Section 1 Introduction
1 Clinical head and neck anatomy for the
anesthesiologist 1
Nicole M. Fowler and Joseph Scharpf
2 Otolaryngology instruments 101 for the
anesthesiologist 18
Paul C. Bryson and Michael S. Benninger
3 Preoperative evaluation for ENT
surgery 26
Jie Zhou and Linda S. Aglio
4 The difficult airway in otolaryngology 36
D. John Doyle
5 Preoperative endoscopic airway
examination 50
William H. Rosenblatt
6 Awake intubation 58
Carlos A. Artime and Carin A. Hagberg
7 Anesthesia for ENT trauma 83
Matthew R. Eng and Marshal B. Kaplan
8 Anesthesia for ENT emergencies 90
D. John Doyle
9 Airway pathology in otolaryngology:
anesthetic implications 94
D. John Doyle
10 Use of Heliox in managing stridor: an ENT
perspective 101
D. John Doyle
11 Prevention and management of airway
fires 105
D. John Doyle
Section 2 Anesthesia for nasal, sinus
and pituitary surgery
12 Anesthesia for septoplasty and
rhinoplasty 113
Ursula Galway and Daniel Alam
13 Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery 121
Paul Kempen
14 Anesthesia for transsphenoidal pituitary
surgery 133
Gazanfar Rahmathulla, Robert Weil
and David E. Traul
Section 3 Anesthesia for head and
neck surgery
15 Anesthesia for neck dissection and
laryngectomy 143
David W. Healy and Carol R. Bradford
16 Anesthesia for head and neck flap
reconstructive surgery 151
Edward Noguera, Brian Burkey and
Basem Abdelmalak
17 Anesthesia for thyroid and parathyroid
surgery 163
Twain Russell and Richard M. Cooper
18 Anesthesia for obstructive sleep
apnea surgery 175
Ursula Galway and Alan Kominsky
19 Anesthesia for carotid body tumor
resection 186
Maged Argalious and Sivan Wexler vii
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:02:22 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201220 Anesthesia for Zenker 's
diverticulectomy 195
Ashish Khanna, Benjamin Wood and
Basem Abdelmalak
21 Anesthesia for parotid surgery 203
Mauricio Perilla, Biao Lei and Daniel Alam
22 Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland,
mandibular and temporomandibular
joint surgery 210
Gail I. Randel and Tracey Straker
23 Anesthesia for face transplantation 220
Jacek B. Cywinski, Thomas Edrich and
D. John Doyle
24 Anesthesia for airway panendoscopy 228
Louise Ellard and David T. Wong
25 Anesthesia for ENT laser surgery 237
D. John Doyle
Section 4 Anesthesia for laryngotracheal
surgery
26 Anesthesia for laryngoplasty 245
Michael S. Benninger and Tatyana Kopyeva
27 Anesthesia for tracheotomy 255
Onur Demirci and Marc Popovich
28 Anesthesia for the management of subglottic
stenosis and tracheal resection 263
John George III and D. John Doyle
29 Anesthesia for otologic and
neurotologic surgery 271
Vladimir Nekhendzy
Section 5 Anesthesia for bronchoscopic
surgery
30 Anesthesia for diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures 297
Basem Abdelmalak and Mona Sarkiss
31 Anesthesia for therapeutic bronchoscopic
procedures 309
Basem Abdelmalak and Mona Sarkiss
Section 6 Anesthesia for pediatric
ENT surgery
32 Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic
surgery 321
Rahul G. Baijal and Emad B. Mossad
33 Anesthesia for reconstructive airway surgery
in pediatrics 337
Megan Nolan and David S. Beebe
Index 346
Contents
viii
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:02:22 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Foreword
Medical historians enjoy a spirited debate about
whether Dr. Crawford Long or Dr. William T.G.
Morton deserves credit for introducing ether anes-
thesia. Long used the agent in 1842 in Georgia, but
his work was largely unnoticed. In 1846, Dr. Morton
made a public demonstration of ether anesthesia in
Boston and quickly published his work, achieving
widespread notice and revolutionizing medicine.
Notably, it was head and neck surgery in both
instances that was performed at the dawn of modern
anesthesiology, forming a deep connection between
otolaryngology and anesthesiology that carries on in
this volume.
There may be no area of surgical specialization
for which seamless coordination with the anesthesio-
logist is of such paramount importance. The shared,
perhaps compromised, airway demands that each
physician approach the patient with a deep under-
standing of each other 's needs and abilities. More
so than in many surgical fields, the ENT patient
can be a newborn or a centenarian and the anesthesia
knowledge base is correspondingly broad. The pace of
innovation in ENT surgery has been relentless, with
the introduction of advanced laser therapies, image
guided procedures and endoscopic approaches. All
these considerations demand an up-to-date reference
for anesthesiologists involved in these procedures.
The editors have assembled a group of authors
who have devoted their anesthesia careers to the
highest level of care for patients undergoing the full
range of otolaryngologic surgery. They come from
institutions in which innovations in ENT surgery
are developed and practiced. All of us now have the
opportunity to benefit from their experience.
Alexander A. Hannenberg, MD
Boston, January 2012
Past President, American Society of Anesthesiologists
Clinical Professor of Anesthesiology,
Tufts University School of Medicine;
Associate Chair, Department of Anesthesiology,
Newton-Wellesley Hospital.
ix
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:02:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.001
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Foreword 2
The management of anesthesia for any surgical pro-
cedure is of the highest importance and is often
fraught with difficulty and risk. This is particularly
true for patients undergoing otolaryngology surgery.
Compounding these issues is the pathology (tumor,
infection, trauma, etc.) that prompted the need for
surgery in the first place.
An otolaryngologic procedure case typically
requires multiple exchanges of real-time clinical
information between the surgeon and the anesthesia
provider. There are few circumstances where preo-
perative planning and a formal “huddle” around the
patient to discuss planned management are more
critical than in an ENT patient. The roles of each
member of the anesthesia, surgical and nursing team
should be explicitly identified, and specific steps to
ensure maximum safety should be articulated. All the
necessary equipment should be available and ready.
The group should also be prepared for unexpected
problems that may necessitate the execution of a
back-up plan.
Although this is not per se a textbook on clinical
airway management, airway issues naturally arise on a
regular basis in otolaryngology surgery. This is par-
ticularly true of upper airway surgery, which relies
heavily on the coordinated efforts of both the anes-
thesia and surgical teams. In such cases these teams
need to plan a coordinated approach to establishing a
safe airway, must maintain that airway during the
procedure and have to ensure that the airway is
maintained as the procedure ends. There are many
times throughout the procedure where the control of
the airway needs to be shared or complete control
relegated from one team to the other. This exchange
requires not only knowledgeable team members and
timely communication; it requires seamless transition
and continuous vigilance.
This book will help to illustrate the complexities of
anesthesia in the otolaryngology patient. It will help
to identify the key procedures that are performed and
the surgical and anesthesia set-up needed to protect
the patient during the procedure. Besides airway
management considerations, it details the other anes-
thetic considerations, systematically presented in the
form of preoperative consideration, intraoperative
management, as well as postoperative care and poten-
tial complications. Of great importance, the book
highlights the significance of communication between
the clinical teams and such a detailed “full picture ”
presentation of class of or individual procedures is
expected to help greatly facilitate such communica-
tions. Only with an experienced and prepared com-
bined effort can the procedures be performed in a safe
and efficient manner.
Michael S. Benninger, MD
Chairman, Head and Neck Institute
Cleveland Clinic, President of the American Laryngo-
logical Association, and President of the International
Association of Phonosurgery.
x
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:01 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.002
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Contributors
Basem Abdelmalak, MD
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, Departments
of General Anesthesiology and Outcomes Research,
Director, Anesthesia for Bronchoscopic Surgery,
Director, Center for Sedation, Anesthesiology
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Linda S. Aglio, MD, MS
Director of Otorhinolaryngologic Anesthesia and
Neuroanesthesia, Department of Anesthesiology,
Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Associate Professor of
Anesthesia, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Daniel Alam, MD
Section Head Aesthetic & Reconstructive Surgery,
Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Maged Argalious, MD, MBA
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, Medical
Director, PACU and SDS, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Carlos A. Artime, MD
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology, Department of
Anesthesiology, The University of Texas Medical
School at Houston, TX, USA
Rahul G. Baijal, MD
Baylor College of Medicine, Texas Children 's
Hospital Department of Pediatrics and
Anesthesiology, Houston, TX, USA
David Beebe, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology, Department of
Anesthesiology, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Michael S. Benninger, MD
Chairman, Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic
and Professor of Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Lerner
College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH, USA
Carol R. Bradford, MD
Professor and Chair, University of Michigan
Department of Otolaryngology, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Paul C. Bryson
Staff Otolaryngologist, Department of
Otolaryngology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Brian Burkey, MD
Adjunct Professor, Department of Otolaryngology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Staff
Surgeon, Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Richard M. Cooper BSc, MSc, MD, FRCPC
Professor, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto
and Toronto General Hospital, Department of
Anesthesia and Pain Management, Toronto, Canada
Jacek B. Cywinski
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology, Cleveland
Clinic Lerner College of Medicine Department of
General Anesthesiology, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA
Onur Demirci, MD
Department of General Anesthesiology, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
D. John Doyle, MD, PhD
Professor of Anesthesiology and Staff Anesthesiologist,
Department of General Anesthesiology, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Thomas Edrich, MD, PhD
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and
Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women 's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA
xi
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:21 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Louise Ellard, MBBS
Clinical fellow, Department of Anesthesia, University
Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Matthew R. Eng, MD
Department of Anesthesiology, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Nicole M. Fowler, MD
Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, USA
Ursula Galway, MD
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology, Cleveland
Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Staff
Anesthesiologist, Department of General
Anesthesiology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
John George III, MD
Department of General Anesthesiology, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Carin A. Hagberg, MD
Joseph C. Gabel Professor and Chair, Department of
Anesthesiology, The University of Texas Medical
School at Houston, TX, USA
David W. Healy, MD, MRCP, FRCA
Assistant Professor and Director, Head and Neck
Anesthesiology, University of Michigan Department
of Anesthesiology, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Marshal B. Kaplan, MD
Attending Anesthesiologist, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center and Associate Clinical Professor, Department
of Anesthesiology, UCLA David Geffen School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Paul Kempen, MD, PhD
Department of General Anesthesiology, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Ashish Khanna, MD
Anesthesiology Resident, Anesthesiology Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Alan Kominsky, MD
Staff Surgeon, Department of otolaryngology, Head
and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, USA
Tatyana Kopyeva MD
Staff Anesthesiologist, Department of General
Anesthesiology, Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Biao Lei, MD, PhD
Anesthesiology Resident, Anesthesiology Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Emad B. Mossad, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Texas Children 's Hospital Department
of Pediatrics and Anesthesiology, Houston,
TX, USA
Vladimir Nekhendzy, MD
Clinical Associate Professor of Anesthesia and
Otolaryngology and Chief, ENT Anesthesia Division,
Director, Difficult Airway Management Program,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA
Edward Noguera, MD
Attending Intensivist, Associate Instructor Case
Western Reserve University Medical School, and
Director, Surgical ICU, Louis Stokes Cleveland VA
Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
Megan Nolan, MD
Assistant Professor, Anesthesiology, Department of
Anesthesiology, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis, MN, USA
Mauricio Perilla, MD
Staff Anesthesiologist, Section Head of Anesthesia,
Glickman Urological Institute, Department of
General Anesthesiology, Anesthesiology Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Marc Popovich, MD
Director of Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Department
of General Anesthesiology, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA
Gazanfar Rahmathulla, MD
Clinical Scholar, Neurosurgery Program, Burkhardt
Brain Tumor & Neuro-Oncology Center, Department
of Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
List of contributors
xii
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:21 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Gail I. Randel, MD
Associate Clinical Professor, Northwestern Memorial
Hospital, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
IL, USA
William H. Rosenblatt, MD
Professor of Anesthesiology and Surgery, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT, USA
Twain Russell, MBBS, FRACGP, FANZCA
Anaesthesia Department, Sir Charles Gairdner
Hospital, Hospital Ave, Nedlands, Western Australia,
Australia
Mona Sarkiss, MD
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, Department
of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine,
Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA
Joseph Scharpf, MD
Staff Surgeon, Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Tracey Straker, MD, MPH
Associate Clinical Professor, Montefiore Medical
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New
York, NY, USA
David E. Traul, MD, PhD
Staff Anesthesiologist, Department of General
Anesthesiology, Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Robert Weil, MD
Staff Neurosurgeon, Burkhardt Brain Tumor &
Neuro-Oncology Center, Department of
Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Sivan Wexler, MD
Staff Anesthesiologist, Department of General
Anesthesiology, Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
David T. Wong, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia,
University Health Network, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada
Benjamin Wood, MD
Staff Surgeon, Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA
Jie Zhou, MD, MS, MBA
Staff Anesthesiologist, Department of Anesthesiology,
Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA
List of contributors
xiii
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:21 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:21 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Preface
This textbook was motivated by our discovery
that there is a serious dearth of detailed information
on the topic of anesthesia for ENT surgery in
current anesthesiology texts. (For instance Kathryn
E. McGoldrick 's book Anesthesia for Ophthalmic
and Otolaryngologic Surgery is now over 20 years
old.) In most anesthesia books, anesthesia for ENT
surgery shares a chapter with anesthesia for ophthal-
mologic procedures. However, because of size limita-
tions, such chapters have barely enough information
to begin to describe what it is like to provide safe,
effective anesthesia for these often highly specialized
procedures. In addition, anesthesia airway textbooks
focus often on the management of the difficult airway,
and airway devices, more so than discussing the broad
spectrum of the anesthetic management options for
otolaryngologic surgery. Thus, there is an informa-
tion gap we seek to address.
This textbook is designed to provide an account of
the currently available evidence in the field of anes-
thesia for ENT surgery. When rigorous scientific evi-
dence is lacking (regretfully, this is still the case in
many areas of medicine and surgery) expert opinion
on the management of these often very complex pro-
cedures is offered. In addition, many new procedures
have been introduced to the field, such as laryngo-
plasty, jaw and face reconstruction, and facial trans-
plantation, which we cover in this volume. However,
we have omitted some extremely rare procedures like
laryngeal and tracheal transplantation. Also, the new
expanding field of bronchoscopic surgery performed
by ENT surgeons, pulmonologists, and thoracic sur-
geons is a one that only a specialized book like this
would be able to discuss in detail.
In an attempt to make our textbook clinically
relevant, we have ended many clinical chapters with
clinical case descriptions where the concepts dis-
cussed in the chapter are applied to a clinical scenario.
In addition, some especially important topics are
covered briefly in early overview chapters and are
covered in more detail later. We believe that this
macro/micro approach has been helpful in our teach-
ing and hope that it will also be successful here.
The diversity of the authors ' institutions, back-
ground expertise, and geographical location was
intentional, as it allows us to present different
examples of clinical practice. For example, smooth
emergence from anesthesia is one of the much sought
after goals in the majority of otolaryngologic surgical
procedures, and a number of chapters discuss com-
pletely different ways to accomplish that goal. Indeed,
in many chapters, the presented anesthetic plan is not
the editors ' first choice, but is presented in the spirit
of clinical diversity and clinical richness. It should
similarly follow that this book is not intended as a
resource to definitively state standards of clinical
care so much as it aims to offer clinicians broad
approaches to tackle difficult, sometimes unique, situ-
ations in ENT surgery.
Finally, we would like to point out that many
chapters are intentionally co-authored by an anesthe-
siologist and a surgeon, to make sure that the chapter
is providing an accurate account from both points
of view.
We sincerely hope that this textbook will be of
great value to both practicing clinicians and trainees,
with the ultimate goal of improving patient safety and
comfort.
Basem Abdelmalak
D. John Doyle
Cleveland, February 2012
xv
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.003
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:03:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.003
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
1
Introduction
Clinical head and neck anatomy
for the anesthesiologist
Nicole M. Fowler and Joseph Scharpf
Introduction
An understanding of anatomy is paramount to the
ability to safely anesthetize the head and neck sur-
gery patient. In contrast to other patient populations,
the head and neck surgery patient 's pathology may
obfuscate normal anatomy and impede or even pre-
vent the anesthesiologist from being able to intubate
the patient. Furthermore, recognized anatomic vari-
ations may complicate the anesthesiologist 's man-
agement of the patient. Cooperation among the
entire operating team is the key to a successful oper-
ation. The surgeon and anesthesiologist must discuss
the particular patient 's anatomy and specific proced-
ural needs prior to each case. Potential airway man-
agement options such as routine oral intubation,
nasotracheal intubation, awake fiberoptic intubation
and even awake tracheotomy must be considered.
Contemporary technological advances can enhance
this discussion by including photography and video-
graphy. For example, computerized imaging systems
in use in modern operating rooms can be synchron-
ized to a server in the otolaryngology clinic to allow
the review of both photographs and videos of
patients' airways and the extent that they have been
altered through disease progression. While the added
dimension of visual review integrated into the dis-
cussion can be an invaluable adjunct to this team
approach, always bear in mind that conditions could
have worsened significantly since the imaging was
performed.
Patient safety concerns continue to be increasingly
recognized as a vital component of modern health
care. At the authors ' institution we perform both an
operative “huddle” with the patient awake and a sur-
gical “time-out” prior to performing any procedure.
The huddle is an ideal time to review the intubation
plan including the use or avoidance of long-acting
muscle relaxants for the case. The huddle process also
ensures that both the anesthesiologist and surgeon are
present and ready to handle any potential periopera-
tive complications. The head and neck surgeon
should be considered an airway specialist and partner
with the anesthesiologist.
Face anatomy
The basic underlying structure of the face is formed
by the skull, facial bones and mandible (Figure 1.1).
The skull is formed by a series of eight bones:
paired parietal and temporal bones and single frontal,
occipital, sphenoid and ethmoid bones [1]. The facial
skeleton creates the anterior portion of the skull and
includes the orbits, nares, maxilla and mandible. The
face is formed by 12 uniquely shaped bones: paired
lacrimal bones, nasal bones, maxillae, zygomatic and
palatine bones and a single vomer and mandible. The
maxillae and mandible support the teeth (Figure 1.1).
The teeth are numbered from superior right to left
and inferior left to right from 1 to 32 for adults and
lettered A –T in the same order for pediatric primary
dentition. Normal occlusion, also termed class
I occlusion, is defined by the mesiobuccal cusp of
the first maxillary molar impacting the mesiobuccal
groove of the first mandibular molar [2]. Class II
occlusion, commonly referred to as retrognathic,
occurs when the mesiobuccal cusp of the first maxil-
lary molar impacts mesial to the groove (overbite).
Class III occlusion, commonly referred to as prog-
nathic, occurs when the mesiobuccal cusp of the first
maxillary molar impacts distal to the groove
(underbite).
Trauma resulting in facial fractures can compli-
cate intubation. Mandibular fractures are usually
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
1
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012paired and occur on opposite sides of the mandible.
Fractures of the maxillae are commonly categorized
based on the Le Fort classification [3]. Le Fort
I fracture is a horizontal fracture of the maxilla
superior to the alveolar process and the pterygoid
plates of the sphenoid. Le Fort II fractures involve
an oblique fracture of the maxillary sinus and hori-
zontal fractures of the lacrimal and ethmoid bones
a c r o s st h en o s er e s u l t i n gi na nu n s t a b l em i d f a c e
where the hard palate is separated from the skull.
Le Fort III fractures involve a horizontal fracture
through the superior orbi tal fissure, the ethmoid
and nasal bones through the greater wing of the
sphenoid bone and frontozy gomatic sutures. This
may occur in conjunction with fractures of the
zygomatic arches resulting in an unstable midface
where the maxilla and zygomatic bones are no
longer attached to the skull. If significant facial
trauma has occurred the patient may have resulting
skull and brain injuries which may supersede treat-
ment of the facial injuries. Depending on the sever-
ity of the trauma, the airway may have been triaged
in the field and an emergency cricothyroidotomy
or tracheotomy may have already been performed
if an oral intubation was not possible. When
preparing to intubate a patient with a mandibular
fracture carefully evaluate the teeth as the tooth
roots are areas of bony weakness and may be
involved in the fracture. Orbital fractures com-
monly of the inferior orbital rim may result in
entrapment of the extraocular muscles; in particu-
lar, the inferior rectus ca nr e s u l ti na c t i v a t i o no f
the oculocardiac reflex [4]. This reflex between the
trigeminal and vagus nerve can result in bradycar-
dia, a junctional rhythm, asystole or even death.
Treatment includes surgical release of the muscle,
atropine or glycopyrrolate.
Face shape is determined by the bones, muscles
and subcutaneous tissue (Figure 1.2). The muscles of
facial expression lie within the subcutaneous tissue.
The muscles of facial expression are innervated by
the facial nerve. They generally attach to bone or
fascia and act by pulling the skin to create facial
expression. When performing surgery around the
facial nerve or its branches, including otologic pro-
cedures, parotidectomy, submandibular gland exci-
sion and neck dissections, neuromuscular blockage is
contraindicated and all or part of the ipsilateral face
may need to be included in the surgical field for
monitoring.
Perpendicular plate of ethmoid bone
Inferior orbital fissure
Temporal fossa
Orbital surface of frontal bone
Supraorbital notch
(A)
Mental foramen
Angle of mandible
Alveolar processes
Ramus
Mastoid process
Infraorbital foramen
Frontal bone
Parietal bone
Greater wing of sphenoid bone
Glabella
Nasal bone
Lacrimal bone
Greater wing of sphenoid bone
Zygomatic bone
Maxilla
Vomer
Temporal bone
Mandible
Anterior nasal spine
Mental protuberance
Figure 1.1 (A). Anterior cranium and overlying facial topography. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
2
Section 1: Introduction
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Ear anatomy
The ear is divided into three parts: the external,
middle and internal. The external ear (Figure 1.3)
includes the external auditory canal to the tympanic
membrane. This is approximately 2 –3 cm in length.
The lateral one-third is cartilaginous and the inner
two-thirds is composed of skin directly on the perios-
teum of the tympanic portion of the temporal bone.
The middle ear is an air-filled cavity containing the
three auricular ossicles – the malleus, incus, and
stapes. The middle ear pressure is regulated by the
eustachian tube, which opens into the nasopharynx.
The inner ear is contained within the petrous portion
of the temporal bone and includes the cochlea, vesti-
bule and semicircular canals. The cochlear hair cells
activate the cochlear nerve, resulting in hearing trans-
mission. The vestibule is a small oval chamber
containing the saccule and utricle, which along with
the semicircular canals control balance. The labyrin-
thine and tympanic portions of the facial nerve lie in
close proximity to these structures and may be dehis-
cent, necessitating lack of neuromuscular blockade
and close monitoring of facial movements during
certain otologic procedures.
Nose anatomy
The nose projects from the face largely based on the
amount of cartilage. Extending from the nasal bone
are the upper and lower lateral cartilages. Stability is
provided from the underlying nasal septum which is
also composed of both bone and cartilage. The pos-
terior bony septum is formed from the perpendicular
plate of the ethmoid and vomer but the majority of
the septum, the anterior septum, is the quadrangular
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 8
16
17
15
18
14
19
13
20
21
22
2324
32
31
30
29
28
27
26 25
A
B
C
D
E
J
KT
LS
MR
NQ
OP
I
H
G
F
12
11
109
Maxilla
Maxilla
Incisors
Incisors
Incisors
Incisors
Canine
Canine
(B)
Canine
Canine
Bicuspids
Bicuspids
Molars
Molars
Molars
Molars
Mandible
Mandible
Figure 1.1 (B). The teeth are numbered from superior right to left and inferior left to right from 1 to 32 for adults and lettered A to T in the
same order for pediatric primary dentition.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
3
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012cartilage. The nasal ala are supported by U-shaped
alar cartilage which is free and mobile, allowing the
dilatation or constriction of each nostril. In prepar-
ation for a nasotracheal intubation or a fiberoptic
intubation the nares should be examined for any
septal deviation. The degree and site of deviation
may help decide which nostril to use for the intub-
ation. Care must be taken when placing any foreign
object into the nose because of its robust blood
supply. The anterior nasal septal area is referred to
as Kiesselbach 's plexus and is the site of a capillary
anastomosis from the sphenopalatine artery, anterior
and posterior ethmoid arteries, greater palatine artery
and the superior labial artery. Any object placed into
the nose should be directed along the floor of the
nose, which is wider than the roof. In preparation
for any nasal manipulation the nasal mucosa should
be treated with a vasoconstrictor and anesthetic.
Orbicularis oculi
Orbital part
Palpebral part
Levator labii superioris
Levator labii superioris
aleque nasii
Zygomaticus minor
Zygomaticus major
Platysma
Sternocleidomastoid
Orbicularis oris
Procerus
Depressor anguli oris Depressor labii inferioris
Frontalis
Temporalis
Nasalis
Risorius
Mentalis
Masseter
Figure 1.2. Muscles of facial expression. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Section 1: Introduction
4
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012A vasoconstrictor such as phenylephrine or oxyme-
tazoline will act on the erectile tissues of the nasal
mucosa and result in decongestion and opening
of the nasal passages. If profuse bleeding occurs
pressure should be applied, and medications such
as oxymetazoline (Afrin), phenylephrine or an epi-
nephrine-soaked pledget can be placed into the
nares. Following successful nasotracheal intubation
extreme care must be taken to position the nasotra-
cheal tube such that it is not applying pressure to the
nasal alar skin. Even slight pressure can result in
necrosis of the alar skin. Within each nostril are the
three turbinates, inferior, middle and superior,
which increase the surface area for humidification
and warming of the inspired air. The paranasal
sinuses are air-filled spaces extending into the
frontal, ethmoid, sphenoid and maxillary bones.
Since the advent of the endoscope much of rhinology
has become endoscopic.
Mouth anatomy
The mouth is subdivided into the oral cavity and the
oropharynx. The oral cavity begins at the skin –
vermilion junction of the lips and extends posteriorly
to the junction of the hard and soft palate superiorly
and to the line of the circumvallate papillae on the
tongue inferiorly. The oral cavity therefore includes
the lips, buccal mucosa, maxillary and mandibular
alveolar ridges/teeth/gingiva, floor of the mouth,
hard palate, the retromolar trigone and the anterior
oral tongue (Figure 1.4). The hard palate forms the
roof of the mouth and separates the oral cavity from
the anterior nasal vault. It is composed of the palatine
process of the maxilla and the horizontal plate of the
palatine bone. Figure 1.5 shows a primary tonsillar
cancer with extension to the soft palate. Tumors are
very friable and will bleed easily so in this patient
great care was taken to avoid any manipulation of
the palate. The retromolar trigone is a triangular area
just anterior to the ascending ramus of the mandible.
A triangle is drawn with its medial aspect coinciding
with the anterior tonsillar pillar, the base being across
the mandibular alveolus posterior to the last molar
and its apex being the coronoid process. In this area
the mucosa is tightly adherent to the ascending ramus
of the mandible. Carcinomas originating in this
region tend to invade the mandibular periosteum
and medial pterygoid muscle causing significant
trismus. Referred otalgia is also a common symptom
due to innervation by the mandibular branch of the
trigeminal nerve, the lesser palatine nerve and the
glossopharyngeal nerve. The circumvallate papillae
and terminal sulcus divide the tongue into an anterior
two-thirds and posterior one-third. The anterior two-
thirds of the tongue can largely be easily visualized by
the patient and clinician. Patients will routinely pre-
sent with a small non-healing ulcer or sore lesion. The
oral tongue is composed of three extrinsic tongue
muscles: the genioglossus, hyoglossus and styloglos-
sus muscles (Figure 1.6; Table 1.1a). In combination
with the intrinsic tongue musculature these muscles
assist with speech articulation and deglutition. The
tongue musculature is innervated by the hypoglossal
nerve (CN XII). Taste to the anterior oral tongue is
supplied by the lingual nerve (CN V3) having received
fibers from the chorda typani nerve. As these nerve
fibers travel with those to the external ear, external
Helix
Scaphoid fossa
Crura of antihelix
Antihelix
Antitragus
Triangular fossa
Tragus
Concha
Intertragic incisure
Lobule of ear
Entrance to external
auditory meatus
Figure 1.3. External ear structure.
Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
5
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012auditory canal and tympanic membrane referred otal-
gia is a common presenting symptom with tongue
cancers. Lateral tongue cancers drain to the ipsilateral
level IB or II nodes. The medial tongue may drain
directly to level III. The tip of the tongue drains to
level IA. The floor of the mouth is the mucosa lying
between the mandibular alveolus and the oral tongue.
This area is pierced by the submandibular gland duct
(Wharton's duct) bilaterally on either side of the lin-
gual frenulum. The length and site of attachment of the
lingual frenulum on the ventral surface of the tongue
can affect tongue protrusion. Tethering of the tongue
is termed ankyloglossus and can be surgically cut if it
affects speech articulation or feeding as an infant.
Odontogenic infections can become life-threatening
if they spread into the submental or submandibular
spaces. Ludwig's angina is a severe infection involving
the floor of mouth. As the infection and swelling
worsens the tongue is pushed posteriorly and super-
iorly, causing respiratory obstruction. The patient
may have marked trismus in addition to odynophagia
and may have dysphagia to the extent that they
cannot tolerate their own secretions. Infections in this
space are considered an airway emergency and may
require an awake tracheotomy for management.
Complete airway obstruction is the most frequent
cause of death from this disease [2]. The oropharynx
extends from an imaginary line extending back from
the hard palate superiorly to the level of the hyoid
bone inferiorly and includes the soft palate, tonsils,
base of tongue and posterior pharyngeal wall. This
Epiglottis
Median glossoepiglottic fold
Lateral glossoepiglottic fold
Root of tongue
Body of tongue
Vallecula
Foramen cecum
Palatopharyngeal arch
Palatopharyngeal muscle
Palatine tonsil
Palatoglossus muscle
Palatoglossal arch
Lingual tonsil and lingual follicles
Terminal sulcus
Vallate (circumvallate) papillae
Foliate papillae
Filiform papillae
Median sulcus
Fungiform papillae
Apex of tongue
Figure 1.4. Dorsal tongue anatomy. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Figure 1.5. Photo of a primary tonsillar cancer with extension to
the soft palate. Photo courtesy of Dr. Joseph Scharpf.
Section 1: Introduction
6
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012area is much more difficult to visualize for both the
patient and the clinician. The pharyngeal walls are
composed of mucosa, submucosa, pharyngobasilar
fascia, the superior and upper middle constrictor
muscle, and buccopharyngeal fascia (Figure 1.7; Table
1.1b and Table 1.2). Posterior to the buccopharyngeal
fascia is the retropharyngeal space. This potential
space exists between the buccopharyngeal fascia and
the alar layer of the prevertebral fascia (Figure 1.7).
This space extends from the skull base to the superior
Cartilaginous part of auditory tube
(eustachian tube)
Salpingopharyngeus
Palatopharyngeus
Stylopharyngeus
Superior pharangeal constrictor
Middle pharangeal constrictor
Inferior pharangeal constrictor
Hyoid bone
Esophagus
Stylohyoid ligament
Levator veli palatini
Tensor veli palatini
Palatoglossus
Soft palate
Longitudinal muscle of tongue
Hyoglossus
Genioglossus
Geniohyoid
Cricothyroid
Thyroid cartilage
Tracheal cartilage
Thyrohyoid membrane
Mylohyoid
Styloglossus
Figure 1.6. Sagittal view of the pharyngeal musculature. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Table 1.1a. Muscles of the soft palate. Reproduced with permission from Olson TR, Pawlina W. ADAM Student Atlas of Anatomy .
Cambridge University Press, 2008
Muscle Superior attachment Inferior
attachment
Innervation Main actions
Levator veli
palatini
Cartilage of auditory tube
and petrous part of
temporal bone
Palatine
aponeurosis
Pharyngeal br. of vagus
n. via pharyngeal
plexus (CN X)
Elevates soft palate during
swallowing and yawning
Tensor veli
palatini
Scaphoid fossa of medial
pterygoid plate, spine of
sphenoid bone & cartilage
of auditory tube
Medial pterygoid n.
(a br. of the
mandibular n.) via
otic ganglion (CN V3)
Tenses soft palate and
opens cartilagenous part of
auditory tube during
swallowing and yawning
Palatoglossus Palatine aponeurosis Side of
tongue
Pharyngeal br. of
vagus n. (CN X) via
pharyngeal plexus
Elevates posterior part of
tongue and draws soft
palate onto tongue
Palatopharyngeus Hard palate and palatine
aponeurosis
Lateral wall
of pharynx
Tenses soft palate and pulls
walls of pharynx superiorly,
anteriorly, and medially
during swallowing
Musculus uvulae Posterior nasal spine and
palatine aponeurosis
Mucosa of
uvula
Shortens uvula and pulls it
superiorly
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
7
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Table 1.1b. Extrinsic muscles of the tongue. Reproduced with permission from Olson TR, Pawlina W. ADAM Student Atlas of Anatomy .
Cambridge University Press, 2008
Muscle Stable
attachment
Mobile attachment Innervation Actions
Genioglossus Sup. part of
mental spine of
mandible
Dorsum of tongue
and body of hyoid
bone
Hypoglossal
n. CN XII
Protrudes, retracts and depresses
tongue; its post. part protrudes
tongue
Hyoglossus Body and greater
horn of hyoid
bone
Side of tongue Depresses and retracts tongue
Styloglossus Styloid process
and stylohyoid lig.
Side and inf. aspect
of tongue
Retracts tongue and draws it up
to create a trough for swallowing
Palatoglossus Palatine
aponeurosis of
soft palate
Side of tongue Pharyngeal br. CN
X and pharyngeal
plexus
Elevates post. part of tongue
Thyroid cartilage
Esophagus
Cricoid cartilage
Vocal folds
Sternothyroid
Anterior jugular vein
Sternohyoid
Omohyoid
Sternocleidomastoid
Anterior scalene
Middle scalene
Posterior scalene
Levator scapulae
Splenius capitis
Trapezius
Longus colli
Vagus nerve
Annulus fibrosus
Spinal cord
C5 vertebra
Superficial cervical fascia
Nucleus pulposus
Vertebral artery and vein
Lymph nodes
Internal jugular vein
Internal carotid artery
Fascial layers;
Prevertebral layerCarotid sheath
Superficial (investing) layer
of deep cervical fascia
Pretracheal layerFascia of infrahyoid muscles
Figure 1.7. Divisions of the cervical fascia. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Section 1: Introduction
8
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:07 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012mediastinum. Contingent upon the patient, his or her
clinical history, and the location of a retropharyngeal
space abscess in relation to the great vessels (carotid
artery, internal jugular vein), the abscess may be
amenable to transoral drainage versus a more trad-
itional transcervical drainage. The tonsils are housed
within a fossa created by two muscles, the anterior
tonsillar pillar formed from the palatoglossus muscle
and the posterior tonsillar pillar by the palatopharyn-
geal muscle. A small primary tonsillar or base of
tongue tumor may be asymptomatic and present with
metastatic cervical lymphadenopathy. Careful exam-
ination of the oral excursion is advised in any patient
with a tonsillar tumor as invasion into the lateral
pterygoid muscle may result in trismus, which will
not improve with muscular relaxation. The soft palate
is composed of the levator veli palatini, tensor veli
palatini, musculus uvulae and tonsillar pillars muscles
as above. The base of the tongue extends from
the circumvallate papillae to the glossoepiglottic fold.
The lingual tonsils are found laterally and lie in a
superficial plane creating an irregularity to the
surface. Alternatively, base of tongue tumors may
grow to very large sizes with minimal symptoms.
Patients with a large base of tongue tumor may be
able to maintain their airway but extreme caution
should be taken prior to induction. An awake trache-
otomy should be considered based on the anesthesiol-
gist's experience and comfort with awake fiberoptic
intubation.
The throat or pharynx is subdivided into the
larynx and the hypopharynx. The larynx is further
subdivided into three spaces: the supraglottis,
glottis and subglottis. Furthermore the larynx is com-
posed of nine cartilages joined by ligaments and
membranes: three single cartilages: thyroid, cricoid
and epiglottic; and three paired cartilages: arytenoid,
corniculate and cuneiform (Figure 1.8). The largest of
the cartilages, the thyroid cartilage, was so named
from the Greek word thyreos, or shield, due to its
shield-like appearance and its main function being
that of protection of the vocal cords. It is composed
Table 1.2. Pharyngeal muscles. Reproduced with permission from Olson TR, Pawlina W. ADAM Student Atlas of Anatomy .
Cambridge University Press, 2008
Muscle Lateral attachments Medial
attachments
Innervation Main actions
Circular pharyngeal muscles
Superior constrictor Pterygoid hamulus,
pterygomandibular raphe,
post. end of mylohyoid line
of mandible and side of
tongue
Median raphe of
pharynx and
pharyngeal tubercle
Pharyngeal and sup.
laryngeal brr. of
vagus n. [CN X]
through pharyngeal
plexus
Constrict wall
of pharynx
during
swallowing
Middle constrictor Stylohyoid lig. and greater
and lesser horns of hyoid
bone
Median raphe of
pharynx
Inferior constrictor Oblique line of thyroid
cartilage and side of cricoid
cartilage
Elevate
pharynx and
larynx during
swallowing,
speakinga
Longitudinal pharyngeal muscles
Palatopharyngeus Hard palate and palatine
aponeurosis
Post. border of
lamina of thyroid
cartilage and side
of pharynx and
esophagus
Salpingopharyngeus Cartilaginous part of
auditory tube
Blends with
palatopharyngeus
Stylopharyngeus Styloid process of temporal
bone
Post. and sup.
borders of thyroid
cartilage with
palatopharyngeus m.
Glossopharyngeal
n. [CN IX]
a The salpingopharyngeus muscle also opens the auditory tube.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
9
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012of two large plate-like laminae which fuse in the
midline forming a prominent V, which in men is
termed the “Adam's apple ”. Inferior to the thyroid
is the cricoid cartilage, which is shaped as a signet ring
and is the only complete cartilaginous ring in the
airway. In women the cricoid cartilage is the most
prominent cartilaginous landmark. The cricothyroid
membrane bridges the gap between the thyroid and
cricoid cartilages. This cricothyroid space is easily
palpable as a soft spot either inferior to the thyroid
cartilage (in men) or immediately superior to
the prominent cricoid cartilage (in women). This is
the site of the most superficial aspect of the
larynx that is externally accessible. An emergency
cricothyroidotomy utilizes these critical features in
an airway emergency. The two cartilages articulate
at the cricothyroid joint. This joint allows rotation
of the thyroid cartilage, resulting in changes in the
vocal cord length and tension and ultimately
changes in vocal pitch. Posteriorly the cricoid cartil-
age articulates with the arytenoid cartilage, forming
the cricoarytenoid joint, which allows the arytenoids
to move medially and laterally, as well as tilt anteri-
orly and posteriorally. The vocal ligament is the skel-
eton on which the vocal cords form and extends from
the thyroid cartilage to the arytenoid cartilages. The
supraglottis extends from the top of the epiglottis to
the ventricles. This includes the epiglottis (both lin-
gual and laryngeal surfaces), arytenoids, aryepiglottic
folds (AE folds) and false vocal cords. The epiglottis is
a heart-shaped elastic cartilage which is pedicled off
the thyroid cartilage extending superiorly. The epi-
glottis may be omega-shaped, retroflexed or floppy
and may decrease the ability to visualize the vocal
cords on intubation (depending on intubation tech-
nique). Sensation of the supraglottis is supplied by the
internal branch of the superior laryngeal nerve. Figure
1.9A is a drawing of the laryngeal complex with a
supraglottic mass centered in the epiglottis. Safe
intubation techniques include an awake fiberoptic
intubation. Figure 1.9B is a picture of an actual laryn-
geal complex having been removed as a total laryn-
gectomy specimen for a patient with an extensive
supraglottic tumor. The glottis includes each true
Epiglottis
Posterior arytenoid
Lamina of cricoid cartilage
Aryepiglottic muscle
Oblique arytenoid
Arytenoid cartilage
Transverse arytenoid
Epiglottis
Hyoid bone
Lesser horn of hyoid bone
Greater horn of hyoid bone
Superior horn of thyroid cartilage
Inferior horn of thyroid cartilage
Tracheal cartilage
AnteriorPosterior
Superior
Cricothyroid
Cricoid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Corniculate and cuneiform tubercles
Vocal folds
Vestibular folds
Rima glottidis
Laryngeal prominence
Figure 1.8. Laryngeal skeleton and musculature. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Section 1: Introduction
10
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012vocal cord, the anterior commissure and posterior
intra-arytenoid area. The true vocal cords are instru-
mental in sound production and, more importantly,
the prevention of aspiration and maintenance of a
patent pathway for respiration. The true vocal cords
are composed of the vocal ligament and the vocalis
muscle (Figure 1.8). Figure 1.10A is of a large trans-
glottic tumor and 10B is that of a very exophytic
transglottic tumor. The intrinsic muscles of the larynx
are all supplied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve off
the vagus nerve (CN X) except for the cricothyroid
muscle supplied by the external branch of the super-
ior laryngeal nerve. There is only one main abductor
of the true vocal cords; the posterior cricoarytenoid
muscle. The other intrinsic laryngeal muscles
(cricothyroid, lateral cricoarytenoid, thyroarytenoid,
arytenoid muscles) adduct, tense or relax the
vocal cords. The subglottis extends 5 mm (anteriorly)
to 10 mm (posteriorly) inferior to the apex of the
true vocal cords. A subglottic tumor is pictured in
Figure 1.11.
Airway stenosis and particularly subglottic sten-
oses may result from trauma, systemic diseases
(e.g. granulomatosis with polyangiitis, previously
known as Wegener 's granulomatosis) or without a
recognizable etiology (idiopathic). It has been pro-
posed that the subglottis is prone to stenosis due to
the complete cricoid ring, lack of a direct vascular
supply (it is a watershed area between two vascular
beds), complex mechanical forces resulting from
turbulent airflow, and exposure of the respiratory
epithelium to gastric contents [5]. Due to the slowly
progressive nature of the disease patients will accom-
modate their activity to match their breathing ability.
In cases of tight airway stenosis the patient may need
to be mask ventilated and jet ventilated until the
stenosis has been lysed or dilated enough to accom-
modate an endotracheal tube. Figure 1.12A,B shows a
subglottic stenosis pre- and postoperatively.
The hypopharynx extends from the level of
the hyoid to the cricoid cartilage. The hypopharynx
is divided into three subsites: the posterior
pharyngeal wall, the post-cricoid area and the piri-
form sinuses. Laterally the pyriform sinuses are tri-
angularly shaped. The base is located superiorly at the
pharyngoepiglottic fold and the triangle extends to its
apex at the level of the true vocal cords, medially is the
larynx and laterally is the thyroid cartilage. The
(A) (B)
Figure 1.9. (A) Artist rendering of supraglottic tumor. Artwork created by Emily Evans. (B) Photo of large supraglottic tumor.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Joseph Scharpf.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
11
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(A)
(B)
Figure 1.10. A and B; Two examples of
transglottic tumors. Photos courtesy of
Dr. Joseph Scharpf.
Section 1: Introduction
12
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012hypopharynx is in direct communication with the
oropharynx superiorly and the cervical esophagus
inferiorly. A large hypopharyngeal tumor is pictured
in Figure 1.13. Inferior to the inferior constrictor
is the cricopharyngeus muscle which acts as the
upper esophageal sphincter. Normal resting tone pre-
vents or reduces reflux of esophageal contents into
the hypopharynx. The coordinated relaxation of the
cricopharyngeus is critical for normal swallowing.
The esophagus is lined by a layer of stratified squa-
mous epithelium. The cervical esophagus is composed
of voluntary striated muscle, in contrast to the lower
esophagus, which is largely composed of involuntary
smooth muscle.
Potential anatomy pitfalls exist for each of the
categories within the oral cavity, nasopharynx,
Figure 1.11. Photo of subglottic tumor.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Joseph Scharpf.
(A)
 (B)
Figure 1.12. Photo of subglottic stenosis pre- and post-dilatation. Photos courtesy of Dr. Joseph Scharpf.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
13
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012oropharynx, larynx, and hypopharynx. Within the
oral cavity large masses can develop which will be
readily visible and can therefore be appropriately
considered prior to intubation planning. The more
difficult cases occur with cancers of the retromolar
trigone, tonsils or posterior oropharyngeal wall with
accompanying trismus which decreases the ability to
visualize the full extent of these lesions and limits the
intubation options. In addition the surface overlying a
cancerous growth may be ulcerated or friable and
can result in significant bleeding with minimal
manipulation. Base of tongue tumors may grow to a
large size prior to detection or may hinder intubation
not only by bulk effect but also by displacing the
epiglottis posteriorly so that it overlies the vocal cords.
Epiglottic tumors may cause a direct mass effect or
may again overhang the vocal cords, hindering intub-
ation. A glottic tumor or transglottic tumor may limit
the glottic aperture by its bulk or may result in vocal
cord immobility. The subglottic area may be stenosed,
which needs to be considered when choosing the
appropriate endotracheal tube size. The anesthesiolo-
gist must trust their otolaryngologist colleague
regarding the size, extent and airway patency in cases
of oropharyngeal, laryngeal and hypopharyngeal
lesions as these are not able to be visualized prior to
making the intubation plan unless the aforementioned
photodocumentation strategies have been utilized to
synchronize office evaluation pictures with the operat-
ing suite computers.
Neck anatomy
The neck is the connection between the head and
the body. It includes several life-sustaining struc-
tures including the spine and associated nerves,
blood vessels and glands. The cervical spine is
composed of cervical vertebrae 1 –7. Superiorly the
neck extends from the inferior aspect of the man-
dible to the clavicles. Immediately beneath the
skin and subcutaneous tissue lies the platysma
muscle. This muscle serves as a protective land-
mark, demarcating a safe plane in which to raise
both superior and inferior flaps in a variety of neck
procedures. The next key cervical landmark is the
sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) which divides
the neck into anterior and posterior triangles. This
muscle has two heads, the sternal and clavicular
heads, which attach to the sternum and clavicle
respectively.
Anatomical levels of the neck
The neck is further divided into levels (Figure 1.14;
see Figure 15.2). Levels IA and IB are located super-
ior to the hyoid bone. Level IA is the triangle of
space formed between the midline medially, anter-
ior belly of the digastric muscle laterally and hyoid
inferiorly. Level IA diss ections are usually per-
formed bilaterally and therefore include all fibroa-
dipose tissue between the anterior bellies of the
Figure 1.13. Photo of a large pyriform
sinus hypopharyngeal tumor. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Joseph Scharpf.
Section 1: Introduction
14
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012digastric muscle from the mandible to the hyoid
bone. This region is also termed the submentum.
Laterally level IB is composed of the submandibular
triangle, which is found between the anterior and
posterior bellies of the digastric muscle. Level II
extends superiorly from the skull base to the hyoid
inferior and from the sternohyoid muscle antero-
medially to the SCM muscle posterolaterally. This
level is divided into level IIA and level IIB by the
accessory nerve (CN XI), with level IIA being ante-
romedial to the nerve and l evel IIB being postolat-
eral to the nerve. Level III extends from the hyoid
bone superiorly to the cricoid cartilage inferiorly
and from the sternohyoid muscle anteromedially
to the SCM muscle posterolaterally. Level IV
extends from the cricoid cartilage superiorly to the
clavicle inferiorly and from the sternohyoid muscle
anteromedially to the SCM mu scle posterolaterally.
Levels II, III, and IV comprise the anterior cervical
triangle. Level V extends superiorly between the
skull base superiorly and clavicle inferiorly and
between the SCM anteromedially and trapezius
muscle posterolaterally and is also referred to as
the posterior triangle. Level VI extends from the
hyoid bone superiorly to the sternal notch or
innominate artery inferiorly and laterally extends
from carotid artery to carotid artery. This is also
termed the central compartment. The goal of a neck
Mandible
Angle of mandible
Thyroid gland
Thyroid cartilage
Hyoid bone
Jugulodigastric lymph node
Digastric (anterior belly)
Digastric (posterior belly)
Mastoid process
External jugular vein
Internal jugular vein
Internal carotid artery
Figure 1.14. Cervical lymphatic levels. Artwork created by Emily Evans.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
15
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012dissection is to remove all the fibroadipose tissue
contained within each respective compartment and
in doing so remove all lymph nodes which may be
harboring metastatic disease.
The thyroid and parathyroid glands
The thyroid gland lies beneath the sternohyoid and
sternothyroid muscles at approximately C5 –T1. It
consists of two lobes, the left and right, with a central
isthmus usually found anterior to the second and third
tracheal rings. The thyroid gland is very vascular and is
supplied by the superior and inferior thyroid arteries,
which enter the gland laterally at the superior and
inferior pedicles respectively. It is important to recog-
nize an enlarged thyroid gland or goiter as this may
cause pressure on the trachea or tracheal deviation to
occur. Even more importantly, thyroid cancers may
invade the trachea or the recurrent laryngeal nerves,
causing vocal cord paralysis. Not only may thyroid
disorders make intubation difficult but a surgical
airway may be extremely difficult in the setting of a
large thyroid goiter or thyroid cancer. Posterior to the
thyroid gland lies the parathyroid glands which are
usually a total of four paired glands (two superior
and two inferior). These glands control calcium levels
through the action of parathyroid hormone.
Neck anatomy after neck dissection
surgery
Neck anatomy can be significantly altered by cancer
or cancer treatments including surgery and radi-
a t i o no rc h e m o r a d i a t i o nt h e r a p y .C a n c e r sm a y
invade or compress vital structures including the
internal jugular vein or carotid artery. The radical
neck dissection pioneered in 1906 by Dr. Crile of
the Cleveland Clinic includes the removal of three
structures: the SCM muscle, the accessory nerve
(CN XI) and the internal jugular vein. Patients
who have undergone this surgery are easily recog-
nized by the resultant neck deformity. Routinely
otolaryngologists are now able to perform selective
neck dissections or modified radical neck dissec-
tions which allow preservation of these structures
and selective removal of the neck levels at highest
risk of metastasis. It is very important to investigate
any neck scars to determine previous cervical pro-
cedures prior to intubation.
Altered anatomy following
laryngectomy surgery
An important example of altered cervical anatomy
occurs after total laryngectomy. After removal of
the larynx a permanent tracheocutaneous stoma will
be created. The result of this procedure is the per-
manent separation of the nares, nasopharynx, oral
cavity and oropharynx from the lungs and pulmon-
ary system. Therefore a total laryngectomy patient
can only be intubated through their stoma. Any
attempt to instrument their nose or oral cavity can
only result in communication with the esophagus
and stomach. Vocal rehabilitation after a total lar-
yngectomy is obtained through placement of a voice
prosthesis through a transesophageal puncture.
A puncture is placed in the posterior tracheal wall
through the anterior esophageal wall. A one-way
valve is then placed in this tract allowing air to
travel from the lungs into the esophagus and out
of the mouth, providing a modified version of
esophageal speech. When preparing to intubate a
total laryngectomy patient an endotracheal tube
can be passed directly into the stoma, taking care
not to dislodge their voice prosthesis (if present)
and being especially cognizant of the fact that the
tube can be easily advanced into the right mainstem
due to the shortened distance of the trachea. The
endotracheal tube should not be advanced beyond
the first mark so that the cuff is located immediately
distal to the stoma site.
Summary
In conclusion, knowledge of the anatomical
background pertaining to head and neck surgery
as well as the details of the pathologic processes
involved and the expected post-surgical changes
will assist the anesthesiologist to better communi-
cate with his or her surgical colleagues and to
devise a safe plan for general anesthesia and airway
management.
Clinical pearls
/C15Knowledge of the anatomical background for
head and neck surgery as well as the details of
the pathologic processes involved and the
expected post-surgical changes will assist the
anesthesiologist to better communicate with his or
Section 1: Introduction
16
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012her surgical colleagues and to devise a safe plan for
anesthesia and airway management.
/C15Cooperation among the entire operating team is
the key to a successful operation. The surgeon and
anesthesiologist must discuss the particular
patient's anatomy, pathology and specific
procedural needs prior to each case.
/C15If significant facial trauma has occurred, the patient
may have resulting skull and brain injuries which
may supersede the treatment of the facial injuries.
/C15Orbital fractures commonly of the inferior orbital
rim may result in entrapment of the extraocular
muscles, particularly the inferior rectus, which can
result in activation of the oculocardiac reflex. This
reflex involving the trigeminal and vagus nerves
can result in bradycardia, a junctional rhythm,
and even asystole. Treatment includes surgical
release of the muscle, and the administration of
atropine or glycopyrrolate.
/C15Care must be taken when placing any foreign
object into the nose because of its robust blood
supply. The anterior nasal septal area is referred to
as Kiesselbach's plexus and is the site of a capillary
anastomosis from the sphenopalatine artery,
anterior and posterior ethmoid arteries, greater
palatine artery and the superior labial artery. Any
object placed into the nose should be directed
along the floor of the nose, which is wider
than the roof.
/C15Ludwig's angina is a severe infection involving
the floor of the mouth. As the infection and
swelling worsen, the tongue is pushed posteriorly
and superiorly, causing respiratory obstruction.
The patient may have marked trismus.
Infections in this space are considered an
airway emergency.
/C15It has been proposed that the subglottis is prone to
stenosis due to the complete cricoid ring, lack of a
direct vascular supply (it is a watershed area
between two vascular beds), complex mechanical
forces resulting from turbulent airflow, and
exposure of the respiratory epithelium to gastric
contents.
/C15Cancers of the retromolar trigone (a band of
mucosa situated behind the mandibular molars
and covering the ascending ramus), tonsils or
posterior oropharyngeal wall are often
accompanied by trismus, which impairs the
ability to visualize the full extent of these
lesions and limits the intubation options.
/C15Not only may thyroid disorders make intubation
difficult but a surgical airway may be extremely
difficult in the setting of a large thyroid goiter or
thyroid cancer.
References
1. Moore K, Dalley A. Clinically
Oriented Anatomy , 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 1999.
2. Bailey B, Johnson J, Newlands S.
Head & Neck Surgery –
Otolaryngology, 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2006.
3. Allsop D, Kennett K. Skull and
facial bone trauma. In Nahum
AM, Melvin J, eds. Accidental
Injury: Biomechanics and
Prevention. Berlin: Springer; 2002.
4. Paton J, Boscan P, Pickering AE,
Nalivaiko E. The yin and yang of
cardiac autonomic control:
vago-sympathetic interactions
revisited. Brain Res Rev 2005;
49(3):555–65.
5. Gluth MB, Shinners PA,
Kasperbauer JL. Subglottic
stenosis associated with
Wegener's granulomatosis.
Laryngoscope 2003;113(8):1304–7.
Chapter 1: Clinical head and neck anatomy for the anesthesiologist
17
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:05:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.004
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
2
Introduction
Otolaryngology instruments 101
for the anesthesiologist
Paul C. Bryson and Michael S. Benninger
Introduction
The anesthesiologist and otolaryngologist share
the airway. The surgeon requires adequate visualiza-
tion of the pathology to perform surgery and the
anesthesiologist requires adequate oxygenation and
ventilation. While communication between the
anesthesiologist and the otolaryngologist is crucial, it
is also prudent for the anesthesiologist to become
familiar with the equipment used by the otolaryn-
gologist, particularly when the surgical procedure
involves the upper aerodigestive tract. This chapter
will introduce and discuss some of the more common
equipment used during procedures involving the
larynx, trachea, cervical esophagus, pharynx, and
paranasal sinuses.
Surgery of the larynx and trachea
Surgery of the larynx, pharynx, and trachea begins
with securing the airway with an appropriate device
that will allow for adequate ventilation. Often, a
smaller-sized endotracheal tube or an endotracheal
tube that is safe for laser surgery is selected
(Figure 2.1). There are also occasions where the
patient's pathology may preclude the use of an endo-
tracheal tube and require the use of jet ventilation. Jet
ventilation is typically employed via a subglottic Hun-
saker catheter, via supraglottic attachment to the
laryngoscope (Figure 2.2), or via jet laryngoscope.
Both techniques have been found to be useful and
safe for microlaryngeal surgery [1 –3]. For certain
tracheal pathology, the use of a rigid bronchoscope
(Figure 2.3) may be necessary. In this situation, the
anesthesiologist can connect the breathing circuit to
the rigid bronchoscope 's side port. For airway
obstructive pathology, the surgeon may also employ
dilatational balloons and powered instrumentation,
such as a micro-debrider, to increase the airway
diameter (Figure 2.4).
For microlaryngeal surgery, the surgeon will typ-
ically use a tubular laryngoscope that allows him or
her to visualize the pathology of interest. Once the
pathology is visualized, the surgeon must suspend the
laryngoscope to allow for a stable, motion-free opera-
tive field. There are many surgical laryngoscopes, but
the more common operative laryngoscopes include
the Dedo laryngoscope (Teleflex-Pilling, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA) and the Universal Modular
Glottiscope (Endocraft, LLC, Providence, Rhode
Island, USA) [4]. To achieve a motion free operative
field, there are two suspension devices/systems
employed by most otolaryngologists – a chest
anchored, torsion-fulcrum device and an elevated
vector suspension device (Figure 2.5) [5]. Once in
suspension, the surgeon will bring the operating
microscope into the field and use a variety of
microlaryngeal instruments to manage the pathology
of interest (Figure 2.6).
Surgery of the pharynx and
cervical esophagus
Airway management for endoscopic surgery of the
pharynx and cervical esophagus is similar to that of
the larynx and trachea in that a smaller-sized
endotracheal tube or laser-safe endotracheal tube
is typically used. Typical pathology treated by the
otolaryngologist includes cancer, Zenker 's diverti-
culum, cricopharyngeal hypertrophy or achalasia,
and pharyngo-esophageal stenosis. Surgery in this
area can employ a number of unique scopes including
a Weerda-type distending diverticuloscope, A Feyh –
Kastenbauer (FK) laryngo-pharyngoscope, Dohlman/
Kashima diverticuloscope, and a rigid esophagoscope
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
18
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(A)
(B)
Figure 2.1. Two types of laser-safe
endotracheal tubes. The cuffs of both
tubes are typically filled with saline. Care
should be taken to remove all of the fluid
prior to extubation.
(A)
(B)
Figure 2.2. Jet ventilation systems; (A) supraglottic system; (B) subglottic Hunsaker catheter. The supraglottic ventilation system is
typically attached to the laryngoscope.
Chapter 2: Otolaryngology instruments 101 for the anesthesiologist
19
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(Figure 2.7). All of these devices allow for wide expos-
ure of pathology and allow room for necessary
instrumentation. The FK retractor has become more
common as trans-oral robotic surgery has become
more widespread. Serial dilatation systems for sten-
osis include Maloney-type and Savory-type dilatation
systems (Figure 2.8).
Surgery of the nose and paranasal
sinuses
Surgery in the nose and paranasal sinuses can present
unique challenges to the anesthesia team. These are
primarily related to the anesthesia access to the airway
during the procedure. Since the nose opens inferiorly
above the mouth, the position of access to the nose by
the nasal surgeon generally requires them to be pos-
itioned at the side of patient below the head. This can
obstruct continuous access to the airway and a clear
separation of the anesthesiologist from the endotra-
cheal tube.
Many cases of septoplasty and rhinoplasty are
performed under local anesthesia with varying
degrees of sedation. In such cases, there are two issues
that need to be considered by the anesthesiologist.
Does the patient require supplemental oxygen? This
can be delivered with a nasal cannula placed in the
mouth. Will the surgeons be utilizing a device like an
electrocautery or a surgical laser, where care must be
taken to avoid high oxygen levels which might lead to
a fire?
Endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) is a particularly
complicated set-up. If performed under local anesthe-
sia the set-up and airway issues are similar to those
which are considered with septoplasty and rhino-
plasty. Most endoscopic sinus surgeries and many
functional and cosmetic operations are performed
under general anesthesia, usually with the head
Figure 2.3. Rigid bronchoscope.
Figure 2.4. Radial dilatation balloon.
These balloons come in a variety of sizes
and will require a period of apnea while
inflated.
Section 1: Introduction
20
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012elevated above the body or in a reverse Trendelenburg
position. Since most surgeons are right-handed,
they will need to stand (or sit) on the right side of
the patient 's body. There may be an assistant on the
left side for septoplasty, rhinoplasty, or nasal
reconstruction.
With ESS, only one surgeon typically operates at
any given time, so they will remain on one side of the
patient. In such cases, the endotracheal tube should be
brought out through the opposite side of the mouth
and the anesthesia team and machine should be on
the opposite side of the body. In many cases, an image
(A)
 (B)
Figure 2.5. Laryngeal suspension devices (A, chest support; B, elevated vector). The choice of device is largely surgeon-dependent.
Figure 2.6. Microlaryngeal
instruments.
21
Chapter 2: Otolaryngology instruments 101 for the anesthesiologist
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012guidance system is used to assist with important
endonasal and skull base landmarks. Some image
guidance systems run off a headpiece and others use
optical systems which are a short distance from the
patient, but where the line of the optics has to be free
from obstruction. This may become important when
a bispectral index (BIS) monitoring system (Covedien
Inc., Dublin, Ireland) is used. In these cases, the BIS
monitor may need to be placed higher on the fore-
head with the attachment cable running underneath
the operative table, keeping in mind that it may also
result in some interference with the imaging system,
(B)(A)
(C)
Figure 2.7. (A) Weerda diverticuloscope, (B) FK retractor, (C) rigid
esophagoscope. The Weerda diverticuloscope is a large, extended
length proximally and distally extending scope used to
endoscopically treat Zenker 's diverticulum. Given the size of the
scope, a smaller endotracheal tube should be used to help facilitate
scope placement. The FK retractor is a specialized scope used in
trans-oral robotic surgery as well as in sleep surgery. It is a larger
scope and has the capability to attach blades of varied length
and cheek retractors. A smaller endotracheal tube is typically helpful
with this scope as well.
Section 1: Introduction
22
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012prohibiting its use all together. In all cases, the sur-
geons will be utilizing telescopes and video monitors,
and therefore the anesthesia team needs to be pos-
itioned to avoid obstructing their view. Finally, to
facilitate the passing of instruments, the scrub nurse
will need to be on the opposite side of the body from
the surgeon. This will place the anesthesia machine
farther away from the patient, behind the surgical
assistant. With this in mind, there will be a need to
use a longer breathing circuit (Figure 2.9).
The last important issue with nasal and sinus
surgery has to do with the growth of intranasal
Figure 2.8. Esophageal dilatation
system. The dilatation system shown
in this figure is mercury-weighted
and soft. Other dilatation systems
include dilators that are placed over
a guide wire and balloon dilatation
systems.
Figure 2.9. Typical set-up for
endoscopic sinus surgery. The
surgeon is positioned on the right
side of the body and is able to view
both the navigation equipment and
monitor. The surgical nurse/assistant
will be on the opposite side of the
patient. The endotracheal tube and
circuit are on the left side of the
body and the anesthesiologist is on
the left side behind the nurse.
Chapter 2: Otolaryngology instruments 101 for the anesthesiologist
23
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012approaches to the skull base. These techniques are
used to repair CSF leaks as well as resection of skull
base or brain lesions where the surgery may result in
a CSF leak. In such cases it is optimal to have a
smooth and gentle emergence from anesthesia to
avoid coughing or bucking, which may increase
intracranial pressure and break down the skull base
repair.
Transoral robotic surgery
Transoral robotic surgery is an emerging technology
that is becoming more common at tertiary care
centers. Specially trained head and neck surgeons
are using this technology to surgically resect tumors
and masses from the oropharynx, larynx, and hypo-
pharynx. There are several considerations that must
be kept in mind when providing anesthesia for these
patients. Airway management may involve standard
transoral intubation with care to avoid the pathology
or the lesion may require a flexible fiberoptic
approach. Preoperative discussions with the operat-
ing surgeon are imperative. Additionally, laser
assistance and electrocautery are frequently used.
Appropriate laser-safe endotracheal tubes, laser pre-
cautions for the patient and staff, and open commu-
nication are necessary throughout the procedure.
Finally, the current size of the surgical robots
requires a large operating room with enough space
for the robot (Figure 2.10), operating team, and the
anesthesiology team. As this technology becomes
more common and refined, instrumentation and size
are expected to decrease.
Summary
Surgery of the upper aerodigestive tract deals with
diverse pathology that requires a variety of special
surgical instrumentation. Given the demands of the
surgeon and anesthesiologist, it is crucial for optimal
patient care that open communication before, during,
and after the procedure be standard operating proto-
col. Basic understanding of otolaryngologic instru-
mentation as described in this chapter will hopefully
allow for mutual understanding between the surgical
and anesthesia teams.
Clinical pearls
/C15Given the demands on the surgeon and
anesthesiologist, it is crucial that open
communication before, during, and after the
procedure be standard operating protocol. A basic
understanding of the otolaryngologic
instrumentation will help allow for mutual
understanding between the surgical and anesthesia
teams.
/C15For certain tracheal pathologies, the use of a
rigid bronchoscope may be necessary. In this
situation, the anesthesiologist can connect the
breathing circuit to the rigid bronchoscope 's
side port, or utilize a special adapter to deliver jet
ventilation through the same side port.
/C15To achieve a motion-free operative field with
direct laryngoscopy, there are two suspension
devices/systems employed by most
otolaryngologists – a chest-anchored, torsion-
fulcrum device and an elevated vector suspension
device.
/C15Some image guidance systems for sinus
endoscopy surgery employ a headpiece while
others use an optical system located a short
distance from the patient, but where the line
of sight has to be free of obstructions. This may
become important when a bispectral index
(BIS) monitoring system is desired to be used. In
these cases, the BIS monitor may need to be
placed higher on the forehead with the
attachment cable running underneath the
operative table. In addition, the BIS monitor may
interfere with the imaging system, prohibiting its
use all together.
Figure 2.10.
Section 1: Introduction
24
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012References
1. Davies JM, Hillel AD, Maronian
NC, Posner KL. The Hunsaker
Mon-Jet tube with jet ventilation is
effective for microlaryngeal surgery.
Can J Anaesthes 2009;56(4):284–90.
2. Orloff LA, Parhizkar N, Ortiz E.
The Hunsaker Mon-Jet ventilation
tube for microlaryngeal surgery:
optimal laryngeal exposure. Ear
Nose Throat J 2002;81(6):
390–4.
3. Rezaie-Majd A, Bigenzahn W,
Denk DM, et al . Superimposed
high-frequency jet ventilation
(SHFJV) for endoscopic
laryngotracheal surgery in more
than 1500 patients. Br J Anaesth
2006;96(5):650–9.
4. Zeitels SM. Universal modular
glottiscope system: the evolution of
a century of design and technique
for direct laryngoscopy. Ann
Otol Rhinol Laryngol Suppl
1999;179:2–24.
5. Zeitels SM, Burns JA, Dailey SH.
Suspension laryngoscopy revisited.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 2004;
113(1):16–22.
Chapter 2: Otolaryngology instruments 101 for the anesthesiologist
25
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:11:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.005
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
3
Introduction
Preoperative evaluation for ENT surgery
Jie Zhou and Linda S. Aglio
The first public demonstration of ether on October 16,
1846 was administered for ENT surgery. Dr. William
Morton anesthetized patient Edward Gilbert Abbott for
removal of a tumor from Abbott 's neck by Dr. John
Warren [1]. Since then, significant advances in both
ENT anesthesia and ENT surgery have been made.
The relationship between ENT anesthesia and ENT
surgery has never been stronger than it is today, and
there is probably no other subspecialty of anesthesia
that has such close ties with a subspecialty of surgery.
ENT surgical procedures require that anesthesiologists
share the airway with the ENT surgeons. A good ENT
anesthesiologist should not only understand the condi-
tion of the patient preoperatively, but should also be
able to anticipate the effects of surgery on the patient.
Traditionally, ENT operations consist of relatively
short procedures, ranging from tonsillectomies, to
tympanostomies, to tracheostomies. However, some
of the most dreaded anesthesia tragedies occur in
this setting. For instance, Bishop documented that
anesthesia-related intraoperative death accompanying
tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy ranged from 12% to
17% of the entire intraoperative mortality during the
1920s and 1930s in the United States [2]. Both anesthe-
siologists and surgeons should realize that nothing is
trivial just because the procedure is small and short.
Improvements in both anesthesia and surgery have
been made to ensure the safety of the patients.
One of the standards implemented was proper
preoperative evaluation. The information acquired
during preoperative evaluation is pertinent to deter-
mining the anesthetic and the surgical techniques.
Essentially, it is also a risk assessment process. In
addition, it also, in part, predicts the postoperative
course of the patient.
A thorough preoperative evaluation will provide
both anesthesiologist and surgeon valuable information
which may alter the course of patient care. Anesthetic
preoperative evaluation is composed of four compon-
ents: patient history, physical examination, laboratory
studies, and anesthetic plan.
Patient history
It is important for the clinician to spend time with the
patient or proxy and the patient 's family. Some of
the generic information related to patient history
includes: patient 's demographic information, height
and weight, presence of systemic conditions, previous
hospitalizations and operations, previous anesthetic
issues, family history of any relevant conditions, aller-
gies, medications, social history, recreational agent or
tobacco consumption, and the patient 's fasting status.
For the patient preparing for an ENT surgery,
some of the pertinent information is crucial for the
anesthesiologist. For example, for pediatric patients
undergoing tonsillectomy, it is useful to obtain infor-
mation on signs and symptoms of sleep apnea. Spe-
cific considerations during preoperative evaluation
with each surgical condition will be discussed in
depth in its respective chapter.
Physical examination
Physical examination is a very important step for
anesthesiologists to appreciate the patient and his/
her condition. The examination usually starts with
baseline vital signs. A review of systems examination
is usually a useful approach; this includes assessment
of cardiac, pulmonary, renal, hepatic, neurological,
gastrointestinal, endocrinological/metabolic, muscu-
loskeletal, psychiatric, gynecological and obstetric
organ systems. When assessing a pediatric patient,
attention should be paid to clinically significant
inherited conditions, such as muscular dystrophies,
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
26
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012which may carry serious clinical consequences. The
majority of pediatric patients have never had previous
anesthesia.
Cardiac anomalies
Anesthesiologists should be informed if adult patients
have a history of congenital anomaly. Likewise,
anesthesiologists should pay attention to pediatric
patients with congenital anomalies. Some of these
conditions are associated with cardiac, respiratory
and other systemic problems. For example, a signifi-
cant portion of the patients with the Pierre Robin
syndrome also have cardiac anomalies. Ventricular
septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and atrial
septal defect are the most common congenital cardiac
anomalies in this syndrome [3].
Pulmonary system
Pulmonary assessment is crucial to anesthesiologists
caring for patients scheduled for ENT procedures.
Patients with preexisting pulmonary conditions may
benefit from receiving preoperative testing before
elective procedures. Some of the acute changes (in
the clinical presentation and/or test results) may
require immediate attention, which may result in
deferral of the elective ENT procedure. A patient
who suffers from chronic airway obstruction may
develop pulmonary hypertension or even right-sided
heart failure (cor pulmonale).
Neurological system
ENT procedures can directly affect central and per-
ipheral nervous systems. Preoperative evaluation
should check for any preexisting neurological deficit
if indicated. Review of systems should include history
of seizures and other neurological symptoms.
Psychological evaluation and preparation
Psychological preparation for patients undergoing
ENT operations is imperative, especially in the pediat-
ric population. Patients may express fear and anxiety
towards having surgery. One of the reasons for anxiety
is the lack of adequate information and good commu-
nication. Hatava et al. rated children 's anxiety and
satisfaction with information and care, which demon-
strated that intramuscular injection of premedication
and induction of anesthesia were the most negative
procedures reported independently by children and
parents, respectively [4]. Adult patients undergoing
laryngectomy may experience very intrusive, life-
changing impact from loss of speech. A preoperative
preparation program and counseling have been shown
to alleviate anxiety in not only patients of all ages, but
also parents of the children [5,6].
Anesthetic-specific elements
During the past three decades, the anesthesia-related
mortality rate has decreased 10-fold [7]. As a result,
anesthesia is often cited as the only specialty in health
care to have reached the six sigma defect rate [7].
However, recent retrospective studies showed that
the incidence of dental injury, most commonly
involving upper incisors, was still reported to be
around 0.05% [8] to 0.36% [9] in the developed world.
While the airway is often shared between anesthesia
and surgical personnel, a thorough preoperative
inspection of the patient 's dental condition is critical.
The authors are in favor of utilizing the standardized
tooth numbering system beginning with the right
maxillary molar tooth in both pediatric and adult
patients (Figure 3.1). At Brigham and Women 's Hos-
pital in Boston, the authors raised the awareness of
dental injury through departmental educational con-
ferences. Documentation of dental injuries should at
least include descriptions of enamel damage, loose or
missing teeth, and other preexisting conditions.
Airway assessment should include examination of
voice quality, respiratory rate, auscultation for breath
sounds to detect stridor and wheezing, testing for
ability to handle secretions, and checking for dyspha-
gia. A history of radiation to the head and neck could
imply airway fragility. Assessment of visible anatomic
landmarks, including the Mallampati scale, may be of
value in predicting difficult intubation. However,
lingual tonsil hyperplasia may interfere with face-
mask ventilation and rigid laryngoscopic intubation,
despite a promising examination on the Mallampati
scale [10]. In children with obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome, the maximal upper airway narrowing is
located in the region where the adenoids and tonsils
overlap [11]. The size of the palatine tonsil may indi-
cate the potential for airway obstruction, which may
have a greater impact in overweight patients [12].
A history of snoring should alert the practitioner that
the patient is at risk for sleep apnea. Pediatric patients
with congenital syndromes often have associated
difficult airways, which need extra attention. For
Chapter 3: Preoperative evaluation for ENT surgery
27
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012example, patients with trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
often have a large tongue with relative hypotonia; a
curved Macintosh blade may provide a better view for
intubation in such an instance. Concerns about pos-
sible atlanto-axial instability in Down 's patients may
require radiological evaluation. The anesthesia plan
should be tailored towards the findings of the indi-
vidual patient.
Laboratory evaluation
The use of preoperative laboratory study may be
divided into two categories: routine or “screening”
and indicated or “diagnostic”. The American Society
of Anesthesiologists (ASA) task force on preanesthe-
sia evaluation defines a routine test as a test ordered
in the absence of a specific clinical indication or
purpose. An indicated test is defined as a test
that is ordered for a specific clinical indication or
purpose [13]. The use of routine preoperative labora-
tory studies is pervasive, partially due to the miscon-
ception that it provides medicolegal protection
against liability [14]. The ASA practice advisory on
preanesthesia evaluation concluded that there was not
sufficiently rigorous literature to permit an unam-
biguous assessment of the clinical benefits or harms
associated with routine testing or testing in the pres-
ence of specific clinical characteristics. The decision-
making parameters for a specific preoperative test or
timing of the test cannot be unequivocally determined
from the available scientific literature [13]. Indicated
or diagnostic studies are for diagnosis of individual
conditions. For example, the American Academy of
Pediatrics recommended polysomnography as the
gold standard for establishing the presence and sever-
ity of sleep-disordered breathing in children [15].
With the implementation of anesthesiologist-
led preoperative clinics, there have been substantial
changes in clinical practice in the past two decades
[16]. It is now the general consensus that tests
should be obtained only for specific clinical indica-
tions. The authors advocate a reasonable consider-
ation of the five elements of the intended laboratory
tests, including relevance, normal value, sensitivity
and specificity, cost, and risk/benefit analysis, before
determining the usefulness and interpretation of
laboratory test results [14].
A recent survey of 793 US board-certified
otolaryngologists demonstrated that most physicians
(69.9%) do not order routine laboratory tests prior to
tonsillectomy; of interest, private-practice otolaryn-
gologists ordered more tests than did those in aca-
demia [17]. Nevertheless, pediatric surgeons and
academic surgeons were significantly more likely to
admit patients postoperatively [17]. In 1999, the
American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head
and Neck Surgery issued a consensus statement
entitled the “Clinical Indicators Compendium ”,
which stated that the performance of coagulation
and bleeding work-up was appropriate only if there
was an abnormality suspected or genetic information
was unavailable [18].
Anesthesia assessment and plan
In 1963, the American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) adopted a five-category classification system
to summarize patient physical status. A sixth category
for brain-dead patients was added later (Table 3.1). In
Figure 3.1. Illustration of standard numbering of primary and
permanent teeth.
Section 1: Introduction
28
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the case of an emergency, a letter “E” is designated to
follow the physical status classification.
The ASA physical status classification has been
used to dictate the care plan for patients. Patients with
low risk (ASA I and II) undergoing minor ENT
surgery are often cared for in an outpatient setting.
There are benefits to patients, especially the pediatric
population, if the operations are performed in a day
surgery fashion. It usually involves much less behav-
ioral change, which may hasten the recovery process
of the children [19 –21]. However, on most occasions,
it is to the anesthesiologist 's disadvantage. There is
often less certainty on patient fasting status. In add-
ition, the entire team is under time pressure for pre-
operative evaluation, surgical time and postoperative
discharge.
Patient selection becomes a crucial process to bal-
ance clinical efficiency and patient safety. Although
some studies showed no statistical difference in com-
plication rate of ASA class III patients compared with
that of ASA classes I and II, most of the clinical
guidelines for outpatient patient selection consist of
only ASA classes I and II patients. There is contro-
versy regarding the age limit of children for outpa-
tient procedures. Premature infants have a series of
potential problems due to prematurity, including but
not limited to pulmonary dysplasia, hypothermia and
anemia. There is also a reported 25% incidence of
apnea within the first 12 hours postoperatively,
resulting from immature brain stem function [22].
Positive findings on patient history, physical examin-
ation and laboratory study may require further
workup.
The ASA recently updated its practice guidelines
for preoperative fasting and use of pharmacological
agents to reduce the risk of pulmonary aspiration
based on scientific and opinion-based evidence [23].
The current recommended minimal fasting periods
for clear liquid, breast milk, infant formula,
nonhuman milk, light meal and fatty food are 2 h, 4
h, 6 h, 6 h, 6 h and 8 h, respectively. Although the
guidelines above apply to patients of all ages, they do
not guarantee complete gastric emptying. Acceptable
clear liquid drinks include water, fruit juices without
pulp, carbonated beverages, clear tea, and black
coffee. Minimal fasting time of 8 h or more may be
needed for meals that include fried or fatty foods or
meat. While they recognize the effectiveness of the
combined use of histamine-2 receptor antagonists
and gastrointestinal stimulants in reducing both gas-
tric volume and acidity, the new guidelines do not
recommend routine use of any gastrointestinal stimu-
lants, gastric acid secretion blockers, antacids, antie-
metics, anticholinergics, or combinations of the
medications above. The 2011 ASA fasting guidelines
may not apply to, or may need to be modified for,
(1) patients with coexisting diseases or conditions that
can affect gastric emptying or fluid volume (e.g.,
pregnancy, obesity, diabetes, hiatal hernia, gastroeso-
phageal reflux disease, ileus or bowel obstruction,
emergency care, external tube feeding) and (2)
patients in whom airway management might be
difficult [23].
Indications for surgery postponement
and cancellation
With the implementation of preoperative evaluation
clinics, the rate of cancellation for outpatient surgery
has decreased. For ENT surgery, most of the time,
anesthetic-related reasons for cancellation are due to
recent upper respiratory infection or non-compliance
with preoperative fasting guidelines. Cancellation of
cases because of upper respiratory infection remains
controversial. The decision whether or not to proceed
with the operation should be an individualized deci-
sion based on discussion involving the patient,
anesthesiologist and surgeon.
Table 3.1. ASA Physical Status Classification System, reproduced with permission of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
Class 1 A normal healthy patient
Class 2 A patient with mild systemic disease
Class 3 A patient with severe systemic disease
Class 4 A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life
Class 5 A moribund patient who is not expected to survive with or without the operation
Class 6 A declared brain-dead patient whose organs are being removed for donor purposes
Chapter 3: Preoperative evaluation for ENT surgery
29
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Informed consent
Modern medical ethics respects the concepts of
autonomy, beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice.
The 1957 landmark case of Salgo v Leland Stanford
etc. Bd. Trustees emphasized the need to discuss with
patients the nature of the procedure, potential risks
and complications, anticipated benefits, and thera-
peutic alternatives [24].
Naturally, this crucial task should be achieved by
honest, knowledgeable and responsible individuals
with good communication skills. The process of
informed consent consists of seven elements: (1)
establishing the decision-making capacity or compe-
tency of the patient, (2) establishing freedom or vol-
untariness in decision-making, including absence of
over-riding legal or state interests, (3) ensuring that
adequate disclosure of material information has
occurred, (4) offering a clinical plan recommenda-
tion, (5) ensuring an understanding of the above by
the patient, (6) a decision by the patient in favor of
the recommended plan, and (7) authorization of that
plan [24].
A recent study of the role of informed consent in
patient recall of perioperative risk showed that ENT
patients who received written summaries had a higher
recall of the risk discussion [25,26]. There was a
tendency for patients to remember serious compli-
cations, such as facial nerve paralysis (88%) and hear-
ing loss (85%), compared to anesthesia reactions (4%)
and hoarseness (2%) [25].
Although it has been a routine practice to obtain
informed consent for clinical research protocols to be
conducted at least 24 hours before the intervention to
allow enough time for the patient 's consideration, it is
generally acceptable for day surgery ENT patients to
give consent on the same day as the surgery. However,
in the United Kingdom, there were a number of
medicolegal cases in which the plaintiffs argued that
they were not given enough time to consider the risks
of surgery. Berry et al. conducted a prospective audit
for ENT patients concerning policy changes for writ-
ten consent to be done prior to the day of surgery;
they concluded that such a policy change not only
protects the hospital but also provides a smooth jour-
ney for the patients [27].
Informed consent for minors is not always a
simple issue. For example, problems can arise when
the parents are divorced. In such circumstances, legal
custody, but not physical custody, empowers the right
to consent. With regard to informed consent in the
case of medical care for a minor, most states allow it
when a specified age, e.g. 12, 14 or 17, is reached. One
should seek counsel for individual state 's minors '
consent law. In case of a medical emergency, the
situation can become very difficult. Generally speak-
ing, one should inform the institutional legal counsel
and risk management teams, while proceeding under
the legal doctrine of “implied consent ”. Note that in
some emergency situations health care providers may
still be required to inform the minor 's parent(s) or
guardian.
Refusal of care
As with treatment consent, competent adult patients
also have the right to refuse treatment, even if neces-
sary to save life or limb. This concept is rooted in the
fundamental legal tradition of self-determination.
One of the examples of such is the refusal, on reli-
gious grounds, of a clinically necessary blood transfu-
sion in Jehovah 's Witness patients.
Preoperative evaluation for
pediatric patients
Pediatric patients are unique in many ways for
anesthesiologists. To better serve this special popula-
tion, one should understand that there are a number
of important physiological and anatomical differences
between pediatric and adult airways [28].
(1) Oxygen consumption is 6 ml/kg/min in neonates,
which gradually approaches that of 3 ml/kg/min
in adults.
(2) The foramen ovale closes over in a few months,
but may remain patent in 15% –25% of adults.
(3) The sympathetic nervous system matures more
slowly than the parasympathetic system, resulting
in an exaggerated vagal response to stimuli, e.g.,
during airway instrumentation.
(4) Infants possess a relatively large occiput; a
shoulder roll may help in extending the head and
opening of the mouth.
(5) The pediatric larynx (cricoid cartilage at C4) is
located cephalad compared to that of adult
(cricoid cartilage at C7). It may take until age
13 years for the adult position of the cricoid
cartilage to be assumed.
(6) The narrowest portion of the infant airway is the
cricoid cartilage vs. the vocal cords in an adult. This
Section 1: Introduction
30
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012is because the shape of the adult larynx is
cylindrical, while it is funnel-shaped in infants.
This is why uncuffed endotracheal tubes can be
sealed successfully in pediatric patients.
(7) The infant epiglottis is often relatively larger and
stiffer than that in an adult. Lifting of the
epiglottis with the tip of the laryngoscope is often
needed to visualize vocal cords during
laryngoscopy.
(8) The nares of infants are much smaller, and so are
prone to obstruction by secretions, edema,
bleeding or an improperly placed face mask.
Premedication should be considered in children
older than the age of 6 to 9 months when separation
anxiety has developed. Psychological preparation is
also important [4,29]. Doll-play has been recognized
as an excellent way to communicate with the child
[30]. The anesthesiologist should always have a good
understanding of the surgical plan, because it not
only improves collaboration with the surgeons intrao-
peratively, but also facilitates in alleviating the anxiety
of the parents during the preoperative evaluation
process.
Preoperative evaluation for
geriatric patients
The geriatric label usually applies to patients who are
65 years old or older. While age itself is not a surgical
contraindication, increased age is associated with
multiple systemic comorbidities. In addition,
advanced age also places the patient at higher risk
for postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction
[31–33]. Therefore, geriatric patients require a thor-
ough preoperative evaluation before any procedure.
Preoperative evaluation of comorbidity, func-
tional status and pharmacological status is critical to
the safety of geriatric surgery [34]. Preoperative
mental status assessment of the elderly provides a
reference for postoperative delirium or alteration,
which should be carefully documented. This infor-
mation may be helpful in determining the intraopera-
tive anesthetic approach [35]. Preoperative laboratory
testing should be considered based on the history
and the physical examination. While most of the
ENT procedures are in the low surgical risk category,
some of the large elective ENT operations are con-
sidered intermediate surgical risk. According to the
2009 American College of Cardiology Foundation
and American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) peri-
operative guidelines, head and neck surgery is rated
intermediate risk with a reported cardiac risk gener-
ally of 1% –5% [36]. A preoperative resting 12-lead
ECG is recommended for patients with known cor-
onary heart disease, peripheral arterial disease, or
cerebrovascular disease who are undergoing inter-
mediate-risk surgical procedures. It is also reasonable
for patients with at least one clinical risk factor, which
includes a history of ischemic heart disease, a history
of compensated or prior heart failure, a history of
cerebrovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, or renal
failure, who are undergoing intermediate-risk opera-
tive procedures. Preoperative ECG testing is not indi-
cated in asymptomatic persons undergoing low-risk
surgical procedures [36].
According to the 2009 ACC/AHA perioperative
guidelines, the cardiac evaluation and care algorithm
for noncardiac surgery should follow a five-step pro-
cess based on active clinical conditions, known car-
diovascular disease, or cardiac risk for patients
50 years of age or greater [27].
Step 1: evaluate the need for emergency noncardiac
surgery: if needed, proceed to the operating room
with perioperative surveillance and postoperative
risk stratification and risk factor management.
Step 2: assess whether the patient has active cardiac
conditions: if so, consider surgery after evaluation
and treatment per ACC/AHA guidelines.
Step 3: determine whether the procedure is of low
risk: if so, proceed with the planned surgery.
Step 4: assess whether the patient 's functional
capacity is greater than or equal to 4 metabolic
equivalents (METs) without symptoms: if so,
proceed with planned surgery.
Step 5: if all of above are inapplicable and the
patient has 1 –3 or more clinical risk factors,
surgical procedure should still be able to proceed
with heart rate control. Consider noninvasive
testing if it will change management.
The 2009 ACC/AHA guidelines also provided a
detailed recommendation regarding the application,
withdrawal, risk, and caveats of the perioperative
administration of beta-blockers [36].
Evaluation of patient capacity sometimes enters
into the process of informed consent or refusal in
the elderly. Clinicians often face difficulty in deter-
mining decision-making capacity in such cases;
Chapter 3: Preoperative evaluation for ENT surgery
31
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012for example, the diagnosis of mild dementia does not
preclude capacity for medical decision-making.
In general, decision-making capacity requires three
basic elements: (1) the capacity to understand and com-
municate; (2) the capacity to reason and deliberate;
and (3) possession of a set of values and goals [37].
Contrary to the legal term of competency, medical deci-
sion-making capacity is not an all-or-none property.
Advance directives and do-not-
resuscitate (DNR) order
All patients undergoing anesthesia and surgical pro-
cedures should be given an opportunity for producing
advance directives, which are decisions that the
patient makes while he/she still retains the capacity
for making such decisions. The advance directives
assume power when the patient loses capacity. The
living will and proxy directive are the two forms of
advance directive [37]. Advance directives are recog-
nized by the US Federal Patient Self-Determination
Act, which is legally binding in all 50 states.
A DNR order, also known as DNAR order (do-
not-attempt-resuscitation), is a medical decision
made by patients in preparation for possible life-
terminating cardiac/pulmonary events. Traditionally,
anesthesiologists often consider perioperative cardiac
and pulmonary events relatively controlled and easily
reversible. Therefore, some institutions require auto-
matic suspension of DNR status during the immedi-
ate perioperative period. However, ASA ethical
guidelines affirmed in 2008 advised that such prac-
tices may not sufficiently address a patient 's rights to
self-determination. Such directives should be clarified
and modified based on institutional guidelines and
the preferences of the patient [38].
Safe surgery checklist and teamwork
As anesthesia and ENT personnel sometimes share
the airway, teamwork is extremely important. Close
communication is crucial to safe, smooth patient
care. Use of the World Health Organization (WHO)
Safe Surgery Checklist is highly recommended [39].
The checklist identifies three phases of an operation,
each corresponding to a specific period in the normal
flow of work: before the induction of anesthesia
(“sign in ”), before the incision of the skin ( “time
out”), and before the patient leaves the operating
room ( “sign out ”). At each phase, the surgery team
should complete specified tasks before proceeding
with the operation. In addition, all operating room
personnel, including anesthesia providers, ENT sur-
geons and nurses, should have a clear plan and role
designation for potential emergencies, such as airway
fires and difficult airway problems.
Case study
Case description
The patient is a 68-year-old male, 5 0900 (175 cm) in
height and weighing 86 kg, with a history of anaplas-
tic thyroid cancer metastatic to lungs and liver. He
refused surgery on his thyroid cancer; since then the
size of his thyroid mass has been increasing. He had
been on adriamycin for chemotherapy and was placed
on sorafenib 2 weeks prior to admission. He now
presents to an outside hospital with acute respiratory
distress, progressive stridor, hemoptysis, and diffi-
culty clearing secretions. He is scheduled for an
urgent tracheostomy.
Past medical history: hypertension, type II dia-
betes, hypercholesterolemia, severe chronic obstruct-
ive pulmonary disease, 40 pack year smoking history.
Past surgical history: percutanous endoscopic gas-
trostomy tube placement (tube feedings stopped
8 hours ago).
Other medication: metformin, atorvastatin,
coumadin.
Code status: DNR, DNI.
Preoperative evaluation
Comorbidities: hypertension and diabetes.
Airway: Mallampati Class 4 airway, thyromental
distance of 2 finger breadths, no overbite. Large thy-
roid mass.
Psychological: patient is awake, alert and oriented.
He is capable of decision-making.
CT scan of the neck revealed a 6.4 cm /C27.1 cm
neck mass compressing the airway (Figure 3.2).
Laboratory study: International Normalized Ratio
(INR) was 1.0; partial thromboplastin time was 33.6
seconds.
The patient understood the risks and benefits of
anesthesia and the proposed operation. He was con-
sented for awake fiberoptic intubation for tracheos-
tomy. He would like to suspend the DNR and DNI
orders during the perioperative period.
Section 1: Introduction
32
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:42 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Induction of anesthesia
The patient had been NPO for more than 8 hours.
The anesthesia team and the surgical team discussed
the procedure and airway management plans. The
plan for anesthesia is an awake fiberoptic intubation
approach based on the preoperative evaluation.
After transporting the patient onto the operating
table, he was placed in a semi-sitting position with the
back up at 70 degrees. After applying standard moni-
tors, the patient was premedicated with intravenous
administration of 50 mg of fentanyl. The patient was
then pre-oxygenated with a face mask and albuterol
nebulizer.
Awake fiberoptic intubation was achieved with
spontaneous breathing maintained. Airway was
secured with a #5.5 cuffed endotracheal tube. Pos-
itioning of the ET tube was confirmed by chest rise,
the presence of bilateral breath sounds and capnogra-
phy. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed to con-
firm the depth of the tube and to rule out other
intrapulmonary processes. The patient was main-
tained on helium (79%)/oxygen (21%) mix and sevo-
florane. Tracheostomy was performed smoothly
Figure 3.2. (A) Chest X-ray showing deviated trachea. (B) Preoperative CT scan of the neck showing the thyroid mass compressing the
trachea. (C and D) Photo of the patient with a large thyroid mass in the semi-sitting position before an awake fiberoptic intubation.
Chapter 3: Preoperative evaluation for ENT surgery
33
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012without difficulty. Potential complications of acute
airway, bleeding (including endobronchial bleeding),
pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, laryngospasm,
and bronchospasm, were avoided.
Clinical pearls
/C15A good ENT anesthesiologist should not only
understand the condition of the patient
preoperatively, but should also be able to
anticipate the effects of surgery on the patient.
/C15The assessment of pediatric patients should pay
attention to clinically significant inherited
conditions, such as muscular dystrophies, which
may carry serious clinical consequences.
/C15A thorough preoperative inspection of the
patient's dental condition is critical.
Documentation of dental injuries should include
descriptions of enamel damage, loose or missing
teeth and other preexisting conditions.
/C15Airway assessment should include examination of
voice quality, respiratory rate, auscultation for
breath sounds to detect stridor and wheezing,
testing for ability to handle secretions, and
checking for dysphagia. A history of radiation to
the head and neck could imply airway fragility.
/C15Routine preoperative testing is no longer
utilized; it is now the general consensus that tests
should be obtained only for specific clinical
indications.
/C15The 2011 ASA fasting guidelines may not apply to,
or may need to be modified for, patients in whom
airway management might be difficult.
/C15Cancellation of surgery because of upper
respiratory infection remains controversial. The
decision whether or not to proceed with the
operation should be an individualized decision
based on a discussion involving the patient,
anesthesiologist and surgeon.
/C15While most of the ENT procedures are in the low
surgical risk category, some of the large elective
ENT operations are considered intermediate-risk
surgery.
References
1. Edward Gilbert Abbott. 2011
April 8, 2011 [cited 2011 July 31,
2011]; Available from: http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/
Edward_Gilbert_Abbott
2. Bishop HF. Operating room
deaths. Anesthesiology 1946;7(6):
p. 651–62.
3. Pearl W. Congenital heart disease
in the Pierre Robin syndrome.
Pediatr Cardiol 1982;2(4):307–9.
4. Hatava P, Olsson GL,
Lagerkranser M. Preoperative
psychological preparation for
children undergoing ENT
operations: a comparison of two
methods. Paediatr Anaesth
2000;10(5):477–86.
5. Fincher W, Shaw J, Ramelet AS.
The effectiveness of a standardised
preoperative preparation in
reducing child and parent anxiety:
a single-blind randomised
controlled trial. J Clin Nurs
2012;21(7–8):946–55.
6. Cady J. Laryngectomy: beyond
loss of voice – caring for the
patient as a whole. Clin J Oncol
Nurs 2002;6(6):347–51.
7. Haller G, Laroche T, Clergue F.
Morbidity in anaesthesia: today
and tomorrow. Best Pract Res Clin
Anaesthesiol 2011;25(2):
123–32.
8. Newland MC, Ellis SJ, Peters KR,
et al. Dental injury associated with
anesthesia: a report of 161,687
anesthetics given over 14 years.
J Clin Anesth 2007;19(5):339–45.
9. Ueda N, Kirita T, Imai Y, et al.
[Dental injury associated with
general anesthesia and the
preventive measures]. Masui
2010;59(5):597–603.
10. Ovassapian A, Glassenberg R,
Randel GI, et al. The unexpected
difficult airway and lingual tonsil
hyperplasia: a case series and a
review of the literature.
Anesthesiology 2002;97(1):
124–32.
11. Arens R, McDonough JM, Corbin
AM, et al. Upper airway size
analysis by magnetic resonance
imaging of children with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2003;167(1):65–70.
12. Wang JH, Chung YS, Cho YW,
et al. Palatine tonsil size in obese,
overweight, and normal-weight
children with sleep-disordered
breathing. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2010;142(4):516–9.
13. Practice advisory for
preanesthesia evaluation: a report
by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Preanesthesia Evaluation.
Anesthesiology 2002;96(2):485–96.
14. Kumar A, Srivastava U. Role of
routine laboratory investigations
in preoperative evaluation.
J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol
2011;27(2):174–9.
15. Clinical practice guideline:
diagnosis and management of
childhood obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome. Pediatrics 2002;109
(4):704–12.
16. Power LM, Thackray NM.
Reduction of preoperative
investigations with the
introduction of an anaesthetist-led
preoperative assessment clinic.
Section 1: Introduction
34
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Anaesth Intensive Care 1999;
27(5):481–8.
17. Setabutr D, Adil EA, Adil TK,
Carr MM. Emerging trends in
tonsillectomy. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 2011;145(2):
223–9.
18. Wieland A, Belden L,
Cunningham M. Preoperative
coagulation screening for
adenotonsillectomy: a review and
comparison of current physician
practices. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2009;140(4):542–7.
19. Bong CL, Ng AS. Evaluation of
emergence delirium in Asian
children using the Pediatric
Anesthesia Emergence Delirium
Scale. Paediatr Anaesth 2009;19
(6):593–600.
20. Fishkin S, Litman RS. Current
issues in pediatric ambulatory
anesthesia. Anesthesiol Clin North
America 2003;21(2):305–11, ix.
21. Zuckerberg AL. Perioperative
approach to children. Pediatr Clin
North Am 1994;41(1):15–29.
22. Stenger MM. Anesthesia for
outpatient ear, nose, and throat
procedures. In McGoldick K, ed.
Anesthesia for Ophthalmic and
Otolaryngologic Surgery .
Philadelphia: W.B. Sauders; 1992.
pp. 144–55.
23. Practice guidelines for
preoperative fasting and the use of
pharmacologic agents to reduce
the risk of pulmonary aspiration:
application to healthy patients
undergoing elective procedures:
an updated report by the
American Society of
Anesthesiologists Committee on
Standards and Practice
Parameters. Anesthesiology
2011;114(3):495–511.
24. Hoehner PJ. Ethical aspects of
informed consent in obstetric
anesthesia – new challenges and
solutions. J Clin Anesth 2003;15
(8):587–600.
25. Aremu SK, Alabi BS, Segun-
Busari S. The role of informed
consent in risks recall in
otorhinolaryngology surgeries:
verbal (nonintervention) vs
written (intervention) summaries
of risks. Am J Otolaryngol, 2011;32
(6):485–9.
26. Henney S, Rakhra S. Patient
information in
otorhinolaryngology: a
prospective audit. JRSM Short Rep
2011;2(5):37.
27. Berry NH, Phillips JS, Salam MA.
Written consent – a prospective
audit of practices for ENT
patients. Ann R Coll Surg Engl
2008;90(2):150–2.
28. Infosino A. Pediatric upper airway
and congenital anomalies.
Anesthesiol Clin North America
2002;20(4):747–66.
29. Tanaka K, Oikawa N, Terao R,
et al. Evaluations of psychological
preparation for children
undergoing endoscopy. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 2011;
52(2):227–9.
30. Letts M, Stevens L, Coleman J,
Kettner R. Puppetry and doll play
as an adjunct to pediatric
orthopaedics. J Pediatr Orthop
1983;3(5):605–9.
31. Rathier MO, Baker WL. A review of
recent clinical trials and guidelines
on the prevention and management
of delirium in hospitalized older
patients. Hosp Pract (Minneap)
2011;39(4):96–106.
32. Steiner LA, Postoperative
delirium. Part 1: pathophysiology
and risk factors. Eur J Anaesthesiol
2011;28(9):628–36.
33. Steiner LA. Postoperative
delirium. part 2: detection,
prevention and treatment. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2011;28(10):
723–32.
34. Bettelli G. Preoperative evaluation
in geriatric surgery: comorbidity,
functional status and
pharmacological history. Minerva
Anestesiol, 2011; 77(6):637–46.
35. Muravchick S, Grichnik K.
Evaluation of the geriatric patient.
In Longnecker DE, et al., eds.
Anesthesiology New York:
McGraw-Hall; 2008. pp. 341 –57.
36. Fleischmann KE, Beckman JA,
Buller CE, et al. 2009 ACCF/AHA
focused update on perioperative
beta blockade. J Am Coll Cardiol
2009;54(22):2102–28.
37. Hoehner PJ. Ethical decisions in
perioperative elder care.
Anesthesiol Clin North America
2000;18 (1):159–81, vii–viii.
38. Ethical guidelines for the
anesthesia care of patients with
do-not-resuscitate orders or other
directives that limit treatment.
October 22, 2008; available from:
http://www.asahq.org/For-
Healthcare-Professionals/~/
media/For%20Members/
documents/Standards%
20Guidelines%20Stmts/Ethical%
20Guidelines%20for%20the%
20Anesthesia%20Care%20of%
20Patients.ashx. Accessed August
23, 2011.
39. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry
WR, et al. A surgical safety
checklist to reduce morbidity and
mortality in a global population.
N Engl J Med 2009;360(5):
491–9.
Chapter 3: Preoperative evaluation for ENT surgery
35
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:12:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.006
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
4
Introduction
The difficult airway in otolaryngology
D. John Doyle
Introduction
This chapter is concerned with difficult airway man-
agement in the context of otolaryngologic surgery.
(A related chapter, Chapter 9, is concerned with some
specific otolaryngologic tumors and infections.) While
the focus here is on otolaryngologic surgery, most of
the principles discussed herein apply to clinical airway
management in general, regardless of the surgical
procedure. In particular, the American Society of
Anesthesiologists’difficult airway algorithm (or similar
algorithm), briefly outlined in this chapter and shown
in Figure 4.1, should ordinarily be a starting point for
nearly all aspects of clinical airway management.
To a large extent, the airway management tech-
nique for otolaryngologic surgery will depend on
clinical circumstances (Table 4.1) as well as the airway
management skills of the anesthesiologist and the
available equipment (Tables 4.2 and 4.3).
The following general options exist: (1) general
endotracheal anesthesia, (2) general anesthesia using
a supraglottic airway device such as a laryngeal mask
airway, (3) general anesthesia using an ENT laryngo-
scope (to expose the airway) in conjunction with jet
ventilation, (4) employing intermittent apnea, (5)
general anesthesia using the patient 's natural airway,
with or without adjuncts such as jaw-positioning
devices or nasopharyngeal airways, and (6) local anes-
thesia in conjunction with IV sedation in some form,
with the patient breathing spontaneously. The first
option is doubtless the most popular, but the tech-
nique chosen, as well as the method of implementing
the technique chosen, will depend on factors such as
the perceived difficulty of intubating the patient using
ordinary methods. Evaluation of the airway in this
particular respect is discussed elsewhere in this book
(Chapters 3 and 5).
The obstructed airway
A patient 's airway can become obstructed for many
reasons. Examples include aspirated foreign bodies;
infections such as epiglottitis, diphtheria or Ludwig 's
angina; laryngospasm; tumors and hematomas
impinging on the airway; trauma to the airway;
obstructive sleep apnea; tonsillar hypertrophy; airway
edema (for example, due to anaphylaxis, prolonged
laryngoscopy or smoke inhalation burn injury), as
well as many other causes.
Although tracheal intubation is the“gold standard”
means of managing the obstructed airway, in many
cases the airway may be opened with a simple jaw
thrust, the use of a nasopharyngeal airway or an oro-
pharyngeal airway, or the use of a supraglottic airway
device such as the laryngeal mask airway (LMA).
Ordinary mask ventilation is frequently employed
where positive-pressure ventilation is desired.
Mask ventilation
Mask ventilation is an important clinical skill to
master, but can sometimes be difficult [1 – 3]. In most
resuscitation settings a self-reinflating bag with non-
rebreathing valves is used to provide positive-pressure
ventilation, usually using 100% oxygen. This bag fills
spontaneously after being squeezed and can be used
even when oxygen is unavailable. Ventilation is often
made much easier when the “jaw thrust maneuver ” is
carried out. Oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal
airways can also be helpful. Following prolonged bag
and mask ventilation, a nasogastric tube may be used
to vent any air that may have been forced into the
stomach.
Ordinarily, should intubation be difficult, clin-
icians can still provide ventilation and oxygenation
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
36
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20121.  Assess the likelihood and clinical impact of basic management problems:
2.  Actively pursue opportunities to deliver supplemental oxygen throughout the process of difficult airway management
3.  Consider the relative merits and feasibility of basic management choices:
A.
A.
Awake Intubation
Preservation of Spontaneous Ventilation Ablation of Spontaneous Ventilation
Invasive Technique for Initial 
Approach to Intubation
Intubation Attempts After Induction of
General Anesthesia
Non-Invasive Technique for Initial
Approach to Intubation
B.
B.
C.
4.  Develop primary and alternative strategies:  
FAILSucceed*
Cancel
Case
Consider Feasibility
of Other Options(a)
Invasive
Airway Access(b)*
Airway Approached by
Non-Invasive Intubation
Invasive
Airway Access(b)* Initial Intubation
Attempts Successful*
FACE MASK VENTILATION NOT ADEQUATEFACE MASK VENTILATION ADEQUATE
NON-EMERGENCY PATHWAY
Ventilation Adequate, Intubation Unsuccessful
Alternative Approaches
to Intubation(c)
Successful
Intubation*
FAIL After
Multiple Attempts
IF BOTH
FACE MASK 
AND LMA
VENTILATION
BECOME
INADEQUATE
LMA NOT ADEQUATE
OR NOT FEASIBLE
LMA ADEQUATE*
CONSIDER/ ATTEMPT LMA
EMERGENCY PATHWAY
Ventilation Not Adequate,
Intubation Unsuccessful
Call for Help
Emergency Non-Invasive Airway Ventilation(e)
Successful Ventilation*
Awaken
Patient(d)
Consider Feasibility
of Other Options(a)
Invasive
Airway Access(b)*
FAIL
Emergency
Invasive Airway
Access(b)*
Initial Intubation
Attempts UNSUCCESSFUL
INTUBATION ATTEMPTS AFTER
INDUCTION OF GENERAL ANESTHESIA
AWAKE INTUBATION
FROM THIS POINT
ONWARDS CONSIDER:
1.   Calling for Help
3.   Awakening the Patient
2.   Returning to Spontaneous
      Ventilation
A.   Difficult Ventilation
B.   Difficult Intubation
C.   Difficulty with Patient Cooperation or Consent
D.   Difficult Tracheostomy
* Confirm ventilation, tracheal intubation, or LMA placement with exhaled CO2
a.  Other options include (but are not limited to): surgery utilizing face
     mask or LMA anesthesia, local anesthesia infiltration or regional 
     nerve blockade.  Pursuit of these options usually implies that mask
     ventilation will not be problematic.  Therefore, these options may be
     of limited value if this step in the algorithm has been reached via
     the Emergency Pathway.
b.  Invasive airway access includes surgical or percutaneous
     tracheostomy or cricothyrotomy.
c.  Alternative non-invasive approaches to difficult intubation include
     (but are not limited to): use of different laryngoscope blades, LMA
     as an intubation conduit (with or without fiberoptic guidance),
     fiberoptic intubation, intubating stylet or tube changer, light wand,
     retrograde intubation, and blind oral or nasal intubation.
d.  Consider re-preparation of the patient for awake intubation or
     canceling surgery.
e.  Options for emergency non-invasive airway ventilation include (but
     are not limited to):  rigid bronchoscope, esophageal–tracheal combitube
     ventilation, or transtracheal jet ventilation.
vs.
vs.
vs.
AMERICAN SOCIETY
OF ANESTHESIOLOGISTS
DIFFICULT AIRWAY ALGORITHM
Figure 4.1. Synopsis of the 2003 ASA difficult airway algorithm. It is expected that future editions of the algorithm will place special emphasis
on the use of videolaryngoscopy for those situations where direct laryngoscopy produces an unsatisfactory view of the glottic structures.
Reproduced with permission from the American Society of Anesthesiologists.
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
37
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012via face-mask ventilation. However, in some cases,
mask ventilation can be difficult. Obviously, being
able to accurately predict difficult mask ventilation
may improve the safety of airway management. In a
study of this matter by Langeron et al. [1], difficult
mask ventilation (DMV) was defined as the inability
of an unassisted anesthesiologist to maintain the
oxygen saturation over 92% or to prevent or reverse
signs of inadequate ventilation during positive-
pressure mask ventilation under general anesthesia.
With this definition, DMV was found in 75 of 1502
patients studied (5%), with one case of impossible
ventilation. Of particular interest, DMV was antici-
pated by the anesthesiologist in only 13 patients, or
17% of the DMV cases. Using multivariate analysis,
five criteria were identified as independent factors for
DMV. These are listed in Table 4.4. The presence of
two factors was found to indicate an especially high
likelihood of DMV (sensitivity, 0.72; specificity, 0.73).
In a study conducted at the University of Mich-
igan [2], the authors studied the incidence and pre-
dictors of difficult and impossible mask ventilation
Table 4.1. Some ENT diseases and conditions associated with
difficult airway management
Infection-related
/C15Abscess of upper airway
/C15Epiglottitis
/C15Ludwig's angina
/C15Quinsy
/C15Retropharyngeal abscess
Tumor-related
/C15Supraglottic and glottic tumors
/C15Tumors of base of tongue
/C15Oral malignancies
/C15Previous head and neck surgery
/C15Previous radiation treatment to head and neck
Trauma-related
/C15Facial smash
/C15Fractured larynx
/C15Maxillofacial trauma
/C15Cervical spine trauma
/C15Trismus
/C15Temporomandibular joint injury
Other conditions
/C15Externally fixed head (eg. halo traction)
/C15Wired jaws or teeth
/C15Congenital malformation
/C15Very anterior larynx
/C15Fused cervical-spine (e.g. ankylosing spondylitis)
/C15Supraglottic or subglottic edema
Table 4.2. Popular supraglottic airway devices
/C15LMA family of products
/C15Disposable LMA (LMA Unique)
/C15Flexible LMA
/C15Intubating LMA (LMA Fastrach)
/C15LMA Proseal
/C15Combitube
/C15Laryngeal tube and variants
/C15i-gel family of supraglottic airways
/C15Air-Q family of supraglottic airways
/C15King tube
Table 4.3. Popular and specialty laryngoscopes
“Conventional” laryngoscopes
/C15Macintosh-type laryngoscopes
/C15Miller-type laryngoscopes and other
straight-blade designs
/C15McCoy laryngoscope and variants
Rigid fiberoptic laryngoscopes
/C15Bullard laryngoscope
/C15Upsher laryngoscope
/C15Wu laryngoscope
Video laryngoscopes
/C15GlideScope video laryngoscope
/C15Storz video laryngoscope
/C15McGrath video laryngoscope
/C15KingVision video laryngoscope
/C15Clarus family of laryngoscopes
Section 1: Introduction
38
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(MV) using the grading scale developed by Han et al.
[3] (Table 4.5). This scale consists of five categories
(grades 0 – 4), with grades 3 and 4 representing diffi-
cult and impossible mask ventilation respectively. The
authors summarize their findings as follows: “Body
mass index of 30 kg/m 2 or greater, a beard, Mallam-
pati classification III or IV, age of 57 yr or older,
severely limited jaw protrusion, and snoring were
identified as independent predictors for grade 3 MV.
Snoring and thyromental distance of less than 6 cm
were independent predictors for grade 4 MV. Limited
or severely limited mandibular protrusion, abnormal
neck anatomy, sleep apnea, snoring, and body mass
index of 30 kg/m 2 or greater were independent pre-
dictors of grade 3 or 4 MV and difficult intubation. ”
These findings emphasize the importance played by a
large neck size (e.g., such as may be found in obesity)
or by abnormal neck anatomy (e.g., such as may be
found following radiation treatment to the neck.)
Tracheal intubation in patients
undergoing otolaryngologic surgery
Most patients undergoing otolaryngologic surgery
have their airway managed via tracheal intubation.
Under ordinary circumstances, tracheal intubation is
straightforward and ordinary laryngoscopic tech-
niques work well. From time to time, patients who
are expected to be difficult to intubate are encoun-
tered, and these patients are usually managed using
techniques such as videolaryngoscopy or fiberoptic
intubation (Figure 4.2). A key decision in such cases
is whether or not the intubation should be carried out
awake or following the induction of general anesthe-
sia. Another important decision is what tools/inter-
ventions to employ in the event that difficulty with
ventilation or with intubation is encountered.
Patients for otolaryngologic surgery are often
intubated using an ordinary polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) endotracheal tube, but microlaryngeal, laser
tubes and reinforced tubes are frequently employed.
In the case of reinforced tubes, their principal advan-
tages are that they are very unlikely to kink and that
they fit especially well into tracheostomy stomas
because of their excellent flexibility. Laser tubes are
discussed in Chapter 25.
The usual considerations in this situation start with
the fact that the tube must be adequately secured using
tape or by other means (some maxillofacial surgeons
prefer to tie the tube to the side of the mouth or to tie
the tube to the teeth with wire). One should also ensure
that the tube tip is not too close to the carina (or worse,
positioned endobronchially), that the tube cuff is pos-
itioned appropriately deep past the vocal cords, and
that the tube not be situated so that kinking is likely to
occur with head movement or so that it exerts pressure
onto the posterior pharyngeal wall.
In addition, it is important that the cuff pressures
in the endotracheal tube ordinarily be kept less than
25 mmHg to avoid damage to the tracheal mucosa.
With respect to this last issue, it should be remem-
bered that in cases where nitrous oxide is used the
cuff pressures will gradually increase over time as
nitrous oxide enters the cuff by diffusion. This is of
particular concern in surgical procedures of long dur-
ation, such as free-flap surgery.
Role of the ASA difficult
airway algorithm
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has
issued guidelines for management of the difficult
airway. This began with an algorithm initially pub-
lished in 1993 [4], followed by a revision in 2003 [5],
These guidelines, as well as similar guidelines from
Table 4.4. Predictors of difficult mask ventilation. From
Langeron O, Masso E, Huraux C, et al. Prediction of difficult mask
ventilation. Anesthesiology 2000;92:1229– 36
/C15Age over 55 yr
/C15Body mass index exceeding 26 kg/m 2
/C15Presence of a beard
/C15Lack of teeth
/C15History of snoring
Table 4.5. Grading scale for difficulty of mask ventilation
developed by Han et al. (2004)
Classification Description/ definition
Grade 0 Ventilation by mask not attempted
Grade 1 Ventilated by mask
Grade 2 Ventilated by mask with oral airway or
other adjuvant
Grade 3 Difficult mask ventilation (inadequate,
unstable, or requiring two practioners)
Grade 4 Unable to mask ventilate
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
39
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012other sources [6 – 28], offer considerable useful advice
to the clinician facing potentially difficult airway chal-
lenges. Such advice includes (1) the importance of
performing an airway evaluation prior to inducing
anesthesia, (2) the importance of providing oxygen
at every opportunity, (3) the potential value of awake
intubation, (4) the value of supraglottic airway devices
such as the laryngeal mask airway (LMA ™)a sa
possible airway rescue maneuver should failure occur,
and so on. Figure 4.1 summarizes the 2003 ASA
difficult airway algorithm.
Prediction of intubation difficulty:
intubation difficulty scale
Before attempting tracheal intubation it is very help-
ful to have a means to predict which patients will be
difficult to intubate using direct laryngoscopy. While
a number of studies and reviews on the topic are
available [24– 28], most clinicians will be satisfied with
the 11-point airway assessment tool included with the
2003 ASA difficult airway algorithm. This is summar-
ized in Table 4.6, while Table 4.7 lists some tech-
niques useful in clinical airway management. In
addition, following the completion of tracheal intub-
ation, it can sometimes be helpful to summarize
the difficulty (if any) encountered. Here, the
Intubation Difficulty Scale (IDS) introduced by Adnet
et al. [28] can be useful. It is a numerical score
indicating overall intubation difficulty based on seven
descriptors associated with intubation difficulty:
number of supplementary intubation attempts,
number of supplementary operators, alternative tech-
niques used, laryngoscopic grade, subjective lifting
force, the use of external laryngeal manipulation,
and the characteristics of the vocal cords.
Laryngoscopes
Most intubations are achieved using traditional Mac-
intosh and Miller laryngoscopes, although a number
of alternative laryngoscopes have been advocated.
Where the view at laryngoscopy is suboptimal, the
use of introducers such as the Eschman stylet
(“gum elastic bougie ”) can sometimes be very helpful
[29– 31]. It is used as follows: when a poor laryngo-
scopic view of the glottic structures is obtained, the
intubator places the introducer into the patient 's
mouth and gently advances it through the glottic
opening (in the case of a Grade II view) or anteriorly
under the epiglottis (in the case of a Grade III view).
Subtle clicks resulting from the introducer passing
over the tracheal rings help confirm proper placement
of the introducer. With the introducer held steady,
one then railroads a tracheal tube over the introducer
into the glottis. Some clinicians preload the intro-
ducer with a tracheal tube as shown in Figure 4.3.
Special devices such as the McCoy laryngoscope
and the Bullard laryngoscope are also popular in
some centers. In recent years, however, video laryn-
goscopes such as the GlideScope, the McGrath video
laryngoscope, the Storz video laryngoscope and the
(A) (B)
Figure 4.2. This is a patient with a massive parotid tumor, encroaching into the airway and limiting mouth opening, rendering this patient a
difficult airway that required awake intubation. Image courtesy of Dr. B. Abdelmalak. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 1: Introduction
40
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Pentax AWS have proven to be particularly valuable,
especially in patients with an “anterior” larynx or in
patients with cervical spine immobilization. Among
the available videolaryngoscopes, the GlideScope
(Figure 4.4) has the largest market share. Figure 4.5
shows a typical view of the glottis during intubation
with the GlideScope. Figure 4.6 shows a sample “dif-
ficult airway letter ” that may be included in the
patient's chart and given to the patient.
Fiberoptic intubation: awake
intubation
Awake intubation involves endotracheal tube inser-
tion in a conscious or lightly sedated patient and is
usually performed because intubation under general
anesthesia is judged to be too risky because of con-
cerns about possible difficulties with ventilation or
intubation or concerns about aspiration. While fiber-
optic intubation under topical anesthesia is the most
common means of carrying out awake intubation,
other methods include awake blind nasal intubation
using an Endotrol ® (or similar) endotracheal tube, or
using a Macintosh, Miller, GlideScope or other laryn-
goscope under topical anesthesia. A number of airway
blocks can be used in addition to topical anesthesia.
These are discussed in Chapter 6.
Table 4.6. Components of the preoperative airway physical examination as recommended in the ASA difficult airway algorithm
(2003 edition). In ordinary clinical practice, special emphasis is usually placed on the visibility of the oropharyngeal structures with the
tongue protruded when the patient is in the sitting position (Mallampati classification)
Airway examination component Nonreassuring findings
1. Length of upper incisors Relatively long
2. Relation of maxillary and mandibular incisors
during normal jaw closure
Prominent “overbite” (maxillary incisors anterior to mandibular
incisors)
3. Relation of maxillary and mandibular incisors
during voluntary protrusion of mandible
Patient cannot bring mandibular incisor anterior to (in front of)
maxillary incisors
4. Interincisor distance Under 3 cm
5. Visibility of uvula Not visible when tongue is protruded with patient in sitting
position (e.g., Mallampati class greater than class II)
6. Shape of palate Highly arched or very narrow
7. Compliance of mandibular space Stiff, indurated, occupied by mass, or nonresilient
8. Thyromental distance Less than 3 ordinary finger breadths
9. Length of neck Short
10. Thickness of neck Thick
11. Range of motion of head and neck Patient cannot touch tip of chin to chest or cannot extend neck
Table 4.7. Techniques for difficult airway management. This
table from the 2003 ASA difficult airway algorithm lists some
commonly cited techniques. Since the time of publication the
use of video laryngoscopy (e.g., GlideScope, McGrath video
laryngoscope, Storz video laryngoscope, Pentax AWS) has
become commonplace and should be added to the left-hand
column. Naturally, the tools used in any particular situation
will depend on the specific circumstances
Techniques for difficult
intubation
Techniques for difficult
ventilation
Alternative laryngoscope
blades
Esophageal tracheal
Combitube
Awake intubation Intratracheal jet stylet
Blind intubation (oral or
nasal)
Laryngeal mask airway
(LMA)
Fiberoptic intubation Oral and nasopharyngeal
airways
Intubating stylet or tube
changer
Rigid ventilating
bronchoscope
Intubation via LMA Invasive airway access
Light wand Transtracheal jet
ventilation
Retrograde intubation Two-person mask
ventilation
Invasive airway access
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
41
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The use of fiberoptic intubation for the airway
management of patients undergoing otolaryngologic
surgery is popular because this technique works well
in the presence of many kinds of airway pathology.
While fiberoptic intubation can often be safely per-
formed under complete general anesthesia [32] many
clinicians opt to perform this technique under topical
anesthesia with the patient only lightly sedated (“awake
fiberoptic intubation”), depending on the skill level of
the anesthesiologist, the cooperation of the patient,
and the severity of the pathology. A central consider-
ation behind the choice of “awake” versus “asleep”
fiberoptic intubation is the safety margin an awake
technique allows: if intubation is not successfully
accomplished, the patient 's ability to maintain his or
her own airway remains intact. In addition, during
awake intubation, airway reflexes are generally main-
tained sufficiently to guard against pulmonary aspir-
ation, an important point in patients with high
aspiration risk such as full stomach trauma patients.
It should also be emphasized that awake intub-
ation is not synonymous with fiberoptic intubation.
Awake intubation can be accomplished safely utiliz-
ing many other airway devices. Other possible options
for awake intubation include but are not limited
to: direct laryngoscopy with Macintosh and Miller
laryngoscopes, blind nasal intubation, use of a Glide-
Scope or other video laryngscope, use of a lighted
stylette, etc.
Typically, with awake intubation the airway is
anesthetized with gargled and atomized 4% lidocaine.
Superior laryngeal and transtracheal blocks are
occasionally also employed. In addition, judicious
sedation is usually administered. Midazolam, fenta-
nyl, remifentanil, ketamine, propofol and clonidine
have all been used in this setting. Recently, the use
of dexmedetomidine, a selective a2 agonist with seda-
tive, analgesic, amnestic, and antisialagogue proper-
ties, has been reported [33]. A key advantage of this
agent is that it maintains spontaneous respiration
with minimal respiratory depression. Patients under
dexmedetomidine sedation are generally easy to
arouse. However, this advantage, along with that of
Figure 4.3. Photograph showing a
tracheal tube with a preloaded introducer
containing a Coude tip. Intended for
situations where the laryngoscopic view
is suboptimal, the upturned distal Coude
tip is placed under the epiglottis or, if
visible, above the interarytenoid notch,
followed by advancement of the tracheal
tube into the trachea. Image credit:
http://www.airwaycam.com/images/
bougieKiwiGrip_01.gif.
Figure 4.4. The GlideScope videolaryngoscope utilizes a color
CMOS video camera and LED light source embedded into a plastic
laryngoscope blade. The standard (adult) blade is 14.5 mm at its
maximum width, and bends 60 /C14at the mid-line. This configuration
provides a view that is frequently superior to that obtained by direct
laryngoscopy. The video image is displayed on a liquid crystal
display (LCD) monitor, and can also be recorded electronically. An
anti-fog mechanism helps ensure that a quality image is obtained. In
addition to the standard blade, a mid-sized (pediatric) blade and a
neonatal blade are also available.
Section 1: Introduction
42
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012maintaining spontaneous respiration, may not hold
under very large doses.
Doyle [34] has described the successful use of the
GlideScope in four cases of awake intubation. The
following potential advantages are worthy of note.
First, the view is generally excellent. Second, the
method appears to be less affected by the presence
of secretions or blood as compared to the use of
fiberoptic intubation. Third, there are no special
restrictions on the type of ETT that can be placed
when using the GlideScope, while this is not the case
for fiberoptic methods. Fourth, the GlideScope is
much more rugged than a fiberoptic bronchoscope,
and is far less likely to be damaged with use. It should
also be noted that while it is well known that advan-
cing the ETT into the trachea over the fiberoptic
bronchoscope often fails as a result of the ETT impin-
ging on the arytenoid cartilages, this is generally not a
problem with the GlideScope.
In the end, however, the use of awake fiberoptic
intubation in the setting of the patient with airway
pathology remains steadfastly popular, because it is
Figure 4.5. Close-up views from the GlideScope, as the endotracheal tube (ETT) passes through the vocal cords. Note that during ETT
placement the tube tip often tends to hit against the anterior tracheal wall. This problem is easily handled by pulling back the stylette by
about 3 cm and then advancing the ETT. Sometimes it also helps to rotate the ETT 180 /C14to direct the ETT tip more posteriorally (once the
stylette has been removed). From case 112 of the author 's unpublished series.
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
43
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012***IMPORTANT *** 
To the physician: This person was found to be a DIFFICULT INTUBATION on
__ ___ /_____ /__ ___ at ____ ___ _____ _______ ______ _____ ___  (Hospital), 
Tel: __ _____ ___ __________ ___ _____ ___ __ __ ___ ___ ________
Reasons for difficulty included (circle all that apply):
1) Poor neck mobility
2) Poor jaw mobility
3) Prominent teeth
4) Large/stiff tongue
5) Anterior larynx
6) Limited mouth opening
7) Other (specify) 
Ventilation with bag and mask was:
1) Easy
2) Difficult
3) Impossible
Ventilation adjuncts used included (circle all that apply):
1) Oropharyngeal airway
2) Nasopharyngeal airway
3) Other (specify)
Success was achieved:
1) Unconscious / paralyzed
2) Awake
using (circle all that apply): 
  1) Alternate blade (specify) 
  2) Video laryngoscope (specify)
  3) Fiberoptic bronchoscope
  4) Light wand / transillumination
  5) Blind nasal intubation
  6) Other (specify)
Figure 4.6. Model difficult airway form. This is a model difficult airway form you can adapt for your clinical practice. It is suggested that
you keep these forms readily available in the anesthesia lounge to report difficult airway information to the patient and to his or her physician.
It is provided courtesy of John R. Davidson MD FRCPC.
Section 1: Introduction
44
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012__ ___ ___ _____ ___ __ __ ___ ___ _____ ___ __ __ ___ ___ _____ ___ __ __ ___
*** IMPORTANT *** 
At the time of your recent anesthetic there was difficulty getting this tube into
position. Such difficulties arise because of the relative position of a patient's 
mouth, teeth, and windpipe.
The attached form describes the problem in detail for the benefit of any
anesthesiologist taking care of you in the future. Please keep this form and show
it to your anesthesiologist if you ever have surgery in the future. It will warn the 
anesthesiologist and will enable him or her to take better care of you.  
During general anesthesia (sleep for surgery) an oxygen tube is usually placed in
the patient's throat. This assures an adequate supply of oxygen to the lungs, 
heart, brain and other vital organs. 
For future anesthetics in fasted patients I recommend:
1) Long pre-oxygenation, short acting agents, early wake-up if success not 
forthcoming. 
2) Awake intubation. 
I hope this information is helpful to you.
To The Patient:
You should also get a Medic Alert bracelet to warn of this problem. The bracelet 
should say: "DIFFICULT INTUBATION".  The address information for the 
MedicAlert Foundation is as follows: 
MedicAlert Foundation International 
2323 Colorado Avenue 
Turlock, California, USA 95382  
http://www.medicalert.org
By phone, 24 hours a day:
888-633-4298
209-668-3333 from outside the U.S.
This is IMPORTANT! Knowing you are a "Difficult Intubation" could save your 
life in an emergency. 
Figure 4.6. (cont.)
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
45
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012gentle to the airway, is generally well tolerated, and
does not require the application of force to obtain
glottic exposure.
In addition, concerns about injuries associated with
the use of the GlideScope have added to some individ-
uals' reluctance to use the device on a routine basis [35].
Can't intubate – what now?
Occasionally one encounters patients who cannot be
intubated by direct laryngoscopy either due to poor
judgment or from unexpected difficulty. Depending
on the clinical circumstances, one may choose one of
the following options.
Always remember to call for help
when needed
[Option 1] Ventilate the patient and allow them to
wake up. If ventilation is also difficult, utilize a two-
person technique whereby one person manages the
mask and holds the jaw in position using both
hands, while the other ventilates the patient by hand
using the rebreathing bag. Insertion of an airway of
some kind, such as an oral airway or a
nasopharyngeal airway, can be helpful. Alternately,
ventilation can be assisted with the use of a
supraglottic airway, although this may be of limited
value in some patients with abnormal airways.
Then one can either cancel the case, proceed with
awake intubation or proceed with regional
anesthesia, as appropriate. The regional anesthesia
option suffers from the disadvantage that the
airway will be in jeopardy should local anesthetic
toxicity be a problem.
[Option 2] While the patient is still under general
anesthesia, proceed to intubate using a video
laryngoscope, a lighted stylette or a fiberoptic
bronchoscope.
[Option 3] Keep the patient asleep and insert a
supraglottic airway of some kind. Then either do
the case using a supraglottic airway or use the
supraglottic airway as a conduit for tracheal
intubation. However, performing the case using a
supraglottic airway may not be a satisfactory
option in many cases, such as in prone cases or
patients at substantial risk of aspiration.
[Option 4] Allow an otolaryngologist to attempt
intubation using specialized equipment such as a
Dedo laryngoscope, an anterior commissure
laryngoscope or a rigid bronchoscope.
[Option 5] In patients where neither intubation nor
ventilation is possible despite everyone 'sb e s t
efforts, a surgical airway will be needed.
Airway edema in ENT cases
Airway edema is a frequent accompaniment to pro-
longed surgery of any kind, especially when vigorous
fluid resuscitation has been carried out, or in patients
with some forms of airway pathology, such as some
infections. Many clinicians have used the leak test to
determine readiness for extubation, despite its recog-
nized limitations. (The presence of a leak around the
endotracheal tube when the cuff is down is said to
imply that the airway is not overly edematous.)
Difficult extubation
Extubation, removing an endotracheal tube (ETT)
from the patient 's trachea, should ordinarily only be
done with the patient awake enough to obey verbal
commands. Even under such conditions, however,
catastrophes following extubation can occur, such as
total collapse of the airway in a patient with tracheo-
malacia. Sometimes it is wise to extubate over an ETT
exchange catheter, such as any patient who would be
very difficult to reintubate or where delayed edema
following laser airway surgery is expected.
Such an exchange catheter can be left in place and
later used to facilitate reintubation should a trial of
extubation end in failure. If reintubation becomes
necessary the exchange catheter can then be used as a
far-from-foolproof guide to direct the new ETT
through the cords. Some exchange catheters can also
be used to administer low-flow oxygen deep into the
lungs (e.g. 2 – 4 liters/min flow rate) as well as for
capnography or even emergency jet ventilation in a
manner similar to transtracheal jet ventilation (TTJV).
Patients may be at high risk following extubation
either because of an inability to tolerate extubation or
because of potential difficulties in reestablishing the
airway. Examples of the former include tracheomala-
cia, vocal cord palsy, bilateral recurrent laryngeal
nerve injury, etc. Difficulty reestablishing the airway
may occur with major head or neck surgery, previous
intubation difficulties, maxillomandibular fixation
and many other situations.
Section 1: Introduction
46
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Summary
Difficult airway management for otolaryngologic sur-
gery relies heavily on the American Society of Anesthe-
siologists difficult airway algorithm and, particularly,
on the use of awake intubation in the spontaneously
breathing patient. In addition, one must always have at
hand a plan for the situation where the patient cannot
easily be intubated by direct laryngoscopy.
Case study
A 55-yr-old, 59-kg man was admitted to hospital
with an acute exacerbation of COPD/emphysema
requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation.
While breathing room air, his PaO 2 was 50 mmHg
and PaCO 2 was 63 mmHg. He was known to be diffi-
cult to intubate as a result of extensive radiation for
head and neck cancer. Intravenous sedation with dex-
medetomidine was started with a loading dose of 1 mg/
kg followed by an infusion of 0.7 mg/kg/h while oxygen
was delivered by nasal cannula. Following this, oxygen
saturation measured by pulse oximeter stayed above
90% and the respiratory rate declined from 32 breaths/
min to 18 breaths/min. Topicalization of the airway
was achieved with gargled 2% viscous lidocaine and 4%
lidocaine spray. A Williams airway was used to facili-
tate orotracheal intubation. Once the cords were in
view, additional 4% lidocaine was administered under
direct vision via an epidural catheter introduced into
the biopsy channel of the bronchocsope. Once the tube
was advanced into the trachea and the correct position
established clinically, fiberoptically and capnographi-
cally, additional sedation using propofol was used to
facilitate positive-pressure ventilation.
Clinical pearls
/C15To a large extent, the airway management
technique for otolaryngologic surgery will depend
on specific clinical circumstances as well as the
airway management skills of the anesthesiologist.
/C15Should intubation be difficult, clinicians can still
provide ventilation and oxygenation via face-mask
ventilation. However, it some cases, mask
ventilation can be difficult.
/C15Body mass index of /C2130 kg/m 2, a beard,
Mallampati classification III or IV, age of /C2157 yr,
severely limited jaw protrusion, thyromental
distance of less than 6 cm and snoring were
identified as independent predictors of difficult
mask ventilation.
/C15Although patients for otolaryngologic surgery are
often intubated using an ordinary polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) endotracheal tube,
microlaryngeal, laser-safe and wire-reinforced
tubes are frequently employed.
/C15Awake intubation is usually performed because
intubation under general anesthesia is judged to
be too risky (difficulties with ventilation or
intubation or concerns about aspiration).
A central consideration behind the choice of
“awake” versus “asleep” fiberoptic intubation is
the safety margin an awake technique allows.
/C15The use of fiberoptic intubation for the airway
management of patients undergoing
otolaryngologic surgery is popular because this
technique works well in the presence of many
kinds of airway pathology. Moreover, it is gentle
to the airway, generally well tolerated, and does
not require the application of force to obtain
glottic exposure.
/C15Awake intubation is not synonymous with
fiberoptic intubation, as awake intubation can be
accomplished safely using many other airway
devices, such as direct laryngoscopy with
Macintosh and Miller laryngoscopes, blind nasal
intubation, use of a GlideScope or other video
laryngscopes, use of a lighted stylette, etc.
/C15In patients where neither intubation nor
ventilation is possible despite everyone 's best
efforts, a surgical airway will be needed.
References
1. Langeron O, Masso E, Huraux C,
et al. Prediction of difficult mask
ventilation. Anesthesiology
2000;92:1229– 36.
2. Kheterpal S, Han R, Tremper KK,
et al. Incidence and predictors of
difficult and impossible mask
ventilation. Anesthesiology
2006;105(5):885– 91.
3. Han R, Tremper KK, Kheterpal S,
O'Reilly M. Grading scale for
mask ventilation. Anesthesiology
2004;101:267
4. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway. A report by the American
Society of Anesthesiologists Task
Force on Management of the
Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology
1993;78:597– 602.
5. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway: an updated report by the
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
47
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Management of the Difficult
Airway. Anesthesiology
2003;98:1269– 77.
6. Frova G, Sorbello M. Algorithms
for difficult airway management:
a review. Minerva Anestesiol
2009;75(4):201– 9.
7. Cook TM. Difficult Airway
Society guidelines. Anaesthesia
2004;59:1243– 4; author reply
1247.
8. Crosby ET, Cooper RM, Douglas
MJ, et al. The unanticipated
difficult airway with
recommendations for
management. Can J Anaesth
1998;45(8):757– 76.
9. Combes X, Jabre P, Margenet A,
et al. Unanticipated difficult
airway management in the
prehospital emergency setting:
prospective validation of an
algorithm. Anesthesiology
2011;114(1):105– 10.
10. Amathieu R, Combes X, Abdi W,
et al. An algorithm for difficult
airway management, modified for
modern optical devices (Airtraq
laryngoscope; LMA CTrach ™): a
2-year prospective validation in
patients for elective abdominal,
gynecologic, and thyroid surgery.
Anesthesiology 2011;114(1):25– 33.
11. Weiss M, Engelhardt T. Proposal
for the management of the
unexpected difficult pediatric
airway. Paediatr Anaesth 2010;20
(5):454– 64. Epub 2010 Mar 22.
12. Dupanovic M, Fox H, Kovac A.
Management of the airway in
multitrauma. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2010;23(2):276– 82.
13. Vaida SJ, Pott LM, Budde AO,
Gaitini LA. Suggested algorithm
for management of the
unexpected difficult airway in
obstetric anesthesia. J Clin Anesth
2009;21(5):385– 6. Epub 2009
Aug 22.
14. Heard AM, Green RJ, Eakins P.
The formulation and introduction
of a ‘can’t intubate, can't ventilate'
algorithm into clinical practice.
Anaesthesia 2009;64(6):601– 8.
15. Saxena S. The ASA difficult
airway algorithm: is it time to
include video laryngoscopy and
discourage blind and multiple
intubation attempts in the
nonemergency pathway? Anesth
Analg 2009;108(3):1052.
16. Boseley ME, Hartnick CJ. A useful
algorithm for managing the
difficult pediatric airway. Int
J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2007;
71(8):1317– 20.
17. Heidegger T, Gerig HJ.
Algorithms for management of
the difficult airway. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2004;17(6):
483– 4.
18. Petrini F, Accorsi A, Adrario E,
et al. Gruppo di Studio SIAARTI
“Vie Aeree Difficili ”; IRC e
SARNePI; Task Force.
Recommendations for airway
control and difficult airway
management. Minerva Anestesiol
2005;71(11):617– 57.
19. Segal R. A response to ‘Difficult
Airway Society guidelines for
management of the unanticipated
difficult intubation ’, Henderson
JJ, Popat MT, Latto IP and Pearce
AC, Anaesthesia 2004;59:675– 94.
Anaesthesia 2004;59(11):1150– 1.
20. Rosenblatt WH. The Airway
Approach Algorithm: a decision
tree for organizing preoperative
airway information. J Clin Anesth
2004;16(4):312– 6.
21. Henderson JJ, Popat MT, Latto IP,
Pearce AC; Difficult Airway
Society. Difficult Airway Society
guidelines for management of the
unanticipated difficult intubation.
Anaesthesia 2004;59(7):
675– 94.
22. Combes X, Le Roux B, Suen P,
et al. Unanticipated difficult
airway in anesthetized patients:
prospective validation of a
management algorithm.
Anesthesiology 2004;100(5):
1146– 50.
23. Rosenblatt WH, Whipple J. The
difficult airway algorithm of the
American Society of
Anesthesiologists. Anesth Analg
2003;96(4):1233.
24. Randell T: Prediction of difficult
intubation. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 1996;40:1016– 23.
25. Iohom G, Ronayne M,
Cunningham AJ. Prediction of
difficult tracheal intubation. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2003;20:31– 6.
26. Honarmand A, Safavi MR.
Prediction of difficult
laryngoscopy in obstetric patients
scheduled for Caesarean delivery.
Eur J Anaesthesiol 2008;25:
714– 20.
27. Khan ZH, Mohammadi M,
Rasouli MR, Farrokhnia F, Khan
RH. The diagnostic value of the
upper lip bite test combined with
sternomental distance,
thyromental distance, and
interincisor distance for
prediction of easy laryngoscopy
and intubation: a prospective
study. Anesth Analg
2009;109:822– 4.
28. Adnet F, Borron SW, Racine SX,
et al. The intubation difficulty
scale (IDS): proposal and
evaluation of a new score
characterizing the complexity of
endotracheal intubation.
Anesthesiology 1997;87:1290– 7.
29. Shah KH, Kwong BM, Hazan A,
Newman DH, Wiener D. Success
of the gum elastic bougie as a
rescue airway in the emergency
department. J Emerg Med 2011;
40(1):1– 6.
30. Boedeker BH, Bernhagen M,
Miller DJ, Murray WB.
Comparison of a disposable
bougie versus a newly designed
malleable bougie in the intubation
of a difficult manikin airway. Stud
Health Technol Inform .
2011;163:65– 7.
31. Combes X, Dumerat M,
Dhonneur G. Emergency gum
elastic bougie-assisted tracheal
intubation in four patients
Section 1: Introduction
48
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012with upper airway distortion.
Can J Anaesth 2004;51(10):
1022– 4.
32. Abdelmalak BB, Bernstein E, Egan
C, et al. GlideScope® vs flexible
fibreoptic scope for elective
intubation in obese patients.
Anaesthesia 2011;66 (7):
550– 5. PubMed PMID:
21564041.
33. Abdelmalak B, Marcanthony N,
Abdelmalak J, et al.
Dexmedetomidine for anesthetic
management of anterior
mediastinal mass. J Anesth
2010;24(4):607– 10. PubMed
PMID: 20454810.
34. Doyle DJ. Awake intubation using
the GlideScope video
laryngoscope: initial experience in
four cases. Can J Anaesth 2004;51
(5):520– 1. PubMed PMID:
15128649.
35. Cooper RM. Complications
associated with the use of the
GlideScope videolaryngoscope.
Can J Anaesth 2007;
54(1):54– 7. PubMed PMID:
17197469.
Chapter 4: The difficult airway in otolaryngology
49
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:14:27 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.007
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
5
Introduction
Preoperative endoscopic airway
examination
William H. Rosenblatt
Patients presenting to the operating room must be
evaluated for the presence of anatomic or functional
issues which may affect safe airway control, regardless
of the need to employ general anesthesia. If moni-
tored anesthesia care with sedation or infiltrative or
regional anesthesia is anticipated, an airway plan is
still needed [1].
All patients fall into one of three broad categories:
the patient with no known or suspected airway abnor-
malities, the patient with obvious airway distortion,
and the patient with “unknown” airway disease, i.e.,
presenting with a diagnosis of pathology affecting
some part of the airway. Using the American Society
of Anesthesiologist (ASA) difficult airway algorithm
as a benchmark, the first group of patients is managed
via the routine induction root point (Figure 5.1,
box B) that includes the control of the airway after
the induction of anesthesia [2].
On occasion, problems with noninvasive ventila-
tion or tracheal intubation (by one or any means)
may occur. The ASA algorithm provides for these
occurrences with guidelines for the use of alternative
ventilation/intubation techniques, returning to spon-
taneous ventilation and, eventually, invasive airways.
The large majority of patients presenting to the oper-
ating room will enter the ASA algorithm at this root
point.
The other two patient groups, the known and
“unknown” difficult airway patients, provide a con-
undrum in the era of modern airway management.
Prior to the development of the sophisticated arma-
mentarium of the modern airway manager, the
patient who presented with obvious difficulty for lar-
yngoscopy (e.g., fixed trismus) or the patient present-
ing with a significant airway mass was often managed
with awake intubation [3]. Though successful airway
management was readily accomplished, application to
patients who did not truly require this intensity of care
represented an overutilization of resources, and often
produced undue patient and staff stress. Because the
need for this what is considered by some as an aggres-
sive approach could not be ruled in or out, a priori, this
choice was made in the pursuit of safety and repre-
sented, at times, a “mis-diagnosis”. This is akin to the
now out-dated adage that unless a general surgeon had
a 10% false-positive diagnosis rate for acute appendi-
citis, he or she was under-diagnosing this condition
[4]. In the era of ubiquitous CT scans and ultrasounds,
the “negative appendectomy” is much less common.
The goal of this chapter is to highlight a technique
of airway evaluation which is readily available to the
anesthesiologist, is minimally invasive and may pro-
vide enough information to reduce the use of awake
intubation by providing improved clinical informa-
tion. Preoperative endoscopic airway examination
(PEAE), uses the commonly available flexible intub-
ation scope, and unlike use of the same instrument for
awake intubation, requires minimal time and patient
preparation because it is well tolerated by patients,
mimicking an ordinary office ENT laryngoscopic
examination.
The transnasal endoscopic exam was first intro-
duced into the practice of otolaryngologic evaluation
in 1968 [5]. It is considered an ideal method of airway
evaluation because it does not interfere with pharyn-
geal and laryngeal function, which can therefore be
observed [6]. Its use has been adopted by many med-
ical specialties including pulmonary and emergency
medicine. Anesthesiologists have employed the trans-
nasal endoscopic approach for tracheal intubation, but
until the work by Moorthy et al. it had not been
described in an objective fashion for diagnostic use [7].
The idea of applying flexible endoscopic evalu-
ation of the airway in the practice of anesthesiology
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
50
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:18 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012was first proposed Williams et al. , in the otolaryn-
gology literature [8]. These authors described a series
of patients who failed indirect mirror laryngoscopy,
but who could be successfully examined with a nasal
fiberscope, and suggested that anesthesiologists might
glean important airway information about the achiev-
ability of direct laryngoscopy via the same assessment.
These authors also described how the superior diag-
nostic view afforded by the fiberscope resulted in
fewer patients requiring general anesthesia for direct
laryngoscopy and biopsy.
Flexible nasal endoscopy was first applied to evalu-
ation for intubation in an objective manner by Moorthy
et al. [7] in a non-randomized series of patients who
presented with a surgical diagnosis of papillomas, car-
cinomas, sarcomas, chondromas, hemangiomas, webs
and cysts of the airway (Figure 5.2). These lesions,
invisible on the anesthesiologist's routine physical exam
of the airway, have the potential to cause both airflow
obstruction and impediment to tracheal intubation
after the induction of anesthesia. Other signs and symp-
toms (e.g., dysphagia, stridor, loss of voice quality) may
not be illuminating as to the extent of the pathology and
its bearing on the success of airway control [7]. Moorthy
et al. performed indirect laryngoscopy of the airway
using a 6 mm flexible bronchoscope. This procedure
was undertaken in the operating room, and included
the thorough use of topical anesthetics (4 ml of 4%
lidocaine, Cetacain spray™ and 0–4m lo f4 %l i d o c a i n e
via the flexible scope). Patients were assigned an airway
grade based upon both their symptoms and the degree
to which the laryngeal inlet could be visualized. The
plan to control the airway was based upon the assigned
grade (Table 5.1).
Moorthy et al. applied an endoscopic technique
familiar to most anesthesiologists to the internal
evaluation of the airway, hitherto limited to an exter-
nal exam. This group 's approach potentially avoided
catastrophic outcomes (e.g., avoided anesthetic induc-
tion and failed airway control of group 2b patients
with few subjective signs of airway compromise) as
well as reduced the use of an at best time-consuming
(at least for the infrequent practitioner of awake
intubation), and at worst uncomfortable and stressful
procedure (e.g., avoided awake intubation in the
group 1 or 2a patient).
Rosenblatt et al . tested the hypothesis that the
information gleaned from PEAE could change
the clinical approach to airway management in a
high-risk population, reducing the need for awake
Figure 5.2. Pharyngeal web in a patient with a history of
pharyngeal radiation therapy. The patient complained of mild
dysphagia and no other symptoms. The vocal folds can be seen
(arrow) beyond the hypopharyngeal web.
A. Awake intubation B. Airway control after Induct
Non-invas’ Invas’
Laryngoscopy
Failure
Face mask
SGA
Emergency pathway
Success
Non-Emerg’
Consider
alternatives Always be prepared to return
Figure 5.1. “Skeletonized” version of
the American Society of
Anesthesiologists’ difficult airway
algorithm.
Chapter 5: Preoperative endoscopic airway examination
51
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:18 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012intubation, and detecting patients with unsuspected
significant disease [9]. One hundred and thirty-eight
patients presenting for diagnostic and therapeutic
procedures underwent a routine airway history and
physical exam. After a clinical airway plan was
recorded, PEAE was performed, and the clinician
was allowed to make a change in the airway plan
based upon his or her findings.
Though 68% of this high-risk group were slated to
have routine anesthetic induction and airway control
based on routine exam alone, 74% were managed in
this manner after PEAE. The net result of PEAE
appears to be a reduction in the use of awake intub-
ation, as clinicians ' concerns about the airway archi-
tecture were allayed. PEAE therefore had the effect of
reducing unnecessary awake intubations, and conse-
quently anesthesia care time. Conversely, a closer look
at Figure 5.3 reveals that eight patients, whose stand-
ard assessment suggested that routine anesthetic
induction prior to airway control was a safe course,
underwent awake intubation following PEAE. These
eight patients represent the population that PEAE
serves best: those whose clinical exam belies the true
extent of their disease. Based on the low incidence of
complete airway failure even in high-risk populations,
it is uncertain how many of these patients would have
required invasive airway intervention had routine
induction been undertaken.
Neither study by Moorthy et al. or Rosenblatt
et al. employed a randomized controlled protocol
[7,9]. In an ideal study, all patients would undergo
PEAE, and only a subset have their airway plan
affected by the results of the endoscopy. Additionally,
careful logging of procedure time could attest to the
efficiency of one approach over another [10].
Patients presenting to the operating room under
the care of an otolaryngologist for management (diag-
nostic or therapeutic) of an airway lesions have, in
most cases, undergone a flexible endoscopy in the
surgeon's office. Though communication between
specialties is no more important than among those
who share the airway, relying solely on the otolaryn-
gologist's assessment may be at best immaterial, and
Table 5.1. Airway grades based on respiratory symptoms and degree of the laryngeal inlet visualization
Grade Symptoms Airway mass Laryngeal view Root point of
ASA-DAAa
0 None No lesion Complete view B
1 Hx smoking, no
hoarseness
Small lesion Complete view B
2a Hoarse voice, no
difficulty in breathing
Laryngeal or
supraglottic lesion
Clear view of vocal folds partial of fully B
2b Hoarse voice, no
difficulty in breathing
Large laryngeal or
supraglottic lesion
Partial view of parts of the vocal folds A
3 Hoarse voice, some
difficulty in breathing
Large laryngeal or
supraglottic lesion
Difficult to view vocal folds. May be seen
only on inspiration
A
4 Large mass Vocal folds cannot be visualized A b
a Root points of the ASA difficult airway algorithm include Box A: awake intubation and Box B: airway control after the induction of anesthesia.
b Awake tracheostomy.
Clinical decision planAwake intubation
Clinical decision plan intubation after induction
138
44
8
28
PEAE
PEAE94
114
PEAE plan
Post induction
PEAE plan
Awake intubatiom
24
Routine
clinical exam
Figure 5.3. Data from Rosenblatt et al. [9]. After routine clinical
examination 44 of 138 patients with known airway disease were to
undergo awake intubation. Following subsequent PEAE this number
was reduced to 24 patients, representing crossover in both
directions.
Section 1: Introduction
52
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:19 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012at worst misleading. The exam of the otolaryngologist
is focused on three matters (Table 5.2) of less import-
ance to the anesthesiologist: (1) location and extent
of disease, (2) preservation of laryngeal function and
(3) urgency of proceeding to the operating room for
corrective or debulking procedures [8]. The surgeon 's
exam does not concern itself with the ease of direct
laryngoscopy, the potential for difficult or impossible
mask ventilation, or likelihood of visual obstruction
with the induction of anesthesia. For example, the
otolaryngologist is unlikely to comment on findings
such as lingual tonsil hyperplasia, which is a common
finding in a normal population, but might have severe
implications for the laryngoscopist [11]. Lastly, some
lesions described during the surgeon 's preoperative
exam may have progressed significantly if that exam
occurred more than a few days prior to presentation
to the operating room.
To the uninitiated, PEAE may appear to duplicate
the exam of the otolaryngologist. Apart from giving
the anesthesiologist a first-hand view of what may
have been appreciated by the surgeon, the endoscopist
explores three other aspects of the airway (Table 5.2).
Apart from the flexible intubating scope (fiberop-
tic or digital), conventional as well as innovative
intubating devices are primarily dependent on move-
ment in a sagittal plane from the mouth or nose to the
larynx. Direct laryngoscopes, video laryngoscopes,
optical stylets, channeled scopes, and intubating
laryngeal masks may produce or facilitate the creation
of a spatial conduit from the operator to the larynx,
but only in a single plane which follows the airway
axes (Figure 5.4).
Masses which occupy the airway or deform native
tissues and distort this plane have the potential to
render these devices ineffective. PEAE affords the
laryngoscopist information about this sagittal plane
access – information not available through routine,
visible anatomy examination (e.g., Mallampati class,
thyromental distance, interincisor gap, etc.). In cases
where sagittal-plane access does not exist based on
PEAE, the clinician might consider the use of a flex-
ible intubation scope after the induction of anesthesia,
but risks not knowing the complexity of anatomy
beyond the obstruction. Once appreciating the loss
of the sagittal-plane access, most experienced anesthe-
siologists would pursue awake intubation. In cases
where the sagittal-plane access appears present on
PEAE, the clinician must be competent to manage
any unexpected findings. For example, as described
by Moorthy et al. , a patient may have a partially
visible larynx [7]. The induction of anesthesia and
onset of neuromuscular relaxation may result in the
anteroposterior movement of the larynx relative to
the plane of the pharynx, converting from a grade 2
to a grade 3 or 4 in the asleep patient [12].
Modern airway resuscitation was buoyed signifi-
cantly by the advent of supraglottic ventilation. The
introduction of the laryngeal mask airway resulted in
hundreds of case reports of airway rescue and spurred
the American Society of Anesthesiologists and the
American Heart Association to include supraglottic
ventilation in their resuscitation guidelines [2,13].
Newer supraglottic airways have also been reported
in airway salvage [14]. Because all supraglottic devices
rely on positioning within or below the inferior cri-
copharyngeus muscle (or upper esophageal sphinc-
ter), PEAE can be used to evaluate anatomy in this
region. Large lesions occupying the hypopharynx pos-
terior to the laryngeal inlet, or pharyngeal wall osteo-
phytes and other masses seen on PEAE may herald
difficult or impossible SGA placement [15]. Con-
versely, the absence of such lesions as well as the lack
of sagittal-plane deformity could encourage the rou-
tine induction of anesthesia and airway management
in the patient who has external airway exam findings
consistent with difficult laryngoscopy, but who might
be accessed with an alternative instrument.
Lastly PEAE can be used to evaluate lesions
which might preclude or be damaged by airway instru-
ments which rely on anterior anatomic positioning.
The finding of lingual tonsil hyperplasia, epiglottic
Table 5.2. Information sought during PEAE
Surgeon's exam Anesthesiologists ' exam
Extent and location of disease Sagittal-plane access to the larynx
Preservation of function Presence of lesions which might interfere with supraglottic airway placement
Immediacy of intervention required Presence of anterior lesions which might be damaged by traditional laryngoscopy
Chapter 5: Preoperative endoscopic airway examination
53
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:19 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012hemangiomas or friable papillomas may influence the
clinician to either avoid those instruments which
might be traumatic or might fail due to increased base
of tongue size (e.g., direct laryngoscopy).
Routine PEAE
PEAE may be performed in the preoperative clinic set-
ting, holding area or operating room. Once the proper
equipment has been assembled, the procedure will
require less than 5 minutes (with good time manage-
ment an experienced endoscopist will require less than
1m i n u t e ) .E v e na5o rm o r em i n u t ed e l a yi nt h eh o l d i n g
area will be balanced by the avoidance of a longer awake
intubation procedure in the operating room. The oto-
laryngology service will soon appreciate these time
savings [9]. It is important to pay close attention to
patient comfort during the endoscopy – this will often
be the first procedural interaction between anesthesiol-
ogist and patient and building trust is paramount. It is
likely that the patient has undergone prior nasal endos-
copies, and will be comparing your technique to their
cumulative experience. If, based on the endoscopy find-
ings, an awake intubation procedure is chosen, a good
PEAE experience will result in a cooperative patient.
Unless there are unusual circumstances, the nasal
route is chosen over an oral approach for PEAE. As
will be discussed, minimal nasal mucosa analgesia will
be required, and there is rarely a need to blunt the gag
reflex. If the oral route is chosen, the flexible scope is
likely to have more contact with the posterior pha-
ryngeal wall, eliciting gag. Because of the risk of biting
as well as patients ' innate tendency to “hump up ”
the tongue, an intubating oral airway will probably
be necessary, provoking gag and requiring more
significant airway analgesia [8].
Figure 5.4. The airways sagittal plane
arch.
Section 1: Introduction
54
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:19 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Risks of nasal PEAE include epistaxis, laryngos-
pasm, local anesthetic allergic reaction, and pain.
Unique untoward events will be addressed. Identical
to the office exam routinely performed by otolaryn-
gologists, PEAE requires no monitoring, desiccation
or intravenous access. Because it is not a sterile pro-
cedure, it does not require gowning or a change from
street clothes for either the patient or clinician. Gloves
and eye protection are appropriate as the flexible
scope will be in contact with the patient 's mucosa.
Though not required, nasal vasoconstriction and the
application of a local anesthetic are recommended for
the prevention of epistaxis and for patient comfort.
Commercial vasoconstrictors or a preparation of 1%
phenylephrine is applied to the nose. Because the
anatomy on the right or left may be more accommo-
dating of the fiberscope, both nasal passages should
be prepared unless there is a contraindication. Any
local anesthetic agent and preparation may be used.
Historically, cocaine was employed by the otolaryn-
gologist because of its vasoconstricting actions [8].
The anesthetic may be applied to the nasal passage
on soaked pledgets or via a non-needle catheter. Only
a minimal amount of local anesthetic is needed: no
airway analgesia beyond the nasal passages is
required. It is unnecessary to anesthetize the tongue,
fauces, pharynx or larynx [8]. If there is a strong
suspicion that the PEAE will be followed by an awake
intubation, a desiccant can be given. This is otherwise
unnecessary for the PEAE and can be unpleasant for
the patient. Guiding the flexible scope tangential to
the posterior oropharygeal wall and avoiding direct
contact with the epiglottis and structures of the laryn-
geal inlet minimizes pain, gag, and cough.
Once the local anesthetic has been applied, the
patient is asked to extend the head on the neck com-
fortably to encourage posterior drainage. A flexible
intubation scope or a dedicated nasopharyngosocpe
can be used. Scopes 2.5 to 3.5 mm are ideal, being less
likely to cause trauma and pain than larger instru-
ments (e.g., 5 mm or larger) which are often preferred
for tracheal intubation. Though helpful, suction or
oxygen need not be applied if the flexible scope
includes a working channel. This may not be an
option in smaller-diameter scopes.
The patient may be in a sitting or recumbent
position. A right-handed clinician typically stands
facing the patient, on their right side. If a video
system is available, it is best placed close to the left
side of the patient 's head. The patient is asked to keep
their head in a neutral position and to keep their eyes
open. A surgical lubricant or local anesthetic prepar-
ation may be applied to the distal 15 cm of the flexible
scope. Using his or her dominant hand, the scope 's
distal end is placed into the nasal cavity (left or right),
the back of the hand resting on the patients nose,
avoiding pressure on the eyes. Slow advancement
whilst gauging the patient 's discomfort is advised.
The flexible scope should skirt the nasal floor, travel-
ing below the large inferior turbinate. Unrelenting
pain or obstruction to advancement typically implies
a rostral migration of the flexible scope or a blocked
passage. Significant pain may also dictate a change to
the contralateral nostril, or reapplication of the anes-
thetic agent. The nasopharygeal wall is typically
encountered in 4 to 6 cm. At this juncture gentle
contact of the objective lens with the nasopharyngeal
wall will clear secretions and moisture, without caus-
ing undue discomfort. A caudad deflection of the
flexible scope 's articulating tip will direct it towards
the oral pharynx. As the insertion continues, the
epiglottis and base of tongue will come into view.
Masses, mass effects, papillomas, lingual tonsil hyper-
plasia and other lesions should be noted. Often secre-
tions or moisture on the objective lens are
encountered. Asking the patient to swallow or deflect-
ing the objective lens against tissue will “clean” it.
Barring the existence of a large mass, the structures
of the larynx should be visible beyond the epiglottis.
To improve the view, the fiberscope can be gently
inserted deeper, with care to avoid touching the epi-
glottis. Asking the patient to “pant” or produce a
prolonged “i” sound may reveal the larynx from
behind the epiglottis. During this phonation, the sym-
metry and movement of the vocal folds can be
observed, and pathologic findings noted. Because only
minimal local anesthetic has been used, touching the
vocal folds will probably result in cough or laryngos-
pasm. Despite this, views of the larynx as far as the
cricoid cartilage may be possible (Figure 5.5). With
the fiberscope objective lens repositioned above the
epiglottis, side-to-side rotation will allow evaluation
of the pyriform sinuses. Having the patient “blow”
against closed lips and pinched nares may improve
visualization. Once the exam has been completed the
flexible scope is withdrawn. Pain is not unusual
during removal, and the patient should be reassured.
Care should be taken to ensure that the flexible
scope's articulating segment is in the neutral position
during withdrawal. This is best accomplished by
Chapter 5: Preoperative endoscopic airway examination
55
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:19 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012removing the operator 's fingers from the control
lever.
Mention should be made of the use of the “awake
look” technique whereby the airway is examined
using conventional laryngoscopy under topical anes-
thesia. The belief is that if the glottic aperture is visible
in this setting, it is safe to induce anesthesia in such a
patient. Unfortunately, a number of individuals have
stories of patients in whom the view while awake was
good but with the introduction of anesthesia and
muscle relaxation changes in the glottic architecture
made intubation unexpectedly difficult.
Finally, there are other exciting technologies that
may be useful in this context. In particular, the use of
3D radiologic imaging (virtual laryngoscopy) can
provide insights into the airway not readily available
by classic means. Advantages include its noninvasive
and painless characteristics; disadvantages include
radiation exposure and the cost of the procedure
[16]. Unlike PEAE, these exams are not available at
the immediate pre-procedure bedside, which makes
them impractical for most outpatients unless reliably
coordinated with the surgical staff.
Summary
Preoperative endoscopic airway exam extends the
anesthesiologist 's ability to evaluate the patient 's
airway beyond the bounds of the naked eye and
palpation, using instruments and techniques famil-
iar to him or her. Patients who present with “invis-
ible” airway pathology (e.g., papillomas, supraglottic
masses), which may compromise the clinician 's
ability to control the airway, can be more thor-
oughly assessed. This evaluation can be rapidly per-
f o r m e da tt h et i m eo fp r e s e n t a t i o nt ot h eo p e r a t i n g
room. Because awake intubation is often the safest
course of action in these cases, but may not be
necessary, PEAE can clarify the airway architecture
prior to entering the operating room. Similarly,
patients who present with obvious airway deform-
ity, whether congenital, iatrogenic or traumatic,
may have benign “invisible” anatomy. In these
cases, though direct laryngoscopy and similar
devices may not be effective, the clinician can glean
from the PEAE information allowing routine anes-
thetic induction and the use of alternative airway
control devices.
Clinical pearls
/C15PEAE extends the anesthesiologist 's ability to
evaluate the patient 's airway beyond the bounds
of the naked eye and palpation; the population
that PEAE serves best are those whose clinical
exam belies the true extent of their disease.
/C15The information gleaned from a preoperative
endoscopic airway exam (PEAE) could change the
clinical approach to airway management in
high-risk patients, as pathology having the
potential to cause airflow obstruction or serve as
an impediment to tracheal intubation is
sometimes identified.
/C15Large lesions occupying the hypopharynx
posterior to the laryngeal inlet or pharyngeal
wall osteophytes and other masses seen on
PEAE may herald difficult or impossible SGA
placement.
/C15The induction of anesthesia and onset of
neuromuscular relaxation may result in the
anteroposterior movement of the larynx relative
to the plane of the pharynx, converting the airway
view from a grade 2 to a grade 3 or 4 in the asleep
patient.
Figure 5.5. The cricoid cartilage as well as a tracheal web can be
visualized distal to the vocal folds during a PEAE.
Section 1: Introduction
56
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:19 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012References
1. Peterson GN, Domino KB, Caplan
RA, et al. Management of the
difficult airway: closed claims
database. Anesthesiology
2005;102:33–9.
2. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway. An updated report by the
American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Management of the Difficult
Airway. Anesthesiology
2003;98:1269–77.
3. Benumof JL. Management of
the difficult adult airway.
Anesthesiology 1991; 75; 1087–110.
4. Storer EH. Appendix. In Schwartz
SI, Shires GT, Spencer FC, Storer
EH, eds. Principles of Surgery, 4th
edn. New York: McGraw-Hill;
1983. pp. 1245 –56.
5. Sawashima M, Hirose H. New
laryngoscope technique by use of
fiberoptics. J Acoust Soc Am 1968;
43:168–9.
6. Leder SB, Ross DA, Briskin KB,
et al. A prospective, double-blind,
randomized study on the use of a
topical anesthetic, vasoconstrictor,
and placebo during transnasal
flexible fiberoptic endoscopy.
J Speech Lang Hear Res 1997;
40:1352–7.
7. Moorthy SS, Gupta S, Laurent B,
et al. Management of airway in
patients with laryngeal tumors.
J Clin Anesth 2005; 17:604–9.
8. Williams GT, Farquharson IM,
Anthony J. Fibreoptic
laryngoscopy in the assessment of
laryngeal disorders. J Laryngol
Otol 1975;89:299–316.
9. Rosenblatt WH, Ianus AI,
Sukhupragarn W, et al.
Preoperative endoscopic airway
examination (PEAE) provides
superior airway information and
may reduce the use of unnecessary
awake intubation. Anesth Analg
2011;112:602–7.
10. Akça O, Lenhardt R, Heine M,
et al. Can transnasal flexible
fiberoptic laryngoscopy
contribute to airway management
decisions? Anesth Analg
2011;112:519–20.
11. Ovassapian A, Glassenberg R,
Randel G, et al. The unexpected
difficult airway and lingual tonsil
hyperplasia. Anesth Analg
2002;97:124–32.
12. Sivarajan M, Joy JV. Effects of
general anesthesia and paralysis
on upper airway changes due to
head position in humans.
Anesthesiology 1996;85:787–93.
13. Neumar RW, Otto CW, Link MS.
Adult advanced cardiovascular life
support: 2010 American Heart
Association Guidelines for
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
and Emergency Cardiovascular
Care (Part 8). Circulation
2010;122:S729–67.
14. Cook TM, Hommers C. New
airways for resuscitation?
Resuscitation 2006;69:371–87.
15. Cesur M, Alici HA, Erdem AF.
An unusual cause of difficult
intubation in a patient with a large
cervical anterior osteophyte: a case
report. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2005;49:264–6.
16. Osorio F, Perilla M, Doyle DJ,
Palomo JM. Cone beam computed
tomography: an innovative tool
for airway assessment. Anesth
Analg 2008;106(6):1803–7.
PubMed PMID: 18499613.
Chapter 5: Preoperative endoscopic airway examination
57
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:15:19 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.008
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
6
Introduction
Awake intubation
Carlos A. Artime and Carin A. Hagberg
Introduction
The incidence of difficult airway is higher in patients
undergoing ENT surgery and, specifically, in
patients undergoing ENT cancer surgery [1]. Airway
management of the patient with a known or predicted
difficult airway undergoing ENT surgery requires a
thorough preoperative evaluation, a discussion with
the ENT surgeon regarding the patient 's airway and
surgery-specific issues, and a detailed plan of action.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
formed a Task Force on Difficult Airway Management
in 1992, and sought to establish a “difficult airway
algorithm” to facilitate the management of the difficult
airway and reduce the likelihood of adverse outcomes
[2]. In this algorithm, which was updated in 2002,
one of the primary management choices for the
anesthesiologist is the decision of whether or not
to perform awake intubation or attempt intubation
after induction of general anesthesia [2,3]. The ASA
algorithm stresses the concept that formulation of a
strategy for intubation should include the feasibility of
three basic options: awake intubation vs. intubation
after induction of general anesthesia, noninvasive
vs. invasive (surgical) techniques, and preservation vs.
ablation of spontaneous ventilation [7]. It is well-
accepted that the safest method for a patient who
requires endotracheal intubation and has a difficult
airway is for that patient to undergo awake intubation
for the following reasons [2 –8].
1. Patency of the airway is maintained through
upper pharyngeal muscle tone.
2. Spontaneous ventilation is maintained.
3. A patient who is awake and well topicalized is
easier to intubate, as the larynx moves to a more
anterior position after induction of anesthesia, as
compared to while awake.
4. The patient can still protect his or her airway from
aspiration.
5. The patient is able to monitor his or her own
neurologic symptoms to guard against disruption
of the integrity of their own neurologic system
(for example, the patient with cervical spine
pathology).
General indications for awake intubation are presented
in Table 6.1 [4,6,9]. There are no absolute contrain-
dications to awake intubation other than patient 's
refusal, a patient who is unable to cooperate (such as
a child, a patient with an intellectual disability, or an
intoxicated, combative patient), or a patient with a
documented true allergy to all local anesthetics [7].
Extreme caution should be taken in the patient
with critical airway obstruction. Even the process of
topicalization with local anesthetic can precipitate loss
of the airway, as can some of the complications asso-
ciated with awake intubation (e.g., airway bleeding
and laryngospasm) [10]. These patients require
coordination of their care with the ENT surgeon
and one must consider the feasibility and appropri-
ateness of an awake surgical airway.
Preoperative preparations
Chart review
Whenever possible, previous anesthetic records
should be examined, especially those involving airway
management [3,11]. One should note the degree of
difficulty of prior intubations, the position used for
laryngoscopy, and the equipment used. Other records
documenting ease of mask ventilation and tolerance
of drugs are also valuable. One should be alert for
evidence of reactions to local anesthetics and of apnea
with minimal doses of opioids.
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
58
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:21 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The ENT surgeon 's notes should also be reviewed
in detail, with specific attention to characterizations
of the patient 's airway, as well as any results of
nasopharyngeal laryngoscopy performed beforehand.
Computed tomography (CT) of the airway, if per-
formed, should also be examined prior to formalizing
an airway management plan.
The patient interview
After the medical records have been reviewed, a careful
patient history should be obtained, including a review
of symptoms that may indicate airway obstruction,
such as stridor or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
[10]. The preoperative interview should also address
the possibility of events having occurred since the last
anesthetic such as weight gain, laryngeal stenosis from
previous airway intervention, airway radiation, facial
cosmetic surgery, and worsening temporomandibular
joint disorder or rheumatoid arthritis.
Once the anesthesia practitioner and surgeon have
made the decision that awake intubation is necessary,
communication with the patient and psychological
preparation is of the utmost importance in order to
maximize the odds for a successful awake intubation
[7]. In a careful, unhurried manner, the anesthesiologist
should describe conventional intubation contrasted with
awake intubation to the patient and focus on the fact
that, while the former is easier and less time-consuming,
t h el a t t e ri ss a f e ri nl i g h to ft h ep a t i e n t's own anatomy or
condition. The anesthesiologist should present his or
herself as a knowledgeable, caring physician who is
willing to take extra measures to ensure the patient 's
safety. Recommendations should be presented to the
p a t i e n tw i t hc o n v i c t i o n ,a n di ft h ep a t i e n ti ss k e p t i c a l
about proceeding as such, help from the surgeon may be
enlisted. Since the patient has an established relationship
with their surgeon, the surgeon 's reinforcement of the
anesthesiologist's opinion may be quite helpful [8].
Complications of awake intubation should also be
presented, including local anesthetic toxicity, airway
trauma, discomfort, recall, and failure to secure the
airway. Patients ' recall after awake intubation using
different methods of sedation, analgesia, or local anes-
thetics has not been studied in a controlled fashion.
Although episodes of explicit awareness during gen-
eral anesthesia are rare, it is anticipated that the
incidence of recall during awake intubation with min-
imal levels of sedation would be higher [12].
Staff, monitors, and equipment
Per the ASA difficult airway guidelines, there should
be “at least one additional individual who is immedi-
ately available to serve as an assistant in difficult airway
management” [3]. Preferred, whenever possible, is a
second member of the anesthesia care team who can
assist in the monitoring, ventilation, and pharma-
cotherapy of the patient, as well as provide an extra
set of hands during fiberoptic intubation (FOI). In the
case of a patient in extremis or with a critically
obstructed airway, the ENT surgeon should be avail-
able with the appropriate equipment to perform an
emergency surgical airway, if necessary.
During awake intubation, the routine use of ECG,
pulse oximetry, NIBP, and capnography is required as
part of standard basic intraoperative monitoring.
Depending on the complexity of the surgery and the
patient's condition, invasive hemodynamic monitor-
ing (i.e., arterial line) may be necessary prior to awake
intubation. Indications for this include hemodynamic
instability, severe ischemic or valvular heart disease,
Table 6.1. Indications for awake intubation [4,6,9]
1. Previous history of difficult intubation
2. Anticipated difficult airway based on physical
examination:
Small mouth opening
Receding mandible/micrognathia
Macroglossia
Short, muscular neck
Limited range of motion of the neck (rheumatoid
arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, prior cervical fusion)
Congenital airway anomalies
Morbid obesity
Pathology involving the airway (tracheomalacia)
Airway masses (malignancy of the tongue, tonsils,
or larynx; large goiter; mediastinal mass)
Upper airway obstruction
3. Unstable cervical spine
4. Trauma to the face or upper airway
5. Anticipated difficult mask ventilation
6. Severe risk of aspiration
7. Severe hemodynamic instability
8. Respiratory failure
Adapted from Hagberg CA, ed. Benumof's Airway Management , 2nd
edn. St. Louis: Mosby; 2007. p. 257.
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
59
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:21 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and patients for whom hypertension and tachycardia
are potentially dangerous (e.g., the patient with aortic
dissection or intracerebral aneurysm).
Adequate preoxygenation and the use of supple-
mental O2 throughout airway management (including
sedation, topicalization, intubation, and extubation) is
encouraged in all patients undergoing awake intubation
[3]. In addition to the standard methods of supplemen-
tal O 2 delivery (nasal cannula or face mask), other
opportunities include, but are not limited to: delivering
O2 through the suction port of the fiberoptic broncho-
scope (FOB) [7], through the atomizer or nebulizer
during topicalization, or by elective transtracheal jet
ventilation (TTJV) in the patient in extremis [7,13,14].
There are many techniques that can be used to
secure the airway in the awake patient. Direct laryngo-
scopy, video laryngoscopy, intubating LMAs, flexible
fiberoptic bronchoscopy, rigid fiberoptic laryngo-
scopy, retrograde intubation, lighted stylets, and blind
nasal intubation have all been used successfully in
performing awake intubation [4,15 –20]. No matter
which technique is selected, all necessary equipment
should be prepared ahead of time and be readily avail-
able, when needed. The practitioner should also have
several back-up modalities in mind, and the required
equipment available, in case the initial technique used
is ineffective (i.e., Plan B, C, etc.).
Premedication
Prior to awake intubation, premedication is com-
monly used to reduce secretions, enable adequate
topicalization of the airway, reduce the risk of epi-
staxis, and protect against the risk of aspiration.
Antisialagogues
One of the most important goals of premedication for
awake intubation is drying of the airway. Secretions
can obscure the view of the glottis, especially when
using flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy or videolaryn-
goscopy. In addition, secretions can prevent local
anesthetics from reaching intended areas, resulting
in failed topicalization, or can wash away and dilute
local anesthetics, diminishing their potency and dur-
ation of action.
The medications most often used for their anti-
sialagogic properties are the anticholinergics, which
inhibit salivary and bronchial secretions by way of
their antimuscarinic effects. They should be adminis-
tered as early as possible for maximal effect (at least
30 minutes in advance), as they do not eliminate
existing secretions but rather prevent new secretion
formation. The anticholinergics most often used in
clinical practice are glycopyrrolate, scopolamine, and
atropine [21]. A summary of their pharmacologic
properties is presented in Table 6.2. Glycopyrrolate
(0.1–0.3 mg IV) is the anticholinergic of choice for
most clinical circumstances due to its marked anti-
sialagogue effect and rapid onset of 1 to 2 minutes
after IV dosing. It is moderately vagolytic and is
devoid of CNS effects, as its quaternary amine struc-
ture prevents passage through the blood –brain
barrier. Scopolamine (0.4 mg IV) is the least vagolytic
of the anticholinergics in clinical use and, as a result,
may be the drug of choice for patients in whom
tachycardia is undesirable (e.g., a patient with
advanced coronary artery disease in whom the use
of glycopyrrolate would be relatively contraindicated).
Scopolamine has an onset of 5 to 10 minutes after IV
bolusing. In addition to being a very effective anti-
sialagogue, scopolamine has potent CNS effects, with
sedative and amnestic properties. In some patients,
this may lead to restlessness, delirium, and difficulty
waking after short procedures. Atropine (0.4 –0.6 mg
IV) produces only a mild antisialagogic effect, but
causes significant tachycardia due to its potent vago-
lytic effects. As such, it is not an ideal drug for use in
drying the airway [21].
Table 6.2. Pharmacologic characteristics of anticholinergic drugs
Tachycardia Antisialagogue effect Sedation
Atropine þþþ þþ þ
Glycopyrrolate þþ þþþ 0
Scopolamine þ þþþ þþþ
0, no effect; þ, minimal effect; þþ, moderate effect; þþþ, marked effect.
Adapted from Morgan GE Jr, Mikhail MS, Murray MJ. Clinical Anesthesiology, 3rd edn. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2002. p. 208.
Section 1: Introduction
60
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:21 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Nasal mucosal vasoconstrictors
The nasal mucosa and nasopharynx are highly vascu-
lar. When a patient requires nasotracheal intubation,
adequate vasoconstriction is essential, as bleeding can
make visualization of the larynx extremely difficult,
especially during nasal FOI. Nasal mucosal vasocon-
strictors should be applied 15 minutes prior to nasal
intubation. One commonly used agent is 4% cocaine,
which has both vasoconstrictive and local anesthetic
effects. It can be applied to the nasal mucosa using
cotton-tipped applicators. The maximum dose is 1.5 –
3 mg/kg. Caution should be taken in patients with
hypertension, coronary artery disease, hyperthyroid-
ism, pseudocholinesterase deficiency or preeclampsia,
and in patients taking MAOIs. Alternatively, a mix-
ture of lidocaine 3% and phenylephrine 0.25% can be
made by combining lidocaine 4% and phenylephrine
1% in a 3:1 ratio [22]. This combination has similar
anesthetic and vasoconstrictive properties to cocaine
and can be used as a substitute. This mixture can be
either sprayed intranasally or applied with cotton-
tipped applicators. Commercially available nasal
decongestants containing either oxymetazoline
0.05% (Afrin) or phenylephrine 0.5% (Neo-Synephr-
ine) may also be applied to nasal mucosa. The usual
dose is two sprays in each nostril. Pediatric patients
are especially sensitive to these drugs and require
lower concentrations.
Aspiration prophylaxis
Routine prophylaxis against aspiration pneumonitis
is not recommended, but may be beneficial in patients
with risk factors for aspiration such as a full stomach,
symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux disease, hiatal
hernia, presence of a nasogastric tube, morbid
obesity, diabetic gastroparesis, s/p esophagectomy
with stomach pull through, or pregnancy [23,24].
The goal of aspiration prophylaxis is two-fold:
to decrease gastric volume and to increase gastric
fluid pH. Commonly used agents include non-
particulate antacids (e.g., Bicitra), pro-motility agents
(e.g., metoclopramide), and H 2-receptor antagonists.
These drugs may be used alone or in combination.
See Table 6.3 for dosing and pharmacology.
Sedation
Depending on the clinical circumstance, intravenous
sedation may be useful in allowing the patient to
tolerate awake intubation by providing anxiolysis,
amnesia, and analgesia. Benzodiazepines, opioids,
hypnotics, a2 agonists, and neuroleptics can be used
alone or in combination [15]. It is important that
these agents be carefully titrated to effect, as over-
sedation can render a patient uncooperative and
make awake intubation more difficult and unsafe
[7]. Spontaneous respiration with adequate oxygen-
ation and ventilation should always be maintained
[15]. Extreme caution should be taken in patients with
critical airway obstruction, as awake muscle tone is
sometimes necessary in these patients to maintain
airway patency [25]. In these situations, sedation
should be used sparingly or avoided altogether.
Avoidance of over-sedation is also important in the
patient with a full stomach, as an awake patient can
protect his or her own airway in the event of aspir-
ation [7].
Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines, via their action at the g-aminobuty-
ric acid (GABA)-benzodiazepine receptor complex,
have hypnotic, sedative, anxiolytic, and amnestic
properties [26]. They have also been shown to depress
Table 6.3. Drugs used for aspiration prophylaxis
Route Adult dose Pediatric dose Onset Effect on gastric
volume
Effect on
gastric pH
Bicitra PO 15 – 30 ml 0.4 ml/kg 5 min ""
Metoclopramide IV 10 mg 0.15 mg/kg 1 – 3 min # –
H2 antagonists
Cimetidine
Ranitidine
Famotidine
IV
IV
IV
300mg
50 mg
20 mg
5– 10 mg/kg
0.25– 1 mg/kg
0.15 mg/kg
45– 60 min
30– 60 min
60– 120 min
#"
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
61
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:21 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012upper airway reflex sensitivity [27], a property that is
desirable for awake intubation. Benzodiazepines are
frequently used to achieve sedation for awake intub-
ation in combination with opioids [28], or are used
for their amnestic and anxiolytic effects when any of
the other sedatives (e.g., dexmedetomidine, ketamine,
or remifentanil) is chosen as the primary agent
[29,30]. Three benzodiazepine receptor agonists are
commonly used in anesthesia practice: midazolam,
diazepam, and lorazepam [26]. Due to its more rapid
onset and relatively short duration of action, midazo-
lam is the more commonly used agent.
Sedation with midazolam is achieved with doses of
1 to 2 mg IV repeated until the desired level of
sedation is achieved. The IM dose is 0.07 to 0.1 mg/
kg. Onset is rapid, with peak effect usually achieved
within 2 to 3 minutes of IV administration. Duration
of action is 20 to 30 minutes, with termination of
effect primarily as a result of redistribution. Although
recovery is rapid, the elimination half-life is 1.7 to 3.6
hours, with prolongation noted in cirrhosis, congest-
ive heart failure, obesity, the elderly, and patients with
renal failure [26,31].
The primary effects of benzodiazepines are
amnesia, sedation, a decrease in respiratory rate and
tidal volume, and a mild decrease in systemic vascular
resistance and cardiac output. These effects are aug-
mented synergistically by other medications used for
sedation, including opioids, propofol, and a2 agonists
[32,33]. Systemic absorption of local anesthetics used
for airway topicalization may also lead to potentiation
of the sedative/hypnotic effects of midazolam [34].
Oversedation with benzodiazepines can cause
respiratory depression, which may lead to hypoxemia
or apnea [26]. Flumazenil, a specific benzodiazepine
antagonist, may be used to reverse the sedative and
respiratory effects of benzodiazepines if a patient
becomes too heavily sedated. It is administered in
incremental IV doses of 0.2 mg, repeated as needed
to a maximum dose of 3 mg. Because it has a half-life
of 0.7 to 1.8 hours, resedation can be a problem if it is
being used to reverse high doses or longer-acting
agents and patients should be monitored carefully in
those circumstances. Flumazenil is generally safe and
devoid of major side effects [35,36].
Opioids
Opioids, by way of their agonist effect on opioid
receptors in the brain and spinal cord, provide
analgesia, depress airway reflexes, and prevent hyper-
ventilation associated with pain or anxiety. These
properties make them a useful addition to the sed-
ation regimen for awake intubation. While any opioid
receptor agonist could theoretically be used for this
purpose, fentanyl, alfentanil, and remifentanil are
particularly useful due to their rapid onset, relatively
short duration of action, and ease of titration [37].
Fentanyl is widely used in anesthetic practice,
and is the most commonly used opioid for awake
intubation. The sedative dose ranges from 0.5 to
2 mg/kg IV. Onset is rapid, within 2 to 3 minutes.
The relatively short duration of action (30 to 45 min-
utes) is due to redistribution of fentanyl to a large
peripheral compartment rather than rapid elimin-
ation; hence the duration of action after cessation of
a prolonged infusion is markedly longer, due to redis-
tribution to the central compartment from the per-
ipheral compartment. [28,38].
Alfentanil has an even quicker onset (1.5 to 2
minutes) and a more rapid recovery after a single
bolus dose (10 to 15 minutes) than fentanyl. This
potentially makes alfentanil the drug of choice when
a transient peak effect after a single bolus is desired, as
in awake intubation [39,40]. The sedative dose ranges
from 10 to 30 mg/kg IV, administered in 3 –5 mg/kg
aliquots [37].
Remifentanil is an ultrashort-acting opioid that is
unique compared with the other short-acting agents
in that it is metabolized by nonspecific plasma
esterases, with a half-life of 3 minutes. It undergoes
no redistribution and, therefore, has no context-
sensitivity. Its potency approximates that of fentanyl
[41]. Several studies have shown the effectiveness and
safety of remifentanil sedation for awake intubation
as a single agent [29,30,42], as well as in combination
with midazolam [43 –46] or propofol [47]. Remifen-
tanil is usually administered as a weight-based infu-
sion. A bolus of 0.5 mg/kg followed by an infusion
of 0.1 mg/kg/min, as described by Atkins and Mirza
[41], achieves a plasma concentration that provides
adequate sedation with preservation of spontaneous
ventilation in most patients. The infusion can subse-
quently be titrated by 0.025 to 0.05 mg/kg/min incre-
ments in 5-minute intervals to effect. Lower doses
may be required when remifentanil is combined with
other agents.
The most serious adverse effect of opioids is
respiratory depression leading to overt apnea. Factors
that increase the susceptibility to opioid-induced
Section 1: Introduction
62
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:21 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012respiratory depression include old age, obstructive
sleep apnea, and concomitant administration of cen-
tral nervous system depressants. Naloxone, an opioid
antagonist, can be used to restore spontaneous venti-
lation in patients after an opioid overdose. Onset after
IV administration is rapid, within 1 –2 minutes, and
duration of action is 30 –60 minutes. Naloxone should
be administered in 0.04 –0.08 mg IV boluses every 2 to
3 minutes. Doses of 1 –2 mg/kg will restore adequate
spontaneous ventilation in most cases while preserv-
ing adequate analgesia. Potential complications of
naloxone administration are reversal of analgesia,
tachycardia, hypertension, and in severe cases, pul-
monary edema or myocardial ischemia [37].
Chest wall rigidity leading to ineffectual bag-mask
ventilation is commonly cited as a potential adverse
effect of opioids, particularly fentanyl, alfentanil, and
remifentanil. Clinically significant rigidity usually
occurs after an opioid dose sufficient to cause apnea,
as a patient loses consciousness [37]. Careful titration
to prevent overdose is perhaps the best way to prevent
rigidity-associated difficult ventilation. Should it
occur, however, treatment with naloxone or neuro-
muscular blocking agents is effective [48,49].
Propofol
Propofol is the most frequently used intravenous
anesthetic today. Its primary effect is hypnosis as a
result of an unclear mechanism; however, there is
evidence that a significant portion of this hypnotic
effect is mediated by interaction with GABA recep-
tors. After an induction dose of 1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg IV,
propofol has a quick onset (60 to 90 s) with recovery
in 4 to 5 minutes as a result of both rapid elimination
and redistribution. It attenuates airway responses and
provides a smooth induction with few excitatory
effects [26]. For awake intubation, intermittent doses
of 0.25 mg/kg IV or a continuous IV infusion of 25 to
75 mg/kg/min provide an easily titratable level of
sedation with rapid recovery. The use of propofol in
awake intubation is well described both as a single
agent [16,44] and in combination with remifentanil
[47]. Care should be taken in the patient with a
critical airway, as propofol causes reduction of tidal
volumes and an increase in respiratory frequency at
sedative doses. At sufficiently elevated plasma concen-
trations, propofol can lead to apnea. Other common
adverse effects are a decrease in arterial blood pres-
sure and pain on injection.
Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine is a centrally acting, highly select-
ive a2-adrenoreceptor agonist with several properties
that make it well suited for use in awake intubation. It
has sedative, analgesic, anxiolytic, antitussive, and
antisialagogue effects while causing minimal respira-
tory impairment, even at high doses. Dexmedetomi-
dine sedation provides unique conditions in which
the patient is asleep, but is easily arousable and
cooperative when stimulated [50 –52]. There are
several reports of dexmedetomidine sedation in
awake FOI, both in combination with other sedatives
or as a sole agent in conjunction with airway topica-
lization by local anesthetics [53 –57]. Dosing for
awake intubation is a 1 mg/kg load over 10 minutes
(loading dose), followed by a continuous infusion
of 0.2 to 1 mg/kg/h. A reduced dose should be
considered in the elderly, in patients with depressed
systolic function, and in patients with hepatic or
renal impairment [58]. Dexmedetomidine is not a
reliable amnestic [59] and is frequently combined
with midazolam to decrease the incidence of recall
[55]. Adverse hemodynamic effects include brady-
cardia, hypotension, and hypertension. During the
loading dose, hypertension and bradycardia can occur
due to stimulation of peripheral postsynaptic a2B-
adrenergic receptors resulting in vasoconstriction.
Central a2A-mediated sympatholysis eventually leads
to bradycardia, hypotension, and decreased cardiac
output [60]. The bradycardic effect can be mitigated
by pretreatment with an anticholinergic (e.g., glyco-
pyrrolate) [55].
Ketamine
Ketamine is an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antag-
onist that produces dissociative anesthesia, which
manifests clinically as a cataleptic state with many
reflexes intact, including the corneal, cough, and swal-
low reflexes. Ketamine-induced anesthesia is associ-
ated with amnesia, nystagmus, and the potential for
hallucinations and other undesirable psychological
reactions; benzodiazepines are commonly adminis-
tered to attenuate or treat these effects. Usual doses
for sedation range from 0.2 to 0.8 mg/kg IV, with onset
in 1 to 2 minutes and a duration of hypnosis of 5 to
10 minutes. At these doses, minute ventilation, tidal
volume, functional residual capacity, and the minute
ventilation response to CO2 are maintained [26]. Keta-
mine increases blood pressure, heart rate, cardiac
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
63
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:21 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012output, and myocardial oxygen consumption via a
centrally mediated stimulation of the sympathetic
nervous system. Ketamine is a direct myocardial
depressant, however, and in patients with depleted cat-
echolamine stores (e.g., the patient in shock) it may
cause hypotension [61]. Its use in awake intubation
has been described in combination with benzodiazep-
ines [4] and dexmedetomidine [62,63]. Patients receiv-
ing ketamine sedation should always be pretreated with
an antisialagogue, as ketamine causes increased airway
secretions that can lead to upper airway obstruction or
make FOI difficult.
Droperidol
Droperidol is a neuroleptic medication occasionally
used in anesthesia practice for its sedative and antie-
metic properties. Its mechanism of action is antagon-
ism of dopamine receptors in the central nervous
system; it also interferes with GABA-, norepineph-
rine-, and serotonin-mediated neuronal activity. In
combination with opioids, it produces a state of hyp-
nosis, analgesia, and immobility classically referred to
as neuroleptanalgesia [8,26]. This combination has
been used for awake intubation with favorable results
[4,64,65]. In this state, patients may experience
extreme fear and apprehension despite appearing out-
wardly calm; droperidol is also a poor amnestic. For
this reason, benzodiazepines should be administered
for anxiolysis and amnesia. Doses for neuroleptanal-
gesia range from 2.5 to 5 mg IV; the antiemetic dose is
0.625 to 1.25 mg. Onset is in 20 minutes, with a half-
life of approximately 2 hours. Side effects include
mild hypotension due to peripheral a-adrenergic
blockade, dysphoria, and extrapyramidal symptoms.
Droperidol can also cause QT prolongation, especially
in larger doses. This has led to an FDA “black box ”
warning concerning the risk of potentially fatal tor-
sades de pointes. As a result, droperidol should not be
administered to patients with a prolonged QT interval
(>440 ms for males, >450 ms for females) and ECG
monitoring should be performed during and for 2 to
3 hours following treatment [66].
Topicalization
Topicalization of the airway with local anesthetics
should, in most cases, be the primary anesthetic for
awake intubation; many times, it is all that is needed
[7]. While intubation of a topicalized, non-sedated
patient is considered the safest method of difficult
airway management, it is not without risk. Total
airway obstruction during topical anesthesia in a
non-sedated patient with a critical airway has been
reported. This was postulated to have been caused by
dynamic airway obstruction related to loss of upper
airway tone as a result of topicalization [67]. In add-
ition, local anesthetic toxicity is a real concern; death
due to lidocaine toxicity of a healthy volunteer under-
going bronchoscopy has occurred [68,69].
Local anesthetics
When using local anesthetics, it is important to be
familiar with the speed of onset, duration of action,
optimal concentration, signs and symptoms of tox-
icity, and the maximum recommended dosage of the
drug chosen [70]. The rate and amount of topical
local anesthetic absorption vary depending on the site
of application, the concentration and total dose of
local anesthetic applied, the hemodynamic status of
the patient, and individual patient variation [71].
Early symptoms of local anesthetic toxicity include
euphoria, dizziness, tinnitus, confusion, perioral
numbness, and metallic taste. Higher plasma levels
can lead to seizures, respiratory failure, loss of con-
sciousness, and circulatory collapse [15]. The most
commonly used agents for topical anesthesia of the
airway are lidocaine and cocaine.
Lidocaine, an amide local anesthetic, is an excel-
lent choice for airway anesthesia due to a rapid onset
of 2 to 5 minutes and a wide therapeutic index
[72,73]. Its duration of action is 30 to 60 minutes
after topical application or infiltration. It is available
in various concentrations (1% to 10%) and prepar-
ations including aqueous and viscous solutions, oint-
ments, gels, and creams. For infiltration and minor
nerve blocks, 1% to 2% is commonly used; for topical
anesthesia the concentration utilized is 2% to 4%. The
maximum recommended dosage for infiltration
of lidocaine without epinephrine is 4 –5 mg/kg of
lean body mass. For topicalization of the airway, the
maximum dose is less well-established. The British
Thoracic Society recommends a maximum dose of
8.2 mg/kg [74], based on a study by Langmack et al.
[75]. Other studies of peak lidocaine plasma concen-
tration after topicalization have shown significant
variability between patients with regard to absorption
[76,77]. Some authors, therefore, recommend using
the lower limit of 4 –5 mg/kg and encourage the use of
2% lidocaine for airway topicalization [78].
Section 1: Introduction
64
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Cocaine, a naturally occurring ester anesthetic, is
used primarily for anesthesia of the nasal mucosa
when the nasal route is planned for awake intubation
[79]. It has a vasoconstrictor property that makes it
particularly useful for this application, as the nose is
highly vascularized and bleeding can make FOI
impossible. It is available commercially as a 4% solu-
tion (each drop contains 3 mg), and can be applied to
the nasal mucosa using cotton pledgets or cotton-
tipped swabs. The maximum recommended dosage
for intranasal application is 100 mg (1.5 mg/kg).
Cocaine is primarily metabolized by plasma pseudo-
cholinesterase; it also undergoes slow hepatic meta-
bolism and is excreted unchanged by the kidney.
The signs and symptoms of cocaine toxicity include
tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmia, hypertension, and
fever. Severe complications include convulsions,
respiratory failure, coronary spasm, cardiac arrest,
stroke, and death. It must be used with caution in
patients with hypertension, coronary artery disease,
hyperthyroidism, pseudocholinesterase deficiency,
preeclampsia, and in those patients taking mono-
amine oxidase inhibitors [79].
Other local anesthetics that have been used for
airway topicalization include benzocaine and tetra-
caine. Benzocaine, available as a 20% spray, is an
ester-type local anesthetic agent that is mainly
useful for topical application. It has a rapid onset
(<1 minute) with an effective duration of 5 to 10 min-
utes. Its primary limitation is the significant risk of
methemoglobinemia, which can occur with as little as
1 to 2 seconds of spraying [73,80]. Cetacaine is a
topical application spray containing 14% benzocaine,
2% tetracaine, and 2% butyl aminobenzoate (a local
anesthetic similar to benzocaine). Like 20% benzo-
caine spray, this combination produces rapid airway
anesthesia, but with a prolonged duration of action
compared to benzocaine alone. The risk of methemo-
globinemia is still a consideration, and cases of
severe toxicity have been reported [81,82]. Tetracaine,
a long-acting amide local anesthetic, is infrequently
used due to the fact that it is rapidly absorbed
through the respiratory tract, increasing the risk of
toxicity [15].
Application techniques
Local anesthetic may be directly applied to the airway
mucosa by several different methods. It is helpful to
differentiate the airway into three distinct areas: the
nasal cavity and nasopharynx; the oral cavity and
oropharynx; and the larynx, trachea, and oropharynx.
The basis for this distinction involves the innervation
of these different areas and is explained in more detail
later on in this chapter.
Regardless of which technique is used to anes-
thetize the nasal cavity, the nares should be inspected
for patency using a nasal speculum or an FOB.
Alternatively, the patient can be asked to breathe
deeply through each individual nare while occluding
the opposite nare; the nare through which the
patient breathes more freely should be chosen as
the route for nasotracheal intubation. Nasal anesth-
esia can be achieved by placing cotton pledgets or
cotton-tipped swabs soaked in cocaine 4%, lidocaine
4% with epinephrine 1:200 000, or a 3:1 mixture of
lidocaine 4% and phenylephrine 1% in the nares.
A similar preparation usi ng viscous 4% lidocaine
can be applied using a syringe attached to a 14G
angiocatheter [73].
Oral cavity topicalization is not necessary for
awake intubation per se. The gag reflex and the pos-
terior oropharynx, however, do require anesthesia,
particularly if the airway management technique
chosen will be stimulating these areas. A 2% to 4%
solution of lidocaine can be used to “swish, gargle,
and spit” [83]. This technique adequately anesthetizes
the oral and pharyngeal mucosa, although the larynx
and trachea may require additional topicalization.
Laryngeal anesthesia can be achieved via the aspir-
ation of local anesthetic. There are several methods to
achieve this. A “lidocaine lollipop ” can be made
by placing lidocaine 5% ointment or viscous lidocaine
2–4% on the end of a tongue depressor. This is then
placed lidocaine-side-down onto the posterior tongue.
The patient is encouraged not to swallow, but rather
allow the lidocaine to “melt” and run down the base
of the tongue and pool above the glottis, where it is
then aspirated. The “toothpaste method ” is a similar
concept that involves placing a line of lidocaine 5%
ointment down the middle of the tongue. The patient
is instructed to place the tongue against the roof of the
mouth and is encouraged not to swallow.
Aspiration of liquid lidocaine can be achieved by
slowly trickling 10 –12 ml of lidocaine 2% onto the
back of the tongue, while the tongue is held by the
operator between two pieces of gauze. This prevents
the patient from swallowing and results in aspiration
of the lidocaine, resulting in adequate laryngotracheal
anesthesia [84].
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
65
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The “spray-as-you-go” technique involves injecting
local anesthetics through the suction port of an FOB or
other airway device. One method requires attaching a
triple stopcock to the proximal portion of the suction
port in order to connect oxygen tubing from a regulated
oxygen tank set to flow at 2–4 l/min. Under direct vision
through the bronchoscope, targeted areas are sprayed
with aliquots of 0.2 to 1.0 ml of 2% to 4% lidocaine. The
physician then waits 30 to 60 seconds before advancing
to deeper structures and repeating the maneuver. The
flow of oxygen allows higher FiO 2 delivery, keeps the
FOB lens clean, disperses mucous secretions away from
the lens, and aids in nebulizing the local anesthetic [73].
A second method involves passing a multiorifice epi-
dural catheter (internal diameter of 0.5 to 1.0 mm)
through the suction port of an adult FOB and intermit-
tently administering aliquots of 0.2 to 1.0 ml of 2% to
4% lidocaine [85].
These techniques are especially useful in patients
who are at risk of aspirating gastric contents, because
the topical anesthetic is applied only seconds before the
intubation is accomplished and allows the patient to
maintain his or her airway reflexes as long as possible.
Atomization is a common method of local anes-
thetic application to the airway. Disposable plastic
atomizers are available for this purpose (Figure 6.1).
The atomizer reservoir is filled with 2% to 4% lidocaine
and tubing is connected from the atomizer to an oxygen
cylinder with a flow rate of 8 to 10 l/min. The phalange
is depressed and the spray of local anesthetic solution is
directed towards the soft palate and posterior pharynx
to topicalize the mucosa. A disadvantage with this
method is the difficulty in controlling the exact amount
of local anesthetic administered. Alternatively, the
MADgic® Mucosal Atomization Device (Wolfe Tory
Medical, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT) is a disposable,
latex-free device that, when attached to a Luer fitted
syringe containing local anesthetic, can be used to
dispense a fine mist to the oropharyngeal or nasal
mucosa (Figure 6.2). The tubing is malleable, allowing
for delivery of local anesthetic to deeper pharyngeal
structures and the glottis. Because a syringe is used, a
known amount of local anesthetic can be administered.
The primary disadvantage of this device is that smaller
particle sizes are not achieved, limiting the amount of
local anesthetic that reaches the trachea.
Nebulizers may also be used to apply local anes-
thetic to the airway. A standard mouthpiece-type
nebulizer (Figure 6.3) can topicalize the oropharynx
and trachea. If nasal cavity anesthesia is needed, a
face-mask-type nebulizer (Figure 6.4) can be used;
the patient is instructed to breathe in through the
nose. This approach is especially advantageous in
patients with increased ICP, open eye injury, and
severe coronary artery disease, due to a decreased
incidence of coughing [86]. A typical dose of lido-
caine used in a standard nebulizer is 4 ml of 4%
lidocaine. This results in a total dose of 160 mg of
lidocaine, which is well within the safe dosage range.
Nerve blocks
Although topicalization of the mucosa can supply
adequate anesthesia to the entire airway in many
circumstances, clinical scenarios may arise where the
Figure 6.1. Typical disposable atomizer (from Hagberg CA, ed.
Benumof’s Airway Management, 3rd edn., St. Louis; Mosby 2012).
 Figure 6.2. MADgic Mucosal Atomization Device (Wolfe Tory
Medical, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT).
Section 1: Introduction
66
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012denser anesthesia provided by airway nerve blocks is
preferable. Some studies have shown superior patient
comfort and hemodynamic stability when a com-
bined regional block technique is used in comparison
to nebulized local anesthetic [87]. The nerve blocks
presented in this section are notable for their ease of
performance, their minimal risk to the patient, and
their fast onset.
Airway sensory innervations
The anatomy of the airway as it relates to sensory
innervations [7,11,15,73,88,89] can be generally
divided into three regions (Figure 6.5): the nasal
cavity and nasopharynx, innervated by branches of
the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve [CN] V); the oro-
pharynx and posterior third of the tongue, innervated
by branches of the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX);
and the larynx and trachea, innervated by branches of
the vagus nerve (CN X).
Sensory input from the nasal cavity and nasophar-
ynx is supplied by the greater and lesser palatine
nerves and the anterior ethmoidal nerve. The palatine
nerves are derived from branches of the maxillary
nerve (CN V 2) and arise from the sphenopalatine
ganglion (also known as the pterygopalatine or Meck-
el's ganglion). They provide sensory innervation to
the nasal turbinates and most of the nasal septum, as
well as the roof of the mouth, soft palate, and tonsils.
The anterior ethmoidal nerve is derived from a
branch of the ophthalmic nerve (CN V 1). It provides
sensory innervation to the anterior portion of the
nasal cavity.
The glossopharyngeal nerve (GPN) supplies sens-
ory innervation to the posterior and lateral walls of
the pharynx, the vallecula, the anterior surface of the
epiglottis, and the tonsillar pillars. By way of its lin-
gual branch, the GPN also innervates the posterior
third of the tongue and acts as the afferent limb of
the gag reflex. It emerges from the skull through the
jugular foramen and passes anteriorly between the
internal jugular and carotid vessels, traveling along
the lateral wall of the pharynx.
Sensory innervation of the larynx is supplied by
the superior laryngeal nerve (SLN), a branch of the
vagus nerve. The internal branch of the SLN contains
sensory fibers that are distributed to the base of the
tongue, epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, arytenoids, and
the glottis down to the level of the vocal cords. It
passes medially between the greater cornu of the
hyoid bone and the superior cornu of the thyroid
Figure 6.3. Typical mouthpiece-type nebulizer.
Figure 6.4. Typical facemask-type nebulizer (from Hagberg CA, ed.
Benumof’s Airway Management, 3rd edn., St. Louis; Mosby 2012).
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
67
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012cartilage and pierces the thyrohyoid membrane along
with the superior laryngeal artery and vein. The nerve
then lies in a closed space bounded by the thyrohyoid
membrane laterally and the laryngeal mucosa medi-
ally, termed the paraglottic space, where it ramifies.
The recurrent laryngeal nerves, also branches of the
vagus nerve, supply sensory innervation to the tra-
cheobronchial tree up to and including the vocal
cords, as well as supplying motor nerve fibers to the
intrinsic muscles of the larynx (except the crico-
thyroid).
Sphenopalatine ganglion block
The sphenopalatine ganglion block provides anesthe-
sia to portions of the airway innervated by the greater
and lesser palatine nerves, including the posterior
two-thirds of the nasal cavity. It also blocks sensation
from the roof of the mouth, soft palate, and tonsils,
making it useful even when a transoral intubation is
planned [85,89,90].
The sphenopalatine ganglion lies in the pterygo-
palatine fossa, posterior to the middle turbinate,
just under the nasopharyngeal mucosa. Long cotton-
tipped applicators soaked in either 4% cocaine or 4%
lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200 000 are passed along
the upper border of the middle turbinate at approxi-
mately a 45 /C14 angle to the hard palate and directed
posteriorly until the upper posterior wall of the naso-
pharynx is reached. The sphenopalatine ganglion
underlies the mucosal surface at this point (Figure
6.6A). The applicator is then left in place for approxi-
mately 5 minutes. Alternatively, cotton pledgets
soaked in local anesthetic solution may be used and
applied to the nasal cavity in the same manner using
bayonet forceps [85,89,90].
Anterior ethmoidal nerve block
The anterior third of the nasal cavity can usually be
sufficiently anesthetized by either topical or nebulized
local anesthetic; however, selective blockade of
the anterior ethmoidal nerve can also be performed.
A long cotton-tipped applicator, soaked in either 4%
cocaine or 4% lidocaine with epinephrine 1:200 000, is
inserted parallel to the dorsal surface of the nose until
it meets the anterior surface of the cribriform plate
Vagus n.Glossopharyngeal n.Trigeminal n.
Figure 6.5. Innervation of the upper airway. (Reproduced from Brown D, ed. Atlas of Regional Anesthesia , 2nd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders;
1999, with permission from Elsevier.)
Section 1: Introduction
68
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(Figure 6.6B). The applicator is held in position for 5
minutes [90].
Glossopharyngeal nerve block:
intraoral approach
The afferent limb of the gag reflex, mediated by the
lingual branch of the GPN, arises from stimulation of
deep pressure receptors found in the posterior third
of the tongue, which many times cannot be reached
by the diffusion of local anesthetics through the
mucosa. In situations where blunting of a prominent
gag reflex is desired, selective blockade of the lingual
branch of the GPN may be performed [7,91 –93].
The patient is placed in the sitting position with
the physician facing the patient on the contralateral
side of the nerve to be blocked. The patient 's mouth is
opened wide with the tongue protruded. With the
non-dominant hand, a tongue blade is used to dis-
place the tongue medially, forming a gutter or trough
along the floor of the mouth between the tongue and
the teeth. The gutter ends in a cul-de-sac formed by
the base of the palatoglossal arch (also known as the
anterior tonsillar pillar), which is a U- or J-shaped
structure starting at the soft palate and running along
the lateral aspect of the pharynx. A 25-gauge spinal
needle is inserted 0.25 to 0.5 cm deep at the base of
the palatoglossal arch, just lateral to the base of the
tongue, and an aspiration test is performed (Figure
6.7). If air is aspirated, the needle has been advanced
too deeply (the tip has advanced all the way through
the palatoglossal arch) and should be withdrawn until
no air can be aspirated; if blood is aspirated, the
needle should be redirected more medially. Two milli-
liters of 1% to 2% lidocaine are injected, and the
procedure is repeated on the contralateral side. The
same procedure can be performed noninvasively with
cotton-tipped swabs soaked in 4% lidocaine; the swab
is held in place for 5 to 10 minutes [7,91 –93].
Glossopharyngeal nerve block:
external approach (peristyloid)
This approach is most useful when the patient 's
mouth opening is insufficient to allow adequate visu-
alization to perform an intraoral block. The patient is
placed supine with the head in a neutral position. The
styloid process is located by identifying the midpoint
of the line between the mastoid process and the angle
of the jaw. A skin wheal with local anesthetic is made
at this location and a 22-gauge spinal needle is
advanced perpendicularly to the skin until the styloid
process is contacted. Depending on the patient 's habi-
tus, this should occur at a depth of 1 to 2 cm. The
needle is then redirected posteriorly and as soon as
contact is lost with the styloid process, 5 to 7 ml of
Figure 6.6. Left lateral view of the right
nasal cavity, showing long cotton-tipped
applicators soaked in local anesthetic.
A, applicator angled at 45 /C14 to the hard
palate with cotton swab over mucosal
surface overlying the sphenopalatine
ganglion. B, applicator placed parallel to
the dorsal surface of the nose, blocking
anterior ethmoidal nerve. (From
University of California, Irvine,
Department of Anesthesia, D.A. Teaching
Aids; reprinted with permission from
Hagberg CA, ed. Benumof's Airway
Management, 2nd edn. St. Louis: Mosby;
2007.)
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
69
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20120.5% to 1% lidocaine is injected after a negative aspir-
ation for blood (Figure 6.8). The procedure is then
repeated on the opposite side [73].
Because of the proximity of the GPN at this loca-
tion to the internal carotid artery, care must taken to
avoid intraarterial injection, which could result in
headache or seizure. If blood is aspirated or the
patient complains of headache during injection,
the needle should be removed and repositioned.
Tachycardia may result from blockade of the afferent
nerve fibers of the GPN that arise from the carotid
sinus [94].
Superior laryngeal nerve block
Blockade of the SLN produces dense anesthesia of the
hypopharynx and upper glottis, including the vallec-
ula and the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis. In
combination with oropharyngeal topical anesthesia
with or without a glossopharyngeal nerve block, this
allows adequate airway anesthesia for a variety of
awake intubation techniques, including direct laryn-
goscopy [6,73,88,95 –97]. In this approach, local
anesthetic is injected into the paraglottic or preepi-
glottic space, targeting the nerve soon after it pierces
the thyrohyoid ligament. Using lidocaine 1% to 2%,
satisfactory sensory blockade is achieved within
5 minutes, with a success rate of 92% to 100% [97].
The patient is placed in the supine position, head
slightly extended, with the physician standing on the
side to be blocked. Several different landmarks may be
used: the greater cornu of the hyoid, the superior
cornu of the thyroid, and the thyroid notch
[6,73,88,95–97].
The greater cornu of the hyoid is the most lateral
aspect of the hyoid bone that can be palpated. One
side can be made more prominent by displacing the
contralateral side toward the side being blocked. A 25-
gauge needle is “walked off ” the cornu of the hyoid
bone in an anterior –inferior direction aiming toward
the middle of the thyrohyoid membrane (Figure
6.9A). A slight resistance is felt as the needle is
advanced through the membrane usually at a depth
of 1 to 2 cm (2 to 3 mm deep to the hyoid bone). The
needle at this point has entered the preepiglottic
space. Aspiration through the needle should be
Figure 6.7. Glossopharyngeal nerve
block, anterior approach. Tongue
displaced medially forming a gutter
(glossogingival groove), which ends
distally in a cul-de-sac. A 25-gauge spinal
needle is placed at the base of the
palatoglossal fold. (From University of
California, Irvine, Department of
Anesthesia, D.A. Teaching Aids; Reprinted
with permission from Hagberg CA, ed.
Benumof's Airway Management , 2nd edn.
St. Louis: Mosby; 2007.)
Section 1: Introduction
70
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012attempted. If air is aspirated, the needle has gone too
deep and may have entered the pharynx, and it should
be withdrawn until no air can be aspirated. If blood is
aspirated, the needle has cannulated either the super-
ior laryngeal artery or vein or has cannulated the
carotid artery; the needle should be directed more
anteriorly. When satisfactory needle placement is
achieved, 2 to 3 ml of local anesthetic is injected as
the needle is withdrawn. The block is repeated on the
opposite side. An ultrasound-guided technique to this
approach has been described, and may be beneficial in
patients with abnormal neck anatomy [98].
The superior lateral cornu of the thyroid cartilage
can be identified by palpating the superior thyroid
notch (“Adam's apple”) and tracing the upper edge of
the thyroid cartilage laterally until the most lateral
aspect is identified. In many patients, this structure
is easier and less painful to palpate than the hyoid
bone. A 25-gauge needle is walked off the cornu of the
thyroid cartilage in a superior –anterior direction
aiming toward the lower third of the thyroid mem-
brane (Figure 6.9B); the same precautions as before
are taken and the local anesthetic solution is injected
as the needle is withdrawn. The block is repeated on
the opposite side.
The easiest landmark to identify in many patients,
especially in the morbidly obese, is the thyroid notch
(Adam's apple), the most medial and superficial
Mandibular angle
Mastoid
Sympathetic
trunk
Internal carotid a.
Styloid process
INITIAL AFTER
REDIRECTION
Internal
jugular v.
Vagus n.
Accessory n.
Hypoglossal n.
Glossopharyngeal n.
Figure 6.8. Glossopharyngeal nerve
block, peristyloid approach. A 22-gauge
spinal needle is contacted with the
styloid process. It is then redirected
posteriorly, putting the tip of the needle
in proximity to the glossopharyngeal
nerve. (Reproduced from Brown D, ed.
Atlas of Regional Anesthesia , 2nd edn.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1999, with
permission from Elsevier.)
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
71
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012aspect of the thyroid cartilage. The thyroid notch is
palpated, and the upper border of the thyroid cartil-
age is traced laterally for approximately 2 cm. Using a
25-gauge needle, the thyrohyoid ligament is pierced
just above the thyroid cartilage at this location and the
needle is advanced in a posterior and cephalad direc-
tion to a depth of 1 to 2 cm from the skin (Figure
6.9C). After an aspiration test, the 2 to 3 ml of local
anesthetic is injected before the needle is withdrawn.
The block is repeated on the opposite side. An added
benefit of this approach is the decreased likelihood of
blocking the motor branch of the SLN.
When performing a SLN block, care should be
taken to avoid insertion of the needle into the thyroid
cartilage to avoid the possibility of injecting the local
anesthetic at the level of the vocal cords, which could
cause laryngeal edema and airway obstruction. The
carotid artery should be identified and displaced
posteriorly to minimize the risk of intravascular injec-
tion; even small amounts (0.25 to 0.5 ml) of local
anesthetic injected into the carotid artery can induce
seizures. Hypotension and bradycardia have also been
associated with SLN blockade. A number of possible
causes of this reaction have been postulated: (1) vaso-
vagal reaction related to painful stimulation, (2)
digital pressure on the carotid sinus, (3) excessive
manipulation of the larynx causing vasovagal reac-
tion, (4) large doses of or accidental intravascular
administration of local anesthetic drugs, and (5)
direct neural stimulation of the branch of the vagus
Figure 6.9. Superior laryngeal nerve
block, external approach. A, using the
greater cornu of the hyoid bone as
landmark; B, using the superior cornu of
the thyroid cartilage as landmark; and
C, using the thyroid notch as landmark.
(From University of California, Irvine,
Department of Anesthesia, D.A. Teaching
Aids; Reprinted with permission from
Hagberg CA, ed. Benumof's Airway
Management, 2nd edn. St. Louis: Mosby;
2007.)
Section 1: Introduction
72
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012nerve by the needle [99]. It is recommended that
anticholinergics be administered before the block
is performed. Contraindications to the external
approach include local infection, local tumor growth,
and coagulopathy. Although not universally accepted,
some have advocated avoidance of SLN anesthesia in
patients at high risk of aspiration [100].
Transtracheal anesthesia
As both the sensory and motor fibers of the recurrent
laryngeal nerves run together, bilateral recurrent
laryngeal nerve blocks cannot be performed because
they would result in bilateral vocal cord paralysis and
complete airway obstruction. The alternative is topi-
calization of the tracheal mucosa by transtracheal
injection. While not a nerve block in the strictest
sense, this technique is invasive and bears similar
risks to other airway nerve blocks. Tracheal topicali-
zation is of particular benefit in cases where a neuro-
logic exam is required after intubation, as it makes the
presence of an endotracheal tube more tolerable.
The patient should be positioned supine with the
neck in extension. The thyroid cartilage (Adam 's
apple) is palpated at midline and followed caudally
until a depression and a firm ring of tissue are identi-
fied. These are the cricothyroid groove and the cricoid
cartilage, respectively. Overlying the cricoid groove is
the cricothyroid membrane.
The physician should stand at the side of the
patient with the dominant hand closest to the patient.
The patient is asked not to talk, swallow, or cough
until instructed. The midline of the cricothyroid
membrane is identified as the needle insertion site.
The index and middle finger of the nondominant
hand can be used to mark this spot and stabilize the
trachea (Figure 6.10). Using a tuberculin syringe or a
25-gauge needle, a small skin wheal is raised. A 20-
gauge angiocatheter attached to a 5 to 10-ml syringe
containing 3 to 5 ml saline is used. The needle is
advanced through the skin perpendicularly or slightly
caudally while aspirating. When air is freely aspirated,
the sheath of the angiocatheter is advanced slightly,
the needle is removed, and a syringe containing 3 to 5
ml of 2% to 4% lidocaine is carefully administered
using the catheter sheath that has been left in place.
Aspiration of air is reconfirmed, the patient is warned
to expect vigorous coughing, and the local anesthetic
is injected rapidly during inspiration (Figure 6.11).
The sheath of the angiocatheter may be left in place
until the intubation is complete in case more local
anesthetic is needed and to decrease the likelihood
of subcutaneous emphysema. Coughing helps to
nebulize the local anesthetic so that the inferior and
Trachea
Thyroid
gland
isthmus
Thyroid
Hyoid
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Cricothyroid
membrane—
midline
injection
Figure 6.10. Translaryngeal anesthesia,
anatomic landmarks. (Reproduced from
Brown D, ed. Atlas of Regional Anesthesia ,
2nd edn. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1999,
with permission from Elsevier)
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
73
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012superior surfaces of the vocal cords can be anesthe-
tized along with the tracheobronchial tree and infer-
ior larynx. Anesthesia of the epiglottis, vallecula,
tongue, and posterior pharyngeal wall are possible,
but unreliable [11,15,73,88,101]. The success of trans-
laryngeal anesthesia has been found to be as high as
95% and is attributed to both topicalization of the
airway and systemic absorption.
This technique may also be performed using a
standard 20- or 22-gauge needle without the place-
ment of an angiocatheter. This may, however,
increase the risk of airway injury by way of the sharp
metal bevel as the patient coughs. If this technique is
utilized, care should be taken to remove the needle
immediately after injection of the local anesthetic.
Smaller-gauge needles should not be used due to the
risk of breakage [101].
The tip of the needle should never be aimed in a
cephalad direction in order to avoid laryngeal trauma
and to ensure adequate local anesthetic spread below
the vocal cords. Because this procedure may poten-
tially eliminate the patient 's ability to protect his/her
own airway from aspiration, it should not be per-
formed in patients at high risk of aspiration. Trans-
tracheal injection should be avoided in patients with
local tumor or large goiter. Potential complications
include bleeding (subcutaneous and intratracheal),
infection, subcutaneous emphysema [102], pneumo-
mediastinum, pneumothorax, vocal cord trauma, and
esophageal perforation [101].
(A)
(C)
(D)
(B)
Figure 6.11. Translaryngeal anesthesia (midsagittal view of the head and neck). (A) Angiocatheter inserted at the cricothyroid membrane,
aimed caudally. Aspiration test performed to verify position of tip of needle in tracheal lumen. (B) Needle is removed from angiocatheter.
(C) Syringe containing local anesthetic attached. Aspiration test repeated. (D) Local anesthetic is injected, resulting in coughing and
nebulization of the local anesthetic (shaded area). (From University of California, Irvine, Department of Anesthesia, D.A. Teaching Aids;
Reprinted with permission from Hagberg CA, ed. Benumof's Airway Management , 2nd edn. St. Louis: Mosby; 2007.)
Section 1: Introduction
74
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Awake intubation techniques
While flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy is the most
common technique for awake intubation, numerous
other methods have been described. The decision of
which technique to use should depend on the route
chosen (orotracheal vs. nasotracheal), the patient 's
airway conditions, and the familiarity of the anesthe-
siologist with specific modalities. The latter is an
important point – the difficult airway is not an appro-
priate setting during which to experiment with a new
technique!
Orotracheal vs. nasotracheal intubation
The decision of whether to proceed with intubation
via the oral or nasal route should be made before
deciding which airway management technique will
be utilized. Many times in ENT surgery, the intub-
ation route is dictated by the needs of the surgeon for
a particular procedure. When the surgery allows for
either route, however, the benefits and disadvantages
of each route should be taken into account.
The orotracheal route has several advantages. It is
potentially less traumatic and presents a lower risk of
bleeding compared to the nasotracheal route, it usu-
ally allows for placement of a larger endotracheal tube
(ETT), and it provides for more options in terms of
airway management techniques. The major disadvan-
tage is that orotracheal techniques usually result in
stimulation of the gag reflex, requiring denser airway
anesthesia and potentially being less comfortable for
the patient. Nasotracheal intubation, on the other
hand, bypasses the gag reflex and is usually more
easily tolerated by the awake patient. However, the
risks of epistaxis, trauma to the nasal turbinates, and
submucosal tunneling in the nasopharynx must be
taken into account [7].
Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy
FOI using an FOB is currently the most commonly
used and well-described airway management tech-
nique used in the awake patient. FOI provides several
advantages: it allows for visual examination of the
airway prior to intubation, it provides confirmation
of tube placement, avoiding esophageal and endo-
bronchial intubation, it is well tolerated in awake
patients, it has less potential for airway and dental
trauma, and it can be performed in multiple pos-
itions. FOI is a useful technique for both orotracheal
and nasotracheal intubation [7,8,25,103].
For orotracheal FOI, one major challenge is naviga-
ting the FOB around the base of the tongue to achieve a
satisfactory view of the larynx. To facilitate this,
specialized intubating oral airways are commonly used.
There are several types available, each with unique
design differences; they include the Ovassapian,
Berman, and Williams airways (Figure 6.12). In add-
ition to providing a conduit for the FOB, these airways
protect the FOB from damage by biting. A disadvantage
of these devices is that they place pressure on the base of
the tongue, potentially causing gagging in awake
patients. ROTIGS (Hanu Surgical Devices; Honolulu,
HI) is a novel device that has been developed to replace
the intubating oral airway during awake oral FOI.
ROTIGS (Rapid OroTracheal Intubation Guidance
Figure 6.12. Berman, Williams, and
Ovassapian airways.
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
75
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012System) is composed of a mouthpiece, bite block, and
guidance tube (Figure 6.13). The mouthpiece and bite
blocks keep the device centered and allow a midline
approach to the larynx. Because the device does not rest
on the tongue, it does not cause gagging, making it well-
suited for use in awake and minimally sedated patients.
For nasotracheal FOI, the challenge is usually related
to placement of the ETT through the nasal passage into
the nasopharynx. There are several steps that can be
taken to increase the chances of success: (1) adminis-
tering a nasal mucosal vasoconstrictor, (2) gauging the
degree of patency of the nasal passage using soft plastic
nasopharyngeal airways (nasal trumpets), (3) placing the
ETT into the nares first, as a conduit for the FOB, and
(4) using a smaller ETT, a rotating ETT going counter-
clockwise as the ETT enters the glottis, so the bevel is
positioned anteriorly, and the use of a specially designed
ETT, such as the Parker Flex-Tip ™ Tube (Parker
Medical, Highlands Ranch, CO, USA). Items 4 –6c a n
also be useful for orotracheal fiberoptic intubation.
There are limitations to the use of FOI in certain
situations. Severe airway bleeding can obscure anatom-
ical landmarks and soil the tip of the FOB with blood,
making visualization of the larynx extremely difficult.
Obstruction or severe stenosis of the airway, such that an
F O Bc a n n o tb ep a s s e d ,c a na l s om a k eF O Ii m p o s s i b l e .
Video laryngoscopy
Videolaryngoscopes are novel intubation devices con-
taining a miniature video camera, allowing indirect
visualization of the glottis. They provide superior views
of the glottis compared to standard direct laryngoscopes
in patients with both normal and difficult airways. The
use of videolaryngoscopy has been well described as a
technique for awake intubation. Video laryngoscopy
provides several advantages compared to a standard
FOI: a faster and easier glottic view, equipment that is
simpler to set up and less prone to breakage, and less
training required to develop proficiency in its use [104].
One of the first devices using similar technology
described for use in awake intubation was the Bullard®
laryngoscope (Gyrus ACMI, Southborough, MA, USA)
[7,19]. More recently, the GlideScope ® (Verathon
Medical, Bothell, WA, USA), the Pentax-AWS® (Pentax
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), and the McGrath ® video
laryngoscope (Aircraft Medical, Edinburgh, UK) have
been used for awake intubation [106,117,118].
Video laryngoscopes that incorporate an angulated
blade, such as the GlideScope ® and the McGrath ®
videolaryngoscope, eliminate the necessity for three-
axis alignment and facilitate visualization of the glottis.
There have been several case series published describing
their use for awake intubation of the difficult airway,
including patients with upper airway neoplasm and
signs of airway obstruction [18,105 –107]. The blades
are relatively small and, because of the angulated blade,
minimal pressure is placed on the tongue, allowing for
minimal discomfort to the awake, topicalized patient.
The Pentax-AWS ® is a rigid videolaryngoscope
that incorporates two channels: a main channel is used
to guide the ETT, while a side channel can accommo-
date a suction catheter. This side channel can be used
in awake intubation, however, as a means to adminis-
ter topical anesthesia with a catheter such as the
MADgic® mucosal atomization device. Suction and
supplemental oxygen can then be administered
through the ETT by using a suction catheter via a
Bodai connector and the breathing circuit [104,
108,109]. Limitations of this technique are the neces-
sity for at least a 25 mm mouth opening and the
necessity to lift once the tip of the video laryngoscope
is in the vallecula, potentially requiring a greater
degree of airway anesthesia than other techniques.
The Pentax-AWS® has been used successfully to facili-
tate awake nasotracheal intubations, as well [110,111].
Optical stylets
Another class of devices that can be used for awake
intubation is the rigid optical stylet. The Bonfils Ret-
romolar Intubating Fiberscope ™ (Karl Storz GmbH,
Tuttlingen, Germany) is a rigid fiberscope with a
fixed anterior tip curvature of 40 /C14 . The rigid shaft
allows for greater facility in navigating through soft
Figure 6.13. ROTIGS (Hanu Surgical Devices, Honolulu, HI).
Section 1: Introduction
76
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012tissues and around airway structures. A 1.2 mm
working channel can be used for applying local anes-
thetic either directly, or with the aid of an epidural
catheter [112 –115]. The Sensascope ™ (Acutronic
Medial Systems AG, Hirzel, Switzerland) is a similar
device that incorporates an S-shaped curve and a
steerable, flexible distal tip. It has also been used
successfully for awake intubation [116].
Other techniques
Essentially, any technique that can be used to intub-
ate the patient under general anesthesia can be
used to perform awake intubation. Conventional
direct laryngoscopy with a standard laryngoscope
was commonly used prior to the advent of the
FOB [4]. Of all the techniques, however, it is the
most stimulating and requires dense airway anesthe-
sia [7]. Blind techniques, such as a blind nasotra-
cheal intubation or a blind orotracheal intubation
through an intubating oral airway, have been shown
to have high success rates. The risk of upper airway
bleeding, however, should be taken into consider-
ation as this may make subsequent fiberoptic
attempts more difficult [4]. Blind techniques should
not be attempted in the setting of airway neoplasm.
Other techniques that have successfully been used
for awake intubations and may be indicated in
specific circumstances include lightwand-guided
intubation, the intubating LMA, and retrograde
intubation [16,17,20].
Case study
The patient is a 56 kg, 73-year-old male with a past
history of laryngeal cancer treated with radiation
monotherapy 2 years ago. He has noticed a progres-
sive shortness of breath, worsening stridor, and a
change in voice over the past 2 months. During an
outpatient ENT clinic visit 2 weeks ago, diagnostic
nasopharyngeal laryngoscopy (NPL) was performed,
revealing an edematous larynx with obstruction of the
supraglottis by an enlarged, prolapsed right arytenoid
and right aryepiglottic fold. The vocal cords were not
fully visualized. A PET scan was performed which
showed evidence of local recurrent neoplasm. Other
medical history is significant for controlled hyperten-
sion and malnutrition. He now presents for elective
tracheostomy, direct laryngoscopy, and biopsy. He
has been NPO for 12 hours.
Clinical management
The patient 's history, clinical status, and imaging
were reviewed. The recent NPL findings and airway
plan were discussed in detail with the attending ENT
surgeon. The decision was made to attempt awake
nasotracheal FOI. The patient was brought into the
operating room and placed in a seated position. Pre-
medication with glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg IV and mid-
azolam 1 mg IV was administered. Airway
topicalization was initiated with 5 ml of nebulized
4% lidocaine. Sedation was achieved with a dexmede-
tomidine IV load of 0.5 mg/kg over 5 minutes,
followed by an infusion of 0.5 mg/kg/h.
The nasal passage was prepared with cotton swabs
soaked in a solution of lidocaine 3% with 0.25%
phenylephrine. Once the back of the nasopharynx
could be reached, a sphenopalatine block was per-
formed by holding the soaked cotton swabs in place
for 5 minutes. The decision was made not to attempt
any further topicalization of the larynx to avoid
coughing and potential airway compromise. The
patient at this point was comfortable, following com-
mands, and reporting numbness of the back of the
throat.
A 6.0 ETT was placed in the right nostril and a
lubricated FOB was advanced through the tube, into
the nasopharynx until a view of the glottis was pos-
sible. The findings were similar to those seen 2 weeks
previously. The fiberoptic scope was navigated down
towards the larynx and maneuvered around the right
aryepiglottic mass into the subglottic space, which
showed no stenosis or mass. The ETT was advanced
over the fiberoptic scope into the trachea; there was
minimal resistance noted. Once the ETT was in place,
bilateral breath sounds and positive end-tidal carbon
dioxide were confirmed, general anesthesia was
induced with propofol 100 mg IV, and muscle relax-
ation was achieved with 30 mg of rocuronium. Mech-
anical ventilation was initiated, and the tube was
secured.
Clinical pearls
/C15 When faced with an anticipated difficult airway,
awake intubation is the gold standard for airway
management.
/C15 Special caution should be taken for the patient
with a critical airway obstruction; awake surgical
airway may be preferred in these circumstances.
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
77
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012/C15 Preparation begins with a careful history and
physical examination, a review of pertinent
imaging, and a detailed discussion of the plan with
the ENT surgeon.
/C15 The goals of premedication are to alleviate
anxiety, provide a clear and dry airway, protect
against the risk of aspiration, and enable adequate
topicalization.
/C15 Many times, airway topicalization with local
anesthetic is sufficient to perform awake
intubation; sedation is not always necessary.
/C15 Sedation, if needed, may be accomplished with
benzodiazepines, opioids, or intravenous
hypnotics either alone or in combination; these
agents must be titrated carefully so as to maintain
cooperation and adequate ventilation.
/C15 When airway topicalization is insufficient, airway
nerve blocks may be employed to supplement
airway anesthesia.
/C15 There are many choices involved when preparing
for awake intubation. Safety should be the
primary consideration.
/C15 The incidence of difficult airways is higher in
patients undergoing ENT surgery and, specifically,
in patients undergoing ENT cancer surgery.
/C15 There are no absolute contraindications to awake
intubation other than patient 's refusal, a patient
who is unable to cooperate (such as a child, a
patient with an intellectual disability, or an
intoxicated, combative patient), or a patient with a
documented true allergy to all known local
anesthetics.
/C15 Potential complication s of awake intubation
include local anesthetic toxicity, airway trauma,
discomfort, recall, and failure to secure
the airway.
/C15 No matter which device is selected, all necessary
equipment should be prepared ahead of time and
be readily available, when needed. The
practitioner should also have several back-up
modalities in mind, and the required equipment
available, in case the initial technique used is
ineffective.
/C15 The nasal mucosa and nasopharynx are highly
vascular. When a patient requires nasotracheal
intubation, adequate vasoconstriction is essential,
as bleeding can make visualization of the larynx
extremely difficult.
/C15 When using local anesthetics for awake
intubation, it is important to be familiar with the
speed of onset, duration of action, optimal
concentration, signs and symptoms of toxicity,
and the maximum recommended dosage of the
drug chosen.
References
1. Arne J, Descoins P, Fusciardi J,
et al. Preoperative assessment for
difficult intubation in general and
ENT surgery: predictive value of a
clinical multivariate risk index. Br
J Anaesth 1998;80:140–6.
2. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway: a report by the American
Society of Anesthesiologists Task
Force on Management of the
Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology
1993;78:596–602.
3. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway: an updated report by the
American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Management of the Difficult
Airway. Anesthesiology
2003;98:1269–77.
4. Kopman AF, Wollman SB, Ross K,
et al. Awake endotracheal
intubation: a review of 267 cases.
Anesth Analg 1975;54:323–27.
5. Meschino A, Devitt JH, Koch P,
et al. The safety of awake tracheal
intubation in cervical spine
injury. Can J Anaesth 1992;39:
114–7.
6. Thomas JL. Awake intubation:
Indications, techniques and a
review of 25 patients. Anaesthesia
1969;24:28–35.
7. Benumof JL. Management of the
difficult adult airway, with special
emphasis on awake tracheal
intubation. Anesthesiology
1991;75:1086–110.
8. Reed AP, Han DG. Preparation of
the patient for awake fiberoptic
intubation. Anesthesiol Clin North
Am 1991;9:69–81.
9. Bailenson G, Turbin J, Berman R.
Awake intubation – indications
and technique. Anesth Prog
1967;14:272–8.
10. Mason RA, Fielder CP. The
obstructed airway in head and
neck surgery. Anaesthesia
1999;54:625–8.
11. Barash PG, Cullen BF, Stoelting
RK, et al. Clinical Anesthesia , 6th
edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
12. Miller RD, ed. Miller's Anesthesia,
7th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier
Churchill Livingstone; 2009.
13. Benumof JL, Scheller MS. The
importance of transtracheal jet
ventilation in the management of
the difficult airway.
Anesthesiology 1989;71:769–78.
14. Boucek CD, Gunnerson HB,
Tullock WC. Percutaneous
Section 1: Introduction
78
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:22 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012transtracheal high-frequency jet
ventilation as an aid to fiberoptic
intubation. Anesthesiology
1987;67:246–9.
15. Reed AP. Preparation of the
patient for awake flexible
fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Chest
1992;101:244–53.
16. Hamard F, Ferrandiere M,
Sauvagnac X, et al. Propofol
sedation allows intubation of the
difficult airway with the Fastrach
LMA. Can J Anesth 2005;
52:421–7.
17. Xue F, He N, Liao X, et al.
Clinical assessment of awake
endotracheal intubation using the
lightwand technique alone in
patients with difficult airways.
Chin Med J 2009;122:
408–15.
18. Doyle DJ. Awake intubation
using the GlideScope video
laryngoscope: initial experience in
four cases. Can J Anaesth
2004;51:520–1.
19. Cohn AI, McGraw SR, King WH.
Awake intubation of the adult
trachea using the Bullard
laryngoscope. Can J Anaesth
1995;42:246–8.
20. Raval C, Patel H, Patel P, et al.
Retrograde intubation in a case of
ankylosing spondylitis posted for
correction of deformity of the
spine. Saudi J Anaesth 2010;
4:38–41.
21. Stoelting RK. Anticholinergic
drugs. In Pharmacology and
Physiology in Anesthetic Practice ,
3rd edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
22. Gross JB, Hartigan ML, Schaffer
DW. A suitable substitute for 4%
cocaine before blind nasotracheal
intubation: 3% lidocaine-0.25%
phenylephrine nasal spray. Anesth
Analg 1984;63:915–8.
23. Kallar SK, Everett LL. Potential
risks and preventive measures for
pulmonary aspiration: new
concepts in preoperative fasting
guidelines. Anesth Analg
1993;77:171–82.
24. White PF, Recart Friere A.
Ambulatory outpatient
anesthesia. In Miller RD, ed.
Miller's Anesthesia, 6th edn.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Churchill
Livingstone; 2005.
pp. 2589–636.
25. Walsh M, Shorten G. Preparing
to perform an awake fiberoptic
intubation. Yale J Biol Med
1998;71:536–49.
26. Reves JG, Glass PSA, Lubarsky
DA, et al. Intravenous nonopioid
anesthetics. In Miller RD, ed.
Miller's Anesthesia, 6th edn.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Churchill
Livingstone; 2005.
pp. 316–78.
27. Murphy PJ, Erskine R, Langton
JA. The effect of intravenously
administered diazepam,
midazolam and flumazenil on the
sensitivity of upper airway
reflexes. Anaesthesia 1994;49:
105–10.
28. Reed AP. Preparation for
intubation of the awake patient.
Mt Sinai J Med 1995;62:10–20.
29. Puchner W, Egger P, Löckinger
A, et al. Evaluation of
remifentanil as single drug for
awake fiberoptic intubation. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2002;
46:350–4.
30. Lee MC, Absalom AR, Menon
DK, et al. Awake insertion of the
laryngeal mask airway using
topical lidocaine and intravenous
remifentanil. Anaesthesia
2006;61:32–5.
31. Reves JG, Fragen RJ, Vinik HR,
et al. Midazolam: pharmacology
and uses. Anesthesiology
1985;62:310–24.
32. Hendrickx JF, Eger EI 2nd,
Sonner JM, et al. Is synergy the
rule? A review of anesthetic
interactions producing hypnosis
and immobility. Anesth Analg
2008;107:494–506.
33. Lichtenbelt BJ, Olofsen E, Daha
A, et al. Propofol reduces the
distribution and clearance of
midazolam. Anesth Analg
2010;110:1596–606.
34. Ben-Shlomo I, Tverskoy M,
Fleyshman G, et al. Intramuscular
administration of lidocaine or
bupivacaine alters the effect of
midazolam from sedation to
hypnosis in a dose-dependent
manner. J Basic Clin Physiol
Pharmacol 2003;14:256–63.
35. White PF, Shafer A, Boyle WA
3rd, et al. Benzodiazepine
antagonism does not provoke a
stress response. Anesthesiology
1989;70:636–9.
36. Amrein R, Hetzel W. Clinical
pharmacology of flumazenil.
Eur J Anaesthesiol Suppl 1988;2:
15–24.
37. Fukuda K. Intravenous opioid
anesthetics. In Miller RD, ed.
Miller's Anesthesia, 6th edn.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Churchill
Livingstone; 2005. pp. 379 –438.
38. Machata AM, Gonano C, Holzer
A, et al. Awake nasotracheal
fiberoptic intubation: patient
comfort, intubating conditions,
and hemodynamic stability
during conscious sedation with
remifentanil. Anesth Analg
2003;97:904–8.
39. Shafer SL, Varvel JR.
Pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, and rational
opioid selection. Anesthesiology
1991;74:53–63.
40. Randell T, Valli H, Lindgren L.
Effects of alfentanil on the
responses to awake fiberoptic
nasotracheal intubation. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 1990;34:
59–62.
41. Atkins JH, Mirza N. Anesthetic
considerations and surgical
caveats for awake airway surgery.
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28:555–75.
42. Mingo OH, Ashpole KJ, Irving
CJ, et al. Remifentanil sedation
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
79
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012for awake fibreoptic intubation
with limited application of local
anesthetic in patients for elective
head and neck surgery.
Anaesthesia 2008;63:1065–9.
43. Machata AM, Gonano C, Holxer
A, et al. Awake nasotracheal
fiberoptic intubation: patient
comfort, intubating conditions,
and hemodynamic stability
during conscious sedation with
remifentanil. Anesth Analg
2003;97:904–8.
44. Rai MR, Parry TM, Dombrovskis
A, et al. Remifentanil target-
controlled infusion vs propofol
target-controlled infusion for
conscious sedation for awake
fibreoptic intubation: a double-
blinded randomized controlled
trial. Br J Anaesth 2008;100:
125–30.
45. Teganeh N, Roshani B, Azizi B,
et al. Target-controlled infusion
of remifentanil to provide
analgesia for awake nasotracheal
fiberoptic intubations in cervical
trauma patients. J Trauma
2010;69:
1185–90.
46. Xu YC, Xue FS, Luo MP, et al.
Median effective dose of
remifentanil for awake
laryngoscopy and intubation.
Chin Med J (Engl) 2009;122:
1506–12.
47. Cafiero T, Esposito F, Fraioli G,
et al. Remifentanil-TCI and
propofol-TCI for conscious
sedation during fibreoptic
intubation in the acromegalic
patient. Eur J Anaesth
2008;25:670–4.
48. Ackerman WE, Phero JC,
Theodore GT. Ineffective
ventilation during conscious
sedation due to chest wall rigidity
after intravenous midazolam and
fentanyl. Anesth Prog 1990;37:
46–8.
49. Jaffe TB, Ramsey FM. Alleviation
of fentanyl-induced truncal
rigidity. Anesthesiology
1983;58:562–4.
50. Belleville JP, Ward DS, Bloor BC,
et al. Effects of intravenous
dexmedetomidine in humans, I:
sedation, ventilation, and
metabolic rate. Anesthesiology
1992;77:1125–33.
51. Coursin DB, Coursin DB,
Maccioli GA. Dexmedetomidine.
Curr Opin Crit Care 2001;7:221–
6.
52. Ebert TJ, Hall JE, Barney JA, et al.
The effect of increasing plasma
concentrations of
dexmedetomidine in humans.
Anesthesiology 2000;93:382–94.
53. Abdelmalak B, Makary L, Hoban
J, et al. Dexmedetomidine as sole
sedative for awake intubation in
management of the critical
airway. J Clin Anesth
2007;19:370–3.
54. Bergese SD, Khabiri B, Roberts
WD, et al. Dexmedetomidine for
conscious sedation in difficult
awake fiberoptic intubation cases.
J Clin Anesth 2007;19:141–4.
55. Bergese SD, Bender SP,
McSweeney TD, et al.
A comparative study of
dexmedetomidine with
midazolam and midazolam alone
for sedation during elective awake
fiberoptic intubation. J Clin
Anesth 2010;22:35–40.
56. Avitsian R, Lin J, Lotto M, et al.
Dexmedetomidine and awake
fiberoptic intubation for possible
cervical spine myelopathy.
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol
2005;17:96–9.
57. Bergese SD, Candiotti KA,
Bokesch PM, et al. A Phase IIIb,
randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multicenter
study evaluating the safety and
efficacy of dexmedetomidine for
sedation during awake fiberoptic
intubation. Am J Ther
2010;17:586–95.
58. Precedex [package insert] . Lake
Forest, IL: Hospira, Inc.; 2008.
59. Ustün Y, Gündüz M, Erdogan O,
et al. Dexmedetomidine vs.
midazolam in outpatient third
molar surgery. J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 2006;64:1353–8.
60. Bloor BC, Ward DS, Belleville JP,
et al. Effects of intravenous
dexmedetomidine in humans, II:
hemodynamic changes.
Anesthesiology 1992;77:1134–42.
61. Perouansky MA, Hemmings HC
Jr. Intravenous anesthetic agents.
In Hemmings HC Jr, Hopkins
PM, eds. Foundations of
Anesthesia, Basic and Clinical
Sciences, 2nd edn. St. Louis:
Mosby; 2006. pp. 295 –310.
62. Iravani M, Wald SH.
Dexmedetomidine and ketamine
for fiberoptic intubation in a
child with severe mandibular
hypoplasia. J Clin Anesth
2008;20:455–7.
63. Scher CS, Gitlin MC.
Dexmedetomidine and low-dose
ketamine provide adequate
sedation for awake fiberoptic
intubation. Can J Anaesth
2003;50:606–10.
64. Coppen JE, Fox JWC.
Endobronchial intubation under
neuroleptanalgesia for a patient
with severe hemoptysis. Anesth
Analg 1968;47:70–1.
65. Redden RL, Biery KA, Campbell
RL. Arterial oxygen desaturation
during awake endotracheal
intubation. Anesth Prog
1990;37:201–4.
66. Droperidol [package insert] . Lake
Forest, IL: Hospira, Inc.; 2004.
67. Ho AMH, Chung DC, To EWH,
et al. Total airway obstruction
during local anesthesia in a non-
sedated patient with a
compromised airway. Can
J Anesth 2004;51:838–41.
68. Day RO, Chalmers DRC,
Williams KM, et al. Death of a
healthy volunteer in a human
research project: implications for
Australian clinical research. Med
J Aust 1998;168:449–51.
69. Case report on death of
University of Rochester student
Section 1: Introduction
80
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012issued; available at: http://www.
health.state.ny.us/press/releases/
1996/wan.htm. Accessed January
2012.
70. Adriani J, Zepernick R, Arens J,
et al. The comparative potency
and effectiveness of topical
anesthetics in man. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 1964;5:
49–62.
71. Perry LB. Topical anesthesia for
bronchoscopy. Chest
1978;73:691–3.
72. Strichartz GR, Berde CB. Local
anesthetics. In Miller RD, ed.
Miller's Anesthesia, 6th edn.
Philadelphia: Elsevier Churchill
Livingstone; 2005. pp. 573 –604.
73. Simmons ST, Schleich AR.
Airway regional anesthesia for
awake fiberoptic intubation. Reg
Anesth Pain Med 2002;27:180–92.
74. British Thoracic Society
guidelines on diagnostic flexible
laryngoscopy. Thorax 2001;
56:1–21.
75. Langmack EL, Martin RJ, Pak J,
et al. Serum lignocaine
concentrations in asthmatics
undergoing research
bronchoscopy. Chest
2000;117:1055–60.
76. Parkes SB, Butler CS, Muller R.
Plasma lignocaine concentration
following nebulization for awake
intubation. Anaesth Intensive
Care 1997;25:369–71.
77. Wieczorek PM, Schricker T,
Vinet B, et al. Airway
topicalization in morbidly obese
patients using atomized lidocaine:
2% compared with 4%.
Anaesthesia 2007;62:984–8.
78. Xue FS, Liu HP, He N, et al.
Spray-as-you-go airway topical
anesthesia in patients with a
difficult airway: a randomized,
double-blind comparison of 2%
and 4% lidocaine. Anesth Analg
2009;108:536–43.
79. Donlon JV Jr, Doyle DJ, Feldman
MA. Anesthesia for eye, ear, nose,
and throat surgery. In Miller RD,
ed. Miller's Anesthesia , 6th edn.
Philadelphia, Elsevier Churchill
Livingstone, 2005; 2526 –56.
80. Novaro GM, Aronow HD,
Militello MA, et al. Benzocaine-
induced methemoglobinemia:
experience from a high-volume
transesophageal
echocardiography laboratory.
J Am Soc Echocardiogr
2003;16:170–5.
81. Douglas WW, Fairbanks VF.
Methemoglobinemia induced by
a topical anesthetic spray
(cetacaine). Chest 1977;71:
586–91.
82. Sandza JG Jr, Roberts RW, Shaw
RC, et al. Symptomatic
methemoglobinemia with a
commonly used topical
anesthetic, cetacaine. Ann Thorac
Surg 1980;30:186–90.
83. Murphy MF. Sedation and
anesthesia for awake intubation.
In Walls RM, Murphy MF, eds.
Manual of Emergency Airway
Management, 3rd edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
and Wilkins; 2008. pp. 94 –103.
84. Chung DC, Mainland PA, Kong
AS. Anesthesia of the airway by
aspiration of lidocaine. Can
J Anaesth 1999;46:215–9.
85. Ovassapian A. Fiberoptic Airway
Endoscopy in Anesthesia and
Critical Care . New York: Raven
Press; 1990.
86. Bourke DL, Katz J, Tonneson A.
Nebulized anesthesia for awake
endotracheal intubation.
Anesthesiology 1985;63:690–2.
87. Kundra P, Kutralam S,
Ravishankar M. Local anesthesia
for awake fiberoptic nasotracheal
intubation. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 2000;44:511–6.
88. Roberts JT. Anatomy and patient
positioning for fiberoptic
laryngoscopy. Anesthesiol Clin
North Am 1991;9:53.
89. Standring S. Gray's Anatomy, the
Anatomical Basis of Clinical
Practice, 40th edn. Philadelphia:
Churchill Livingstone; 2009.
90. Hagberg CA. Airway blocks. In
Chelly JE, ed. Peripheral Nerve
Blocks: A Color Atlas , 3rd edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins; 2008. pp. 176 –84.
91. Mulroy MF. Regional Anesthesia,
An Illustrated Procedural Guide ,
4th edition. Philadelphia,
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2008.
92. Henthorn RW, Amayem A,
Ganta R. Which method for
intraoral glossopharyngeal nerve
block is better? Anesth Analg
1995;81:1113–4.
93. Saliba DL, McCutchen TA,
Laxton MJ, et al. Reliable block of
the gag reflex in one minute or
less. J Clin Anesth 2009;21:463.
94. Kodama K, Seo N, Murayama T,
et al. Glossopharyngeal nerve
block for carotid sinus syndrome.
Anesth Analg 1992;75:1036–7.
95. DeMeester TR, Skinner DB,
Evans RH, et al. Local nerve
block anesthesia for peroral
endoscopy. Ann Thorac Surg
1977;24:278–83.
96. Gotta AW, Sullivan CA.
Anaesthesia of the upper airway
using topical anaesthetic and
superior laryngeal nerve block.
Br J Anaesth 1981;53:1055–8.
97. Furlan JC. Anatomical study
applied to anesthetic block
technique of the superior
laryngeal nerve. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 2002;46:199–202.
98. Manikandan S, Neema PK,
Rathod RC. Ultrasound-guided
bilateral superior laryngeal nerve
block to aid awake endotracheal
intubation in a patient with
cervical spine disease for
emergency surgery. Anaesth
Intensive Care 2010;38:946–8.
99. Wiles JR, Kelly J, Mostafa SM.
Hypotension and bradycardia
following superior laryngeal
nerve block. Br J Anaesth
1989;63:125–7.
Chapter 6: Awake intubation
81
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012100. Walts LF, Kassity KJ. Spread of
local anesthesia after upper
airway block. Arch Otolaryngol
1965;81:76–9.
101. Gold MI, Buechel DR.
Translaryngeal anesthesia: a
review. Anesthesiology
1959;20:181–5.
102. Wong DT, McGuire GP.
Subcutaneous emphysema
following trans-cricothyroid
membrane injection of local
anesthetic. Can J Anaesth
2000;47:165–8.
103. Ovassapian A, Krejcie TC,
Yelich SJ, et al. Awake fibreoptic
intubation in the patient at high
risk of aspiration. Br J Anaesth
1989;62:13–6.
104. Jarvi K, Hillermann C, Danha,
et al. Awake intubation with the
Pentax Airway Scope.
Anaesthesia 2011;66:314.
105. Xue FS, Li CW, Zhang GH, et al.
GlideScope®-assisted awake
fibreoptic intubation: initial
experience in 13 patients.
Anaesthesia 2006;61:1014–5.
106. McGuire BE. Use of the
McGrath video laryngoscope in
awake patients. Anaesthesia
2009;64:912–4.
107. Uslu B, Damgaard Nielsen R,
Kristensen BB. McGrath ®
videolaryngoscope for awake
tracheal intubation in a patient
with severe ankylosing
spondylitis. Br J Anaesth
2010;104:118–9.
108. Suzuki A, Kunisawa T, Takahata
O, et al. Pentax-AWS (Airway
Scope®) for awake tracheal
intubation. J Clin Anesth
2007;19:642–6.
109. Hirabayashi Y, Seo N. Awake
intubation using the Airway
Scope. J Anesth 2007;21:529–30.
110. Asai T. Pentax-AWS
videolaryngoscope for awake
nasal intubation in patients with
unstable necks. Br J Anaesth
2010;104:108–11.
111. Xue FS, Xiong J, Yuan YJ, et al.
Pentax-AWS videolaryngoscope
for awake nasotracheal
intubation in patients with a
difficult airway. Br J Anaesth
2010;104:505.
112. Mazères JE, Lefranc A, Cropet
C, et al. Evaluation of the Bonfils
intubating fibrescope for
predicted difficult intubation in
awake patients with ear, nose,
and throat cancer. Eur J Anaesth
2011;28:646–50.
113. Corbanese U, Possamai C.
Awake intubation with the
Bonfils fibrescope in patients
with difficult airway. Eur
J Anaesth 2009;26:836–41.
114. Xue FS, Luo MP, Liao X, et al.
Airway topical anesthesia using
the Bonfils fiberscope. J Clin
Anesth 2009;21:154–5.
115. Abramson SI, Holmes AA,
Hagberg CA. Awake insertion of
the Bonfils retromolar
intubation fiberscope in five
patients with anticipated
difficult airways. Anesth Analg
2008;106:1215–7.
116. Greif R, Kleine-Brueggeney M,
Theiler L. Awake tracheal
intubation using the
Sensascope™ in 13 patients with
an anticipated difficult airway.
Anaesthesia 2010;65:525–8.
117. Choi GS, Park SI, Lee EH, Yoon
SH. Awake Glidescope ®
intubation in a patient with a
huge and fixed supraglottic
mass – a case report. Korean J
Anesthesiol 2010;59:S26–9.
118. Jeyadoss J, Nanjappa N, Nemeth
D. Awake intubation using
Pentax AWS videolaryngoscope
after failed fibreoptic intubation
in a morbidly obese patient
with a massive thyroid tumour
and tracheal compression.
Anaesth Intensive Care
2011;39(2):311–12.
Section 1: Introduction
82
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:17:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.009
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
7
Introduction
Anesthesia for ENT trauma
Matthew R. Eng and Marshal B. Kaplan
Introduction
Head trauma accounts for 10 to 15% (approximately
230000) of trauma hospitalizations in the United
States per year, resulting in the second leading cause
of trauma hospitalizations [1]. Further, trauma is the
leading cause of death and disability in Americans
younger than 40 years of age [2]. Although motor
vehicle accidents and falls account for the majority of
head trauma in the United States, such injuries often
occur with sporting accidents or assaults.
Maxillofacial trauma poses a difficult challenge for
the anesthesiologist with regard to the patient's airway.
Injuries to the head and neck may result in airway
obstruction from disrupted or distorted anatomy, tissue
edema, foreign debris, vomitus, or bleeding. Craniofa-
cial injuries may distort the anatomy of the tongue or
pharynx to such an extent that airway patency is com-
promised. Traumatic brain injury may result in loss of
central mechanisms of airway protection. Trauma to
the neck may additionally cause direct airway obstruc-
tion when there is injury to the larynx. While airway
management will be discussed in this chapter, the over-
riding principle in the event of an inability to quickly
establish an airway should be to perform a surgical
airway. In a report of patients with laryngeal fractures,
74% required advanced airway techniques [3].
Cervical spine injury has been reported to occur in
up to 6% of patients with maxillofacial trauma [4 –6].
Significant cervical injury should be presumed until
definitively “ruled out ” on clinical grounds and by
radiographic imaging.
The general principles for the anesthetic manage-
ment of other trauma surgery must be applied to ENT
trauma operations. The anesthesiologist must act as
the primary resuscitator and principal manager of the
airway.
Primary survey: ABCDE
The advanced trauma life support (ATLS) course
describes a series of surveys in which the prioritiza-
tion of resuscitation and assessment actions is
defined. The trauma life support training program
for physicians is the most widely recognized program
available. In the primary survey, lasting 2 to 5 min-
utes, the ABCDE sequence of trauma should be
performed – Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disabil-
ity and neurologic status, and Exposure and overall
evaluation for other injuries. Appropriate interven-
tion should be performed immediately by specialized
trauma medical providers. Following the primary
survey, more comprehensive secondary and tertiary
surveys are performed.
Airway management
Ventilation and oxygenation are the greatest priorities
in a trauma patient, and management of the airway in
patients with trauma to the head and neck requires a
skilled practitioner. Knowledge of injury patterns,
anatomy, and a timely strategy allows for optimal
airway management. The failure of oxygenation and
ventilation may occur secondary to shock states, ana-
tomical injury, or CNS injury.
In all trauma cases, the physician should adminis-
ter high-flow oxygen and employ a pulse oximeter
monitor. Also, a high-volume suction should be avail-
able since these patients are at an increased risk of
vomiting. These patients should also be placed in a
rigid cervical collar to avoid further injury in patients
with possible cervical spine injury. Although placing
the patient in a “sniffing” position is often utilized for
improved visualization of the airway during laryngo-
scopy, this technique is contraindicated in patients
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
83
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012with a suspected cervical spine injury. While not
contraindicated, jaw thrust and chin lift may be more
difficult in the presence of a cervical collar or in
comminuted fractures of the mandible. These man-
euvers have also been associated with movement of
the cervical spine, and must be performed with
appropriate support of the head to prevent spinal
injury [7].
The use of oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal
airways requires careful consideration in the patient
with midface injuries. Oropharyngeal airways may be
poorly tolerated in a patient with an intact gag reflex
or may cause airway obstruction with improper sizing
or improper placement [8]. Inserting a nasopharyn-
geal airway may exacerbate nasopharyngeal bleeding
(or produce epistaxis in patients without midface
injuries.) There is also a concern regarding insertion
of nasogastric tubes in patients with midface injuries
or suspected anterior skull base fractures following a
series of reports of these devices entering the cranium
[9–11]. Therefore, blind insertion of nasogastric tubes
in a patient with these injuries should be avoided.
Tracheal intubation or surgical cricothyroidotomy
may be used to provide a definitive airway by experi-
enced clinicians. A definitive airway should be
secured by intubation when any of the following
criteria are present:
(1) inability to oxygenate and ventilate
(2) inability to maintain an adequate airway
(3) underlying injury and physiology of the patient
that may lead to a failure to maintain an adequate
airway, oxygenate, or ventilate.
Practice management guidelines established by ATLS
and The Eastern Association for the Surgery of
Trauma include the following indications for tracheal
intubation [12]:
(1) bilateral mandibular fractures
(2) copious bleeding into the mouth
(3) loss of protective laryngeal reflexes
(4) severe cognitive impairment with GCS < 8o r >
2-point fall
(5) seizures
(6) deteriorating blood gases
(7) acute airway obstruction
(8) hypoventilation
(9) severe hypoxemia despite supplemental oxygen
(10) severe hemorrhagic shock
(11) cardiac arrest.
Oral endotracheal intubation with cervical in-line
immobilization may be effective in patients with sus-
pected cervical spine injury. In a series of cadaveric
studies and clinical studies, cervical in-line immobil-
ization has been shown to be safe without any reports
of associated myelopathy [13 –15]. Less cervical
manipulation has been reported in the use of a
McCoy laryngoscope blade and bougie [16]. How-
ever, there remains a significant concern in obtaining
an optimal view of the vocal cords with restricted
neck extension and positioning in the “sniffing” pos-
itioning. For this reason, many clinicians favor other
techniques.
Oral intubation utilizing the GlideScope [17],
intubating LMA [18], video Macintosh laryngoscope,
lightwand [17], or the Bullard laryngoscope [18]
has been shown to provide intubating conditions
with less cervical spine manipulation compared to
direct laryngoscopy. These methods, however, can
be more time-consuming and equipment access may
be limited in emergency situations.
Oral and nasal intubations with fiberoptic tech-
nique have been suggested to minimize manipulation
of the cervical spine as compared to direct
laryngoscopy [13,14]. Nasal intubations should not
be attempted in the presence of severe trauma to the
midface or basilar skull fractures since the intubation
could breach the cranial vault [19 –22]. Basilar skull
fractures present clinically with Battle 's sign (retro-
auricular hematoma) and raccoon eyes (periorbital
hematoma). Using a fiberoptic scope, even by skilled
practitioners, can still be challenging since visualiza-
tion can easily become obscured by a single drop of
blood or secretions on the tip of the scope [23].
Awake fiberoptic intubation may be appropriate to
reduce the possibility of losing the patent airway
during the induction of anesthesia and possible gas-
tric aspiration. Intoxicated or agitated patients may be
poor candidates for an awake fiberoptic intubation
since patients should ideally be calm and cooperative
during the intubation. The oral mucosa should be
anesthetized by application of a local anesthetic spray,
injection, or nebulizer to the oral/nasal pharyngeal
mucosa.
Retrograde intubation is another potential tech-
nique that may facilitate tracheal intubation in a
patient with suspected cervical spine injury. First
described in 1960, the retrograde intubation is usually
performed by needle cannulation through the cri-
cothyroid membrane with passage of a flexible
Section 1: Introduction
84
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012guidewire or epidural catheter to the oropharynx . The
guidewire or epidural catheter is then retrieved
through the mouth and affixed to the Murphy 's eye
of an endotracheal tube . In a review of 24 patients
undergoing retrograde intubation, the anesthesiolo-
gists were 100% successful in using this method, with
an 88% success of intubating on the first attempt [24].
The technique is cited in the ASA difficult airway
algorithm [25], but the experience of this technique
in trauma settings is extremely limited [24].
In the event of a difficult airway that cannot be
secured using an endotracheal tube, a supraglottic
airway device or esophageal obturator airway should
be utilized as described in the ASA difficult airway
algorithm [25] in the event of an unable to intubate,
unable to ventilate situation, a Classic LMA may
facilitate rescue ventilation, but should not be con-
sidered a definitive airway, and it should be kept in
mind that the patient is still at risk of aspiration. The
LMA Supreme, introduced in late 2007, has a built-in
drain tube which may be used for gastric access and
an anatomic curve which facilitates a blind placement
[26]. Again, the LMA Supreme does not completely
ensure a definitively protected airway, but may serve
as a better rescue ventilation option as compared to
the Classic LMA.
Surgical airways
An advanced surgical airway is necessary when it is
not possible to secure a definitive airway in a timely
fashion by any other method. Acute obstruction from
upper airway trauma (laryngotracheal trauma) or
failed intubations may necessitate a cricothyroidot-
omy or tracheostomy. Surgical airway preparations
should be made prior to any planned intubation
attempt in a patient with ENT trauma in the event
that intubation is not successful. In these circum-
stances, a needle or surgical cricothyroidotomy may
be the preferred airway because it is relatively super-
ficial, less vascular, and accomplished with success of
greater than 90% [27]. The complication rate of a
cricothyroidotomy is reported to be 28.7% [12], and
includes pneumothorax, failed procedure, hemor-
rhage, misplaced tube, and development of tracheal
stenosis. In children, oxygenation and ventilation are
best accomplished by a needle cricothyroidotomy.
A needle cricothyroidotomy may be used to tempor-
ize the patient until a more formal surgical airway is
established.
Types of injury
Laryngeal trauma
Airway management for a patient with laryngeal
trauma is controversial, and attempting intubation
can be very difficult. It is essential to gather any clues
regarding the diagnosis of the laryngeal injury,
including the presence of pain or bruising across the
anterior neck, hoarseness or stridor, or the presence
of crepitus or subcutaneous emphysema. In a recent
review of 19 patients presenting with injury to the
upper aerodigestive tract, 100% were found to have
subcutaneous emphysema, 21% had dysphagia, and
63% had stridor or hoarseness [28]. Attempts at
intubating a patient with laryngeal trauma may result
in further iatrogenic injury or loss of a tenuous
airway. If any intubation attempt is to be made, it
should be done carefully using a fiberoptic broncho-
scope with a small endotracheal tube. If difficulty is
encountered, the intubation should be abandoned,
and a surgical airway established. Supraglottic devices
should not be used in a traumatized larynx since these
devices may worsen the subcutaneous emphysema
with positive-pressure ventilation.
Mandibular fractures
The mandible is the second most commonly fractured
facial bone after the nose. While any injury to the
mandible may pose a risk to the airway, a bilateral
mandibular fracture is of grave concern. Bilateral
fractures of the mandible can result in a “flail man-
dible” and may lead to an oral cavity collapse on the
posterior pharynx. This acute obstruction of the
airway necessitates immediate intubation or a surgical
airway. The otolaryngologist can improve the airway
by placing “bridle wires” in a dentate patient to obvi-
ate the emergent airway intervention. Mandibular
fractures are also associated with vascular damage
with injury to the internal carotid artery and vascular
injury to the inferior alveolar artery within the man-
dibular canal. Adequate lighting and suctioning are
essential in the event of severe bleeding. While bleed-
ing can be controlled by packing the wound or pres-
sure, the definitive control is sometimes only attained
by angiography and embolization.
Maxillary fractures
Maxillary fractures often produce severe bleeding and
the risk of aspiration of broken teeth, blood, and
Chapter 7: Anesthesia for ENT trauma
85
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012fragments of soft tissue. Rene Le Fort defined a clas-
sification of maxillary fractures based on his study of
cadaver experiments [29]. A Le Fort Level I fracture is
a horizontal fracture that involves the inferior nasal
aperture, separating the maxillary alveolus from the
rest of the midfacial skeleton. This fracture typically
occurs as a result of force directed to the lower mid-
face. Le Fort Level II fractures may result from a blow
to the lower or mid maxilla and involve the inferior
orbital rim. These fractures are pyramidal-shaped
nasalmaxillary fractures that break from the upper
craniofacial skeleton. Le Fort Level III fractures are
more rare, and usually result from blunt force to the
nasal bridge or upper maxilla. The fractures may
result in separation of facial skeleton from the skull
base.
Patients with facial injuries may additionally pre-
sent with difficult mouth opening because of pain or
trismus. Induction of anesthesia can provide relax-
ation to facilitate an endotracheal intubation.
Spine injuries
Standard practice dictates that all blunt trauma
victims be assumed to have an unstable cervical spine
until this condition is ruled out. Cervical spine injury
has a reported incidence of 5 –10% in trauma patients
[30] and up to 6% in maxillofacial trauma patients
[4–6].
“Clearing” the cervical spine should occur as soon
as possible because of the issues related to neck
immobilization [31]. The cervical spine may be pro-
tected by manual stabilization, rigid collar, or lateral
restraints and tape until the spine has been cleared.
The cervical spine may be “cleared” without
imaging in many cases, and immobilization can be
removed safely based on clinical criteria alone. The
following clinical criteria should be met for clearance
of the cervical spine:
1. Fully awake, i.e. GCS 14 or 15.
2. No alcohol or intoxicants (in the patient).
3. No (painful) distracting injuries.
4. No pain or tenderness of the spine on deep
palpation.
5. Active movement without pain or neurological
change.
Nevertheless, many practitioners feel that the neck
must remain stabilized pending definitive imaging
studies. In the unconscious patient or a patient with
multiple injuries or brain injury, the clinical assess-
ment for cervical spine clearance may be unfeasible.
In these situations, clearance requires imaging
options including CT, MRI, and direct fluoroscopy
[32]. Plain radiographs do not adequately identify all
cervical spine injuries [33] and result in false nega-
tives in 10% of cases [34,35].
In considering plain radiographs the three stand-
ard ATLS views (lateral, anteroposterior and open-
mouth odontoid peg) should now be regarded as
inadequate [36], identifying only approximately 90%
of cervical spine injuries [33]. In the presence of brain
injury and an abnormal brain CT scan the false-
negative rate of plain radiographs at the craniocervi-
cal junction is approximately 10% [34,35]. The false-
negative rate for a helical CT of the cervical spine is
less than 0.5% [32,37]. In these instances, isolated
ligamentous injuries may be missed and the patient 's
cervical spine may still be at risk.
For definitive clearance, the practitioner may elect
to allow the patient to recover for a proper clinical
assessment. However, the prolonged spinal immobil-
ization carries increased morbidity and mortality. The
imaging modality of choice for spinal immobilization
clearance is MRI, which may detect up to 25% of
ligamentous and soft tissue injuries missed by radio-
graphs and CT. Dynamic fluoroscopy is another tech-
nique used to identify cervical spine injury. This
requires a specialist and continuous fluoroscopy
during dynamic manipulation of the cervical spine.
There are few data to support a significant advantage
of dynamic fluoroscopy compared to combined
radiographs and CT imaging [31].
Inhalational injuries
As with all other trauma injuries, the airway should
be assessed first in the event of an inhalational injury
to the nasopharynx. The patient should be adminis-
tered 100% oxygen and monitored with pulse oxime-
try. Impending airway obstruction may occur in the
presence of stridor, hoarseness, wheezing, or tachyp-
nea, and a patent airway should be established
immediately.
The inhalational damage is primarily from
the inhaled toxins and chemicals which exert
injury at the bronchi and alveoli. Heat is mostly
dispersed throughout the upper airway. With bron-
choscopy, the chemical mucosal damage is evident
with neutrophil-mediated inflammatory changes
Section 1: Introduction
86
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012including erythema, edema, and carbonaceous exud-
ates. Frequent suctioning should be performed to
clear exudates that may plug bronchioles and cause
shunting.
Summary
Anesthesia for head and neck trauma should be
approached utilizing the basic principles of ATLS.
Airway management is best performed with know-
ledge of airway anatomy, an understanding of the
impact of the trauma on the airway, and a thoughtful
approach to the deployment of different airway
devices. Ultimately, patients with difficult airways
and distorted anatomy may require a surgical airway
without delay.
Case study
Not surprisingly, emergency providers around the
world tremble at the thought of having to manage
the emergency patient with respiratory distress
following severe head and neck trauma. In airway
circles the following semi-mythical story sometimes
circulates as a sort of cautionary tale. So here goes the
story.
An otherwise healthy young man ran his outdoor
ATV into a suspended cable and was severely injured.
His companion called for help. The arriving “light
flight” doctor instantly filled with complete dread as
he saw a battered, bloody, gurgling face deeply cut by
some sort of wire. The patient was barely breathing,
and possibly partially decapitated. “Now there was an
impossible airway ”, thought the paramedic.
As feared, even with the best field suction, there
was no way that the patient was able to be intubated
orally. Nasal intubation looked hopeless too. There
was blood everywhere, and secretions to deal with as
well. And a failed attempt at intubation. The flight
doctor switched back to mask ventilation, but it
wasn't satisfactory either, even with an oral airway
and a nasopharyngeal airway placed in what looked
like where the nose was. Then he remembered a
maxim his mentor always emphasized: “If you can 't
intubate and can't ventilate, then it's time to heal with
steel.” He grabbed a scalpel with a size 15 blade with a
view to opening up the airway, but when he got close
and suctioned, he could see that the trachea had been
almost completely transected by the wire. In fact, the
inside of the trachea was clearly visible after suction-
ing. Intubation then became as easy as simply identi-
fying the distal tracheal section and passing an ETT in
the direction of the carina.
Clinical pearls
/C15Injuries to the head and neck may result in
airway obstruction from disrupted or distorted
anatomy, tissue edema, foreign debris, vomitus,
or bleeding. Traumatic brain injury may result
in loss of central mechanisms of airway
protection.
/C15Insertion of nasogastric tubes in patients with
midface injuries or suspected anterior skull base
fractures may result in their entering the cranium.
/C15Attempts at intubating a patient with laryngeal
trauma may result in further iatrogenic injury or
loss of a tenuous airway. If any intubation attempt
is to be made, it should be done carefully using a
fiberoptic bronchoscope with a small endotracheal
tube.
/C15Supraglottic devices should not ordinarily be used
in a traumatized larynx since these devices may
worsen the subcutaneous emphysema with
positive-pressure ventilation.
/C15An inability to quickly establish an airway should
lead to consideration of a surgical airway.
/C15The imaging modality of choice for spinal
immobilization clearance is MRI, which may
detect up to 25% of ligamentous and soft tissue
injuries missed by radiographs using CT.
/C15The following clinical criteria should be met for
clearance of the cervical spine:
/C15Fully awake, i.e. GCS 14 or 15.
/C15No alcohol or intoxicants (in the patient).
/C15No (painful) distracting injuries.
/C15No pain or tenderness of the spine on deep
palpation.
/C15Active movement without pain or neurological
change.
Chapter 7: Anesthesia for ENT trauma
87
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012References
1. Thurman D, Guerrero J. Trends
in hospitalization associated with
traumatic brain injury. JAMA
1999;282:954–7.
2. Web-Based Injury Statistics Query
and Reporting System
(WISQARS). National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control ;
2007.
3. Verschueren DS, Bell RB, Bagheri
SC, Dierks EJ, Potter BE.
Management of laryngo-tracheal
injuries associated with
craniomaxillofacial trauma. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 2006;64:203–14.
4. Beirne JC, Butler PE, Brady FA.
Cervical spine injuries in patients
with facial fractures: a 1-year
prospective study. Int J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 1995;24:
26–9.
5. Davidson JS, Birdsell DC. Cervical
spine injury in patients with facial
skeletal trauma. J Trauma
1989;29:1276–8.
6. Sinclair D, Schwartz M, Gruss J,
McLellan B. A retrospective
review of the relationship between
facial fractures, head injuries, and
cervical spine injuries. J Emerg
Med 1988;6:109–12.
7. Donaldson WF 3rd, Heil BV,
Donaldson VP, Silvaggio VJ. The
effect of airway maneuvers on the
unstable C1-C2 segment.
A cadaver study. Spine (Phila Pa
1976) 1997;22:1215–8.
8. Greenberg RS. Facemask, nasal,
and oral airway devices.
Anesthesiol Clin North America
2002;20:833–61.
9. Hanna AS, Grindle CR, Patel AA,
Rosen MR, Evans JJ. Inadvertent
insertion of nasogastric tube into
the brain stem and spinal cord
after endoscopic skull base
surgery. Am J Otolaryngol 2011.
10. Chandra R, Kumar P. Intracranial
introduction of a nasogastric tube
in a patient with severe
craniofacial trauma. Neurol India
2010;58:804–5.
11. Spurrier EJ, Johnston AM. Use of
nasogastric tubes in trauma
patients – a review. J R Army Med
Corps 2008;154:10–3.
12. Dunham CM, Barraco RD, Clark
DE, et al. Guidelines for
emergency tracheal intubation
immediately after traumatic
injury. J Trauma 2003;55:
162–79.
13. Lennarson PJ, Smith D, Todd
MM, et al. Segmental cervical
spine motion during orotracheal
intubation of the intact and
injured spine with and without
external stabilization. J Neurosurg
2000;92:201–6.
14. Majernick TG, Bieniek R,
Houston JB, Hughes HG. Cervical
spine movement during
orotracheal intubation.
Ann Emerg Med 1986;15:
417–20.
15. McGuire G, el-Beheiry H.
Complete upper airway
obstruction during awake
fibreoptic intubation in patients
with unstable cervical spine
fractures. Can J Anaesth
1999;46:176–8.
16. Gabbott DA. Laryngoscopy using
the McCoy laryngoscope after
application of a cervical collar.
Anaesthesia 1996;51:812–4.
17. Turkstra TP, Craen RA, Pelz DM,
Gelb AW. Cervical spine motion:
a fluoroscopic comparison during
intubation with lighted stylet,
GlideScope, and Macintosh
laryngoscope. Anesth Analg
2005;101:910–5, table of contents.
18. Wahlen BM, Gercek E. Three-
dimensional cervical spine
movement during intubation
using the Macintosh and Bullard
laryngoscopes, the bonfils
fibrescope and the intubating
laryngeal mask airway. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2004;21:907–13.
19. Bahr W, Stoll P. Nasal intubation
in the presence of frontobasal
fractures: a retrospective study.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg
1992;50:445–7.
20. Goodisson DW, Shaw GM, Snape
L. Intracranial intubation in
patients with maxillofacial injuries
associated with base of skull
fractures? J Trauma 2001;50:
363–6.
21. Zmyslowski WP, Maloney PL.
Nasotracheal intubation in the
presence of facial fractures. JAMA
1989;262:1327–8.
22. Junsanto T, Chira T. Perimortem
intracranial orogastric tube
insertion in a pediatric trauma
patient with a basilar skull
fracture. J Trauma 1997;42:746–7.
23. Mason RA, Fielder CP. The
obstructed airway in head and
neck surgery. Anaesthesia
1999;54:625–8.
24. Gill M, Madden MJ, Green SM.
Retrograde endotracheal
intubation: an investigation of
indications, complications, and
patient outcomes. Am J Emerg
Med 2005;23:123–6.
25. Caplan RA, Benumof JL, Berry
FA. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway. An updated report by the
American Society of
Anesthesiologist Task Force on
management of the difficult
airway. Anesthesiology
2003;98:1269.
26. Timmermann A, Cremer S, Eich
C, et al. Prospective clinical and
fiberoptic evaluation of the
Supreme laryngeal mask airway.
Anesthesiology 2009;110:262–5.
27. Wright MJ, Greenberg DE, Hunt
JP, Madan AK, McSwain NE Jr.
Surgical cricothyroidotomy in
trauma patients. South Med J
2003;96:465–7.
28. Goudy SL, Miller FB, Bumpous
JM. Neck crepitance: evaluation
and management of suspected
upper aerodigestive tract injury.
Laryngoscope 2002;112:791–5.
29. Le Fort R. Etude experimentale
sur les fractures de la machoire
superieure. Rev Chir 1901:
479–507.
Section 1: Introduction
88
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201230. Chiu WC, Haan JM, Cushing BM,
Kramer ME, Scalea TM.
Ligamentous injuries of the
cervical spine in unreliable blunt
trauma patients: incidence,
evaluation, and outcome.
J Trauma 2001;50:457–63;
discussion 64.
31. Morris CG, McCoy E. Clearing
the cervical spine in unconscious
polytrauma victims, balancing
risks and effective screening.
Anaesthesia 2004;59:464–82.
32. Griffen MM, Frykberg ER, Kerwin
AJ, et al. Radiographic clearance
of blunt cervical spine injury:
plain radiograph or computed
tomography scan? J Trauma
2003;55:222–6; discussion 6 –7.
33. Stiell IG, Clement CM, McKnight
RD, et al. The Canadian C-spine
rule versus the NEXUS low-risk
criteria in patients with trauma.
N Engl J Med 2003;349:2510–8.
34. Cusmano F, Ferrozzi F, Uccelli M,
Bassi S. [Upper cervical spine
fracture: sources of misdiagnosis].
Radiol Med 1999;98:230–5.
35. Link TM, Schuierer G, Hufendiek
A, Horch C, Peters PE. Substantial
head trauma: value of routine CT
examination of the
cervicocranium. Radiology
1995;196:741–5.
36. Kreipke DL, Gillespie KR,
McCarthy MC, et al. Reliability of
indications for cervical spine films
in trauma patients. J Trauma
1989;29:1438–9.
37. Hogan GJ, Mirvis SE,
Shanmuganathan K, Scalea TM.
Exclusion of unstable cervical
spine injury in obtunded patients
with blunt trauma: is MR imaging
needed when multi-detector row
CT findings are normal?
Radiology 2005;237:106–13.
Chapter 7: Anesthesia for ENT trauma
89
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:18:39 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.010
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
8
Introduction
Anesthesia for ENT emergencies
D. John Doyle
Introduction
Writing a short chapter on ENT emergencies (Table
8.1) is seemingly oxymoronic given that the topic
could easily be the subject of entire textbooks. This
fact notwithstanding, it is the intent of this chapter to
offer a brief overview of otolaryngologic emergencies,
covering the topic in broad strokes. In this sense the
chapter can be envisioned as an overview that links to
more detailed discussions in more specialized chap-
ters to follow.
Equipment
A special effort should be made to ensure adequate
preparation for ENT emergencies [1], especially in
terms of airway equipment (Table 8.2). In addition
to these airway gadgets and unlisted items favored by
individual practitioners, ENT surgeons will want
ready access to an emergency tracheotomy tray as
well as to some form of suspension laryngoscope or
rigid bronchoscope (see Chapter 2). Special attention
to the maintenance and cleaning of fiberoptic bron-
choscopes is also important given that they must
always be easily accessible and reliable when needed.
In the case of electronic fiberscopes incorporating a
video display, establishing that illumination settings
and white balancing have been done correctly prior to
use is particularly important.
Airway obstruction
Complete or partial airway obstruction is not uncom-
mon in ENT practice and anesthesiologists are famil-
iar with a variety of measures, such as tracheal
intubation, to deal with this event. Table 8.3 lists some
causes of airway obstruction.
Table 8.1. A sampling of otolaryngologic emergencies
Bleeding after tonsillectomy, UVPP
(uvulopalatopharyngoplasty) or similar procedure
Bleeding after carotid artery surgery, leading to pressure
on airway structures
The patient exhibiting stridor, reflecting a state of almost
complete airway obstruction
The patient with an obstructed airway (See Table 8.3.
Some causes of airway obstruction)
The patient with head and neck infection, abscess, or
inflammation
The patient with severe epistaxis
Table 8.2. Possible components for ENT airway
emergencies cart
Bag-valve mask ( “Ambu”) bag
Oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal airways
Supraglottic airways
Endotracheal tubes, including “Microlaryngeal” tubes
Malleable stylets
Topical anesthesia, with syringes, and atomizers
Laryngoscope collection with extra batteries
McGill forceps (useful for nasal intubation)
Airway introducer ( “gum elastic bougie ”)
Tube exchange catheters
Carbon dioxide detection system
Video laryngoscope (e.g., GlideScope, McGrath, Pentax-
AWS, etc.)
Surgical airway kit (e.g., Melker cricothyrotomy kit)
Fiberoptic broncohoscope
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
90
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:20:01 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.011
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Angioedema
Angioedema (old term: angioneurotic edema) is the
rapid swelling of the dermis, subcutaneous tissue,
mucosa and submucosal tissues, usually from an aller-
gic reaction to either a food or medication [2 –4]. This
process is mediated via the release of histamine and
other inflammatory mediators. Hereditary angioedema
is a variant existing in three forms caused by an auto-
somal dominant genetic mutation. All forms involve
anomalous activation of the complement system.
Although very often angioedema is harmless
and does not affect breathing, dysphonia, dysphagia,
and dyspnea can all occur, including the possibility of
complete and irrevocable loss of the airway. Just as
with anaphylaxis, epinephrine may be lifesaving when
the angioedema is allergic in cause, but treatment
with epinephrine has not been shown to be helpful
in cases of hereditary angioedema. Intubation is often
needed in cases of angioedema; this will usually be
performed under topical anesthesia with the patient
awake or lightly sedated.
Airway infections
Airway-related infections such as epiglottitis, retro-
pharyngeal abscess and Ludwig 's angina are covered
in Chapter 9. One approach commonly taken in such
cases is awake intubation, especially in conjunction
with a fiberscope.
Bleeding
Airway-related bleeding may occur spontaneously, as
with a bleeding tumor, as a consequence of antic-
oagulation (e.g., for atrial fibrillation), or following
surgery (e.g., after UVPP surgery). Chapter 32 dis-
cusses the management of bleeding after tonsillec-
tomy surgery. Such cases offer a number of special
challenges, such as the presence of blood impairing
the view at laryngoscopy, the need for suction to
remove blood and secretions, the possibility of aspir-
ating oropharyngeal blood and the possibility of the
patient going into hypovolemic shock in the case of
extreme blood loss. Assuming that any coagulation
issues are corrected, attention will be directed at find-
ing the bleeding source and stopping it with cautery,
using a ligature or by other means. This will very
often require reintubation of the patient.
Bleeding after carotid artery surgery may similarly
require intubation of the patient. Both edema second-
ary to venous and lymphatic obstruction and direct
compression of the trachea from an expanding hema-
toma serve to make intubation more difficult. Awake
intubation is a popular choice in this situation [5,6].
Epistaxis
Epistaxis is bleeding from the nose [7]. While it is
usually benign and self-limiting, it can every now and
then be life-threatening. Epistaxis is divided into two
types, anterior bleeds (90% of cases) and posterior
bleeds (10% of cases), on the basis of the site where the
bleeding originates. Anterior nasal packing for bleeding
may be undertaken should direct pressure, topical
agents, or silver nitrate cauterization fail. Posterior
epistaxis may be more severe, may be accompanied by
hematemesis or melena and may require general anes-
thesia and intubation as part of the treatment. Bleeding
diatheses such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
(Osler–Weber–Rendu syndrome) or (more ordinarily)
the use of anticoagulants like aspirin or warfarin should
also be ruled out.
Stridor
One of the most potentially serious ENT emergencies
is dealing with the stridorous patient. Stridor is noisy
inspiration from upper airway turbulent gas flow
resulting from breathing through a partly obstructed
airway. Stridor should always command immediate
attention. The first issue of clinical concern in the
setting of stridor is whether or not intubation or a
surgical airway is immediately needed. If intubation
can be delayed for a period of time, a number of other
options can be considered; these are presented in the
chapter on Heliox. (Patients who are stridorous are
sometimes helped with the administration of Heliox;
this and more information on stridor is discussed in
Chapter 10.) Finally, attempts should be made to
Table 8.3. Some causes of airway obstruction
Tumors compressing the airway from the outside
Tumors invading the airway from the inside
Airway obstruction from inflamed/edematous airway
structures
Obstructive sleep apnea/obstruction from altered
oropharyngeal muscle tone
Buildup of airway secretions
Chapter 8: Anesthesia for ENT emergencies
91
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:20:01 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.011
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012determine the cause of the stridor (e.g., foreign body,
glottic edema, etc.).
Case study
Ludwig's angina
The patient was a 66-year-old male, 5 0600 in height and
weighing 76 kg, with a recent history of an infected
tooth. He had been taking antibiotics for a week for a
sore throat that had developed after the offending
tooth was removed. Recently, his symptoms had
worsened with the onset of fever and dyspnea.
When seen in the emergency department he pre-
sented with a “gurgling” sound while breathing. He
drooled saliva. Trismus was present and he was not
able to protrude his tongue. Vital signs were: tempera-
ture 38.9/C14C, pulse 120/min, blood pressure 185/95 and
a respiratory rate of 25/min. His oxygen saturation was
92% on room air and 99% on 10 l/min oxygen
delivered by face mask. The patient was seated in an
upright sitting posture, given 6 mg of intravenous
dexamethasone while the on-call anesthesia and ENT
teams were paged. Ludwig 's angina was suspected.
A decision was made to bring the patient to the
operating theater for an emergency intubation and
drainage of the infection. The plan was awake fiberoptic
intubation with tracheostomy under local anesthesia as
ab a c k u p .
Preoperative evaluation
Past medical history: hypertension, hypercholesterol-
emia, chronic bronchitis.
Past surgical history: appendectomy at age 39.
Medications: atenalol, atorvastatin, aspirin.
Comorbidities: hypertension and hyperchol-
esterolemia.
Airway: Mallampati Class 4 airway, thyromental
distance of 4 cm, mouth opening 2 cm.
Laboratory studies: Hct 48%. ECG shows only
nonspecific T wave changes. Normal echo.
NPO: the patient has been NPO for more than
8 hours.
Patient education: the patient was explained the
risks, benefits and alternatives of both the proposed
operation and the anesthetic plan.
Management
The anesthesia team and the surgical team reviewed
various airway management plans. The chosen plan
was for placing a size 6.0 mm ID MLT tube via fiber-
optic intubation. After transporting the patient onto the
operating table, he was placed in the supine position,
with the head resting on a foam pillow. After ensuring
adequate IV access and applying standard monitors, the
patient was premedicated with glycopyrrolate but was
not given any sedatives. The airway was topicalized
using gargled and sprayed lidocaine as best as could be
achieved with limited mouth opening. After some diffi-
culty a size 9 Williams airway was placed. The fiber-
scope was then advanced and used to deliver additional
topical anesthesia on the glottis. Copious secretions had
to be suctioned, making the process difficult. After
several attempts the glottis was finally visualized and
the fiberscope passed into the trachea, followed by
placement of the ETT. After clinical and capnographic
confirmation of correct tube placement, the patient was
induced with midazolam, fentanyl, and propofol and
relaxed using rocuronium. The surgeons then drained
the lesion, sent pus for microbial studies and placed a
surgical drain. The patient was then brought to the ICU,
where he was ventilated until the next day. He was then
extubated over a tube exchanger, in case reintubation
became necessary.
Clinical pearls
/C15 A special effort should be made to ensure adequate
preparation for ENT emergencies, especially in
terms of airway equipment. Ready access to an
emergency tracheotomy tray is especially important.
/C15 Special attention to the maintenance and cleaning
of fiberoptic bronchoscopes is important given
that they must always be easily accessible and
reliable when needed.
/C15 Epinephrine may be lifesaving when the cause of
angioedema is allergic in cause, but treatment with
epinephrine has not been shown to be helpful in
cases of hereditary angioedema. Intubation is
often needed when angioedema strikes.
/C15 Posterior epistaxis may be particularly severe, may
be accompanied by hematemesis or melena, and
may require general anesthesia and intubation as
part of the treatment.
/C15 Airway-related infections such as epiglottitis,
retropharyngeal abscess and Ludwig 's angina
constitute an emergency airway. One approach
commonly taken in such cases is awake
intubation, especially in conjunction with a
fiberscope.
Section 1: Introduction
92
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:20:01 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.011
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012References
1. Banga R, Thirlwall A, Corbridge
R. How well equipped are ENT
wards for airway emergencies?
Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2006;88
(2):157–60. PubMed PMID:
16551407; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC1964098.
2. Weis M. Clinical review of
hereditary angioedema: diagnosis
and management. Postgrad Med
2009;121(6):113–20. Review.
PubMed PMID: 19940422.
3. Gompels MM, Lock RJ, Abinun
M, et al . C1 inhibitor deficiency:
consensus document. Clin Exp
Immunol 2005;139(3):
379–94.
4. Lipozenci ć J, Wolf R.
Life-threatening severe allergic
reactions: urticaria, angioedema,
and anaphylaxis. Clin Dermatol
2005;23(2):193–205. PubMed
PMID: 15802213.
5. Beamish D. Airway problems
after carotid endarterectomy.
Br J Anaesth 1997;78(6):776.
PubMed PMID: 9215043.
6. Munro FJ, Makin AP, Reid J.
Airway problems after carotid
endarterectomy. Br J Anaesth
1996;76(1):156–9. PubMed
PMID: 8672360.
7. Pope LE, Hobbs CG. Epistaxis: an
update on current management.
Postgrad Med J 2005;81(955):
309–14. PubMed PMID:
15879044; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC1743269.
Chapter 8: Anesthesia for ENT emergencies
93
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:20:01 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.011
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
9
Introduction
Airway pathology in otolaryngology:
anesthetic implications
D. John Doyle
Introduction
This chapter is intended as a minimal synopsis of
selected airway pathology in terms of associated anes-
thetic and airway implications. The case types covered
in the following discussion are those where awake
intubation by some means (e.g., by fiberoptic
methods) is often the method of choice. Where awake
intubation is impractical (e.g., inadequate equipment
or experience) tracheostomy under local anesthesia
(with minimal or no sedation in extreme cases) is
often advocated as the best means of managing the
airway.
In all the conditions discussed herein, complete
airway obstruction is the outcome that is most feared,
and this can easily occur when sedating agents such as
propofol are used, as they lower the tone of the airway
musculature, thereby changing the airway architecture.
Our selection of pathologic conditions herein is a
rather limited sampling of only the most commonly
encountered pathologic conditions in clinical prac-
tice; for more unusual pathologic entities that impact
on the airway, more information is available from
other chapters of this book and recourse to the abun-
dant ENT literature is encouraged.
Acute epiglottitis
Epiglottitis is among the most dreaded of airway
infections, especially in children [1 –7]. Pediatric
victims are usually children aged 2 to 6, often infected
with Haemophilus influenzae . Fortunately, an avail-
able vaccine against H. influenzae has greatly reduced
the frequency of this tragic affliction. Infected chil-
dren may appear to be systemically ill ( “toxic”) pos-
sibly with a fever and/or assuming a “tripod” position.
Drooling from the mouth related to difficulty with
swallowing is common. Examining the child 's airway
may exacerbate the problem (by increasing airway
edema) so tongue depressors and laryngoscopy are
usually not good options in the initial management.
Anything that might bring the child to cry (for
Table 9.1. Some pathologic conditions in otolaryngology with
airway implications, some of which are covered in this chapter
Airway infections
Abscess in the upper airway
Epiglottitis
Ludwig's angina
Quinsy
Retropharyngeal abscess
Airway tumors
Tumors of upper airway
Anterior mediastinal mass
Oral malignancies/tongue malignancies
Glottic tumors
Previous head and neck tumor surgery
Previous radiation treatment to head and neck
Other conditions
Congenital malformation (e.g., Pierre Robin sequence)
Periglottic edema (e.g., following rigid bronchoscopy)
Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
Jaw wired shut following maxillofacial surgery
Maxillofacial trauma (covered in Chapter 7)
Zenker's diverticulum (covered in Chapter 20)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) (covered in Chapter 18)
Laryngospasm (covered in Chapter 8)
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
94
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012example, needles) should be avoided where possible.
Consequently (and for other reasons), the usual
approach to management involves a careful inhala-
tional induction with the child sitting in the anes-
thetist's lap and intubation of the child while he
or she is breathing spontaneously under deep sevo-
flurane anesthesia. If at laryngoscopy the orifice
through the epiglottis can 't be identified, one trick
is to have someone compress the child 's chest, thus
generating a small air bubble in the glottis that
the intubator can aim for. In the past patients
were often managed by emergency tracheostomy;
however, contemporary management of children
includes short-term nasal i ntubation and intraven-
ous antibiotic therapy. For further details the reader
is directed to Chapter 32, dealing with pediatric
otolaryngologic issues.
Epiglottitis can occur in adults too (George Wash-
ington is said to have died of it) but the situation is
less dreadful here because the adult airway is larger.
Most clinicians would use awake fiberoptic laryngo-
scopy to secure the airway where necessary in this
situation. Although there is considerable disagree-
ment concerning optimal airway management in the
adult with epiglottitis, there seems to be a growing
consensus that most adults are adequately treated in
an intensive care unit with inhaled mist, antibiotics
and corticosteroids, and that tracheal intubation is
necessary only if symptoms of respiratory distress
develop.
Retropharyngeal abscess
Retropharyngeal abscess formation may occur from
bacterial infection of the retropharyngeal space sec-
ondary to tonsillar or dental infections [8 –15].
Untreated, the posterior pharyngeal wall may advance
anteriorally into the oropharynx, resulting in a dys-
pnea and airway obstruction. Other clinical findings
may include difficulty in swallowing, trismus and
a fluctuant posterior pharyngeal mass. An abscess
cavity may be evident on lateral neck X-rays with
anterior displacement of the esophagus and upper
pharynx. Airway management may be complicated
by trismus or airway obstruction. Because abscess
rupture can lead to soiling of the trachea, contact with
the posterior pharyngeal wall during laryngoscopy
and intubation should be minimized. Incision and
drainage are the mainstay of treatment. Tracheos-
tomy is often, but not always, required.
Ludwig's angina
Ludwig's angina is a multispace infection of the floor
of the mouth [16 –25]. The infection starts with
infected mandibular molars and spreads to sublin-
gual, submental, buccal and submandibular spaces.
The tongue becomes elevated and displaced poster-
iorally, which may lead to loss of the airway, especially
when the patient is placed in the supine position. As
with a retropharyngeal abscess, an additional concern
is the potential for abscess rupture into the hypophar-
ynx (with possible lung soiling) either spontaneously
or with attempts at laryngoscopy and intubation.
Airway management options will depend on clinical
severity, surgical preferences, and other factors (e.g.,
CT or MRI findings), but elective tracheostomy prior
to incision and drainage remains the classic, if argu-
ably dated, treatment modality. Most experts advocate
fiberoptic intubation if at all possible. In addition,
since Ludwig 's angina is often associated with tris-
mus, nasal fiberoptic intubation is frequently needed.
Airway tumors
Airway tumors (Figure 9.1) can be benign or malig-
nant, but regardless of type, suffocation from airway
obstruction is always a potential concern [26 –32].
Discussion with the surgical team concerning the
expected type of pathology and the size and location
of the tumor will help determine whether awake
intubation is appropriate. Videos of any previously
recorded nasopharyngoscopic examinations can also
be helpful in establishing whether encountering
tumor during laryngoscopy and intubation might be
a problem.
Airway polyps
Polyps may be found throughout the airway [33 –37].
Nasal polyps and polyps elsewhere in the airway can
lead to partial or complete airway obstruction. Vocal
cord granulomas and polyps may occur as a result of
traumatic intubation, cord irritation from ETT move-
ment or lubricant chemicals, and other causes. The
problem occurs more frequently in women. Peduncu-
lated granulomas or polyps detected following the
investigation of hoarseness are usually removed surgi-
cally as they can sometimes lead to airway obstruction.
Remember also the potential exacerbation of bronchial
asthma in patients with nasal polyps who receive
aspirin, ketorolac (Toradol) and other NSAIDs.
Chapter 9: Airway pathology in otolaryngology: anesthetic implications
95
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Laryngeal papillomatosis
Patients with laryngeal papillomatosis caused by a
HPV infection may require frequent application of
laser treatment for attempted eradication of the pap-
illomas [38 –42]. Prior to treatment the airway may
be close to obstruction from an overgrowth of
lesions. During laser treatment, inspired oxygen con-
centration should be kept to the minimum practical
amount, with the avoidance of nitrous oxide, to
reduce the chance of an airway fire (see Chapter 11).
After treatment the airway will be raw and edematous.
Laryngotracheomalacia may occasionally also be pre-
sent, sometimes leading to complete upper airway
collapse after extubation.
Anterior mediastinal mass
Patients with an anterior mediastinal mass may need
anesthesia and surgery either to obtain a tumor
biopsy with a view to obtaining a tissue diagnosis or
for the relief of acute airway obstruction [43 –52]. In
the latter case, rigid bronchoscopy is frequently
employed as a means of relieving the obstruction
and establishing the location and extent of any airway
compression. Should the airway become “lost” under
anesthesia, with the patient unable to be ventilated,
placing the patient in the lateral decubitus position or
prone position sometimes helps relieve the
obstruction.
The position of an anterior mediastinal mass
within the thorax can predispose patients to severe
respiratory and/or cardiovascular complications
during anesthesia, especially in the supine position
and following the administration of muscle relaxants.
Potential clinical challenges include airway obstruc-
tion, compression of cardiac chambers, and/or com-
pression of the pulmonary artery.
Intraoperative management can be particularly
difficult in these patients. In many cases the patient
should be intubated awake (for example, via an awake
fiberoptic technique) with judicious sedation admin-
istered while the patient is placed in the least symp-
tomatic position.
Some experts suggest that cardiopulmonary bypass
should be available on stand-by basis with femoral
vessel cannulation achieved prior to induction for
severe cases (e.g., over 50% reduction in airway diam-
eter as estimated on a computed tomography scan).
Even with such an arrangement, however, the time
needed to achieve adequate cerebral oxygenation
following complete airway obstruction may be too
long to avoid a substantial degree of brain injury.
Althrough maintaining spontaneous breathing and
performing an inhalational induction with sevoflurane
(A) (B)
Figure 9.1. (A) This is a post-laryngectomy image showing a glottic mass that was obstructing most of the glottic opening leaving
essentially a slit to permit the introduction of the a size 5.0 MLT endotracheal tube loaded over a 4.00 mm flexible fiberoptic scope. The
patient was stridorous and was intubated awake. Image courtesy Drs. B. Abdelmalak and J. Scharpf. (B) The tissue sample in A with the larynx
split open to show the pathology. Image courtesy Drs. B. Abdelmalak and J. Scharpf. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 1: Introduction
96
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012directly or following awake intubation is often advo-
cated as a means to provide anesthesia in some cases,
others have described the option of maintaining spon-
taneous ventilation with dexmedetomidine as the near
sole anesthetic, arguing that it could be very helpful in
reducing the risk of complete airway obstruction in the
anesthetic management of an anterior mediastinal
mass.
Finally, obstruction of the superior vena cava by
tumor (SVC syndrome) may occur in patients with
an anterior mediastinal mass. This may lead to cyan-
osis, engorged upper body veins and edema of the
head and neck, with risks of airway obstruction
(from airway compression by tumor), hypotension
(from impaired venous return to the heart) and
bleeding from engorged veins. Such patients may
also benefit from a semi-upright position to reduce
airway edema.
Case study 1
Carol and Saunders [53] describe a case of a young
woman who collapsed following a sudden onset of
dyspnea. When assessed in the emergency depart-
ment she was unresponsive and cyanotic, with a
pulse oximeter reading of 60%. A severe asthmatic
attack was initially suspected. After attempts at con-
ventional mask ventilation proved to be unsuccess-
ful, the patient was administered etomidate and
succinylcholine with a plan to intubate the trachea.
While the view at laryngoscopy was excellent
(Cormack Lehane Grade 1), the attempt at intub-
ation was complicated by the presence of a polypoid
mass situated above the right vocal cord and
extending over the glottic aperture. As this lesion
prevented the passage of a size 8 ETT into the
trachea, a second attempt at intubation was made
using a size 6 tube in conjunction with a tracheal
introducer ( “bougie”). Following this successful
attempt, oxygenation and ventilation improved dra-
matically, and she was taken to the ICU. She then
went to the operating room, where extensive papil-
lomatous tissue was removed. She was then venti-
lated overnight, and extubated without difficulty the
following day. She developed no neurological seque-
lae, and was discharged home 4 days after her ori-
ginal difficulties. Further history was eventually
obtained that the patient suffered from respiratory
papillomatosis and had an appointment for treat-
ment the day following the incident.
Case study 2
Figure 9.2 shows a fascinating picture of a hole in the
trachea sealed by the cuff on an ETT. The day prior
the surgeons did a meticulous job shaving malignant
tumor from the tracheal wall, being very careful to
remove as much as possible without damaging the
overall integrity of the tracheal wall. Unfortunately,
the patient presented the next morning with subcuta-
neous neck emphysema, making the surgical team
suspicious of the presence of a hole in the trachea.
When brought back to the operating room (OR) the
following image was obtained after careful dissection.
Because of the loss of airway integrity that made
positive-pressure ventilation dangerous (the risk
being that of worsening the emphysema and com-
pressing the airway), the second anesthetic was per-
formed using an awake intubation technique done
while maintaining spontaneous ventilation.
Clinical pearls
/C15In epiglottitis management, if at laryngoscopy the
orifice through the epiglottis can 't be identified,
one trick is to have someone compress the child 's
chest, thus generating a small air bubble in the
glottis that the intubator can aim for.
/C15Most clinicians would use awake fiberoptic
laryngoscopy to secure the airway in adult
epiglottitis. Although there is still substantial
disagreement, there seems to be a growing
consensus that most adults with epiglottitis can be
Figure 9.2. Photograph of a hole in the trachea sealed by the cuff
on an ETT (see text). Image courtesy of Basem Abdelmalak, MD.
Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2012. All Rights Reserved.
Chapter 9: Airway pathology in otolaryngology: anesthetic implications
97
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012adequately treated in an intensive care unit with
inhaled mist, antibiotics and corticosteroids, and
that tracheal intubation is necessary only if
symptoms of respiratory distress develop.
/C15Because retropharyngeal abscess rupture can lead
to soiling of the trachea, contact with the posterior
pharyngeal wall during laryngoscopy and
intubation should be avoided.
/C15Since Ludwig 's angina is often associated with
trismus, nasal fiberoptic intubation is frequently
needed.
/C15Should the airway become “lost” under anesthesia
in patients with anterior mediastinal masses, with
the patient unable to be ventilated, placing the
patient in the lateral decubitus position or
prone position sometimes helps relieve the
obstruction.
/C15Some experts suggest that cardiopulmonary
bypass should be available on stand-by basis with
femoral vessel cannulation achieved prior to
induction for severe cases of an anterior
mediastinal mass. Even with such an arrangement,
however, the time needed to achieve adequate
cerebral oxygenation following complete airway
obstruction may be too long to avoid a substantial
degree of brain injury.
References
Acute epiglottitis
1. Syed I, Odutoye T, Lee MS, Wong
P. Management of acute
epiglottitis in adults. Br J Hosp
Med (Lond) 2011;72(5):M74–6.
PubMed PMID: 21647034.
2. Tibballs J, Watson T. Symptoms
and signs differentiating croup
and epiglottitis. J Paediatr Child
Health 2011;47(3):77–82. doi:
10.1111/j.1440–1754.2010.01892.
x. Epub 2010 Nov 21. PubMed
PMID: 21091577.
3. Ito K, Chitose H, Koganemaru M.
Four cases of acute epiglottitis
with a peritonsillar abscess. Auris
Nasus Larynx 2011;38(2):284–8.
Epub 2010 Aug 25. PubMed
PMID: 20800396.
4. Al-Qudah M, Shetty S, Alomari
M, Alqdah M. Acute adult
supraglottitis: current
management and treatment. South
Med J 2010;103(8):800–4. Review.
PubMed PMID: 20622745.
5. Cheatham ML. The death of
George Washington: an end to the
controversy? Am Surg 2008;74
(8):770–4. PubMed PMID:
18705585.
6. Glynn F, Fenton JE. Diagnosis and
management of supraglottitis
(epiglottitis). Curr Infect Dis Rep
2008;10(3):200–4. PubMed
PMID: 18510881.
7. Guldfred LA, Lyhne D, Becker
BC. Acute epiglottitis:
epidemiology, clinical
presentation, management and
outcome. J Laryngol Otol 2008;122
(8):818–23. Epub 2007 Sep 25.
PubMed PMID: 17892608.
Retropharyngeal abscess
8. Christoforidou A, Metallidis S,
Kollaras P, et al . Tuberculous
retropharyngeal abscess as a cause
of oropharyngeal dysphagia. Am
J Otolaryngol 2011 Aug 24. [Epub
ahead of print] PubMed PMID:
21871690.
9. Afolabi OA, Fadare JO, Oyewole
EO, Ogah SA. Fish bone foreign
body presenting with an acute
fulminating retropharyngeal
abscess in a resource-challenged
center: a case report. J Med
Case Reports 2011;5(1):165.
PubMed PMID: 21524286;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC3098805.
10. Hoang JK, Branstetter BF 4th,
Eastwood JD, Glastonbury CM.
Multiplanar CT and MRI of
collections in the retropharyngeal
space: is it an abscess? AJR Am
J Roentgenol 2011;196(4):
W426–32. Review. PubMed
PMID: 21427307.
11. Rizk NN, Spalla TC, Al-Khudari
S, Ghanem TA. Case report:
mediastinal hematoma secondary
to hypertension, presenting as a
retropharyngeal space abscess.
Laryngoscope 2010;120 Suppl 4:
S179. PubMed PMID: 21225777.
12. Lee S, Joo KB, Lee KH, Uhm WS.
Acute retropharyngeal calcific
tendinitis in an unusual location:
a case report in a patient
with rheumatoid arthritis and
atlantoaxial subluxation.
Korean J Radiol 2011;12(4):
504–9. Epub 2011 Jul 22.
PubMed PMID: 21852912;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC3150679.
13. Kakarala K, Durand ML, Emerick
KS. Retropharyngeal abscess in
the setting of immune modulation
for rheumatoid arthritis.
Laryngoscope 2010;120 Suppl 4:
S131. Review. PubMed PMID:
21225729.
14. Choi SH, Kim HJ. A case of
Kawasaki disease with coexistence
of a parapharyngeal abscess
requiring incision and drainage.
Korean J Pediatr 2010;53(9):
855–8. Epub 2010 Sep 13.
PubMed PMID: 21189972;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC3005218.
15. Rao MS, Linga Raju Y,
Vishwanathan P. Anaesthetic
management of difficult airway
due to retropharyngeal abscess.
Indian J Anaesth 2010;54(3):
246–8. PubMed PMID: 20885875;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC2933487.
Section 1: Introduction
98
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Ludwig'sa n g i n a
16. Hasan W, Leonard D, Russell J.
Ludwig's angina - a controversial
surgical emergency: how we do it.
Int J Otolaryngol
2011;2011:231816. Epub 2011 Jul
6. PubMed PMID: 21760800;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC3133010.
17. Greenberg SL, Huang J, Chang
RS, Ananda SN. Surgical
management of Ludwig 's angina.
ANZ J Surg 2007;77(7):
540–3. PubMed PMID:
17610689.
18. Loughnan TE, Allen DE. Ludwig 's
angina. The anaesthetic
management of nine cases.
Anaesthesia 1985;40(3):295–7.
PubMed PMID: 3993888.
19. Allen D, Loughnan TE, Ord RA.
A re-evaluation of the role of
tracheostomy in Ludwig 's angina.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1985;43
(6):436–9. PubMed PMID:
3858480.
20. Iwu CO. Ludwig 's angina: report
of seven cases and review of
current concepts in management.
Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1990;28
(3):189–93. Review. PubMed
PMID: 2135660.
21. Infante-Cossío P, Fernández-
Hinojosa E, Mangas-Cruz MA,
González-Pérez LM. Ludwig 's
angina and ketoacidosis as a first
manifestation of diabetes mellitus.
Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal
2010;15(4):e624–7. PubMed
PMID: 20173723.
22. Moreland LW, Corey J, McKenzie
R. Ludwig's angina. Report of a
case and review of the literature.
Arch Intern Med 1988;148(2):461–
6. Review. PubMed PMID:
3277567.
23. Ovassapian A, Tuncbilek M,
Weitzel EK, Joshi CW. Airway
management in adult patients
with deep neck infections: a case
series and review of the
literature. Anesth Analg 2005;
100(2):585–9. PubMed PMID:
15673898.
24. Saifeldeen K, Evans R. Ludwig 's
angina. Emerg Med J 2004;21
(2):242–3. Review. PubMed
PMID: 14988363; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC1726306.
25. Abramowicz S, Abramowicz JS,
Dolwick MF. Severe life
threatening maxillofacial infection
in pregnancy presented as
Ludwig's angina. Infect Dis Obstet
Gynecol 2006;2006:51931.
PubMed PMID: 17485803;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC1581466.
Airway tumors
26. Jung B, Murgu S, Colt H. Rigid
bronchoscopy for malignant
central airway obstruction from
small cell lung cancer complicated
by SVC syndrome. Ann Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2011;17(1):53–7.
PubMed PMID: 21587130.
27. Abdel Rahman AR. Bronchoplasty
for primary broncho-pulmonary
tumors. J Egypt Natl Canc Inst
2010;22(1):73–8. PubMed PMID:
21503009.
28. Blessing M, Schwartz D,
Krellenstein D, Cohen E.
Management of a patient with an
unexpected obstructing carinal
mass. Minerva Anestesiol 2010;76
(9):761–4. Epub 2010 Jul 1.
PubMed PMID: 20820156.
29. Manganaris C, Wittlin S, Xu H,
et al . Metastatic papillary thyroid
carcinoma and severe airflow
obstruction. Chest 2010;138
(3):738–42. PubMed PMID:
20822998; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC2950112.
30. Chung IH, Park MH, Kim DH,
Jeon GS. Endobronchial stent
insertion to manage hemoptysis
caused by lung cancer. J Korean
Med Sci 2010;25(8):1253–5. Epub
2010 Jul 21. PubMed PMID:
20676346; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC2908804.
31. Saji H, Furukawa K, Tsutsui H,
et al. Outcomes of airway stenting
for advanced lung cancer with
central airway obstruction.
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg
2010;11(4):425–8. Epub 2010 Jul
23. PubMed PMID: 20656802.
32. Milisavljevic D, Stankovic M,
Tasic-Dimov D, Radovanovi ć Z,
Stankovic P. Stridor as initial
clinical presentation of tracheal
chondroma. Acta Otorrinolaringol
Esp 2011;62(2):164–6. Epub 2010
Mar 25. PubMed PMID:
20346431.
Airway polyps
33. Kalcioglu MT, Can S, Aydin NE.
Unusual case of soft palate hairy
polyp causing airway obstruction
and review of the literature.
J Pediatr Surg 2010;45(12):e5–8.
Review. PubMed PMID:
21129531.
34. Becker SS. Surgical management
of polyps in the treatment of nasal
airway obstruction. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am 2009;42(2):377–85.
Review. PubMed PMID:
19328899.
35. Tanguay J, Pollanen M. Sudden
death by laryngeal polyp: a case
report and review of the literature.
Forensic Sci Med Pathol 2009;5
(1):17–21. Epub 2008 Sep 25.
Review. PubMed PMID:
19291432.
36. Pawankar R. Nasal polyposis: an
update: editorial review. Curr
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;3
(1):1–6. Review. PubMed PMID:
12582307.
37. Probst L, Stoney P, Jeney E,
Hawke M. Nasal polyps, bronchial
asthma and aspirin sensitivity.
J Otolaryngol 1992;21(1):60–5.
Review. PubMed PMID: 1564752.
Laryngeal papillomatosis
38. Bo L, Wang B, Shu SY. Anesthesia
management in pediatric patients
with laryngeal papillomatosis
undergoing suspension
laryngoscopic surgery and a
review of the literature. Int
J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2011;75
(11):1442–5. Epub 2011 Sep 9.
PubMed PMID: 21907420.
Chapter 9: Airway pathology in otolaryngology: anesthetic implications
99
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201239. Li SQ, Chen JL, Fu HB, Xu J,
Chen LH. Airway management in
pediatric patients undergoing
suspension laryngoscopic surgery
for severe laryngeal obstruction
caused by papillomatosis. Paediatr
Anaesth 2010;20(12):1084–91.
doi: 10.1111/j.1460 –
9592.2010.03447.x. PubMed
PMID: 21199117.
40. Coope G, Connett G. Juvenile
laryngeal papillomatosis. Prim
Care Respir J 2006;15(2):125–7.
Epub 2006 Mar 9. PubMed PMID:
16701772.
41. Soldatski IL, Onufrieva EK,
Steklov AM, Schepin NV.
Tracheal, bronchial, and
pulmonary papillomatosis in
children. Laryngoscope 2005;115
(10):1848–54. PubMed PMID:
16222208.
42. Kendall KA. Current treatment
for laryngeal papillomatosis. Curr
Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2004;12(3):157–9. PubMed
PMID: 15167022.
Anterior mediastinal mass
43. Bassanezi BS, Oliveira-Filho AG,
Miranda ML, Soares L, Aguiar SS.
Use of BiPAP for safe anesthesia
in a child with a large anterior
mediastinal mass. Paediatr
Anaesth 2011;21(9):985–7. doi:
10.1111/j.1460–9592.2011.03607.
x. PubMed PMID: 21793982.
44. Blank RS, de Souza DG.
Anesthetic management of
patients with an anterior
mediastinal mass: continuing
professional development. Can
J Anaesth 2011;58(9):853–9,
860–7. Epub 2011 Jul 21. English,
French. PubMed PMID:
21779948.
45. Garey CL, Laituri CA, Valusek
PA, St Peter SD, Snyder CL.
Management of Anterior
Mediastinal Masses in Children.
Eur J Pediatr Surg . 2011 Jul 12.
[Epub ahead of print] PubMed
PMID: 21751123.
46. Gardner JC, Royster RL. Airway
collapse with an anterior
mediastinal mass despite
spontaneous ventilation in an
adult. Anesth Analg 2011;113
(2):239–42. Epub 2011 May 19.
PubMed PMID: 21596865.
47. Sendasgupta C, Sengupta G,
Ghosh K, Munshi A, Goswami A.
Femoro-femoral
cardiopulmonary bypass for the
resection of an anterior
mediastinal mass. Indian
J Anaesth 2010;54(6):565–8.
PubMed PMID: 21224977;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC3016580.
48. Choi WJ, Kim YH, Mok JM, Choi
SI, Kim HS. Patient repositioning
and the amelioration of airway
obstruction by an anterior
mediastinal tumor during general
anesthesia - A case report. Korean
J Anesthesiol 2010;59(3):206–9.
Epub 2010 Sep 20. PubMed
PMID: 20877707; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC2946040.
49. Chiang JC, Irwin MG, Hussain A,
Tang YK, Hiong YT. Anaesthesia
for emergency caesarean section
in a patient with large anterior
mediastinal tumour presenting as
intrathoracic airway compression
and superior vena cava
obstruction. Case Report Med
2010;2010:708481. Epub 2010
Oct 13. PubMed PMID: 20981348;
PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC2957859.
50. Abdelmalak B, Marcanthony N,
Abdelmalak J, et al .
Dexmedetomidine for anesthetic
management of anterior
mediastinal mass. J Anesth
2010;24(4):607–10. Epub 2010
May 8. PubMed PMID: 20454810.
51. Galway U, Doyle DJ, Gildea T.
Anesthesia for endoscopic
palliative management of a patient
with a large anterior mediastinal
mass. J Clin Anesth 2009;21
(2):150–1. PubMed PMID:
19329025.
52. Slinger P, Karsli C. Management
of the patient with a large anterior
mediastinal mass: recurring
myths. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol
2007;20(1):1–3. PubMed PMID:
17211158.
53. Carroll CD, Saunders NC.
Respiratory papillomatosis: a rare
cause of collapse in a young adult
presenting to the emergency
department. Emerg Med J 2002;
19(4):362–5. PubMed PMID:
12101164; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC1725930.
Section 1: Introduction
100
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:30 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.012
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
10
Introduction
Use of Heliox in managing stridor:
an ENT perspective
D. John Doyle
Introduction
Stridor is noisy inspiration from turbulent gas flow in
the upper airway. It is often seen in partial to near
complete airway obstruction, and should always com-
mand immediate attention. Wherever possible,
attempts should be made to establish without delay
the cause of the stridor (e.g., foreign body, vocal cord
edema, tracheal compression by tumor, functional
laryngeal dyskinesia, etc.) Nasopharyngoscopy can
be helpful in many such cases. This chapter will
discuss in detail the use of Heliox for temporarily
treating stridor in the setting of ENT pathology.
Airway obstructing conditions such as epiglottitis
or tracheal stenosis may be viewed as breathing
through an orifice (defined as involving flow through
a tube whose length is smaller than its radius). Gas
flow through an orifice is always somewhat turbulent
[1]. Under such conditions, the approximate flow
across the orifice varies inversely with the square root
of the gas density. This is in contrast to laminar flow
conditions, where gas flow varies inversely with gas
viscosity. Note that while the viscosity values for
helium and oxygen are similar, their densities are very
different, as shown in Table 10.1.
The usual available mixtures of helium and oxygen
are 30% O 2 : 70% He and 20% O 2 : 80% He and are
usually administered by a nonrebreathing face mask in
patients who face an increased work-of-breathing effort
because of the presence of airway pathology (e.g.,
edema) but in whom endotracheal intubation is prefer-
ably withheld at this time. As indicated above, the low
density of helium allows it to play a significant clinical
role in the management of some forms of airway
obstruction associated with gas turbulence.
Treatment with Heliox is not new. For instance,
Rudow et al. [2] provide the following vignette.
A 78-year-old woman developed airway obstruction
from a thyroid carcinoma that extended into her
mediastinum and compressed her trachea. She had a
2-month history of worsening dyspnea, especially
when positioned supine. On examination, inspiratory
and expiratory stridor was present. Noted on the chest
X-ray were a large superior mediastinal mass and
pulmonary metastases. Clinically, the patient was
exhausted and in respiratory distress.
Almost instant relief was obtained by giving
the patient a mixture of 78% He : 22% O 2, with
improvements in measured tidal volume and oxy-
genation. Later, a thyroidectomy was carried out to
relieve the obstruction. Here, anesthesia was con-
ducted by applying topical anesthesia to the airway
with awake laryngoscopy and intubation performed
in the sitting position. Once the airway was secured
using an armored tube, the patient was given a
general anesthetic with an intravenous induction.
Following the surgery, extubation occurred without
complication.
Another interesting clinical vignette has been pub-
lished by Khanlou and Eiger [3]. They present the
case of a 69-year-old woman in whom bilateral vocal
cord paralysis developed after radiation therapy and
in whom Heliox was successfully used to temporarily
Table 10.1. Density of various gases
Gas Density at 20 /C14 C
Air 1.293 g/l
Nitrogen 1.250 g/l
Nitrous oxide 1.965 g/l
Helium 0.178 g/l
Oxygen 1.429 g/l
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
101
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:56 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.013
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012manage the resultant upper airway obstruction until
she was able to receive a tracheostomy.
A final clinical vignette related to Heliox is from
Polaner [4], who reports on the use of the laryngeal
mask airway (LMA) and Heliox in a 20:80 mixture for
the administration of anesthesia to a 3-yr-old boy
with asthma and a large anterior mediastinal mass.
Clinical management involved an unusual combin-
ation of management strategies: the child was kept
in the sitting position, spontaneous ventilation with a
halothane-in-heliox inhalation induction was used,
and airway stimulation was minimized by use of the
LMA. However, the author cautions that cases such as
these can readily take a deadly turn, noting that “one
must, of course, always be prepared to intervene with
either manipulations of patient position in the event
of airway compromise (including upright, lateral, and
prone) or more aggressive strategies, such as rigid
bronchoscopy and even median sternotomy (in the
case of intractable cardiovascular collapse), or to
allow the patient to awaken if critical airway or car-
diovascular compromise becomes evident at any time
during the course of the anesthesia ”.
Management options
The first issue of clinical concern in the setting of
stridor is whether or not intubation or a surgical
airway is immediately necessary to extricate the
patient from death or injury. Obviously, some
patients will need immediate intubation to rescue
the airway while some patients in whom intubation
is close to impossible will probably require a surgical
airway. If, however, intubation can be delayed for a
period of time, a number of other options can be
considered, depending on the severity of the situation
and other clinical details.
These potential options include:
/C15 expectant management with full monitoring,
oxygen by face mask, and positioning the head of
the bed for optimum conditions (e.g., 45 – 90/C14 );
/C15 use of nebulized racemic epinephrine (0.5 to 0.75
ml of 2.25% racemic epinephrine added to 2.5 to
3 ml of normal saline) in cases where airway
edema may be the cause of the stridor (4% cocaine
in a dose not exceeding 3 mg/kg may also be used,
but not together with racemic epinephrine);
/C15 use of dexamethasone (Decadron ®)4 – 10 mg IV q
8– 12 h or solumedrol 40– 60 mg IV q 6– 8 h in cases
where airway edema may be contributing to the
stridor; note that some time (in the range of hours)
may be needed for dexamethasone to work fully;
/C15 use of Heliox (70% helium, 30% oxygen); the
effect is almost instantaneous (Figure 10.1).
Some causes of stridor
Stridor has many potential causes. It may occur as a
result of foreign bodies (e.g., aspirated peanut, aspir-
ated wire), tumor formation (e.g., laryngeal papillo-
matosis, squamous cell carcinoma), infections (e.g.,
epiglottitis, retropharyngeal abscess, croup), subglot-
tic stenosis (e.g., following prolonged intubation),
airway edema (e.g., following instrumentation of the
airway intubation), as well as a result of laryngoma-
lacia (the most common congenital cause of stridor),
subglottic hemangioma (rare), and vascular rings
compressing the trachea. Abnormalities of vocal cord
function can also be responsible. Congenital anomal-
ies of the airway are present in 87% of all cases of
stridor in infants and children [1].
Table 10.2 lists some causes of stridor in children.
Figure 10.1. An E-size tank of heliox, with a nonrebreathing face
mask for gas delivery.
Section 1: Introduction
102
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:56 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.013
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Diagnosis
Stridor is usually diagnosed on the basis of symptoms
and physical examination, with a view to revealing
the underlying problem or condition. Chest and
neck X-rays, CT scans, and/or MRIs may reveal struc-
tural pathology. Flexible fiberoptic bronchoscopy
can also be very helpful, especially in assessing vocal
cord function or in looking for signs of compression
or infection.
Case study
A 58-year-old female patient presented for surgery for
recurrent head and neck cancer. She had been judged
to have a difficult airway at multiple occasions in the
past. Her airway difficulties had been largely the result
of preexisting glottic pathology related to her cancer;
her rather limited mouth opening (about 3 cm) also
complicated management. She was intubated utilizing
an awake fiberoptic intubation that was rather chal-
lenging due to the complexity of her pathology.
Upon extubation while wide awake and with full
reversal of neuromuscular blockade, the patient
became severely stridorous. This was treated by two
doses of 8 mg Decadron (one administered pre extu-
bation), two doses of nebulized racemic epinephrine
(0.5 ml of 2.25% epinephrine added to 2.5 ml saline),
and assisted mask ventilation with the patient sitting
up at 60 /C14 . On standby we had available almost every
airway gadget ever manufactured, an experienced
ENT surgeon, a number of experienced anesthesiolo-
gists, and everything needed for a surgical airway.
Unfortunately, the patient did not improve and
was starting to tire out. Reintubation would have been
even more difficult than it had been earlier. A surgical
airway was starting to look like our only way out.
Administering a mixture of helium (70%) and
oxygen (30%) was considered, to be delivered using
a nonrebreathing face mask at 10 liters per minute.
Within a mere five to 10 breaths the stridor vanished
and the patient ’s work of breathing became much
more manageable. The patient was then brought to
the recovery room with a large Heliox tank in tow and
with full monitoring. She was then weaned off the
Heliox over several hours.
In conclusion: Heliox adminstred with a nonreb-
reathing face mask should be readily available in every
operating room suite to assist in the treatment of
stridor.
Clinical pearls
/C15 Stridor is usually diagnosed on the basis of
symptoms and physical examination.
/C15 The first issue in the setting of stridor is whether
or not intubation or a surgical airway is
immediately necessary to extricate the patient
from death or injury.
Table 10.2. Differential diagnosis of pediatric stridor
Infectious
Croup
Epigiottitis
Tracheitis
Retropharyngeal abscess
Non-infectious
Symptoms at birth
Laryngeal web
Vocal cord paralysis
Cystic hygroma
Subglottic stenosis
Symptoms after neonatal period
Subglottic hemangioma
Laryngeal papilloma
Laryngomalacia
Tracheomalacia
Vascular ring/sling
Acquired
Foregin body aspiration
Foreign body ingestion
Spasmodic croup
Laryngospasm
Psychogenic stridor
Angioedema
Paratracheal mass (teratoma, lymphoma)
Vocal cord paralysis (secondary to intubation)
Subglottic stenosis (secondary to intubation)
From Marin J, Baren J. Pediatric upper airway infectious disease
emergencies. EB Medicine November 2007. Volume 4, Number 11.
http://www.ebmedicine.net/topics.php?
paction¼showTopicSeg&topic_id¼128&seg_id¼2538.
Chapter 10: Use of Heliox in managing stridor: an ENT perspective
103
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:56 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.013
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012/C15 Gas flow through an orifice is always somewhat
turbulent. Under such conditions, the
approximate flow across the orifice varies
inversely with the square root of the gas density.
This is in contrast to laminar flow conditions,
where gas flow varies inversely with gas viscosity.
/C15 The usual available mixtures of helium and
oxygen are 30% O 2 : 70% He and 20% O 2 :
80% He.
/C15 Use of nebulized racemic epinephrine (0.5 to 0.75
ml of 2.25% racemic epinephrine added to 2.5 to
3 ml of normal saline) can be useful in cases where
airway edema may be the cause of the stridor.
/C15 Consider also use of dexamethasone (Decadron ®)
4– 10mg IV q 8 – 12 h or methylprednisolone
(Solumedrol®)4 0– 60 mg IV Q 6– 8 h in cases where
airway edema may be contributing to the stridor;
note that some time (in the range of hours) may be
needed for dexamethasone to work fully.
/C15 Heliox administered with a nonrebreathing face
mask should be readily available in every operating
room suite to assist in the treatment of stridor.
References
1. Holinger LD. Etiology of stridor.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
1980;89:397– 400.
2. Rudow M, Hill AB, Thompson
NW, et al . Helium-oxygen
mixtures in airway obstruction
due to thyroid carcinoma.
Can Anaesth Soc J 1986;33:
498.
3. Khanlou H, Eiger G. Safety and
efficacy of heliox as a treatment
for upper airway obstruction due
to radiation-induced laryngeal
dysfunction. Heart Lung
2001;30:146– 7.
4. Polaner DM. The use of heliox
and the laryngeal mask airway in a
child with an anterior mediastinal
mass. Anesth Analg 1996;82:
208– 10.
Section 1: Introduction
104
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:21:56 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.013
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 1
Chapter
11
Introduction
Prevention and management of airway fires
D. John Doyle
Introduction
An airway fire is potentially deadly complication that
may occur during tracheotomy surgery, during laser
surgery and with a number of other procedures [1 –4].
The objective of this chapter is to introduce readers to
the prevention and management of airway fires. The
discussion includes the American Society of Anesthe-
siologists Operating Room Fire Algorithm (Figure 11.1),
a checklist-like protocol for dealing with airway fires
(Table 11.1) as well as some British recommendations
specific to tracheotomy surgery (Table 11.2). Operating
room fires are best divided into airway fires and non-
airway fires. A recent report by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists provides specific guidance for both
these scenarios (Figure 11.1).
Some safety principles
Several principles apply to reduce the chance of fires
in the settings of ENT surgery.
/C15Preventive measures do not guarantee that fires
will not occur; always be prepared.
/C15Know the ASA algorithm for operating room
fires.
/C15A simple means to extinguish airway fires
(e.g., 50 ml syringe filled with saline) should be
immediately on hand. In addition, a CO 2 fire
extinguisher is good to have nearby.
/C15The surgeon should avoid entering the trachea
using electrocautery.
/C15The anesthesiologist must maintain special
vigilance at the moment of surgical entry into the
trachea.
/C15The anesthesiologist should keep the administered
oxygen levels to the minimum needed when a
significant potential for an airway fire is present.
/C15Nitrous oxide should not be used during airway
surgery, since it supports combustion just as does
oxygen.
To remove the ETT or not? That is
the question
Prevailing conventional wisdom, at least until
recently, holds that cases of airway fire call for
immediate removal of the endotracheal tube (ETT).
While this is a reasonable rule of thumb, it should
also be noted that there are some patients where
removal of the ETT would in all likelihood result in
irreversible loss of the airway. Clinicians in such a
setting face a particularly difficult choice: leave the
ETT in place and risk fire-related injury to the
patient, or remove the ETT and risk deadly loss of
the airway.
B o t hC h e ea n dB e n u m o f f[ 2 ]a n dN ga n dH a r -
tigan [5] provide examples where leaving the ETT
in place would probably be the best strategy. Chee
and Benumoff offer the following commentary:
“In certain circumstances, the benefits of leaving
the ETT in may outweigh the risks after the airway
fire is extinguished. The ETT may still allow
acceptable ventilation of the lungs with oxygen,
especially when the airway is edematous enough
to provide a reasonable seal around the perforated
c u f f .I na d d i t i o n ,t h eE T Tc a ns e r v ea sac o n d u i t
for a tube exchanger; this consideration may be
extremely important if the airway is difficult to
reestablish. ”
Airway fires in tracheostomy surgery
Airway fires are perhaps most strongly associated
with tracheostomy surgery. Table 11.2 provides some
recommendations from the British literature in this
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
105
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Figure 11.1. American Society of Anesthesiologists operating room fire algorithm. From [3].
Section 1: Introduction
106
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012regard. Table 11.3 from a review by Rogers et al. [4]
provides a list of airway fire cases that illustrates
in detail the variety of clinical outcomes that
may occur.
Chicken model
In a study by Roy and Smith [6] the authors used a
chicken model consisting of a size 6.0 endotracheal
tube inserted into the cranial end of the degutted
central cavity. An electrosurgical unit set for
15 W and grounded to the whole raw chicken served
as an ignition source. Oxygen was then delivered
through the endotracheal tube at varying concentra-
tions and flows. A test was considered negative if no
ignition could be obtained after 4 minutes of
electrocautery applied to tissue. The authors found
the following:
At an O 2 concentration of 100% and a flow rate of 15 l/
min, ignition with a sustained flame was obtained
between 15 and 30 s after initiation of electrocautery. At
100% O 2 at 10 l/min, ignition was obtained at 70 s with
immediate sustained flame. At an O 2 concentration of
60%, ignition occurred at 25 s and sustained fire after
60 s. At an O 2 concentration of 50% ignition with a
sustained flame occurred between 128 and 184 s. At an
O2 concentration of 45%, neither ignition nor sustained
flames could be obtained in any trial.
Based on these results, the authors concluded that
decreasing oxygen concentrations to under 50%
would be expected to decrease the risk of an electro-
cautery-ignited airway fire during oropharyngeal sur-
gery. This study provides empirical support to current
practices of keeping oxygen concentrations around
30% (or lower where practical), as recommended by
the ASA [3].
Flooding the surgical site with
carbon dioxide
Ho et al. [7] hypothesized that flooding the surgical
field with carbon dioxide might be an effective tech-
nique in preventing airway fires during open trache-
ostomy. To study this possibility they cut through
the trachea of pigs ventilated with oxygen using
cautery while flushing the surgical field with carbon
dioxide at 10 l/min. Five times out of five, fire was
induced when the cautery cut through the tracheal
wall with no carbon dioxide being used. However,
five times out of five, fire was not induced when
carbon dioxide was used. The authors concluded that
flooding the surgical site with carbon dioxide helps
prevent airway fires during open tracheostomy using
cautery. This practice, however, does not appear to
be widespread.
Table 11.1. Management of airway fires (courtesy
Dr. B. Abdelmalak)
Prevention and preparedness:
1. Keep oxygen concentration around 30%, less if
possible. Use O 2/air mixture. Avoid N 2O.
2. Use a “laser safe ” endotracheal tube.
3. Inflate endotracheal tube cuff with a dyed normal
saline to provide an early indicator of cuff rupture.
4. Use a preprepared 50 ml syringe of saline to extinguish
any fire and flood the surgical field if a fire occurs.
5. Have an extra endotracheal tube available for re-
intubation in case a fire occurs.
6. Inform the surgical team working on the airway
of any situation where high concentrations of
oxygen are being used.
In the case of an airway fire:
1. Stop lasering. Stop ventilation. Turn O 2 off (as well
as N 2O if it was mistakenly in use).
2. Inform the surgical team and assign someone to
call control desk for help.
3. Remove the burning ET tube and drop it in a
bucket of water if available.
4. Put out the fire with your improvised fire
extinguisher (see 4 above).
5. The area should be flushed with saline.
When the fire is extinguished:
1. Ventilate the patient with 100% oxygen via face
mask (or supraglottic airway if appropriate).
2. When stable, assess the extent of airway damage.
Consider using a ventilating rigid bronchoscope;
debris and foreign bodies should be removed.
3. Reintubate the patient if significant airway
damage is found.
4. Where appropriate, arrange for admission to an ICU.
5. Supportive therapy, including ventilation,
antibiotics, and extubate when appropriate.
6. Tracheotomy may be needed.
Note: removing the endotracheal tube may be inappropriate in
some cases (see text).
Chapter 11: Prevention and management of airway fires
107
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Table 11.2. Airway fire – tracheostomy
Recommendations
All theatre staff should be aware that an airway fire may occur during tracheostomy. Have a bowl of saline and drapes
available on the surgical instrument trolley at all times. Have a fire extinguisher immediately available. In practice,
a carbon dioxide fire-extinguisher will be the usual choice. Halon fire-extinguishers are significantly better for operating
theatre fires but their use is declining owing to environmental concerns.
Have a self-inflating ventilation bag (e.g. Ambu bag) available in case it becomes necessary to ventilate the patient with
room air.
Do not use nitrous oxide or any of the flammable/explosive anesthetic agents.
Use a single-lumen endotracheal tube which is long enough to allow the tip to be advanced to the carina (the carina
is approximately 24 – 25 cm from the teeth in an average male.) Change any in situ double-lumen endotracheal
tube for a single-lumen tube before tracheostomy.
Use saline to inflate the endotracheal cuff. Make sure there is no leak of anaesthetic gases past the endotracheal cuff.
Use the lowest safe FiO 2 in either nitrogen (air/oxygen mixture) or helium.
If the tracheostomy wound is significantly deep (e.g. in an obese patient) use a suction device to clear any build up of
diathermy products from within the wound.
Before the trachea is opened, advance the endotracheal tube down the trachea so the tip is close to the carina in
order to minimize the likelihood of damage to the cuff when the trachea is incised. Consider using a fibre-optic
bronchoscope to position the tip of the endotracheal tube close to the carina. If the tube is too short, consider
changing it for a longer one.
Control all bleeding points and obtain a meticulously dry operative field. Incise the trachea using either a scalpel,
scissors or a harmonic knife. Never use diathermy to cut through the trachea.
Once the trachea has been opened and the surgeon is ready to insert the tracheostomy tube, stop ventilating,
deflate the endotracheal tube cuff and withdraw the endotracheal tube carefully under direct vision until the tip is just
above the tracheal hole (do not remove the tube completely at this stage). Be prepared to push the endotracheal
tube back down the trachea to secure the airway if there are any difficulties, whether while inserting the tracheostomy,
or during the initial ventilation through the tracheostomy.
If bleeding occurs once the trachea has been incised, first ensure that the airway is secured with either a tracheostomy
or endotracheal tube with the cuff inflated. If there is cuff leak from the trachea, then temporarily stop ventilation and
ligate or suture. If unavoidable, use bipolar diathermy while using suction to clear oxygen and products from the
wound. Consider pushing damp swabs into the wound to occlude any air leak.
Once the tracheostomy tube is secure in the trachea, inflate the tracheostomy cuff and suck out the tube using a
suction catheter, checking that the suction tube passes easily though the whole length of the tube. If this is satisfactory,
then commence ventilation through the tracheostomy.
In the event of fire, immediately disconnect the patient from the anaesthetic machine, switch off the anaesthetic gas
flow, disconnect the gas pipelines and ventilate with room air using a self-inflating bag. Use an airway filter if there is
smoke in the theatre. Extinguish the fire. Consider flushing saline down the endotracheal tube to extinguish any
intraluminal fire. Consider removing or changing the tube to minimize the inhalation of toxic products of
combustion and spread of fire into the tracheo-bronchial tree. However, changing the tube may be more risky than
leaving it in if the patient was previously difficult to intubate or the airway has become oedematous.
Reproduced with permission from Rogers ML, Nickalls RW, Brackenbury ET, et al. Airway fire during tracheostomy: prevention strategies
for surgeons and anaesthetists. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2001;83(6):376– 80. Note the use of the British term “diathermy” to denote cautery.
my self The Royal College of Surgeons of England.
Section 1: Introduction
108
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Table 11.3. Case reports of airway fire during tracheostomy
Author Mechanism Diathermy Oxygen
source
Oxygen
conc.
Action Burns site Burns
severity
Bowdle
et al. (1987)
Divided
thyroid
isthmus
NK Percutaneous
transtracheal
100% Drapes
removed
Right neck
Anesthetist
2nd degree
2nd degree
Le Clair
et al. (1990)
Bleeding
tracheal vessel
cauterized
NK ETT 100% Manual
pressure
Trachea Superficial
Bailey et al.
(1990)
NK NK ETT 100% Web
swabs
Trachea Superficial
Mandych
et al. (1990)
Subcutaneous
fat cauterized
Coagulation Face-mask (LA) 5 liters/
min
Drapes
removed
Chin, neck Partial
thickness
Aly et al.
(1991)
Incised trachea NK ETT NK NK Trachea Superficial
Lew et al.
(1991)
Incised trachea Cutting ETT 100% Manual
pressure,
Saline
down ETT
Hypopharynx,
trachea
Death: 13
days
Marsh and
Riley (1992)
Incised trachea Coagulation DL ETT 100% Wet swab Skin ‘Charring’
Wilson
et al. (1994)
Incised trachea Cutting ETT 100% Manual
pressure
None None
Michels
et al. (1994)
Incised trachea NK ETT 100% NK None None
Lim et al.
(1997)
Bleeding
tracheal vessel
cauterized
NK ETT 100% Saline to
wound
None None
Chee &
Benumof
(1998)
NK Coagulation ETT 100% Saline
down ETT
Skin Superficial
Thompson
et al. (1998)
Bleeding
tracheal vessel
cauterized
Coagulation Bronchoscope 50% Manual
pressure
Lower neck 2nd degree
Thompson
et al. (1998)
Bleeding
tracheal vessel
cauterized
Coagulation ETT NK Manual
pressure
None None
Thompson
et al. (1998)
Bleeding
tracheal vessel
cauterized
Blend ETT 100% Web
swab
None None
Bauer &
Butler
(1990)
Incised trachea NK ETT 100% Manual
pressure,
saline to
wound
Larynx,
epiglottis,
trachea
Death:
instant
Reproduced with permission from Rogers ML, Nickalls RW, Brackenbury ET, et al. Airway fire during tracheostomy: prevention strategies for
surgeons and anaesthetists. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2001;83(6):376– 80. Note the use of the British term “diathermy” to denote cautery. my self
The Royal College of Surgeons of England.
NK, not known; ETT, endotracheal tube; DL ETT, double-lumen endotracheal tube; LA, local anaesthetic.
Chapter 11: Prevention and management of airway fires
109
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Two case studies
Case one
Sosis [1] described the following case report of a laser-
ignited airway fire.
The patient was a 56-year-old ASA physical status I man
weighing 79 kg who presented with hoarseness. CO 2
laser excision of a vocal cord polyp was planned.
Anesthesia was induced with 100 mg of fentanyl, 400 mg
of thiopental, and tracheal intubation was facilitated
with succinylcholine 100 mg iv. A 6-mm ID Xomed ®
(Jacksonville, FL) Laser Shield endotracheal tube was
placed. Its cuff was inflated with 5 ml of isotonic saline.
No leak of anesthetic gases was heard during positive
pressure ventilation. The CO 2 laser was set to 20 W in
the pulsed mode of operation with a duration of 0.2 s per
pulse. Anesthesia was maintained with 4 1/min N 2O and
2 1/min O 2 along with isoflurane up to 1.5% as delivered
by a calibrated vaporizer. Intermittent iv boli of
atracurium provided paralysis.
Near the end of the resection, the surgeon noticed
bleeding at the edge of one of the vocal cords. Actuation of
the laser for hemostasis resulted in smoke emerging from
the patient's mouth with flames noted by the surgeon to be
coming from the endotracheal tube. The anesthetist also
noted flames in the disposable corrugated anesthesia
circuit connected to the tracheal tube. The flames were
doused with saline. Breath sounds were absent and an
obvious leak of anesthetic gas could be heard when the
ventilator cycled. The patient's lungs were not being
ventilated. The delivery of nitrous oxide and oxygen was
terminated and the ventilator turned off. The endotracheal
tube was quickly removed, the lungs ventilated via mask,
and the trachea was reintubated with a polyvinylchloride
(PVC) endotracheal tube. Fiber optic bronchoscopy
subsequently revealed extensive burns to the trachea and
both bronchi. No fragments of the endotracheal tube were
seen in the respiratory tract. The Xomed® tube was later
noted to be intact with a ruptured cuff and with evidence of
combustion of the cuff and distal shaft. The patient had a
long intensive care unit stay requiring positive pressure
ventilation, antibiotics, and vigorous pulmonary toilet.
He subsequently underwent a permanent tracheostomy
and had several dilation procedures.
(Take home message: in such cases avoid nitrous
oxide, which supports combustion. Use air instead.
Also, it might have been possible to stop the bleeding
by other means.)
Case two
Consider the following second case, offered by Chee
and Benumof [2].
A 28-yr-old, 100-kg man was scheduled for elective
tracheostomy. The patient 's lungs had been ventilated in
the intensive care unit for 35 days after emergency
craniotomy for a closed head injury. During the course
of intensive care unit stay the patient remained comatose
and adult respiratory distress syndrome developed,
which was now resolving. The airway evaluation
revealed an in situ 8.0-mm ID polyvinylchloride ETT,
swollen lips, an edematous tongue protruding out of the
mouth and an oropharynx filled with secretions.
General anesthesia was induced with 300 mg intravenous
propofol and maintained with 0.4% inspired isoflurane and
a 35% oxygen/air mixture. The vital signs remained stable
within 10% of the baseline values. Electrocautery was used
for coagulation by the surgeons. The patient was
administered 100% oxygen immediately before insertion of
the tracheostomy tube. Suddenly, the surgeons reported a
blue flame shooting up vertically from the patient'sn e c k .
The breathing circuit was disconnected immediately
from the ETT; 20 ml saline, 0.9%, was flushed into the ETT.
The fire extinguished promptly.
(Take home message: in such cases keep the FiO 2 as
low as possible and be careful to enter the trachea
using scissors instead of electrocautery.)
Summary
An airway fire is potentially deadly complication that
may occur during tracheotomy surgery, during laser
surgery and with a number of other procedures. The
American Society of Anesthesiologists operating room
fire algorithm is a good starting point in the prevention
and management of these events. In general, cases of
airway fire call for immediate removal of the endotra-
cheal tube (ETT) and flooding of the field with saline.
While this is a reasonable rule of thumb, it should also be
noted that there are occasional patients where removal of
the ETT would in all likelihood result in irreversible loss
of the airway. Some authors have suggested that flooding
t h es u r g i c a ls i t ew i t hc a r b o nd i o x i d ew i l lh e l pp r e v e n t
airway fires during open tracheostomy using cautery.
Clinical pearls
/C15Operating room fires are best divided into airway
fires and non-airway fires. A recent report by the
American Society of Anesthesiologists provides
specific guidance for both scenarios .
/C15An airway fire is potentially deadly complication
that may occur during tracheotomy surgery,
during laser surgery and with a number of other
procedures.
Section 1: Introduction
110
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012/C15Preventive measures do not guarantee that fires
will not occur; always be prepared.
/C15A simple means to extinguish airway fires (e.g., 50
ml syringe filled with saline) should be
immediately on hand. In addition, a CO 2 fire
extinguisher is good to have nearby.
/C15The surgeon should avoid entering the trachea
using electrocautery; additionally, the
anesthesiologist must maintain special vigilance at
the moment of surgical entry into the trachea.
/C15The anesthesiologist should keep the administered
oxygen levels (fraction of inspired oxygen, FiO 2)
used to the minimum needed when a significant
potential for an airway fire is present.
/C15Nitrous oxide should not be used during airway
surgery, since it supports combustion just as does
oxygen.
/C15Prevailing conventional wisdom holds that cases
of airway fire call for immediate removal of the
endotracheal tube (ETT). While this is a
reasonable rule of thumb, it should also be noted
that there are some patients where removal of the
ETT would in all likelihood result in irreversible
loss of the airway.
/C15Flooding the surgical field with carbon
dioxide might be an effective technique in
preventing airway fires during open
tracheostomy.
References
1. Sosis MB. Airway fire during CO2
laser surgery using a Xomed Laser
endotracheal tube. Anesthesiology
1990;72(4):747–9.
2. Chee WK, Benumof JL.
Airway fire during tracheostomy:
extubation may be
contraindicated. Anesthesiology
1998;89(6):1576–8.
3. Caplan RA, Barker SJ, Connis RT,
et al. Practice advisory for the
prevention and management of
operating room fires.
Anesthesiology2008;108(5):
786–801; quiz 971–2. Available
online at http://www.asahq.org/
publicationsAndServices/
orFiresPA.pdf.
4. Rogers ML, Nickalls RW,
Brackenbury ET, et al . Airway
fire during tracheostomy:
prevention strategies for surgeons
and anaesthetists. Ann R Coll Surg
Engl 2001;83(6):376–80.
5. Ng JM, Hartigan PM. Airway fire
during tracheostomy: should we
extubate? Anesthesiology 2003;
98(5):1303.
6. Roy S, Smith LP. What does it
take to start an oropharyngeal
fire? Oxygen requirements to start
fires in the operating room. Int
J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2011;
75(2):227–30.
7. Ho AM, Wan S, Karmakar MK.
Flooding with carbon dioxide
prevents airway fire induced
by diathermy during open
tracheostomy. J Trauma 2007;
63(1):228–31. PubMed PMID:
17622897.
Chapter 11: Prevention and management of airway fires
111
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.014
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 2
Chapter
12
Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
Anesthesia for septoplasty and rhinoplasty
Ursula Galway and Daniel Alam
Introduction
Septoplasty and rhinoplasty are both commonly per-
formed surgical procedures. Most of these procedures
are performed on an outpatient basis, often in a free-
standing surgical facility. Septoplasty surgery can be
performed to relieve symptoms of nasal obstruction
or as a component of rhinoplasty surgery. Often, it is
combined with turbinate reduction surgery. Patients
with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) may undergo
septoplasty to facilitate use of continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP). Rhinoplasty surgery is per-
formed for cosmetic or reconstructive purposes to
alter the appearance of the nose. The indication for
surgery may be purely cosmetic, post trauma, recon-
structive after tumor resection or to improve nasal
breathing.
Anesthetic management
Preoperative management
A patient presenting for rhinoplasty or septoplasty
should have a preoperative workup directed by their
preexisting medical conditions. Most patients pre-
senting for septoplasty are young and healthy but
some may have OSA. Older patients may present for
reconstruction of their nose following basal cell car-
cinoma resection and may have significant comorbid-
ities owing to their age. Additional testing should be
directed by their history and physical exam.
If the surgery is to be performed in an ambulatory
surgical center, it is imperative that the patient is a
suitable candidate for outpatient surgery in a free-
standing surgical center. Patients with uncontrolled
chronic disease such as uncontrolled hypertension,
unstable angina, symptomatic asthma, or brittle dia-
betes should not be operated on in this setting [1].
Other potential contraindications include patients
with a difficult airway, history of malignant hyper-
thermia, morbid obesity, severe OSA and chronic
pain. These patients should have their operation in a
hospital setting.
All patients should have a thorough airway evalu-
ation. Septoplasty patients may have nasal obstruction
from a deviated septum and thus may be more diffi-
cult to ventilate.
Postoperative bleeding is one of the most
common complications after nasal surgery. Patients
should cease to use NSAIDs and aspirin for 2 weeks
before surgery [2]. Preoperative antibiotics are
optional.
Intraoperative management
There are several anesthetic options available for
patients undergoing septoplasty or rhinoplasty.
Factors to consider include the length of surgery, the
number of procedures being performed, the degree of
expected bleeding, the invasiveness of the procedure
and what the patient is willing to tolerate. Patient
preference is another factor in deciding on the anes-
thetic technique to be used. The main surgical
requirements are patient immobility, a clear surgical
field and smooth emergence from anesthesia.
Local anesthesia with sedation
Many nasal procedures can successfully be performed
under local anesthesia with sedation. The advantages
include the avoidance of airway instrumentation and
positive-pressure ventilation, less intravenous medi-
cation administration and avoidance of inhaled anes-
thetic agents.
When an endotracheal tube is not in place, there is
less coughing, bucking or straining at emergence, all
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
113
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012of which can lead to bleeding from the surgical site.
With less intravenous administration of opioids and
no inhaled anesthetic administration, there are fewer
episodes of nausea and emesis. The disadvantages of
local anesthesia with sedation include patient aware-
ness, the possibility of patient movement, pain with
inadequate block, oversedation resulting in hypoven-
tilation, and even potential for loss of the airway.
Another potential risk of this approach is a probable
need for emergency airway management in the setting
of unexpected or brisk intraoperative bleeding leading
to aspiration or frank obstruction as the airway is
not secure and the patient has an altered sense of
awareness.
Initially a topical decongestant is applied. Cocaine,
phenylephrine or oxymetazoline can be applied to the
nasal mucosa to provide vasoconstriction. The nose
can be packed with local-anesthetic-soaked gauze and
then supplemented with submucosal injection of local
anesthetic with epinephrine. Commonly, 1% lido-
caine (10 mg/ml) with 1:100 000 or 1:200 000 epi-
nephrine is used. The epinephrine will shrink the
nasal mucosa and decrease intraoperative bleeding.
The most painful part is the administration of the
local anesthetic. At this point the patient can be given
a small dose of a short-acting agent such as propofol
and then lightened again for the remainder of the
procedure. With rhinoplasty, excessive infiltration of
local anesthetic will lead to distortion and thus inter-
fere with the assessment of cosmetic results, so care
must be taken not to inject too much. Sedation can be
administered with any combination of medications;
however, patients can become disorientated and
uncooperative with sedative medications so care
should be taken to avoid oversedation. Surgical pro-
cedures performed on the face under sedation pose a
risk of a surgical fire. This is due to the proximity of
an open oxygen-delivery system with a high oxygen
concentration near the face (nasal cannula or face
mask) in the presence of electrocautery. As discussed
in more detail in the chapter on airway fires (Chap-
ter 11) for a fire to occur the triad of fuel (oxygen
tubing, drapes, sponges), oxygen and an ignition
source (electrocautery in this case) is needed. Patients
having surgery under sedation should be placed on
supplemental oxygen, although several precautions
should be taken to avoid a fire. In general, surgical
drapes should be configured to minimize accumula-
tion of oxygen, flammable skin preparation solution
should be allowed to dry before drapes are applied
and gauze and sponges should be moistened before
use in proximity to electrocautery. If moderate or
deep sedation is required for the procedure or if the
patient displays oxygen dependence, it may be advis-
able to use a sealed oxygen-delivery system such as an
endotracheal tube or a supraglottic airway. If neither
of these factors is present and an open oxygen-
delivery system is to be used (i.e., nasal cannula),
several precautions can be taken to avoid the risk of
fire. Only the minimum oxygen requirement to avoid
hypoxia should be delivered. Prior to the use of elec-
trocautery, oxygen should be stopped or decreased to
the minimum required. Then, one should wait a few
minutes to allow dispersion of the oxygen before
electrocautery is used. Insufflation with medical air
or scavenging of the operative field with suction are
other ways to decrease the buildup of oxygen near the
operating field [3].
Operative and recovery times have been shown to
be shorter for patients undergoing surgery with local
anesthesia with sedation compared with general anes-
thesia. There may also be less emesis, epistaxis and
nausea as well as earlier discharge times [4].
General anesthesia
General anesthesia may be preferred for more extensive,
longer or anticipated large-volume blood-loss proced-
ures. The advantages of general anesthesia include the
potential for total patient analgesia and immobility, less
patient cooperation requirement and control of the
airway by intubation or laryngeal supraglottic airway,
reducing risk of aspiration of secretions, blood or irri-
gation fluids [2]. Disadvantages include the potential for
coughing on the endotracheal tube upon emergence,
more nausea and vomiting, higher doses of intravenous
medications, a longer recovery and postoperative dis-
orientation. A general anesthetic may be performed
with either a supraglottic airway or an endotracheal
tube. During induction of anesthesia and mask ventila-
tion an oral airway may be needed to alleviate the effects
of the nasal obstruction if significant septal deviation is
present.
Maintenance of anesthesia can be with volatile
inhaled anesthetic, total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)
or a balanced anesthesia technique. A continuous IV
opioid-based technique with alfentanil or remifentanil
allows for a reduction in the total amount of volatile
anesthesia given and significantly blunts the tracheal
response to the endotracheal tube. This also allows for
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
114
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012improved hemodynamic stability and rapid smooth
emergence. Remifentanil may cause a significant
opioid-induced vagally mediated bradycardia, espe-
cially if given as a bolus, which may lead to decreased
cardiac output and hypotension. A propofol infusion
provides the advantages of decreasing blood pressure
and decreasing the incidence of postoperative nausea
and vomiting as well as being rapidly metabolized,
resulting in a quicker emergence. Inhalational anesthe-
sia can be used and also provides the advantage of
decreasing blood pressure, thus lessening blood loss.
During emergence, patients may buck or cough on the
endotracheal tube, increasing venous pressure and
increasing bleeding and swelling. This should be
avoided if possible.
Patients may be disorientated after general anes-
thesia and may attempt to rub their nose. As this can
disrupt the surgical sutures the patient should be
watched very carefully until they are back to their
baseline mental status.
General anesthesia with supraglottic
airway versus general anesthesia with
endotracheal tube
A supraglottic airway can be used to secure the airway
after administration of general anesthesia. The supra-
glottic airway will provide a patent airway and allow
the patient to breathe spontaneously under deeper
levels of anesthesia without airway obstruction.
Although it can prevent blood and secretions from
entering the airway and stomach [5], it does not
protect adequately for aspiration of blood or gastric
secretions into the lungs.
Some studies show significantly less sore throat
with a supraglottic airway than an endotracheal tube
[3]. However, a review of the literature shows a wide
variation in the incidence of postoperative sore throat
for both supraglottic airways and endotracheal tubes,
with the incidence after endotracheal intubation
ranging from 14 to 50% and after a supraglottic airway
ranging from 6 to 34% [4]. A supraglottic airway
causes less cardiovascular response with insertion as
compared to an endotracheal tube [5]. The supraglot-
tic airway allows for a less stimulating emergence from
anesthesia, thus less coughing and bucking.
The main limiting features of the supraglottic
airway are the potential for aspiration and potential
difficulties in sealing/placement. Other disadvantages
of using a supraglottic airway include the potential for
dislodgement, especially with movement of the head
by the surgeon during surgery, and the possibility of
laryngospasm as the vocal cords are not protected
from blood or secretions.
General anesthesia with an endotracheal tube
ensures better airway protection from secretions or
blood loss from the operative field. A regular endo-
tracheal, reinforced tube (Figure 12.1) or oral Rae
tube (Figure 12.2) may be used. The endotracheal
tube should be fixed in the midline to avoid any
asymmetry of the face.
Throat packs made from saline-soaked gauze can
also be used to prevent blood and secretions from
entering the stomach. As mentioned previously, the
disadvantages to using an endotracheal tube include a
more significant cardiovascular response to insertion
and more stimulation and airway irritation during
emergence, although both can be managed with care-
ful induction, and a well-planned smooth extubation.
Intraoperative considerations
Bleeding
Bleeding is one of the biggest complications of nasal
surgery. Minimization of intraoperative blood loss
allows the surgeon to have an operative field which
he can visualize well. Blood loss can be minimized by
applying epinephrine-containing local anesthetic or
cocaine to the nasal mucosa, maintaining a slight
head-up position, and the use of controlled hypoten-
sion in appropriate individuals.
Vasoconstrictors
The use of vasoconstrictors shrinks the nasal mucosa
and constricts blood vessels, resulting in less surgical
bleeding. Phenylephrine is an a-adrenergic agonist
which can be used as a vasoconstrictor. It is supplied
as a liquid and is sprayed directly into the nose.
Mucosal absorption can lead to hypertension and
even cardiovascular decompensation. The initial dose
should not exceed 0.5 mg (500 mg). Should it occur,
severe hypertension should be either waited out,
treated with a short-acting direct vasodilator or an
a-antagonist. Avoid b-blockers in this setting, espe-
cially long-acting agents like metoprolol and labetalol.
Oxymetazoline is a vasoconstrictor and an imida-
zoline-derivative sympathomimetic amine. It directly
stimulates a-adrenergic receptors and exerts little or
no effect on b-adrenergic receptors. Three sprays of
Chapter 12: Anesthesia for septoplasty and rhinoplasty
115
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20120.05% oxymetazoline spray can be used in each nostril
[5]. Cocaine is both a local anesthetic and a vasocon-
strictor with sympathomimetic effects. Cocaine-soaked
pledgets applied to the nasal mucosa provide both local
anesthesia and vasoconstriction. Peak plasma levels are
reached at 30 minutes and remain elevated for
120 minutes. Cocaine sensitizes the organs to epineph-
rine and blocks the uptake of released epinephrine at
peripheral nerve terminals. Therefore, cocaine should
be avoided in hypertensive patients, those on monoa-
mine oxidase inhibitors and those with coronary artery
disease or arrhythmias as it may cause detrimental
cardiovascular effects. Intranasal doses of 0.5–1m g / k g
increase heart rate and systolic blood pressure, while a
dose of 2 mg/kg sensitizes the myocardium to arrhyth-
mogenic effects of epinephrine, and doses in the range
of 5 –10 mg/kg depress the heart. Cocaine can cause
ventricular fibrillation, hypertension, cardiac arrest,
tachycardia or respiratory depression in susceptible
people. Cocaine is available in both 4% (40 mg/ml)
and 10% (100 mg/ml) solutions, although the 4%
solution is the most commonly used in medical practice.
The recommended intranasal maximum dose of 4%
solution of cocaine is 1.5 mg/kg. Each drop of
4% cocaine contains about 3 mg of cocaine. Cocaine is
metabolized through ester hydrolysis by plasma
Figure 12.2. Oral Rae endotracheal
tube.
Figure 12.1. Reinforced endotracheal
tube.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
116
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012pseudocholinesterase. Intranasal cocaine combined
with epinephrine lowers plasma cocaine levels due to
reduced absorption; however, it may lead to more inci-
dences of arrhythmias and other cardiac events. Epi-
nephrine acts directly on sympathetic neurons,
stimulating the postsynaptic norepinephrine receptors.
The combination of reuptake inhibition of the
cocaine and the direct synaptic stimulation of epineph-
rine may lead to excessive hypertension and tachycar-
dia. While cocaine is an effective anesthetic and
vasoconstrictor, the long-acting cardiac effects which
extend to hours beyond the surgery are an issue that
has led to a tendency for surgeons to use cocaine less
frequently than in the past. The use of lidocaine with
epinephrine and oxymetazoline in combination yields
the same effect without the myocardial sensitization.
Controlled hypotension
Surgeons may sometimes request a controlled
lowering of blood pressure to allow for less bleeding
and improve visualization of the surgical field. Con-
trolled hypotension may be defined as reduction of
the systolic blood pressure to 80 –90 mmHg and a
reduction of the mean arterial pressure (MAP) to
50–65 mmHg or a reduction in MAP by one-third
of its baseline value. A slow return to normal pres-
sures postoperatively is ideal as a rapid return to
normal pressures may cause reactionary hemorrhage.
Drugs used for controlled hypotension include the
following:
/C15Inhalational anesthetics
Inhalational anesthetics lower MAP and systemic vas-
cular resistance (SVR) via vasodilatation and their nega-
tive inotropic effect. They are readily titratable, provide
surgical anesthesia and have a rapid onset and offset.
/C15Sodium nitroprusside
Sodium nitroprusside is a direct vasodilator which acts
through nitric oxide release. It has a rapid onset and
offset and is easy to titrate. Disadvantages include the
potential for cyanide toxicity, rebound hypertension,
sympathetic stimulation, increased pulmonary shunt,
coronary steal, and tachycardia. An arterial line is
ordinarily used whenever sodium nitroprusside is
used, as well as a volumetric infusion pump.
/C15Nitroglycerin
Nitroglycerin is also a direct vasodilator. It also has
a rapid onset and offset and is easy to titrate,
and causes limited tachycardia and no coronary
steal. It too can increase pulmonary shunt. It may
cause methhemoglobinemia and inhibition of platelet
aggregation.
/C15b-Blockers
b-Blockers decrease myocardial contractility, SVR
and heart rate. Some, such as esmolol, have a rapid
onset and offset and are titratable. Disadvantages
include decreased cardiac output, bradycardia, heart
block and bronchospasm.
/C15Calcium channel blockers
Calcium channel blockers cause vasodilatation via
decreased transmembrane calcium movement. They
work rapidly and have no effect on airway reactivity.
However, they can cause cardiac depression, brady-
cardia and conduction blockade.
Historically drugs such a s trimethaphan, pento-
linium and phentolamine have been used for con-
trolled hypotension. Recently, dexmedetomidine has
been shown also to decrease bleeding and intrao-
perative fentanyl consumption in septoplasty
operations.
Relative contraindications to controlled hypoten-
sion include patients with severe cardiovascular dis-
ease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular
disease, renal or hepatic impairment [6]. It is import-
ant to monitor the electrocardiogram for ST segment
depression, which would indicate myocardial ische-
mia is occurring.
Untreated or poorly controlled hypertension is a
relative contraindication as cerebral autoregulation
may be shifted to a higher pressure set point. As a
result, patients may be prone to cerebral ischemia at
higher pressures than in normal individuals.
Care should be taken with patients with preexist-
ing pulmonary disease as decreased arterial oxygen
tension and increased alveolar –arterial oxygen gradi-
ents have been known to occur with deliberate hypo-
tension, due to ventilation/perfusion mismatch and
increase in physiological dead space.
Positioning
ENT patients are usually placed supine, often with
the head of the bed elevated 15 –30/C14with the bed
turned 90 –180/C14from the anesthesiologist. The eleva-
tion of the head 15 –30/C14may cause a decrease in
blood pressure due to decreased venous return to
Chapter 12: Anesthesia for septoplasty and rhinoplasty
117
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the heart, allowing for less bleeding and better visu-
alization of the surgical field. However, as excessive
hypotension may occur in dehydrated or susceptible
patients, caution should be taken to monitor the
blood pressure closely. Eyes should be protected.
With rhinoplasty surgery, the eyes should be pro-
tected in a way that allows early recognition of
orbital injury, i.e., with ointment and minimal tape.
The ETT and tubing should be directed toward the
foot of the bed. A shoulder roll is placed and the
neck extended.
Emergence
After nasal surgery, emergence cough or straining
will produce venous engorgement and increase bleed-
ing from the surgical site, so the necessity for a
smooth extubation provides a challenge for the
anesthesiologists. The stomach can be suctioned at
the end of surgery prior to extubation to eliminate
blood from the stomach. TIVA with propofol, a
remifentanil or alfentanil infusion, IV lidocaine given
prior to emergence or lidocaine sprayed directly on
the vocal cords can all lessen the chances of coughing.
Dexmedetomidine has also been used with success to
improve extubation. Deep extubation can be per-
formed to avoid coughing on the endotracheal tube
but should be performed only with extreme caution if
at all. Deep extubation may be dangerous, as there
may be significant blood in the stomach which could
lead to aspiration. Trickling of blood from the surgi-
cal site can irritate the vocal cords, leading to laryn-
gospasm. If the airway is lost following deep
extubation, reintubation may be difficult due to the
accumulation of blood in the airway. Mask ventila-
tion after rhinoplasty may be difficult and undesir-
able due to the newly reconstructed nose; thus the
patient could be difficult to ventilate should any
airway issues arise post extubation. After extubation
care should be taken not to place excessive pressure
on a newly constructed nose with a face mask. Nasal
cannulae or a face tent can be used to deliver supple-
mental oxygen postoperatively. A facemask can be
modified by cutting off the top portion, thus avoiding
nasal pressure (Figure 12.3). Post septoplasty, the
nasal cavities may be packed and septal splints may
be placed. During rhinoplasty if nasal bone osteo-
tomies are performed the nose is packed and dorsal
nasal splints are placed. The patient will be obliged to
breathe through their mouth and if obstruction
occurs an oral airway may be needed. Antiemetics
should be given to patients to minimize PONV as
vomiting and retching can lead to bleeding. The head
of the bed should also be kept elevated.
Postoperative considerations
In the recovery area the patient 's head should be ele-
vated at 30 /C14and a cold compress applied. A dressing
sponge is folded and taped under the nose if there is
Figure 12.3. Modified simple face mask
with upper portion removed using
scissors.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
118
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012any evidence of bleeding. Proper postoperative pain
control, avoidance of hypertension, vomiting and
Valsalva maneuvers can help minimize epistaxis or
bleeding under the septal or nasal skin flaps. Short-
acting intravenous narcotics, oral narcotics or aceta-
minophen can be used for pain control. NSAIDs
should be avoided because of the potential for platelet
inhibition and increased bleeding.
One study showed the majority of readmissions for
septoplasty were for bleeding, with a strong association
between NSAID use and readmission due to bleeding. If
nasal packing is in place, anti-staphylococcal antibiotics
[7] are often given. Activity should be kept to a min-
imum. Home-going postoperative medications include
an oral opiate and prophylactic antibiotics. Overnight
observation may be needed for patients with severe
underlying medical conditions, uncontrolled pain or
severe OSA.
Complications
Complications of septoplasty and rhinoplasty include
bleeding, infection, traumatic neuromuscular injury
and poor esthetic result. However, less common com-
plications such as endocarditis, meningitis, brain
abscess, hemorrhage and asphyxiation from nasal
packing have been described in the literature.
Summary
The majority of septoplasties and rhinoplasties are per-
formed on healthy patients in the outpatient setting;
however, occasionally patients present with medical
comorbidities or OSA. These surgeries can be performed
with local anesthesia and sedation or general anesthesia
with an LMA or endotracheal tube. The main intrao-
perative concern includes the minimization of bleeding
with use of vasoconstrictors and submucosal epineph-
rine, controlled hypotension and a smooth emergence.
Postoperatively patients need to be observed for bleeding
but can usually be discharged home on the same day.
Case study – anesthesia for septoplasty
and turbinate reduction
Preoperative management
A 25-year-old male presented for septoplasty and
turbinate reduction for septal deviation and nasal
obstructive symptoms. He had no major medical
problems except for severe gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD), for which he was on a proton pump
inhibitor. Despite treatment he continued to have
gastric reflux symptoms. He had no cardiac, pulmon-
ary or respiratory problems. He had been NPO for
over 8 hours and had not taken any medications on
the morning of surgery. An 18-gauge intravenous
catheter was inserted and the patient was given intra-
venous metoclopramide and famotidine as well as
oral sodium citrate for aspiration prophylaxis.
The plan was to perform the surgery on an outpatient
basis.
Intraoperative management
The patient was brought to the operating room and
standard monitors were applied. The decision was
made by the anesthesiologist to perform a rapid
sequence intubation with cricoid pressure because of
the history of severe GERD. Anesthesia was induced
with propofol, fentanyl and succinylcholine and the
airway was easily intubated with a size 7 endotracheal
tube. Anesthesia was maintained with an infusion of
intravenous propofol and alfentanil with oxygen and
nitrous oxide mix. The patient did not receive any
further doses of neuromuscular blockade and was
breathing spontaneously. The surgeon packed the
throat to prevent blood and secretions from entering
the stomach. Three sprays of 0.05% oxymetazoline
were introduced into each nostril for vasoconstriction
and the nasal septum was topicalized with 1% lido-
caine with 1:100 000 epinephrine. Surgery proceeded
uneventfully. Upon emergence, the patient 's mouth
was thoroughly suctioned and the throat pack was
removed. He was breathing spontaneously with good
tidal volumes, a strong head lift and was following
commands. He began coughing violently so the endo-
tracheal tube was removed.
Some bleeding was noted coming from his nose so
the head of the bed was elevated and gauze was placed
under his nose. He was brought to the recovery room
on oxygen via simple face mask.
Postoperative management
In the recovery room, the patient 's vital signs were
stable; however, he continued to have some bleeding
from the nose. Shortly after presenting to the recovery
room, he began to have multiple episodes of emesis.
Intravenous ondansetron was given, which stopped
his nausea and vomiting; however, bleeding from his
nose had worsened at this point. The surgeon was
Chapter 12: Anesthesia for septoplasty and rhinoplasty
119
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012called to the bedside. He examined the patient, placed
pressure on the nose and placed nasal packing. This
helped decrease the bleeding from profuse to mild.
The decision was made to admit the patient overnight
for observation due to epistaxis. Overnight the bleed-
ing resolved and on postoperative day 1 he was dis-
charged home in stable condition.
Complications
As illustrated by this case, this patients ' surgical
course was complicated by severe epistaxis which
required admission to the hospital for further obser-
vation. This adds a significant financial and time
burden for the patient, surgeon and the hospital.
The bleeding may have been caused or aggravated
by the coughing on extubation and by the violent
bouts of emesis in the recovery room. Although
maintenance of anesthesia with a propofol infusion
is useful in preventing postoperative nausea and
vomiting, the patient could have benefited from
receiving intravenous dexamethasone at commence-
ment of surgery and ondansetron prior to emergence.
Although coughing on the endotracheal tube is some-
times unavoidable, perhaps the administration of
intravenous lidocaine prior to extubation could have
prevented or lessened the coughing.
Clinical pearls
/C15Most patients presenting for septoplasty are young
and healthy although some may have OSA; older
patients may present for nasal reconstruction
following basal cell carcinoma resection and may
have significant comorbidities.
/C15Postoperative bleeding is one of the most
common complications after nasal surgery.
Patients should cease to use NSAIDs and
aspirin for 2 weeks before surgery.
/C15In septoplasty cases the main anesthetic
goals are patient immobility, a clear surgical
field and smooth emergence from anesthesia.
/C15Surgical procedures performed on the face under
sedation pose a risk of a surgical fire. This is due to
the proximity of an open oxygen-delivery system
with a high oxygen concentration near the face
(nasal cannula or face mask) in the presence of
electrocautery.
/C15Supraglottic airways have been used successfully
during general anesthesia for septoplasty
surgeries. They provide a patent airway and allow
the patient to breathe spontaneously under deeper
levels of anesthesia without airway obstruction.
However, while they can prevent blood and
secretions from entering the airway and stomach,
they do not protect adequately from aspiration of
blood or gastric secretions into the lungs. They
also offer the potential for dislodgement,
especially with movement of the head by the
surgeon, and a potential for laryngospasm exists
as the vocal cords are not completely protected
from blood or secretions.
/C15After nasal surgery, cough or straining at
emergence will produce venous engorgement
and increase bleeding from the surgical
site – hence the necessity for a smooth extubation.
/C15After extubation care should be taken not to place
excessive pressure on a newly constructed nose
(rhinoplasty) with a face mask.
References
1. Duncan PG. Day surgical
anaesthesia: Which patients?
Which procedures? Can J Anaesth
1991;38(7):881–2.
2. Fedok FG, Ferraro RE, Kingsley
CP, Fornadley JA. Operative times,
postanesthesia recovery times, and
complications during sinonasal
surgery using general anesthesia
and local anesthesia with sedation.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
[Clinical Trial Comparative Study]
2000;122(4):560–6.
3. Higgins PP, Chung F, Mezei G.
Postoperative sore throat after
ambulatory surgery. Br J Anaesth
2002;88(4):582–4.
4. Zuccherelli L. Postoperative upper
airway problems. S Afr J Anaesth
Analg 2003;9(2)12–6.
5. Webster AC, Morley-Forster PK,
Janzen V, et al. Anesthesia for
intranasal surgery: a comparison
between tracheal intubation and the
flexible reinforced laryngeal mask
airway. Anesth Analg 1999;88(2):
421–5.
6. Ward CF, Alfery DD, Saidman LJ,
Waldman J. Deliberate
hypotension in head and neck
surgery. Head Neck Surg 1980;2(3):
185–95.
7. Georgalas C, Obholzer R,
Martinez-Devesa P, Sandhu G.
Day-case septoplasty and
unexpected re-admissions at a
dedicated day-case unit: a 4-year
audit. Ann R Coll of Surg Engl
2006;88(2):202–6.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
120
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:22:43 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.015
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 2
Chapter
13
Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery
Paul Kempen
Introduction
Historically, the use of optical instruments to examine
the nasal passages dates back over 100 years. In 1903,
Hirshmann was the first to document the use of a
cystoscope in diagnostic and surgical applications for
nasal and sinus disorders, known as functional endo-
scopic sinus surgery (FESS). The early years of nasal
endoscopy were primarily dedicated to diagnostic
applications. FESS strived to provide for adequate
airway drainage and aeration with minimal trauma.
Developments over the last few decades have led to an
increasingly wide array of surgical procedures. In the
1960s, fiberoptic technology enabled the elimination of
significant internal heating. Although in 1965 the first
color images of the maxillary antrum were presented,
the fiberoptic limitations in field of vision and illumin-
ation, as well as the inadequacy to precisely localize
surgical biopsy, confined utilization and acceptance in
surgical procedures. In the early 1970s, improvements
in optics greatly facilitated advances leading to
increased utilization of endoscopes in ENT. With the
introduction of stereotactic imaging, increasingly, util-
ization of endoscopic ENT surgery to address complex
problems and tumors, beyond those localized to the
nasal passage and adjacent sinus structures, followed.
As the scope and clinical precision of endoscopic sur-
gery advanced, the importance of anesthetic manage-
ment in facilitating and ensuring intraoperative
homeostasis, hemostasis and absolute immobility facili-
tated the development of inter-specialty cooperation to
include surgical exposure of the ventral central nervous
system by ENT surgeons for neurosurgeons [1].
Clinical goals
These collaborations are of particular importance,
given the close approximation of the nasal passages
to the internal carotid and ethmoidal arteries, the
pituitary gland, skull base, superior cervical laminae
and the ocular orbit [2]. Anesthesiologists have con-
tributed significantly, using anesthetic techniques to
mitigate intraoperative hemorrhage into the surgical
field, thus significantly improving visualization of the
surgical field. Controlling intraoperative ventilation,
arterial and venous blood pressures and eliminating
coughing, retching and vomiting during emergence
are important anesthetic contributions to improved
surgical outcomes [3]. Preventing secondary bleeding
and CSF leaks after subarachnoid surgery in the peri-
operative period is attributed to a smooth emergence
and avoidance of manual positive pressure ventilation
after extubation. Modern, combined ENT-neurosur-
gical procedures can result in large defects in bone
and limitations in the occlusive closure of the naso-
cranium. The initial friability of cranial closures
presents specific anesthetic challenge at emergence.
All of the above perturbations are meticulously
avoided specifically to prevent CSF leaks and bleed-
ing. These goals are further complicated by the
need to ensure adequate respiration without positive
pressure ventilation after extubation and during
emergence in pituitary and cranial base surgery.
Comorbidities further complicate recognized limita-
tions in the native airway, including obstructive sleep
apnea, obesity, and residual anesthetic effects.
While multiple studies have suggested a specific
advantage of individual anesthetic techniques during
FESS (the most simple, frequently performed, and
typically outpatient operations), they nevertheless
suffer from significant limitations regarding the
influence of specific patient factors. These attempts
to standardize anesthetic management for FESS
stressed a short, standard and bloodless outpatient
procedure, at times performed in a physician 's office
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
121
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012or free-standing outpatient surgical center promoting
TIVA, local anesthetics, LMA utilization, and moder-
ate induced hypotension to facilitate operative visibil-
ity approaching “cadaveric bleeding conditions ”. This
contrasts significantly with the increasing scope
and invasiveness of endoscopy in modern ENT sur-
gery, especially in conjunction with multi-specialty
cooperative operations, specifically neurosurgical,
orbital, and orthopedic cervical spine surgery. These
complex surgeries often lead to prolonged and at
times staged procedures over multiple days. The
increasing frequency of morbid obesity and multiple
other comorbidities in the patient population in gen-
eral significantly reduces the clinical success or prac-
tical application of “fast-track” techniques utilizing a
supraglottic airway (SGA) without pharmacological
neuromuscular blockade in all patients. Increasingly,
the application of modern anesthetic techniques in
any endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) must be tailored
primarily to the many and variable patient and surgi-
cal parameters, while facilitating surgical objectives
only secondary to patient safety, as primary anesthetic
goals. Thus, the anesthetic management of ESS must
consider and formulate anesthetic techniques across a
wide spectrum of procedures performed, surgical
lesions, patient comorbidities, surgical durations,
complications and outpatient vs. intensive care,
including surgical staging over multiple days. It is
evident that no single anesthetic technique will be
optimal for any surgery in every patient, but that
anesthetic management for ESS procedures has
reached a complexity of sub-specialty anesthesia.
Surgical considerations for functional
endoscopic sinus surgery
Hirshmann's early attempt to combat sinus pathology
was founded on the appreciation that healthy sinus
functional states required normal ventilation and
drainage of sinus secretions without obstruction due
to mucosal swelling, inflammation or other mechan-
ical impediments. Functional endoscopic sinus sur-
gery (FESS) strives to enable direct examination in
situ with subsequent correction of encountered
chronic changes and barriers which limit sinus drain-
age and aeration. Reduction of abnormal tissue mass,
creation of effective drainage via larger sinus passages
or complete obliteration of smaller sinuses as focal
problems became operative goals [4]. FESS is a rela-
tively safe surgical procedure, although the limited
evidence available suggests that FESS has not been
demonstrated to be superior to medical treatment in
chronic rhinosinusitis [5].
Anesthetic management
Preoperative considerations
These should be conducted in the usual fashion as
described in Chapter 3. Of particular importance to
the surgeries discussed here is the issue with sinusitis
and upper respiratory infection (URI). Infection
should be controlled with the appropriate antibiotics
prior to these (for the most part) elective sinus sur-
geries. The optimal way to manage uncomplicated
URI is controversial; however, most clinicians would
proceed with the planned surgery, provided that there
is no associated fever, severe wheezing, infected secre-
tions, or any other symptoms or signs of active infec-
tion as in bacterial sinusitis, or pneumonia.
Intraoperative management
Anesthetic technique
While many intranasal procedures can be performed
with adequate patient selection without general
anesthetics, increasingly the availability of anesthetic
specialists, minimal adverse effects of newer anes-
thetic agents, increasing numbers of pediatric and
geriatric patients, widespread training of surgeons
utilizing fast-track general anesthesia techniques,
and increased emphasis on patient satisfaction have
all fostered the incorporation of general anesthesia
into the daily surgical pattern.
Anesthetic goals
Patient immobility
Early anesthetic management strived to provide
patient immobility, enabling FESS within the superfi-
cial nasal passages. FESS was typically associated with a
small danger of surgical excursion into the surround-
ing cranial structures. Procedures using topical vaso-
constrictors and anesthetic agents, in combination
with sedatives or general anesthetics, prevailed [4].
Dry surgical field
As availability of anesthesia services and technological
advancement in the specialty proceeded, additional
goals included attempts to provide improved surgical
operative conditions and outcomes for FESS. With
FESS, operating in often very close quarters within
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
122
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the airway, small amounts of intraoperative bleeding
significantly obscured visualization and accuracy in
surgical resections, soiled optical lenses, and pro-
longed operative time. Studies directed at a reduc-
tion in operative estimated blood loss (EBL)
correlated with increase d surgical visualization
using various anesthetic techniques followed. The
minimal amount of blood loss during FESS, even
when doubled, may appear to be trivial in most
instances, yet can contribute to surgical difficulty,
delay and inefficiency.
Smooth, fast emergence
Emergence from general anesthesia can similarly
produce untoward problems, when coughing and
straining occur, contributing to postoperative bleed-
ing, nausea, and vomiting. With FESS typically pre-
senting as short, outpatient and especially elective
procedures, fast-tracking with the use of supraglottic
airway (SGA) techniques and total intravenous anes-
thesia (TIVA) (propofol and short duration narcot-
ics) has become commonplace and was believed to
produce optimization of surgical visual fields in
selected patients [3,6 –8]. The optimization of the
operative surgical visual field can be accomplished
through joint efforts of both teams by suppressing
local hemodynamics in the surgical field: avoiding
hypertension or facilitating appropriate, moderate
hypotension, maintaining low heart rates by the
anesthesiologist and application of combined top-
ical/injected vasoconstrictors with local anesthetic
agents, positioning to optimize drainage from the
surgical field, and good surgical technique by the
surgeon.
Use of supraglottic airways
The use of SGA over endotracheal tubes (ETT)
appears additionally advantageous, providing reduced
incidence and severity of coughing intraoperatively
and during emergence [9]. Contraindications for the
use of SGA include an increased risk of aspiration,
including patients with a full stomach, significant
obesity, and/or lower oesophageal sphincter insuffi-
ciency [3]. The SGAs typically enable routine extuba-
tion at lighter levels of anesthetic depth secondary to
increased LMA tolerance. Once hemostasis is
ensured, the smooth emergence reduces secondary
hemorrhage. The importance of hemostasis has led
to occasional use of intraoperative lasers on rare
occasions, further complicating anesthetic manage-
ment [3,10]. Incorporation of stereotactic and CT-
guided imaging as well as robotic procedures to
increase operative precision has similarly complicated
anesthetic management and prolonged surgical dur-
ations [11,12].
SGAs will typically provide an adequate protective
seal of the airway intraoperatively while enabling con-
trolled extubation at a minimal level of anesthesia to
prevent coughing, hypertension or significant pul-
monary aspiration of blood from the field. The SGAs
are also designed for use in spontaneously breathing
patients where, theoretically, lower intrathoracic pres-
sures reduce venous stasis in the surgical tissues. The
larger diameter of the SGAs compared with that of an
ETT provides significantly less resistance and pres-
sure fluctuations during air exchange, facilitating
larger tidal volumes and lower mean intrathoracic
pressures to minimize venous congestion [3,9]. Limi-
tations of SGA spontaneous respiration techniques
include possible intraoperative patient movement,
which may occur suddenly when surgery progresses
from topically anesthetized tissues to normally sensi-
tive structures under lighter depth of anesthesia.
Hypercarbia is often commonplace in spontaneously
breathing patients when intraoperative narcotics are
employed and this is easily corrected at emergence.
Positive-pressure ventilation via the LMA is fre-
quently possible if needed to assist or control ventila-
tion, but increased thoracic pressure can contribute to
venous distention, facilitating bleeding and leakage of
inhaled agents into the environment. Although
modern fiberoptics and video projection onto screen
monitors allow the surgeon 's face to remain signifi-
cantly distant from any volatile anesthetic leak itself,
small amounts of anesthetics escaping from the
shared airway and inhalation by surgeon and co-
workers remain undesirable. Excessive or increasing
LMA gas leak during pressurized ventilation can also
indicate decreasing compliance, inadequate depth of
anesthesia, or impending patient movements found
with dissipation of intended neuromuscular blocking
agents [13]. Gas leakage may be eliminated/mitigated
by TIVA techniques and appropriate choice of LMA
(or use of Proseal ®-style LMA) to facilitate occlusive
characteristics. Short, corrugated, and flexible airway
extensions ( “Bennett connectors ”) or flexible LMA
styles are preferred by some surgeons to reduce pro-
trusion and the presence of airway tubing near the
operative field.
Chapter 13: Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery
123
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012More on total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA)
Propofol/remifentanil TIVA with spontaneous respir-
ation (PRTSR) is considered by some an optimal strat-
egy to avoid emergence problems and provide
flexibility, and minimize nausea, vomiting, and EBL,
while ensuring rapid induction and emergence. Mul-
tiple studies support PRTSR as advantageous in facili-
tating hemodynamic conditions, minimizing EBL and
thus optimizing surgical conditions, visibility, and effi-
ciency. Although topical and injected local vasocon-
strictors are useful to minimize blood loss from the
soft tissue, penetration into the ossified structures can
be limited and bleeding from resected bone is felt more
amenable to hemodynamic measures of suppression.
The EBL during FESS typically ranges from 1 to 200 ml
of blood and is thus typically of little consequence to
patient welfare. However, the presence of increasing
amounts of blood in the surgical field is of concern to
the surgeons, limiting operative visualization and
extending surgical duration [6 –8]. The use of EEG
monitoring (i.e., bispectral index; BIS) objectifies con-
tinuous TIVA drug delivery and control of anesthetic
depth, especially when the intravenous infusion site is
not readily accessible, as when arms are tucked away
from the anesthesia provider to provide optimal access
for the surgeon. The various intraoperative and emer-
gence advantages (due to anesthetic technique alone)
may be small or negligible over expertly managed endo-
tracheal intubation techniques using TIVA, inhala-
tional anesthetics, endotracheal topical anesthesia and
deep extubation [14]. The use of laryngeal tracheal
anesthetic kits (LTA) at induction can facilitate smooth
extubation in short procedures lasting less than 20 –30
minutes. These topical anesthetic effects mitigate reflex
responses during positioning, intraoperatively and,
when still effective, at extubation [15]. Ultimately the
choice of anesthetic technique for FESS will invariably
result from an active interaction subject to surgeon,
hospital and anesthesia provider assessment, specific-
ally in light of patient-specific considerations.
Endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS):
increasingly difficult surgeries
and patients
As the patient population increasingly presents with sig-
nificant cardiovascular and pulmonary comorbidities,
gastrointestinal reflux disease, and obesity, anesthetic
techniques for simple FESS procedures directed at opti-
mal patient populations increasingly require flexibility to
address multiple individual patient issues. Modern ESS in
tertiary care settings will include neurosurgical, ophthal-
mologic, and cervical orthopedic procedures, often leav-
ing the complicated exposure and closure of the surgical
site to trained ENT specialists [16–18]. Complicated and
repeated ENT ESS entails much longer surgical durations
and increased bleeding and requires invasive monitoring.
The procedures may occasionally be staged over several
days with interval intensive care unit (ICU) management
of an intubated patient. While the ETT can allow small
amounts of blood to accumulate above the balloon cuff
within the trachea and pharynx, it can also drain into the
esophagus. This can typically be prevented intraopera-
tively by surgical packing of the laryngeal outlet or typic-
ally is easily removed with suction prior to or during the
extubation process itself. In contrast to the dangers of
intraoperative aspiration of stomach contents in at-risk
patients during LMA techniques with spontaneous res-
piration, endotracheal intubation and neuromuscular
blockade maximize intraoperative safety with respect to
aspiration and patient movement. Gastric aspiration
remains a danger prior to and after extubation. Passage
of a suction catheter by the surgeon under direct vision at
the end of surgery is recommended to remove any surgi-
cally accumulated secretions and also to protect the sur-
g i c a ls i t ef r o mi n j u r y .A st h esurgical duration increases
and the need for neuromuscular blockade presents itself,
limitations in the utility of the LMA become apparent.
Although many anesthesiologists will utilize LMAs for
increasingly longer surgical periods, a danger of gastric
content aspiration, poor LMA seal or the need for high
ventilation pressures will limit their use in many patients,
where endotracheal intubation is not already associated
with clear advantages. While TIVA techniques may in
many instances be appropriate and possible, the combin-
ation with or principle use of inhalational agents may also
have advantage in the intubated patient. Ultimately, the
type of anesthetic agents utilized will be primarily predi-
cated on team preferences, patient parameters, and cost
considerations. Sudden and rapid bleeding can interrupt
infusion pump delivery via pressure-sensitive pump
alarms, with pressurized infusions/transfusions occur-
ring through common IV sites. Peripheral IV sites may
be inaccessible due to surgical positioning and also infil-
trate, with interruption of anesthetic delivery. While the
use of EEG monitoring may thus be highly desirable in
TIVA anesthetics to confirm drug delivery, the presence
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
124
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012of the electrodes may interfere with stereotactic markers,
as well as cause field interference and interfere with
image-guided surgery. As surgery complexity increases,
arterial and central catheters become indicated and offer
continual pressure measurement, with ensured anes-
thetic and vasoactive drug delivery. Inhalational anes-
thetic agents can alternatively be continually monitored
along with ventilation, thus ensuring appropriate deliv-
ery, anesthetic depth, and ventilation. Although many
a n e s t h e s i o l o g i s t sm a yu s et h eE E Gm o n i t o r st og a u g e
depth of anesthesia as a means to expedite emergence,
the use of the BIS to reduce intraoperative awareness has
been demonstrated to provide no advantage over moni-
toring inhaled agent end tidal concentrations [19].
Repeat surgeries and emergencies
Postoperative bleeding, cerebrospinal fluid leaks,
infections, recurrent tumors and staged procedures
are the primary indications for repeat anesthetics in
patients after initial ESS procedures. Especially in
emergency procedures, where gastric content aspir-
ation is of significant concern, the need to aspirate
gastric contents at the beginning and/or end of the
procedure should be deferred to the ENT surgeon.
Decompression of the stomach content may be
needed prior to surgery to prevent intraoperative
reflux of gastric acid into the surgical field. Similarly,
blood and gastric contents should be removed prior
to emergence and extubation as far as is possible to
prevent aspiration, coughing and vomiting postopera-
tively. It is vitally important to recognize the extent of
prior surgery and any cervical and cranial base dis-
ruptions. Placement of intraoral and especially intra-
nasal implements of any kind, except under direct
visualization, can lead to intracranial insertion and
significant morbidity whenever protective ossified
barriers have been surgically removed. Knowledge of
any retained surgical packing, closure barriers, types
and extent will ultimately put the surgeon in the best
position to insert any drainage or monitoring
equipment that is required under direct endoscopic
visualization. Intubation of the trachea is an anes-
thetic procedure performed typically under direct
visualization via the oral cavity, thus obviating these
concerns at induction. Transnasal intubation should
be strictly avoided. Insertion of gastric tubes, tem-
perature probes, and solid airway devices may occur
without the security of direct visual confirmation of
placement and can lead to disruption of surgical
surfaces and transposition across membranous surgi-
cal closures. The minimal degree of barrier protection
from such membranous closure will provide inad-
equate protection from intracranial migration of
inserted tubings for the duration of the patient 's life,
especially after extensive cranial base procedures.
Repeat and staged procedures themselves will typ-
ically occur in fasted patients. Emergency procedures
require significant concern regarding gastric content
reflux and pulmonary aspiration, especially in
patients with significant CSF leakage. Symptoms of
nausea, vomiting, headache, dehydration, neuro-
logical defects, and obtundation secondary to pneu-
mocephalus and intracranial CSF hypotension may be
further accentuated by meningitis due to CSF leaks.
While small and traumatic CSF leaks are corrected
with high rates of success, larger neurosurgical and
skull base surgeries require complicated closures
and may result in high CSF leak rates approaching
30–58% [16,17,20]. CSF leaks are often believed by
surgeons to start in the early postoperative period and
specifically at emergence, due to fluctuations of CSF
pressure across the closure site. Leaks are attributed
specifically to postoperative coughing, gagging, snor-
ing, and snorting [17]. Infection in these patients can
further lead to intracranial sinus thrombosis and con-
siderable associated morbidity. Preoperative thera-
peutic administration of narcotics may also delay
gastric motility and increase gastric content. Rapid
sequence induction (RSI) may proceed in the usual
fashion as indicated, whereby active positive-pressure
ventilation is avoided to prevent gastric as well as
intracranial air insufflation, as an additional specific
concern. Knowledge of the previous intubation con-
ditions and success often facilitates a decision
favoring RSI. In the event of a known difficult
airway, transoral placement of an airway after
induction of anesthesia may favor SGA over ETT,
or conversion to ETT after securing the airway with
an intubating LMA. Awake intubation is often asso-
ciated with significant gagging and hemodynamic
perturbations. However, the overall patient safety
may in some circumstances warrant awake intub-
ation procedures over postinduction measures, par-
ticularly as the CSF leak will be subsequently
addressed surgically. Vomiting, however, may soil
the surgical site and introduce contamination to the
CSF and risk –benefit analysis is warranted. The
possible and confirmed presence of significant
pneumocephalus warrants the omission of nitrous
Chapter 13: Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery
125
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012oxide as a component of anesthetic care, as the
presence of a CSF leak does not ensure the escape
of sudden gas expansion after nitrous oxide
administration.
An additional and specific postanesthetic concern
arises from postoperative CSF leakage, described as
remote cerebellar hemorrhage (RCH). While in the
setting of ESS, the connotation of “remote” may be
considered a misnomer, RCH had originally been
reported after cervical spine surgery and recently has
most frequently been associated with frontotemporal
craniotomy performed in the supine position [21 –23].
RCH has been further associated with surgeries located
from the cranial apex to lumbar spinal areas, which
produce CSF leaks. The clinical presentation of RCH
is typically that of significant headache, possibly initially
with characteristics of postdural puncture headache,
which subsequently progresses to cerebellar sympto-
mology and may lead to severe neurological comprom-
ise from subtentorial compression from hemorrhage.
The onset of symptoms typically occurs postoperatively
after intervals of hours to days. The role of anesthetic
administration itself remains unclear, although
anesthetic agents, positive-pressure ventilation and the
emergence phenomenon are known to have significant
physical effects on intracranial dynamics. The patho-
physiology of this entity is described as one of intracra-
nial hypotension, leading to sagging of cranial
structures, subarachnoid vascular compromise and
cerebellar hemorrhage. This is supported by the fact
that typically bleeding occurs extraaxially, initially
located along the tentorium, upper vermis, and cerebel-
lar sulci, where the cerebellar veins provide for outflow.
Growing consensus supports the development of
secondary intraparenchymal hemorrhage due to a
combination of anatomic venous predisposition and
mechanical effects, leading to venous parenchyma
engorgement. Whether the stretching or interruption
of these veins leads to occlusion remains unclear.
While clearly a rare postoperative complication,
the importance of RCH becomes significant as a legal
liability whenever a Salem sump, temperature probes
or other tubes are placed nasally and orally in patients
with prior skull-based operations. The patient shown
in Figures 13.1 and 13.2 presented postoperatively with
an emergency CSF leak after C1 –2 anterior resection
and an oragastric tube was placed to decompress the
stomach. Extensive preoperative pneumocephalus
and intraventricular air was noted radiologically.
Figure 13.3 demonstrates the complete absence of
Figures 13.1 and 13.2. The Scout roentgenogram and MRI demonstrate extensive pneumocephalus including intraventricular gas in the
preoperative films.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
126
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012nasal packing, leaving only a thin membranous
covering of the defect and adjacent intrathecal air.
Postoperative control CT demonstrated a new small
subarachnoid hemorrhage along the left frontal lobe
(not shown) and extraaxial subdural hemorrhage
along the tentorium and falx cerebelli. The patient
emerged from anesthesia after control CT 4 hours
post-induction without neurological deficit, but
became obtunded 20 hours postoperatively. Extraaxial
pericerebellar hemorrhage was noted on MRI
(Figure 13.4) and required neurosurgical intervention.
Although neither RCH or transoral intracranial place-
ment of a Salem sump was ever documented in prior
literature, the orogastric insertion became implicated
as causative in the posterior cerebellar bleeding, espe-
cially in conjunction with the caudal extent of surgical
resection below the hard palate (Figure 13.5). Place-
ment of all tubes in patients after any endoscopic
surgery should be undertaken only in a manner to
prevent access to the cranium for life, to prevent access
to the residual non-ossified membranes.
Anesthetic emergence techniques
for ESS
The goals of emergence and extubation after ESS are
particularly challenging. Preoperative discussion of
the emergence plan with the surgeon and the patient
is useful to optimize emergence [24]. Nasal post-
surgical packing will require oral breathing patterns.
The surgical use of local anesthetic agents typically
causes limited pain upon emergence, including even
the most complicated neurosurgical procedures. Both
facts should be stressed reassuringly to the patient
preoperatively. SGA utilization is effective to facilitate
awake removal of the airway without stressful
coughing, hypertension or venous congestion at the
surgical site. Meticulous control of surgical bleeding
and removal of all blood and packing should occur
prior to emergence. Intubation of the trachea requires
increased attention to detail to optimize emergence.
Deep extubation (at surgical planes of anesthesia)
necessitates adequate spontaneous respiration and
avoidance of tracheal stimulation from oral secretions
including surgical bleeding through complete emer-
gence [14]. Deep extubations should only be under-
taken in fasted patients without danger of gastric
content aspiration, as well as only in patients exhibiting
Figure 13.3. This slightly tilted computer tomograph shows a
wide (18 mm diameter) defect in the anterior ossified skull base
structures with intracranial air and only limited soft tissue separating
the pharynx from the medulla at the lower level of the cerebellum.
Figure 13.4. Intracerebellar hemorrhage is evident and developed
20 hours postoperatively. Extensive operative site packing is noted
and closely approximates and protects the anterior pons separated
by Alloderm® graft. The right frontal sinus is filled with fluid.
Chapter 13: Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery
127
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012adequate probability of spontaneous respiration with-
out significant need of supportive measures. Position-
ing of the patient in the lateral and head-dependent
position is useful to drain secretions from the mouth,
but may have limitations if pressure on the nose is a
surgical concern. Insertion of an oral airway to ensure
ventilation until the patient emerges sufficiently to
maintain spontaneous respiration and protective
reflexes deserves consideration. This will also prevent
clenching on the ETT producing airway obstruction, as
well as preventing ETT removal. Frequently, and espe-
cially for the shortest procedures requiring intubation,
the utilization of laryngotracheal anesthesia (LTA) kits
during intubation to distribute 4% lidocaine into the
trachea can effectively obtund cough reflexes for
periods of 20 –30 minutes and allow complete emer-
gence without significant stimulation from the ETT,
facilitating awake extubation and maintenance of a
spontaneous airway patency. After prolonged surgical
procedures, the introduction of topical intratracheal
lidocaine prior to emergence can similarly help provide
for smooth emergence [14].
Several methods provide for effective intratracheal
topical anesthesia at the end of surgery [15]. The instil-
lation of 4 –10% lidocaine into the ETT cuff at intub-
ation has been advocated to allow diffusion of lidocaine
from within the cuff into the adjacent mucosal. This
typically requires a period of up to 60 minutes to
become effective. A significant limitation of this tech-
nique is that only tissue in contact with the cuff will
become anesthetized. Also, the injection and especially
the withdrawal of the solution is difficult and requires
specific attention to ensure an adequately deflated cuff
at extubation. Lidocaine can be topically injected via an
endotracheal tube in situ. The active administration of
topical agents in this fashion may induce coughing, if
the patient is not effectively anesthetized and immobil-
ized by neuromuscular blocking agents at the time of
injection. Using specifically designed laryngotracheal
instillation of topical anesthesia (LITA™) tubes (Sheri-
dan Catheter Corp, Argyle, NY) allows instillation
above and beyond the ETT cuff, as they are designed
to spray the solution in a circumferential fashion at
both sites via an integral port [25,26]. Another
Figure 13.5. This sagittal MRI scan
shows extensive posterior
nasopharyngeal surgical changes deep to
the CSF spaces, including a wide skull
base defect and resection of the body of
C1 and the Dens axis. The fat packing in
the defect appears as the lighter
triangular image. The extent of this
transnasal surgery clearly extends below
the hard palate to the top of the body of
C2, hidden from view behind the soft
palate but providing direct access to the
surgical site from the oropharynx.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
128
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012endotracheal tube type designed to provide low suction
immediately above the cuff to reduce silent aspiration of
secretions in long-term intubated patients (TaperGuard
EvacTM-MallenckrodtTM, Tyco HealthcareTM, Pleasan-
ton, CA, USA) can effect delivery above the cuff only.
Both provide for injectate delivery without manipulation
of the ETT or cuff. However, the injection of the solution
itself may still stimulate cough reflexes with either ETT,
producing movement and intrathoracic pressure
changes, unless a significant depth of anesthesia is
ensured. The cost of such specialty ETTs is also signifi-
cantly 3–4-times that of standard ETTs.
Standard ETTs can also be cost-effectively utilized
to effect application of topical anesthetics to the trach-
eal mucosa exterior to the ETT itself. This requires
injection of 2 –4% lidocaine under deep anesthesia or
complete neuromuscular blockade via the 90 /C14elbow
connecter, between the ETT and the circle system
[15,27]. The local anesthetic is very slowly injected
during a large tidal volume breath applied upon
deflation of the ETT cuff. Again, as the deflation of
any ETT can cause unwanted movement and
permit tracheal flow of pharyngeal secretions,
adequate anesthesia/paralytic dosing, as well as the
slow deflation of the ETT cuff with 5–10 mmHg PEEP,
contributes to akinetic patients during the procedure.
Typically 5 ml of solution is slowly injected directly
down the ETT after the onset of gas egress is heard. The
5 ml injection is timed to correspond to the continual
flow of the 3 liter positive-pressure breath emerging
around the ETT from the larynx. It is important to
ensure the liquid enters the ETT and not the circle
circuit. The instillation of lidocaine should be distrib-
uted across the complete breath volume and the effect
will reliably last 20 minutes from the time of instilla-
tion. The liquid solution adheres to the ETT surface via
surface tension and returns along the outside ETT
surface with the airflow. The ETT cuff is now reinflated
and the lidocaine is afforded 20 –30 seconds to take
effect, rapidly anesthetizing the trachea proximal to the
ETT tip. It is advantageous to place the ETT only as
deep as needed below the cords at intubation, to limit
the length of tracheal mucosa needed to be anesthe-
tized or the amount of lidocaine injected. Subsequent
to effective topical anesthesia application, the deep
anesthesia and/or neuromuscular blockade is reversed,
adequate spontaneous respiration is achieved and the
effectiveness of the topical agent can be assessed by
rapid deflation and immediate reinflation of the cuff
(“the Cuff test ”– a maneuver which reliably causes
coughing if anesthesia is inadequate). Failure of the
patient to adversely respond at sub-MAC concentra-
tions of volatile anesthetic with movement or any
change in respiration will now allow ETT removal
without concern for laryngospasm or agitation. Should
reaction be evident during the cuff test, a repeated
installation of an additional 5 ml of lidocaine is typic-
ally effective in the rare failure of a single application.
Alternately, if the cuff test results in reactions at 30
seconds post installation, ETT cuff reinflation and
repeat testing after an additional 30 seconds often
either allows complete redistribution of the lidocaine
or time for effective anesthesia to develop. Smokers or
individuals with thick tracheal secretions will benefit
from the higher (i.e., 4% lidocaine) concentration to
effectively penetrate to the mucosa. Reversal of neuro-
muscular blockade, discontinuing the volatile agents
with substitution of high-flow nitrous oxide and
allowing CO2 to rise toward 40 torr immediately after
the lidocaine instillation will facilitate both subsequent
rapid return of respiration and emergence.
Similarly, judicious use of intravenous narcotics
titrated to an adequate respiratory pattern at this
point will facilitate mitigation of any pain, coughing
or retching as long as respirations are ensured. In this
manner, patients can completely emerge under spon-
taneous respiration, while following complex com-
mands, to have the ETT removed in a very safe
manner. This method is particularly useful after pitu-
itary and cranial base surgeries where positive-
pressure ventilation, coughing, and hemodynamic
perturbations are noticeably undesirable. Effective
antiemetic administration contributes to minimal
retching and vomiting during emergence and post-
operatively. Dexamethasone may be requested by
some surgeons and should be administered early after
induction to avoid the rare syndrome of perineum
burning and provide time for this slow-onset drug to
become effective [28,29].
Complications
Please see Table 13.1.
Table 13.1. Complications of endoscopic sinus surgery
[2– 4,30– 32]
Minor complications include:
Nasolacrimal duct injury
Synechiae
Chapter 13: Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery
129
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Summary
Functional endoscopic sinus surgery is among
the most challenging of ENT procedures for a variety
of reasons, including the need for immobility, hemo-
stasis, and, especially, gentle emergence from anesthe-
sia. The use of total intravenous anesthesia is a
frequent anesthetic choice for these surgeries. One
particularly important aspect, perhaps more than the
kind of anesthetic administered, is the proper use of
nasal decongestant agents to reduce the likelihood of
intraoperative bleeding that would increase the diffi-
culty of the procedure. Finally, the importance of
antiemetic prophylaxis should not be forgotten.
Case Study
A 61 kg, 160 cm tall, 71-year-old female presented for
FESS after two previous ENT surgeries, a decade
previously, which concerned polyps. She now has
progressive airway congestion while using decongest-
ant and steroid therapy. Prior medical history
included tracheostomy placement (now healed), right
upper lobe resection, PEG tube placement and total
esophagectomy performed 1 year previously. She
exhibited an end cervical esophagostomy with neck-
ostomy pouch for secretion control and baseline BP
of 170/70. General anesthesia with endotracheal
intubation was chosen, as supraglottic airways may
have proved ineffective with absence of the upper
esophageal recess and potential air leak through
the cervical left lateral esophagostomy drainage.
Her intrathoracic airway was deviated by mediastinal
retraction rightward, but not compromised, as shown
in the roentgenogram (Figure 13.6).
Anesthesia was induced with propofol, fentanyl and
rocuronium for endotracheal intubation after preoxy-
genation. Manual mask ventilation led to distention of
the esophagostomy appliance prior to intubation,
which was then drained. The patient was positioned
with the head elevated 10–15/C14. Topical vasoconstriction
and local anesthetics were placed by the surgeon. Pro-
pofol and remifentanil were titrated with inhalational
50% N 2O in oxygen. Neuromuscular blockade was
maintained throughout. Systolic blood pressure was
controlled between 110 and 120 mmHg systolic (under
consideration of baseline pressures) with anesthetic
agents alone. Peak inspiratory pressures remained
below 20 mmHg. The repeat surgical ENT procedure
lasted less than 1 hour, incurring no measurable blood
loss. As the patient aroused to respond to her name, the
endotracheal tube was removed without coughing or
agitation. While initially breathing only on command,
she then resumed spontaneous respiration as residual
remifentanil effects dissipated. She received dexametha-
sone and ondansetron intraoperatively to prevent
nausea and recovered uneventfully.
Clinical pearls
/C15Functional endoscopic sinus surgery is among the
most challenging of ENT procedures for a variety of
reasons including the need for immobility,
hemostasis, and, especially, gentle emergence from
anesthesia. That said, no single anesthetic technique
will be optimal for any surgery in every patient.
/C15The optimization of the operative surgical visual
field can be accomplished through joint efforts of
both teams by avoiding hypertension or
facilitating appropriate moderate hypotension,
maintaining low heart rates, using local anesthetic
agents combined with topical or injected
vasoconstrictors, by positioning to optimize
drainage from the surgical field, and by good
surgical technique.
Table 13.1. (cont.)
Subcutaneous emphysema
Ostial stenosis or closure
Epiphoria
Anosmia
Minor bleeding
Major complications include:
Airway compromise due to uvula edema, clots, tissue
or packing debris
Invasion of the adjacent cortex/pituitary gland
Carotid, ethmoid artery invasion/bleeding
Cranial venous sinus thrombosis
Orbital hematoma and emphysema
Cerebrospinal fluid leak
Penetration into the brain, intracranial infection
Blindness, hemi- or bilateral, resulting from orbital
trauma or damage to the optic nerve
Hemorrhage requiring transfusions or surgical control
Death
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
130
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012/C15The use of supraglottic airways (SGA) over
endotracheal tubes (ETT) for simple sinus
surgeries appears advantageous, providing less
coughing intraoperatively and with emergence.
Contraindications to SGA use include patients
with increased risk of aspiration, or significant
obesity that makes ventilation difficult. Another
challenge with SGA use is that positive-pressure
ventilation via a SGA often results in
contamination of the OR with volatile anesthetic.
Endotracheal intubation and neuromuscular
blockade maximize intraoperative safety with
respect to aspiration and patient movement.
/C15Short corrugated airway extensions ( “Bennett
connectors”) or flexible LMA styles are preferred
by some surgeons to reduce protrusion and the
presence of airway tubing near the operative field.
/C15While many believe that TIVA is superior to
inhalational anesthetic in sinus surgery, it should be
noted that peripheral IV sites may be inaccessible
due to surgical positioning and occasionally
infiltrate, with interruption of IV anesthetic
delivery. While the use of EEG monitoring can help
confirm drug delivery, the presence of the electrodes
may become undesirable to many surgeons and may
interfere with the surgical navigation system.
Inhalational anesthetic agents can alternatively be
continually monitored along with ventilation,
thus ensuring appropriate delivery, anesthetic
depth, and ventilation.
/C15Passage of a suction catheter by the surgeon under
direct vision at the end of surgery is
recommended to remove any surgically
accumulated secretions and also to protect the
surgical site from injury.
/C15In the immediate post-sinus surgery period active
positive-pressure ventilation is avoided to prevent
gastric as well as intracranial air insufflation.
References
1. Maran AG. Endoscopic sinus
surgery. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol.
1994;251(6):309–18.
2. Maniglia AJ. Fatal and other major
complications of endoscopic sinus
surgery. Laryngoscope
1991;101:349–54.
3. Danielsen A, Gravningsbråten R,
Olofsson J. Anaesthesia in
endoscopic sinus surgery. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol 2003;260(9):
481–6.
4. Danielsen A, Olofsson J. Endoscopic
endonasal sinus surgery: a review of
18 years of practice and long-term
follow-up.Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
2006;263(12):1087–98.
5. Khalil HS, Nunez DA. Functional
endoscopic sinus surgery for
Figure 13.6. Roentgenogram shows
extensive postsurgical changes with
mediastinal and tracheal shift to right
after right upper lobectomy and
esophagectomy.
Chapter 13: Anesthesia for endoscopic sinus surgery
131
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012chronic rhinosinusitis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev . 2006 19;3:
CD004458. PMID:16856048.
6. Eberhart LH, Folz BJ, Wulf H,
Geldner G. Intravenous anesthesia
provides optimal surgical
conditions during microscopic and
endoscopic sinus surgery.
Laryngoscope 2003;113(8):1369–73.
7. Beule AG, Wilhelmi F, Kühnel TS,
Hansen E, Lackner KJ, Hosemann
W. Propofol versus sevoflurane:
bleeding in endoscopic sinus
surgery. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2007;136(1):45–50.
8. Wormald PJ, van Renen G, Perks J,
Jones JA, Langton-Hewer CD. The
effect of the total intravenous
anesthesia compared with
inhalational anesthesia on the surgical
field during endoscopic sinus surgery.
Am J Rhinol2005;19(5):514–20.
9. Atef A, Fawaz A. Comparison of
laryngeal mask with endotracheal
tube for anesthesia in endoscopic
sinus surgery. Am J Rhinol 2008;
22(6):653–7.
10. Gerlinger I, Lujber L, Jarai T, Pytel
J. KTP-532 laser-assisted
endoscopic nasal sinus surgery.
Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci 2003;
28(2):67–71.
11. Eichhorn KW, Bootz F. Clinical
requirements and possible
applications of robot assisted
endoscopy in skull base and sinus
surgery. Acta Neurochir Suppl
2011;109:237–40.
12. Parikh SR, Cuellar H, Sadoughi B,
Aroniadis O, Fried MP. Indications
for image-guidance in pediatric
sinonasal surgery. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol 2009;73(3):351–6.
13. Gilbey P, Kukuev Y, Samet A,
Talmon Y, Ivry S. The quality of
the surgical field during functional
endoscopic sinus surgery – the
effect of the mode of ventilation – a
randomized, prospective, double-
blind study. Laryngoscope 2009;
119(12):2449–53.
14. Kempen PM. Extubation in adult
patients: who, what, when, where,
how and why? J Clin Anesth
1999;11:441–44.
15. Ecklund J, Kempen PM. Consider
the use of lidocaine in the cuff of
the ETT, but be aware of the risks
and alternatives. In Marucci C,
Cohen NA, Metro DG, Kirsch JR,
eds. Avoiding Common Anesthesia
Errors. Philadelphia: Wolters
Kluwer. pp. 43 –8.
16. Rutka JT. Craniopharyngioma.
J Neurosurg 2002;97(1):1–2.
17. Snyderman CH, Kassam AB,
Carrau R, Mintz A. Endoscopic
reconstruction of cranial base
defects following endonasal skull
base surgery. Skull Base 2007;
17(1):73–8.
18. Nayak JV, Gardner PA, Vescan
AD, Carrau RL, Kassam AB,
Snyderman CH. Experience with
the expanded endonasal approach
for resection of the odontoid
process in rheumatoid disease. Am
J Rhinol . 2007 Sep-Oct; 21(5):
601–6.
19. Avidan MS, Jacobsohn E, Glick D,
et al. ; BAG-RECALL Research
Group. Prevention of
intraoperative awareness in a high-
risk surgical population. N Engl
J Med 2011;365(7):591–600.
20. Basu D, Haughey BH, Hartman
JM. Determinants of success in
endoscopic cerebrospinal fluid leak
repair. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2006;135(5):769–73.
21. Brockmann MA, Nowak G,
Reusche E, Russlies M, Petersen D.
Zebra sign: cerebellar bleeding
pattern characteristic of
cerebrospinal fluid loss. Case
report. J Neurosurg 2005;
102(6):1159–62.
22. Farag E, Abdou A, Riad I,
Borsellino SR, Schubert A.
Cerebellar hemorrhage caused by
cerebrospinal fluid leak after spine
surgery. Anesth Analg 2005;
100(2):545–6.
23. Friedman JA, Ecker RD, Piepgras
DG, Duke DA. Cerebellar
hemorrhage after spinal surgery:
report of two cases and literature
review. Neurosurgery 2002;50
(6):1361–3; discussion 1363 –4.
24. Mehta U, Huber TC, Sindwani R.
Patient expectations and recovery
following endoscopic sinus
surgery. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2006;134(3):483–7.
25. Gonzalez RM, Bjerke RJ,
Drobycki T, et al. Prevention of
endotracheal tube-induced
coughing during emergence from
general anesthesia. Anesth Analg
1994;79:792–5.
26. Diachun CA, Tunink BP,
Brock-Utne JG. Suppression of
cough during emergence from
general anesthesia: laryngotracheal
lidocaine through a modified
endotracheal tube. J Clin Anesth
2001;13(6):447–51.
27. Burton AW, Zornow MH.
Laryngotracheal lidocaine
administration.Anesthesiology
1997;87(1):185–6. Kempen PM:Reply
28. Neff SP, Stapelberg F, Warmington
A. Excruciating perineal pain after
intravenous dexamethasone.
Anaesth Intensive Care 2002;
30(3):370–1.
29. Steward DL, Grisel J, Meinzen-Derr
J. Steroids for improving recovery
following tonsillectomy in children.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2011 Aug 10;(8):CD003997.
30. Holden JP, Vaughan WC, Brock-
Utne JG. Airway complication
following functional endoscopic
sinus surgery. J Clin Anesth
2002;14(2):154–7.
31. Pepper JP, Wadhwa AK, Tsai F,
Shibuya T, Wong BJ. Cavernous
carotid injury during functional
endoscopic sinus surgery: case
presentations and guidelines for
optimal management. Am J Rhinol
2007;21(1):105–9.
32. Bhatti MT, Schmalfuss IM,
Mancuso AA. Orbital
complications of functional
endoscopic sinus surgery: MR and
CT findings. Clin Radiol 2005;
60(8):894–904.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
132
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:25:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.016
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 2
Chapter
14
Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
Anesthesia for transsphenoidal pituitary
surgery
Gazanfar Rahmathulla, Robert Weil and David E. Traul
Introduction
The transsphenoidal approach is a common surgical
technique utilized to perform resection of lesions
found in the sella turcica. In the early 1900s, the
transsphenoidal technique was promoted as a less
invasive and safer alternative to the transcranial
approach to pituitary tumors [1]. While the popular-
ity of the transsphenoidal approach fluctuated over
the next century, the modern advent of microsurgical
and endoscopic techniques has facilitated its present-
day acceptance as an attractive option for the resec-
tion of lesions in the sella region, including chordo-
mas, craniopharyngiomas, and pituitary tumors.
Surgical procedure
Transsphenoidal pituitary resection allows total, or
near-total, tumor removal with the goals of achieving
neuroendocrine remission as well as providing pituitary
fossa decompression. Generally, the transsphenoidal
approach to the sella region can be divided into two
techniques: (1) the sublabial approach involves an inci-
sion made beneath the upper lip into the gum and
subsequently through the septum and (2) the transnasal
approach involves dissection through the nasal cavity
wall using microsurgical or endoscopic instruments
inserted through the nostrils. With either approach,
insertion of a CSF drain in the lumbar region may be
used to manipulate CSF levels in order to optimize
surgical conditions. Injection of saline or air through
the drain and into the spinal column may help the lesion
descend into the surgical field. Additionally, opening of
the lumbar drain may help alleviate any CSF leakage
present postoperatively. After tumor removal, the integ-
rity of the sella is then reconstructed. Often a Valsalva
maneuver is performed to detect a CSF leak and, if
present, the sella is packed with an autologous fat graft
from the abdominal region. At our institution, the
endonasal technique is typically favored, with the sub-
labial approach reserved for patients in whom the trans-
nasal approach would be difficult or contraindicated
(e.g., a child with small nostrils).
Anesthetic management
The anesthetic management of patients undergoing
transsphenoidal resection of pituitary tumors requires
the anesthesiologist to not only consider the surgical
aspects of the procedure, but to also have a firm
understanding of the unique implications that the
underlying neuroendocrine pathology may have in
terms of their secondary effect on various body
systems. The majority of patients presenting for
transsphenoidal pituitary tumor resection will have a
non-functioning endocrine tumor producing symp-
toms of mass effect such as headache, nausea/
vomiting, or visual disturbances. Alternatively, some
patients will have some pituitary abnormality of
hypo- or hypersecretion warranting a thorough evalu-
ation by an endocrinologist prior to surgery. At our
institution roughly 60% of patients undergoing sur-
gery have a nonfunctional tumor (or express gonado-
tropins on immunohistochemical staining only).
Fifteen percent have acromegaly, 15% Cushing 's dis-
ease, 5% have prolactin-secreting tumors, and 5%
have a craniopharyngioma or Rathke 's cleft cyst.
Preoperative evaluation
As with any patient undergoing a neurosurgical pro-
cedure, a routine preoperative workup for transsphe-
noidal pituitary resection patients would include a
history and physical examination with emphasis on
the neurologic system. A full neurologic evaluation
that includes mental status, cranial nerve function,
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
133
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012motor and sensory testing, reflexes, and coordination
testing should be documented prior to surgery in order
to properly assess any postoperative deviations. Add-
itionally, any comorbidity such as cardiovascular dis-
ease, respiratory disease, or renal disease should be
adequately evaluated, with further testing completed
as warranted by the specific patient requirements. Pre-
vious surgeries and anesthetic experiences are import-
ant data prior to proceeding with surgery. Laboratory
work should include a complete blood count, basic
chemistry panel, and, if indicated, coagulation studies.
Neuroimaging with computerized tomography
(CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is essen-
tial for a differential diagnosis, to plan the surgical
approach, and to assess the configuration of the sphen-
oid sinus. MRI T 1-weighted images, with and without
intravenous contrast, define the anatomy of the sella
and the relationship of the lesion to the parasellar
structures, including the cavernous sinus and the
carotid arteries, and the optic chiasm. T 2-weighted
images help visualize cystic lesions within the sella.
Coronal images help define the location of the internal
carotid arteries, the distance between them, and the
presence of ectatic loops which to a substantial degree
the surgeon should be aware of prior to a transsphe-
noidal approach. CT scans are preferred to MR
imaging to define the three types of sphenoid sinus,
namely, presellar (partially), sellar (completely), and
conchal (solid) sinus, based on the degree of pneuma-
tization. It also helps define the location of the inter-
sphenoid septum to the sella and the location of its
insertion in relation to the carotid arteries, enabling
the surgeon to utilize knowledge of this anatomy to
maintain midline orientation during surgery.
Prior to surgery, a complete neuroendocrine evalu-
ation is required and should include a thyroid panel, as
well as serum levels of cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH), testosterone, follicle stimulating hor-
mone, luteinizing hormone, and prolactin. A pregnancy
test should be obtained in women of childbearing age.
Pre- and perioperative hormone replacement may be
indicated to medically optimize the patient prior to
undergoing transsphenoidal pituitary resection [2].
Nonfunctioning pituitary tumors
Patients with nonfunctioning pituitary tumors will
often present later in the course of the disease with
tumors larger than 1 cm (pituitary macroadenoma).
Patients with macroadenomas typically present with
headaches or signs of local cranial nerve compression
(visual disturbances). Rarely, these patients may have
signs of elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) that must
be taken into consideration during anesthetic man-
agement. The conditions of hypopituitarism, hypo-
thyroidism and adrenal insufficiency must also be
ruled out or managed with perioperative hormone
replacement in this subset of patients.
Functioning pituitary tumors
When the pituitary tumor is functional in nature, the
neuroendocrine workup will be essential in guiding
the evaluation of comorbidities secondary to the asso-
ciated endocrine dysfunction. Typically, a functioning
pituitary tumor is a single-cell-type tumor that pre-
sents with signs and symptoms associated with over-
production of the associated hormone. The clinical
condition associated with each type of functional
pituitary tumor requires special consideration.
Patients with acromegaly have overproduction of
growth hormone from the pituitary, and the secondary
effects of this hormone excess present a wide range of
challenges to the anesthesiologist. Acromegalic
patients express a characteristic phenotype, including
soft tissue and bony hypertrophy of the oral, pharyn-
geal, and laryngeal structures, which may narrow the
airway [3]. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is common
in acromegalic patients as well. Predictably, these char-
acteristics are a frequent cause of difficult tracheal
intubation [4], and require the immediate availability
of alternative ventilation and intubation tools prior to
the start of anesthesia induction. Cardiovascular dis-
turbances such as hypertension, conduction disorders,
cardiomegaly, and valvular disease are a major cause of
mortality and morbidity in acromegalic patients [5]
and appropriate cardiovascular workup, which must
include echocardiography, is essential. Diabetes melli-
tus is also associated with acromegaly and periopera-
tive blood glucose monitoring should be performed.
Cushing's disease is caused by the overproduction
of ACTH and has secondary effects on organ systems
important to the anesthesiologist. Ischemic heart dis-
ease, left ventricular hypertrophy, and systemic hyper-
tension are common [6] and represent a significant
cause of perioperative morbidity. Diabetes mellitus,
osteoporosis, skin fragility, and possible exophthalmos
are other common conditions associated with Cush-
ing's disease that demand attention in the operating
room. Cushingoid patients also have a higher body
mass index, with concomitant OSA, which may make
tracheal intubation unpredictable.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
134
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Prolactinomas are encountered more frequently in
woman than in men, and constitute the most fre-
quently encountered hyperfunctioning pituitary
adenoma in patients, although most do not undergo
transsphenoidal resection of the lesion. While hyper-
prolactinemia causes endocrine-related conditions in
both men and woman, the effects of these disorders
typically are not associated with specific concerns to
the anesthesiologist. Of note, medical therapy for
hyperprolactinemia may consist of the use of bromo-
criptine, a dopamine agonist, therefore warranting
careful use or avoidance of butyrophenone antie-
metics (i.e., droperidol).
Operative room setup and
procedural planning
The use of the fluoroscope (C-arm) to help localize
and direct the approach to the sphenoid sinus has
been gradually taken over by neuronavigation in most
modern operative neurosurgical units [7]. At the
authors' institution, the setup is such that the
patient's head is positioned slightly away from the
center of the room, away from the anesthesia team.
Neuronavigation is placed in front of the operating
surgeon to be more convenient to visualize the
approach at any point of time during surgery. The
surgical team usually stands to the right of the patient,
with the nurse and equipment at the foot end of the
operating table (Figure 14.1).
Intraoperative management
Tracheal intubation can be performed with a standard
endotracheal tube; however, some neurosurgeons may
prefer a reinforced tube or an oral RAE tube. Nasal
intubation should be avoided due to the nature of the
surgical approach. As mentioned previously, patients
Figure 14.1. Operating room organization. The patient is supine and the head is positioned slightly away from the center of the operating
room. The primary surgeon should stand to the right of the patient. Anesthesia team and equipment are placed on the left side of the patient
near the head. Neuronavigation is optimally placed to adequately visualize the localizing device, at the same time allowing easy
visualization for the main operator and assistant.
Chapter 14: Anesthesia for transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
135
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012with acromegaly or Cushing 's disease may be difficult
to ventilate and intubate, and alternative intubating
techniques such as awake fiberoptic intubation may
be indicated. Once intubated, securing the endotra-
cheal tube to the left side of the mouth, avoiding tape
over the upper lip, maximizes operating conditions for
the surgeon. The surgeon, to minimize drainage into
the oropharynx, often places a throat pack.
A second peripheral intravenous line is placed and
invasive blood pressure monitoring, typically via
radial artery catheterization, should be considered in
patients with coexisting heart disease, or with poorly
controlled hypertension. A central venous line is not
necessary in most patients with adequate peripheral
access unless indicated by the presence of cardiovas-
cular comorbidity in the patient.
After intubation, in order to decrease the amount
of bleeding and to optimize surgical conditions, the
surgeon preps the nasal mucosa using a combination
of local anesthetic and a vasoconstrictive agent such
as phenylephrine or epinephrine. Although systemic
absorption of these agents is usually minimal, inad-
vertent intravascular injection of these agents may
result in cardiac arrhythmias or severe hypertension
[8,9]. Therefore, vigilant monitoring of EKG and
blood pressure is important during this phase of the
procedure. The use of non-selective b-blockers to
treat the hypertension may result in unopposed alpha
activity of epinephrine, thereby worsening the hyper-
tension. In such cases, phentolamine or a direct-
acting vasodilator may be required.
Positioning of the patient supine with the upper
torso elevated helps facilitate venous return from the
head. While this semi-seated position may increase
the risk of venous air embolism (VAE), the angle of
head elevation is usually not severe enough to warrant
placement of intracardiac air detection devices such as
transesophageal echo or precordial Doppler. At our
institution, Mayfield pins position the patient 's head
with the neck slightly extended and turned to the
right, allowing adequate space for midline approach
by a right-handed surgeon. The anesthesia circuit is
then secured down the left side of the patient, antici-
pating access to the right abdominal area for fat graft
harvesting. Careful arrangement of peripheral intra-
venous lines, monitoring wires and the anesthesia
breathing circuit prior to draping is required to allow
unhindered access to the patient 's head.
The goals of anesthetic management for transsphe-
noidal pituitary resection include the maintenance of
hemodynamic stability, optimization of surgical con-
ditions, sustaining cerebral perfusion and oxygen-
ation, and rapid emergence. Specific challenges to
these goals inherent to the transsphenoidal approach
include increased stimulation as compared to the tran-
scranial approach and the critical nature of immobility
of the patient due to the proximity of the brain tissue
and neurovasculature to the surgical field. An inhaled
volatile-agent-based maintenance plan with muscle
paralysis and intravenous titration of short-acting
opioids will often provide adequate surgical condi-
tions. However, in some patients the associated
increase in CSF pressure from inhaled agents may be
undesirable [10,11]. Total intravenous anesthesia regi-
mens consisting of propofol and opioid infusions with
muscle paralysis avoid the increase in CSF pressure
seen with inhaled gas-based techniques while provid-
ing acceptable surgical conditions [12]. Frequently, we
use an inhaled gas with low solubility (sevoflurane)
combined with an opioid infusion such as remifenta-
nil. The use of remifentanil allows rapid emergence
while providing hemodynamic stability during the
operation [13]. Alternative narcotic infusions used
include fentanyl infusion 2 mg/kg/h or sufentanil infu-
sion 0.4 mg/kg/h, which have provided clinically appar-
ent smooth emergence from anesthesia
At the end of the procedure, insertion of nasal
packing by the surgeon aids in hemostasis and helps
prevent oozing of fluids into the oropharynx. Prior to
extubation, meticulous suctioning of the oropharynx
is performed. If a sublabial approach is necessary, the
surgeon may perform suctioning of the oropharynx
under direct visualization. Extubation should proceed
once the patient meets extubation criteria. To prevent
coughing that might lead to dislodgement of the
packing material, low-dose remifentanil infusion or
lidocaine bolus (0.5 mg/kg) intravenously may be used
immediately before extubation. Once extubated, the
patient receives supplemental oxygen via a simple
mask. Due to the nasal packing, positive-pressure ven-
tilation through a mask should be avoided. The use of
an oral airway may be required for patients with OSA.
In patients who do not require preoperative glucocor-
ticoid replacement therapy, strict avoidance of
perioperative corticosteroids is practiced in order to
preserve the validity of postoperative hypothalamic –
pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis testing. Pre-emergence
administration of a 5HT-3 receptor antagonist or
butyrophenones is used to prevent nausea/vomiting
and is based on patient risk factors.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
136
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Postoperative/recovery
Patients undergoing transsphenoidal pituitary resec-
tion should be observed in the post-anesthesia care
unit by personnel trained to perform an accurate
screening of the patient 's neurologic system, includ-
ing careful assessment of cranial nerve function. Due
to the proximity of the cranial nerves II –VI to the
pituitary region, any postoperative visual field deficits
or extraocular motility dysfunction should be
reported to the surgical team for consideration of
immediate postoperative brain imaging or possible
re-exploration under general anesthesia. Excessive
rhinorrhea should prompt investigation of a possible
CSF leak, especially when accompanied by headache.
Opioids or nonsteroidal drugs are used to treat inci-
sion pain associated with transsphenoidal resections,
but narcotics should be titrated carefully in a patient
with OSA.
After transsphenoidal pituitary resection, most
patients remain in the hospital for 24 –48 hours for
continued monitoring of neurologic status and for the
required postoperative testing of endocrine function.
Although nearly all patients with normal HPA axis
function preoperatively do not require postoperative
hormone replacement [14], all patients should be
screened for hypopituitarism after tumor removal.
At our institution, a morning total serum cortisol
level above 15 mg/dl postoperatively is used as a pre-
dictor of normal HPA axis function [15,16]. In add-
ition to pituitary function studies, all patients are
monitored for disorders of water imbalance.
Diabetes insipidus (DI) can occur after transsphenoi-
dal pituitary resection and, although usually transient,
may require administration of desmopressin
(DDAVP). Alternatively, the syndrome of inappropri-
ate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) may
develop spontaneously after surgery or by excessive
use of exogenous DDAVP. Hyponatremia associated
with SIADH may require treatment with free-water
restriction or, if severe, hypertonic saline can be used
for treatment.
Complications
Potential complications of the transsphenoidal
approach to pituitary tumors can be classified as
shown in Table 14.1 [17,18]. With an experienced
surgeon, transsphenoidal pituitary resection is a safe
and effective treatment for pituitary tumors and major
complications are uncommon. While the potential risk
of a VAE is increased with a semi-sitting patient,
reports of VAE during transsphenoidal surgery are
rare [21]. Minimal blood loss is expected during most
transsphenoidal pituitary resections; however, the
proximity of the lesion to the internal carotid artery
(ICA) in some patients can facilitate inadvertent punc-
ture of the vessel, leading to significant blood loss [22].
Hemorrhage due to rupture of the ICA can usually be
controlled by direct compression or with a muscle
graft. Deliberate hypotension may be needed for sutur-
ing of the neurovasculature. Persistent CSF leaks
following surgery are uncommon but have the poten-
tial to cause severe headaches, meningitis [23], symp-
tomatic pneumocephalus [24] and death.
Summary
Transsphenoidal pituitary resection is a common sur-
gical procedure that offers unique challenges to the
anesthesiologist. The heterogeneity of the patient
population and their medical condition requires a
fundamental knowledge of the nature of pituitary
disease and management. Understanding the specific
demands of the surgical technique allows the anesthe-
sia provider to facilitate the procedure and increase
the efficacy of the intervention. Additionally, predict-
ing and managing the peri- and postoperative compli-
cations allows the anesthesiologist to maximize the
safety of the patient.
Table 14.1. Potential complications of the transsphenoidal approach
Anesthetic/perioperative (2.8%)
Local nasal/sinus complications [19] Septal perforations [20] (6.7%), epistaxis (3.4%), sinusitis (8.5%)
Intrasellar/parasellar CSF leak (3.9%), meningitis (1.5%), carotid artery injury (1.1%)
Neurological Vision loss (1.8%), ophthalmoplegia (1.4%), CNS injury (1.3%)
Endocrinological Pituitary insufficiency (19.4%), diabetes insipidus (17.8%)
Chapter 14: Anesthesia for transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
137
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Case study
A 46-year-old man complaining of difficulty sleeping
was diagnosed with a pituitary lesion found inciden-
tally on brain MRI performed during workup of
suspected central sleep apnea. Further questioning
revealed intermittent visual disturbances described as
partial loss of visual fields but the patient was unsure
whether the symptom was bilateral or unilateral. His
past medical history was otherwise normal except for
borderline hypertension. He had arthroscopic surgery
on both knees and on his left shoulder without any
general anesthesia complications. Family history was
notable for Huntington's disease in his paternal grand-
mother and aunt. Physical exam revealed blood pres-
sure of 138/97; pulse 58; weight 106 kg; and height
1.87 m. The rest of the physical exam was unremark-
able. Laboratory workup including complete blood
count and chemistry panel was normal except for
elevated serum glucose of 158 mg/dl. Serum levels of
TSH, GH, LH, FSH, and ACTH were all within normal
range. A 24-hour urinary cortisol level was elevated at
78 mg. Visual field testing performed 1 month previ-
ously revealed superior bitemporal hemianopsia.
A brain MRI showed a 27 /C222 /C220 mm 3 sellar and
suprasellar lesion with optic nerve compression con-
sistent with pituitary adenoma. It was believed a trans-
nasal transsphenoidal resection of pituitary adenoma
was his best option.
On the day of surgery, the patient was brought
to the operating room with an 18-gauge peripheral
IV. The patient was positioned supine on the operat-
ing table and standard ASA monitors were placed.
Induction of anesthesia was performed with lidocaine
50 mg, propofol 200 mg, rocuronium 80 mg,
and fentanyl 100 mg intravenously. A 7.5 mm cuffed
endotracheal tube was positioned under direct
laryngoscopy without difficulty. The nasal mucosa
was infiltrated with 2% lidocaine and epinephrine
(1:100 000) for local anesthesia and hemostasis.
Figure 14.2. Patient positioning. View of the patient from the right (surgical team) side. The patient 's head is positioned with about
15/C14rotation to the right and slight extension, being fixed in a Mayfield head holder. This facilitates access to the surgical site by the
right-handed surgeon.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
138
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012A left radial arterial line was placed as was an add-
itional 18-gauge peripheral IV. The patient 's head was
secured in a Mayfield clamp, and then placed in a semi-
seated position with the neck slightly extended and
rotated to the right (Figures 14.2 and 14.3). The
patient's arms were tucked and a warm air blanket
was positioned over the patient's lower torso, allowing
room for a possible abdominal fat graft. The chest was
covered with blankets, and a skin temperature probe
was placed in the left axilla. The anesthesia machine
was positioned to the patient 's left, allowing the
surgeon full access to the head. Surgical instruments
were located towards the patient 's feet to ensure
adequate access to the patient by the operating micro-
scope, frameless stereotaxic equipment, and, if needed,
a fluoroscopy machine (Figure 14.4).
Anesthesia maintenance with 0.5 MAC sevoflur-
ane and remifentanil infusion (0.05 –0.2 mg/kg/min)
was used and adjusted to maintain adequate cerebral
perfusion pressure in accordance with the patient 's
blood pressure. Muscle paralysis was maintained with
periodic boluses of rocuronium. An ABG was ana-
lyzed 1 hour after surgical start time to monitor the
patient's blood count and chemistry values including
serum glucose, which was 130 mg/dl. The surgery
proceeded uneventfully, and 30 min prior to the end
of surgery 4 mg of ondansetron was administered IV.
After closure of the surgical site, the sevoflurane was
discontinued and remifentanil continued at 0.05 mg/
kg/min. Neostigmine 4 mg and glycopyrrolate 0.8 mg
were administered for reversal of neuromuscular
blockade and the patient was extubated after
following commands of hand squeezing and demon-
strating protective airway reflexes. The remifentanil
infusion was discontinued. The patient was admitted
to the recovery room and frequent neurological
checks revealed no abnormalities in cranial nerve
function. Postoperative serum studies including com-
plete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel
were normal. He was discharged to the neurosurgical
floor after 2 hours of recovery room monitoring. On
the first postoperative day, his morning serum
Figure 14.3. Patient positioning. View of the same patient in Figure 14.1 as seen from the left (anesthesia) side. The anesthesia circuit is
secured to the left side of the patient to allow access for possible abdominal fat graft harvesting on the side of the surgical team.
Chapter 14: Anesthesia for transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
139
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012cortisol level was 46.6 mg/dl; having passed his pre-
operative ACTH stimulation test and with adequate
level > 15 mg/dl on postoperative day one, supple-
mental adrenal steroids were not indicated [16]. The
patient complained of mild head pain, which was
improved with oral pain medication. There was no
evidence of diabetes insipidus (DI). He was dis-
charged home on the evening of postoperative day
one with scheduled follow-up in an outpatient neuro-
surgery clinic, where repeat endocrinological studies,
including an ACTH stimulation test, were normal.
Clinical pearls
/C15Two transsphenoidal approaches to the sella
region exist: (1) a sublabial approach that involves
an incision made beneath the upper lip into the
gum and subsequently through the septum and
(2) a transnasal approach involving dissection
through the nasal cavity wall using instruments
inserted through the nostrils.
/C15Insertion of a CSF drain in the lumbar region may
be used to manipulate CSF levels in order to
optimize surgical conditions. Injection of saline or
air through the drain and into the spinal column
may help the lesion descend into the surgical field.
/C15The majority of patients presenting for
transsphenoidal pituitary tumor resection will
have a nonfunctioning endocrine tumor
producing mass effect symptoms such as
headache, nausea/vomiting, or visual
disturbances. Alternatively, some patients will
have some pituitary abnormality of hypo- or
hypersecretion warranting an evaluation by an
endocrinologist.
/C15A neurologic evaluation that includes mental
status, cranial nerve function, motor and sensory
testing, reflexes, and coordination testing should
Instrument table
Suction / Cautery
Microscope
Surgeon
Assistant
Frameless navigation
Anesthesiologist
Scrub nurse
Figure 14.4. Operating room
organization. With the patient properly
positioned, the nursing team and
instrument table are placed near the
patient's feet to provide the ability for the
microscope, frameless navigation system
and possibly fluoroscopy to access the
head. Reprinted with permission,
Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
140
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012be documented prior to surgery in order to
properly assess any postoperative deviations.
/C15Acromegalic patients have soft tissue and bony
hypertrophy of the oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal
structures, which may narrow the airway. OSA is
common in acromegalic patients as well.
Predictably, these characteristics are a frequent
cause of difficult tracheal intubation.
/C15The goals of anesthetic management for
transsphenoidal pituitary resection include the
maintenance of hemodynamic stability,
optimization of surgical conditions, sustaining
cerebral perfusion and oxygenation, and smooth
emergence.
/C15In patients who do not require preoperative
glucocorticoid replacement therapy, strict
avoidance of perioperative corticosteroids is
practiced in order to preserve the validity of
postoperative hypothalamic –pituitary–adrenal
(HPA) axis testing.
/C15Due to the proximity of the cranial nerves II –VI to
the pituitary region, any postoperative visual
field deficits or extraocular motility dysfunction
should be reported to the surgical team for
consideration of immediate postoperative brain
imaging or possible re-exploration under general
anesthesia. Excessive rhinorrhea should prompt
investigation of a possible CSF leak.
/C15Diabetes insipidus (DI) can occur after
transsphenoidal pituitary resection and, although
usually transient, may require administration of
desmopressin (DDAVP). Alternatively, the
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH) may develop spontaneously
after surgery or by excessive use of exogenous
DDAVP.
References
1. Lanzino G. Transsphenoidal
approach to lesions of the sella
turcica: historical overview.
Barrow Q 2002;18(3).
2. Inder WJ, Hunt PJ.
Glucocorticoid replacement in
pituitary surgery: guidelines for
perioperative assessment and
management. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2002;87(6):2745–50.
3. Seidman PA, Kofke WA, Policare
R, Young M. Anaesthetic
complications of acromegaly. Br
J Anaesth 2000;84(2):179–82.
4. Schmitt H, Buchfelder M,
Radespiel-Troger M, Fahlbusch R.
Difficult intubation in
acromegalic patients: incidence
and predictability. Anesthesiology
2000;93(1):110–4.
5. Rajasoorya C, Holdaway IM,
Wrightson P, Scott DJ, Ibbertson
HK. Determinants of clinical
outcome and survival in
acromegaly. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
1994;41(1):95–102.
6. Arnaldi G, Angeli A, Atkinson
AB, et al. Diagnosis and
complications of Cushing 's
syndrome: a consensus statement.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;
88(12):5593–602.
7. Kaye AH, Black PML. Operative
Neurosurgery. London: Churchill
Livingstone; 2000.
8. Pasternak JJ, Atkinson JL,
Kasperbauer JL, Lanier WL.
Hemodynamic responses to
epinephrine-containing local
anesthetic injection and to
emergence from general
anesthesia in transsphenoidal
hypophysectomy patients.
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2004;
16(3):189–95.
9. Chelliah YR, Manninen PH.
Hazards of epinephrine in
transsphenoidal pituitary surgery.
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 2002;
14(1):43–6.
10. Talke P, Caldwell J, Dodsont B,
Richardson CA. Desflurane and
isoflurane increase lumbar
cerebrospinal fluid pressure in
normocapnic patients undergoing
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy.
Anesthesiology 1996;85(5):
999–1004.
11. Talke P, Caldwell JE, Richardson
CA. Sevoflurane increases lumbar
cerebrospinal fluid pressure in
normocapnic patients undergoing
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy.
Anesthesiology 1999;91(1):127–30.
12. Cafiero T, Cavallo LM, Frangiosa
A, et al. Clinical comparison of
remifentanil-sevoflurane vs.
remifentanil-propofol for
endoscopic endonasal
transphenoidal surgery. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2007;24(5):441–6.
13. Gemma M, Tommasino C,
Cozzi S, et al. Remifentanil
provides hemodynamic stability
and faster awakening time in
transsphenoidal surgery. Anesth
Analg 2002;94(1):163–8.
14. Jane JA Jr, Laws ER Jr. The
surgical management of pituitary
adenomas in a series of 3,093
patients. J Am Coll Surg 2001;
193(6):651–9.
15. Marko NF, Gonugunta VA,
Hamrahian AH, et al . Use of
morning serum cortisol level after
transsphenoidal resection of
pituitary adenoma to predict the
need for long-term glucocorticoid
supplementation. J Neurosurg
2009;111(3):540–4.
16. Marko NF, Hamrahian AH,
Weil RJ. Immediate postoperative
cortisol levels accurately
predict postoperative
Chapter 14: Anesthesia for transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
141
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis function after
transsphenoidal surgery for
pituitary tumors. Pituitary
[Research Support, Non-U.S.
Gov't] 2010;13(3):249–55.
17. Ciric I, Ragin A, Baumgartner C,
Pierce D. Complications of
transsphenoidal surgery: results of
a national survey, review of the
literature, and personal experience.
Neurosurgery [Research Support,
Non-U.S. Gov'tR e v i e w ]1997;40
(2):225–36; discussion 236–7.
18. Black PM, Zervas NT, Candia GL.
Incidence and management of
complications of transsphenoidal
operation for pituitary adenomas.
Neurosurgery 1987;20(6):
920–4.
19. Nabe-Nielsen J. Nasal
complication after
transsphenoidal surgery for
pituitary pathologies. Acta
Neurochir (Wien) [Research
Support, Non-U.S. Gov 't] 1989;
96(3–4):122–5.
20. Sherwen PJ, Patterson WJ, Griesdale
D E .T r a n s s e p t a l ,t r a n s s p h e n o i d a l
surgery: a subjective and objective
analysis of results.JO t o l a r y n g o l
1986;15(3):155–60.
21. Arora R, Chablani D, Rath GP,
Prabhakar H. Pulmonary oedema
following venous air embolism
during transsphenoidal pituitary
surgery. Acta Neurochir (Wien)
2007;149(11):1177–8.
22. Fukushima T, Maroon JC. Repair
of carotid artery perforations
during transsphenoidal surgery.
Surg Neurol 1998;50(2):
174–7.
23. Kaptain GJ, Kanter AS, Hamilton
DK, Laws ER. Management and
implications of intraoperative
cerebrospinal fluid leak in
transnasoseptal transsphenoidal
microsurgery. Neurosurgery
2011;68(1 Suppl Operative):
144–50; discussion 150 –1.
24. Rao G, Apfelbaum RI.
Symptomatic pneumocephalus
occurring years after
transphenoidal surgery and
radiation therapy for an invasive
pituitary tumor: a case report
and review of the literature.
Pituitary [Case Reports Review]
2003;6(1):49–52.
Section 2: Anesthesia for nasal, sinus and pituitary surgery
142
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:28:54 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.017
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
15
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for neck dissection
and laryngectomy
David W. Healy and Carol R. Bradford
Introduction/background
Cancers of the aerodigestive system are rare. Each
year they account for 2.5% of the new cases of cancer
in North America [1]. Of these, there are approxi-
mately 3560 new cases of laryngeal cancer. Squamous
cell carcinoma is the most common type. The major
risk factors for the development of laryngeal cancers
are tobacco and alcohol use, acting synergistically to
increase the risk of cancer [2]. The 5 year survival rate
for laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma is 64% [3].
Mortality has remained largely unchanged over
the past 20 years [1], with some authorities reporting
a decline in survival [3], occurring despite improve-
ment in surgical techniques, supplemented by peri-
operative chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Recent
research has focused on molecular biology to provide
new treatment options and target therapy.
The terms neck dissection and laryngectomy
describe a wide variety of surgical procedures that
attempt to remove a cancer and its main route of
spread. The extent of a given procedure is dictated
by the extent of the cancer. Neck dissection is com-
monly performed in the treatment of different
cancers of the head and neck to remove metastatic
tumor deposits and the route of spread. Balancing
anesthesia for the surgical requirements of these pro-
cedures can be a significant challenge.
Surgical procedures
The treatment of laryngeal cancer has three primary
goals:
1. Tumor removal.
2. Prevention of spread and recurrence
3. Preservation of organ function (phonation and
swallowing) if possible.
Partial laryngectomy
Partial laryngectomy is performed in an attempt to
remove the tumor but preserve the organ or its func-
tion [4]. Limited disease may also be treated by laser
and microsurgery.
Total laryngectomy
Total laryngectomy is the removal of the larynx in its
entirety. A tracheal stoma is formed by bringing the
cut end of the trachea to the neck surface. The trachea
is therefore independent of the esophagus, which
remains in continuity with the oral cavity and phar-
ynx. During the procedure a perforation is made
between the trachea and esophagus (tracheoesopha-
geal puncture – TEP) to allow later placement of a
voice prosthesis. The prosthesis allows air to pass into
the pharynx and oral cavity when the tracheal stoma
is occluded, thereby allowing the maintenance of
voice. It consists of a one-way valve, preventing secre-
tions and food soiling the trachea and respiratory
tract (Figure 15.1). Occasionally the procedure is sup-
plemented with microvascular free tissue transfer (see
Chapter 14), which may be required for pharyngeal
reconstruction after laryngo-pharyngectomy or in an
attempt to prevent cutaneous fistula formation due to
poor tissue quality after chemo-radiation.
Neck dissection
Neck dissection is commonly performed during lar-
yngectomy for cancer to prevent and treat any local
spread of the primary disease.
The lymph nodes of the neck are divided into six
main levels [5], which are further subdivided according
to the degree of metastatic spread (Figure 15.2).
The extent of a neck dissection can be described
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
143
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012according to the number of lymph node levels dis-
sected and removed, and the degree of removal of
additional structures. The procedure is termed select-
ive when the contents of a limited lymph level or
levels are removed, or radical when all lymph nodes
and some additional structures (spinal accessory
nerve, internal jugular vein, and sternocleidomastoid
muscle) are removed. The procedure is said to be
modified when something less than the radical neck
dissection is performed, but more extensive than the
purely selective neck dissection.
Anesthetic management
Preoperative evaluation
A careful airway evaluation is an essential part of
preparation for a patient undergoing laryngectomy
with neck dissection. A history of previous difficult
direct laryngoscopy and intubation should be sought,
and must be considered in light of more recent
changes to the airway due to pathology or treatment.
For example, preoperative radiation may have been
used to shrink the tumor and reduce metastatic
spread. Neck radiation changes can make airway
management difficult as its presence is an independ-
ent predictor of failure for both bag-mask ventilation
and Glidescope intubation [6,7]. The assessment
should be supplemented by nasendoscopy, performed
in clinic by the otolaryngologist, as well as neck com-
puterized tomography (CT) findings where available.
If the airway findings are unfavorable a method of
intubation maintaing spontaneous ventilation is rec-
ommended [8]. During assessment, consideration of
an awake tracheostomy should always be given. The
performance of an awake tracheostomy decision
should be made during discussion between the oto-
laryngologist and the anesthesiologist with consider-
ation given to any symptoms of airway obstruction,
tumor location, and appearance on nasendoscopy.
For example, a friable, invasive tumor, located above
or within the glottis, with symptoms of airway
obstruction will usually be managed with awake
tracheostomy. If intubation from above is considered,
one method is to perform awake fiberoptic intub-
ation; however, other methods such as awake video-
laryngoscopy (Glidescope ™, Airtraq ™, Pentax
AWS™) have been described in this setting [9 –11].
Deep inhalation anesthesia with standard direct lar-
yngoscopy is yet another option.
Patients with head and neck cancer are frequently
elderly and often have comorbidites associated
with tobacco and alcohol ingestion. All patients should
have a cardiac workup guided by symptomatology and
functional capacity. Regarding overall cardiovascular
assessment, major head and neck surgery is classified
as intermediate-risk surgery (1–5% risk of preoperative
myocardial infarction or death) according to the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines [12]. The presence
of active cardiac conditions, cardiac risk factors,
and level of functional capacity should guide further
preoperative cardiac investigations. A baseline electro-
cardiogram is often performed. In general it is advisable
for patients to continue their daily b-blocker and
withhold ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor
blockers (ARBs) on the day of surgery [13].
Pharynx
Epiglottis
Vocal folds
Larynx
Trachea Shunt valve
Tracheostoma
Esophagus
Pharyngo-esophageal
 segment
(b)(a) Figure 15.1. Sagittal section of the
head and neck region (a) before
laryngectomy, and (b) after laryngectomy
with a shunt valve placed in the wall
between the trachea and esophagus.
Reproduced with kind permission from
Springer Science and Business Media:
Annals of Biomedical Engineering 2006;34:
1897, Tack, J.W. Figure 15.1. All rights
reserved.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
144
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is associated
with smoking. A complete history should be taken
looking for any recent breathing difficulty, precipitating
factors of dyspnea, b-agonist reversibility, and recent
episodes of infection (increasing symptoms with
sputum). The goal is optimization of their current
respiratory condition and avoidance of complications
(worsening symptoms, infection, or respiratory failure).
Nutritional status is extremely important as the
patient's intake may be limited in the period before
surgery. This should be optimized by dietician advice
before surgery and may require supplementation by
enteral feed (via a small-bore feeding tube) in the
perioperative period.
Patients should be instructed in the use of a
patient-controlled analgesia device (PCA) before
surgery. Methods of communication (especially
regarding pain, nausea, and comfort) should be
discussed and practiced before surgery as the patient
may be without a voice for a variable period of time.
A blood sample for a blood type and antibody
screen should be sent from the preoperative area, for
instance during initial IV access. If antibodies are
detected two units of blood should be cross-matched
immediately. If blood can be made available and
delivered to the operating room within 30 minutes,
a cross-match is not required if significant antibody
interactions are absent from the initial screen.
Intraoperative management
Access and monitoring
Intravenous access should occur in the preoperative
area and a blood sample sent for a CBC and cross-
match. Other blood tests should be guided by patient
morbidity and drug history.
Standard monitoring is commenced with an add-
itional five-lead electrocardiogram.
The decision to place an arterial line, before
induction of anesthesia, should be guided by the
patient's comorbidities. Surgical requirements do
not necessitate it to be placed before induction.
Anesthesia is induced through a small IV
(18 gauge) then a large bore IV is placed after induc-
tion. The practice preference of the author for the
second IV access line is to place a 14-gauge IV in
the lower limb saphenous vein; however, others place
a large IV in the upper limb.
For deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis a pneu-
matic intermittent calf compression is commenced
before induction and a subcutaneous dose of heparin
is often given.
Induction and maintenance
For an asleep intubation technique we induce with
propofol and fentanyl, and give an intermediate-
acting neuromuscular blocking agent (vecuronium).
Nerve function monitoring is required later in the
case during neck dissection; however, neuromuscular
blockade is useful at the beginning of the procedure.
We check neuromuscular function with a neuromus-
cular twitch monitor before dosing vecuronium to
ensure correct lead placement.
Anesthesia is maintained with inhaled isoflurane (or
any other inhalational anesthetic). Intense analgesia or
deep inhalational anesthesia is required to allow the
return of neuromuscular function as the surgeons start
IIBIA
IIA
III
VA
IV
VI
VII
VB
IB
Figure 15.2. Anatomic diagram of the neck depicting the
boundaries of the six neck levels and three neck sub-levels.
Reproduced with permission from the Archives of Otolaryngology
Head and Neck Surgery 134(5); 536– 8, 2008. my self © 2008
American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Chapter 15: Anesthesia for neck dissection and laryngectomy
145
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the neck dissection phase of the procedure. Potent
opioid infusions (e.g., remifentanil or sufentanil) are
beneficial to maintain a constant depth of adequate
analgesia with a standard depth of inhaled anesthesia.
Another method to allow the return of neuromuscular
function is the “single agent technique ” where deep
sedation using high concentrations of inhalational
anesthesia is used. Intravenous anesthesia with propofol
is another option but can accumulate during long
surgeries. A balanced anesthetic technique is preferable
to deep inhalational anesthetic or total intravenous
anesthetic (propofol) techniques; to avoid the hypo-
tension associated with the latter two techniques.
An estimate of filling pressure to guide fluid bal-
ance is important. At The University of Michigan we
use the systolic pressure variation of the arterial line
tracing to help guide fluid replacement [14]. Alterna-
tively a central line, at a different location from the
neck dissection, may be placed after a consideration
of risk –benefit. We use crystalloid to replace the
preoperative fasting deficit, followed by a combin-
ation of colloid (starch) and crystalloid to replace
losses. The hematocrit is monitored with intermittent
arterial blood gas measurements. Of note, excessive
crystalloid administration should be avoided as it may
lead to swelling of the operative site.
A tracheostomy is performed by the surgeons at
the beginning of the case; an appropriately sized
armored endotracheal tube should be available in
the surgical field.
The patient is then often turned 180 /C14 from the
anesthesia machine. Care must be taken to ensure
that all monitors and infusion lines make the turn
intact. There are many methods to ensure success,
and these are best taught under instruction in the
operating room.
Emergence
The prime goals at emergence from anesthesia in any
head and neck case should be the provision of adequate
analgesia, cardiovascular stability, and the prevention
of coughing. If using a short-acting opioid infusion for
the case, such as remifentanil, extra longer-acting
opioid (e.g., morphine) should be given in good
time to be active at extubation and continued as
required through the immediate recovery period.
Alternatively the patient may emerge on a low-dose
opioid infusion (e.g., remifentanil) allowing a gradual
return of spontaneous ventilation. Supplemental opioid
analgesia is then provided in the post-anesthesia
care unit (PACU).
Extubation is relatively simple, removing the
endotracheal tube from the tracheal stoma (the end
of the trachea brought out to the anterior neck) once
spontaneous ventilation is well established with an
adequate minute volume. This should occur after
the patient has been turned back 180 /C14 with the head
near the anesthesia machine. An oxygen face mask is
placed around the neck to deliver supplemental
oxygen during emergence.
Postoperative/recovery
The patient should be transferred to the PACU with
supplemental oxygen and portable pulse oximetry.
Full monitoring should be quickly resumed, and
attention paid to adequacy of ventilation and
oxygenation.
Humidified oxygen should be supplied via a
tracheostomy mask. A PCA should be provided.
Communication via a pick board or writing paper
should be focused on eliciting any evidence of pain
or distress to allow expeditious treatment.
Care is then transferred to either the ICU or step-
down unit as the patient will generally not require
ventilatory support, but will require care of the fresh
tracheal stoma.
Complications
Major:
/C15 respiratory failure
/C15 myocardial ischemia
/C15 pulmonary embolus secondary to deep vein
thrombosis
/C15 nerve injury (dependent upon extent of neck
dissection); most commonly accessory nerve to
trapezius
/C15 hematoma formation; may be precipitated by
coughing or hypertension at emergence
Summary
The terms neck dissection and laryngectomy describe
a wide variety of surgical procedures that attempt to
remove a cancer and its main route of spread. The
extent of procedures is dictated by the extent of the
cancer. Similarly, the anesthetic care of patients
undergoing such procedures can involve a wide var-
iety of techniques, the key features of which should
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
146
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012be: careful assessment and management of the airway;
management of co-morbidities associated with
smoking, alcohol and aging; and a technique that
facilitates the return of neuromuscular function
during the neck dissection with the goal being the
prevention of surgical nerve injury.
Case study
Description
The patient is a 52-year-old male, 5 01100 (180 cm) in
height, weighing 258 lbs (117 kg), with a history of
coronary artery disease (drug-eluting stent placed in
LAD artery 2 years prior to the scheduled surgery),
hypertension, and multiple sclerosis. He has a remote
history of pancreatitis secondary to alcohol 10 years
previously; 20 pack year smoking history.
Current medications: aspirin, alprazolam (Xanax),
doxazosin (Cardura), glatiramer acetate (Copaxone),
rosuvastatin (Crestor), duloxetine (Cymbalta), fenta-
nyl patch, oral morphine, Roxicodone (Oxycodone),
metoprolol (Lopressor), spironolactone (Aldactone).
He is obese, BMI 36; HR 62; BP 140/75.
Airway examination reveals poor dentition, good
neck extension, with mouth opening > 30 mm, Mal-
lampati 3, a thyromental distance of > 6c m .
No evidence of tracheal deviation.
Chest clear. Heart sounds heard and normal.
Upper motor neuron signs on examination of the
left lower limb.
Contrast CT of the neck revealed an irregular
mass involving the epiglottis, vallecula, bilateral arye-
piglottic folds and extending to the true vocal cords
and anterior commissure (Figure 15.3). Several bor-
derline lymph nodes are present on the left side at
levels II and III. These were correlated with increased
uptake on PET.
The surgical clinic note revealed nasendoscopy
findings of a supraglottic mass involving the vallecula
and bilateral aryepiglottic fold, extending to the true
vocal cord. He was graded as a T4 N2 M0 squamous
cell carcinoma after direct laryngoscopy and biopsy.
He had a cycle of induction chemotherapy that
resulted in only minimal reduction in size. He was
scheduled for total laryngectomy with bilateral select-
ive neck dissection and transesophageal puncture.
Preoperative
Evaluation
This involved an assessment of the severity and extent
of comorbidities with consideration of optimization
before surgery.
Cardiovascular
Following his drug-eluting stent placement, dual
therapy consisting of aspirin and clopidogrel was
continued for 1 year after the procedure. Aspirin
was continued to protect the stent according to the
ACC/AHA guidelines [15]. Given the benefit in
terms of preventing cardiac stent occlusion
Airway
Tumor
Hyoid Bone
Figure 15.3. Contrast CT scan of neck
at level of the hyoid demonstrating the
supraglottic carcinoma.
Chapter 15: Anesthesia for neck dissection and laryngectomy
147
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012compared with the risk of increased surgical bleed-
ing, aspirin was continued throughout the periopera-
tive period.
Regarding the need for cardiology workup before
surgery, major head and neck surgery is classified as
intermediate-risk surgery according to the the ACC/
AHA guidelines [12]. The patient 's functional cap-
acity was low due to obesity, and mild right-sided
weakness secondary to multiple sclerosis. If ACC/
AHA guidelines are strictly applied the case could
continue without further workup and simply with
heart rate control. However, the patient saw his car-
diologist, who requested a stress echo before surgery.
The stress echo demonstrated an ejection fraction of
55% with no evidence of reversible ischemia. The
patient's hypertension was well controlled on current
medication.
Pain
The patient is on a significant amount of opioid
analgesia, which must be considered in the postopera-
tive plan for pain control.
Preparation
IV access in preop with an 18G catheter (dorsum of
left hand).
Standard monitors placed þ 5 lead EKG.
Preparation for an awake fiberoptic intubation
(see Chapter 6: Awake intubation).
Arterial line placed in left radial artery under local
anesthesia.
Type and cross blood sample sent to transfusion
laboratory
Intraoperative
Remifentanil infusion commenced at 0.02 mg/kg/min
for awake intubation.
Awake fiberoptic intubation performed; a size 6.5
plain endotracheal tube (ETT) placed.
Propofol induction 140 mg.
Vecuronium 4 mg.
Remifentanil increased to 0.05 mg/kg/min.
Isoflurane inhalational anesthesia commenced.
Eyes taped.
Sufentanil bolus of 5 mg given, infusion com-
menced at 0.25 mg/kg/h, remifentanil discontinued.
Patient turned 180 /C14 to the anesthesia machine.
Temperature-sensing urinary catheter placed.
Forced-air warmer placed on lower body.
14G catheter IVI placed in left lower limb (saphe-
nous vein); connected to fluid warmer.
Lactated Ringer 's (1 liter) given via IVI.
Antibiotics given (ampicillin/sulbactam 1.5 g).
Baseline ABG sent; starting hematocrit (HCT)
checked.
Epiglottis
Tumor
Hyoid
Figure 15.4. Specimen post
laryngectomy with neck dissection
removed “en-bloc”. Image courtesy of the
Department of Otolaryngology, University
of Michigan Health System.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
148
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Hetastarch (1 liter) given slowly; guided by blood
pressure, heart rate, urine output and systolic pres-
sure variability.
Surgeons perform a tracheostomy; place a 6.5
armored ETT sutured to chest.
Surgeons make sure blue cuff can just be seen at
the tracheal site (to avoid endobronchial intubation),
end-tidal carbon dioxide returned, and adequate tidal
volume with airway pressures < 30 cmH 2O.
Surgeons continue with laryngeal resection and
neck dissection.
The tissue sample is removed and sent to path-
ology (Figure 15.4).
Surgeons form the tracheal stoma.
Emergence
Sufentanil infusion stopped in sufficient time to allow
return of spontaneous ventilation, but with residual
analgesic efficacy.
Isoflurane anesthetic stopped.
Patient turned back to 0 /C14 (head near anesthesia
machine).
Gentle suction (via a small endobronchial suction
tube) to tracheal stoma.
Spontaneous ventilation returns, augmented by
pressure-supported ventilation.
Reduction of pressure support, patient maintains
an adequate tidal volume. Patient follows command.
Endotracheal tube is removed.
Transport to PACU with supplemental oxygen
and pulse oximetry
Postoperative
Patient monitored closely in PACU:
/C15 recovery from anesthesia
/C15 maintain cardiorespiratory stability, fluid balance,
temperature control
/C15 provide timely and appropriate administration of
analgesia and anti-emesis
/C15 commence opioid PCA
/C15 observe surgical site integrity and function of bulb
drains then transfer to step-down unit once
recovery complete.
Clinical pearls
/C15 The terms neck dissection and laryngectomy
describe a wide variety of surgical procedures that
attempt to remove a cancer and its main route of
spread. The extent of a given procedure is dictated
by the extent of the cancer.
/C15 The treatment of laryngeal cancer has three
primary goals: tumor removal, prevention of
spread and recurrence, and preservation of organ
function (phonation and swallowing) where
possible.
/C15 A partial laryngectomy is performed in an attempt
to remove the tumor but preserve the organ or its
function
/C15 During a total laryngectomy a perforation is often
made between the trachea and esophagus
(tracheoesophageal puncture – TEP) to allow
subsequent placement of a voice prosthesis.
This prosthesis allows air to pass into the pharynx
and oral cavity when the tracheal stoma is
occluded, thereby allowing the maintenance of
voice
/C15 Neck radiation changes can make airway
management difficult as its presence is an
independent predictor of failure for both
bag-mask ventilation and GlideScope intubation.
/C15 Systolic blood pressure variation of the arterial
line tracing can help guide fluid replacement.
Alternatively a central line, at a different location
from the neck dissection, can be used.
References
1. R. Siegel, E. Ward, Brawley O,
Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2011:
the impact of eliminating
socioeconomic and racial
disparities on premature cancer
deaths. CA Cancer J Clin
2011;61:212–36.
2. Elwood JM, Pearson JC, Skippen
DH, Jackson SM. Alcohol,
smoking, social and occupational
factors in the aetiology of cancer
of the oral cavity, pharynx and
larynx. Int J Cancer 1984;34:
603–12.
3. Hoffman HT, Porter K, Karnell
LH, et al. Laryngeal cancer in the
United States: changes in
demographics, patterns of care,
and survival. Laryngoscope
2006;116(Suppl 111): 1 –13.
4. Pfister DG, Laurie SA, Weinstein
GS, et al. American Society of
Clinical Oncology clinical practice
guideline for the use of larynx-
preservation strategies in the
treatment of laryngeal cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2006;24:3693–704.
5. Robbins KT, Shaha AR, Medina
JE, et al. Consensus statement on
the classification and terminology
of neck dissection. Arch
Chapter 15: Anesthesia for neck dissection and laryngectomy
149
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2008;134:536–8.
6. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks
AM, Tremper KK. Prediction and
outcomes of impossible mask
ventilation: a review of 50,000
anesthetics. Anesthesiology
2009;110:891–7.
7. Aziz MF, Healy D, Kheterpal S,
et al . Routine clinical practice
effectiveness of the Glidescope in
difficult airway management: an
analysis of 2,004 Glidescope
intubations, complications, and
failures from two institutions.
Anesthesiology 2011;114:34–41.
8. American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Management of the Difficult
Airway. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway: an updated report by the
American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Management of the Difficult
Airway. Anesthesiology
2003;98:1269–77.
9. Doyle DJ. Awake intubation using
the GlideScope video
laryngoscope: initial experience in
four cases. Can J Anaesth
2004;51:520–1.
10. Dimitriou VK, Zogogiannis ID,
Liotiri DG. Awake tracheal
intubation using the Airtraq ®
laryngoscope: a case series. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand
2009;53:964–7.
11. Suzuki A, Kunisawa T, Takahata
O, et al . Pentax-AWS (Airway
Scope®) for awake tracheal
intubation. J Clin Anesth
2007;19:642–3.
12. Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown
KA, et al. ACC/AHA 2007
Guidelines on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation and
care for noncardiac surgery.
J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;50:
159–242.
13. Coriat P, Richer C, Douraki T,
et al. Influence of chronic
angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibition on anesthetic
induction. Anesthesiology
1994;81:299–307.
14. Rooke GA, Schwid HA, Shapira Y.
The effect of graded hemorrhage
and intravascular volume
replacement on systolic pressure
variation in humans during
mechanical and spontaneous
ventilation. Anesth Analg
1995;80:925–32.
15. Fleisher LA, Beckman JA,
Brown KA, et al. 2009 ACCF/
AHA focused update on
perioperative beta blockade
incorporated into the ACC/AHA
2007 guidelines on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation and
care for noncardiac surgery: a
report of the American College
of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association
task force on practice
guidelines. Circulation
2009;120:169–276.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
150
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:30:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.018
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
16
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for head and neck flap
reconstructive surgery
Edward Noguera, Brian Burkey and Basem Abdelmalak
Introduction
A tissue transfer in the form of a free or a pedicle flap is a
surgical technique by which autologous tissue(s) com-
posed of fascia, skin, fat, functioning muscle, nerve or
composites is rotated or transferred on a supporting
vascular supply. The graft is transferred to a new loca-
tion of the body by using microvascular surgical tech-
niques (in the free flap) or rotated (in the pedicle flap) to
reconstruct anatomical defects in a permanent fashion.
Some of the advantages to the use of free flaps in head
and neck surgery patients include highly successful
reconstruction of complex defects [1], repair of conta-
minated defects with vascularized flaps leading to
improvement of wound healing, better cosmetic results,
separation of compartments such as intracranial struc-
tures from the digestive tract, improved functionality of
critical structures (e.g., the tongue in swallowing), and
high tolerance of radiation therapy postoperatively.
Thus, such procedures became somewhat routine pro-
cedures especially in tertiary and quaternary medical
care facilities. For appropriate safe anesthetic care, the
anesthesiologists need to have a clear understanding of
these surgical procedures, and their implications that
affect anesthetic management such as: careful planning
for difficult airway management including tracheos-
tomy if airway is compromised, positioning and careful
understanding of graft donor and recipient sites consid-
erations, choice of intraoperative monitoring, consider-
ations related to the length of surgery and
thermoregulation, flap perfusion considerations, plan-
ning postoperative care and level of care. This is in
addition to considerations related to coexisting morbid-
ities in this elderly population who commonly present
with tobacco and alcohol abuse.
Surgical background/considerations
Flaps can be categorized based on their blood
supply. If the flap vessels are transferred intact
with the rotated flap, then the tissue is termed a
pedicle flap. If the flap is moved from a distant site
and the flap vessels are re-anastomosed to the
recipient site vessels, then the tissue is termed a
microvascular free tissue transfer or “free” flap. In
general, pedicle flaps are used when they are
adequate to reconstruct an adjacent defect safely
and there is no loss of function. Pedicled flaps
are highly reliable and can be completed in less
time compared to the more labor intensive free
flaps. Over the last 20 years, the field of micro-
vascular free tissue transfer has advanced [2] and
today the vast majority of complex reconstructions
are performed with free flap transfer because of
the high success rates, the capacity for replacing
head and neck tissue with similar tissue from other
areas of the body, and the capacity for complex
three-dimensional reconstructions not possible
with pedicle flaps secondary to inherent tethering
and other anatomic issues [3]. In the majority of
patients, the harvest vs. recipient sites of the flap are
a p a r ti ns u c haw a yt h a ti ta l l o w sf o rt h es i m u l t a n -
eous harvest of the flap while the resection is
progressing at the recipient site, thus providing
for a reduced operative time. This so-called
“two-team” approach also allows the individual
surgeons to focus all their efforts on only one aspect
of the procedure, which has resulted in shorter
procedure duration and thus fewer after hours
surgery, less surgeon burnout and higher profes-
sional satisfaction.
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
151
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The most common pedicle flaps used are the
myocutaneous flaps, such as the pectoralis major
myocutaneous flap and the latissimus myocutaneous
flap. The former is still popular for reconstruction of
lateral pharyngeal wall defects, pharyngeal defects
after total laryngectomy, and neck cutaneous defects.
Muscle flaps are used to cover the carotid artery after
radical neck dissections where the carotid artery is
sacrificed and reconstructed with a saphenous vein
graft. All the pedicled flaps add little complexity to the
surgical or anesthetic management of the head and
neck tumor patient, as they can be accomplished
quickly and the tissue is fairly close to the primary
resection site. As well, vascular issues are less critical
since the flap vessels remain intact.
Free tissue transfer reconstruction has provided
the reconstructive surgeon with vastly more options
for donor sites. The quality, quantity, and availability
of each tissue and supporting vascular structures
along with donor site characteristics play a major role
in flap selection. Factors such as skin and soft tissue
volume and color, vessel length and caliber, innerv-
ation capacity, bone quality and availability, donor
site location, and potential morbidity are all taken
into account for final selection. Donor site morbid-
ities include functional losses and cosmetic
deformities.
For head and neck surgery patients, a group of
patients have been well characterized as gaining the
most benefit from free flap reconstructions. These
patients typically tend to have poor healing (chemo
and radiation therapy exposure, recurrent cancer,
prior surgical repairs), defects of the anterior man-
dibular arch and pharyngoesophageal defects. The
most common “free flaps ” used in head and neck
surgery involve the following.
Fasciocutaneous flaps
These are used to repair small and moderate soft
tissue defects. The radial forearm fasciocutaneous flap
and anterolateral thigh flap are very reliable and have
become the most utilized flaps in the field. Both flaps
allow for a two-team approach due to their distant
anatomical location from the primary resection site.
Muscle and myocutaneous flaps
These flaps are used to cover large-volume defects.
There are two main donors: the rectus abdominis and
the latissimus myocutaneous flaps. Both have large-
caliber vessels with adequate pedicles. The skin of the
myocutaneous flap provides coverage of relatively
large head and neck defects, such as scalp defects,
and the muscle provides for good sealing potential
of problematic defects, such as CSF leaks. The latissi-
mus muscle is harvested in lateral decubitus position
and is therefore less commonly utilized.
Vascularized bone flaps
These are used primarily to reconstruct oromandibu-
lar defects. Several options are available: the fibula
osteocutaneous flap, the radial forearm osteocuta-
neous flap, the scapula osteocutaneous flap and the
iliac crest-internal oblique osteocutaneous flap. The
scapular free flap requires several changes in patient
positioning during the procedure and does not allow
for a two-team approach, which lengthens the pro-
cedure duration [4]. The radial forearm donor site
provides high-quality bone and so is used primarily
for maxillary reconstructions. The iliac crest flap was
highly popular in the early 1990s due to its abundant
bone and reliable nature, but its bulk has made it a
less popular choice in the USA more recently. The
fibula osteocutaneous flap is clearly the workhorse
flap for oromandibular reconstruction and consti-
tutes 50 –80% of bone flaps in large series [5].
Better understanding of blood supply to different
anatomic regions of the body, improvement of tech-
niques and technologies, along with formal training
has led to the development and creation of a wide
variety of flaps that can potentially be used by recon-
structive surgeons. Flap survival rates now average
95% or greater in most series of reconstructions per-
formed by dedicated microvascular surgeons. More-
over, microvascular techniques are now considered
the standard of care for the repair of many defects
and it is, therefore, expected that anesthesiologists
become more familiar with the dominant flaps in
use for head and neck surgery and the proper anes-
thetic management of such cases.
The prognosis of patients requiring such extensive
head and neck resections and reconstructions
depends on many patient, tumor and other treatment
factors; however, it is not unusual to do large com-
bined resections and flap reconstructions that take
8–14 hours on patients with only a 30 –60% chance
of long-term cure. This is due to several factors. First,
patients many times want a reasonable chance of cure
no matter the effort and surgery is often a central part
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
152
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012of the best treatment, frequently with postoperative
radiation therapy. Second, untreated head and neck
cancers create horrible local problems during the
6–18 months that will transpire before death, includ-
ing fistulas, ulcers, severe otalgia and local pain, and
tissue necrosis. All this makes surgery a much better
option even if cure is unlikely, as it may change the
method of death and allow the patient to have qual-
ity time with family and to pursue lifelong goals of
travel, etc. Finally, the maturation of free flap recon-
struction has allowed extensive surgery with a min-
imal impact on cosmesis and function, with a high
success rate, and with quick healing that permits the
p a t i e n tt or e t u r nt oa c t i v el i f ew i t h o u tp r o l o n g e d
rehabilitation.
Anesthetic considerations
Preoperative assessment and preparation
Patients who benefit from free flaps in ENT surgery are
usually patients with cancer. Microvascular surgery
techniques can also be used for traumatic injuries, con-
genital defects, prior infections or secondary recon-
structions. In general, trauma patients tend to be
younger and, thus, there is a trend towards lower inci-
dence of chronic medical conditions. Acute medical
problems such as intoxication syndromes, intracranial
hypertension or multisystem organ dysfunction from
multiple trauma will delineate clinical management. For
example, trauma patients may have acute airway issues
with unstable spine or possible pneumothorax that may
become clinically relevant during the middle of a surgi-
cal procedure. These repairs are likely to be scheduled
on an elective basis but within a period of time post-
trauma that might coincide with acute or chronic med-
ical complications common in trauma patients (e.g.,
healthcare-associated pneumonia, DVT, acute malnu-
trition, pulmonary embolism, nosocomial infections,
prolonged ICU stay, prolonged hospital stay, etc.). In
contrast, patients with upper aerodigestive tract cancers
tend to be elderly and chronically exposed to tobacco,
alcohol, other recreational substances and chronic
opioid therapy for chronic pain management. Other
common comorbidities include: atherosclerosis, coron-
ary artery disease, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension,
COPD, diabetes, chronic renal insufficiency, chronic
malnutrition and cachexia syndrome, and tendency to
thrombotic complications associated with cancer. Some
of these patients have also been exposed to radiation
therapy and/or chemotherapeutic agents before recon-
struction with free flap is planned [6]. Other patients,
instead, are awaiting free flap reconstruction to have
radiation therapy.
A through preoperative assessment is warranted.
The topic of preoperative assessment is discussed in
detail in Chapter 3. Following clinical algorithms and
guidelines established by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) is recommended. It is also
recommended to review the potential toxicity of che-
motherapeutic agents used in ENT cancer patients
(hematologic, cardiac, pulmonary and renal toxicity)
before anesthesia is planned.
There are several implications of radiation therapy
before free flap reconstruction. Radiation therapy to
the neck structures leads to scarring and difficulties
establishing the airway (decreased extension or flexion
of the neck). Radiation therapy to the mediastinum can
also induce dose-dependent pericarditis, pericardial
effusion, and/or rapid progression of coronary artery
disease and heart failure. Thus, it is advised that
patients with a history of radiation therapy to the
mediastinum are carefully evaluated for ischemic heart
disease regardless of age. Radiation therapy also leads
to higher risk of fistulas due to poor tissue healing.
Poor healing might lead to different infectious compli-
cations, further malnutrition, use of total parenteral
nutrition and overall increased morbidity.
Anesthesiologists can face free flap repairs in two
main scenarios: elective and emergency. Free-flap-
related emergencies are routinely related to flap ische-
mia secondary to: hematoma formation, arterial or
venous thrombosis.
Aside from the general anesthetic implications for
coexisting comorbidities, perhaps the most important
anesthetic implications of tissue transfers are:
(a) careful planning for difficult airway management
including tracheostomy if the airway is
compromised
(b) positioning and careful understanding of graft
donor and recipient site considerations
(c) choice of intraoperative monitoring
(d) considerations related to the length of surgery and
thermoregulation
(e) flap perfusion considerations
(f) planning postoperative care and level of care.
Communication with the surgical team is the key. It
will greatly help delineate many of the following
considerations.
Chapter 16: Anesthesia for head and neck flap reconstructive surgery
153
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Airway management
Free flap reconstruction requires general anesthesia.
The airway is secured via tracheal intubation
(orotracheal or nasotracheal or tracheostomy). Often
the very tumors that indicated the extensive resection
and flap reconstruction and/or the effects of
radiation render the airway extremely difficult, and
awake intubation technique is required to safely
establish the airway. While many airway devices
can be employed with the awake technique, the
flexible fiberoptic scope is very helpful as it offers
the option of navigating around the tumor, to
visualize the glottis.
Tracheostomy is carried out as the initial part of
the resection in those cases where there is an expect-
ation of significant swelling of the tissues of the upper
aerodigestive tract either during the procedure or in
the first 48 hours of the postoperative period, e.g.,
resection of oral tongue or tongue base cancers. In
these cases, accidental displacement of an endotra-
cheal tube postoperatively would create a life-
threatening situation since subsequent reintubation
would be extremely difficult, if not impossible. Add-
itionally, tracheostomy may be carried out initially in
those cases where the oro/nasotracheal tube itself
interferes with the resection of the tumor, e.g., supra-
glottic laryngeal tumors. Frequently, patients present
to the operating room with in situ tracheostomy
which are placed due to obstruction of the upper
airway by the tumor (e.g., advanced supraglottic
tumors).
It is important to anticipate acute and chronic
complications of tracheostomy be familiar with the
different appliances used to manage patients with
tracheostomy. It is always possible to face an emer-
gency tracheostomy-related complication during
anesthesia for free flap reconstructions.
Tracheostomy tubes can be removed when the
patient has a stable airway without significant edema,
which generally is seen within 7 –21 days after the
procedure. The tract heals primarily within 1 week,
with a minimal secondary scarring.
Positioning
Position of the patient for head and neck surgery is
usually supine but some variations in positioning
might be required to harvest tissue from the donor
site. Ultimate positioning must allow for necessary
monitoring and adequate exposure of the head and
neck and flap donor sites. Often two nursing teams
and sterile sites are used to allow for simultaneous
harvesting of the flap during the resection, and room
must be provided to allow the teams to work without
interrupting each other or contaminating sterile
fields. Positioning of the anesthesia machine can be
done at the foot of the patient or off to one side,
depending on local preference and patient safety-
related issues (Figures 16.1 –16.3).
Patients need to be adequately padded to prevent
pressure ulcers and leg compression devices used for
thromboprophylaxis.
Monitoring
Surgical field avoidance can constitute a challenge in
terms of applying appropriate monitors to the patient,
including but not limited to electrocardiogram leads
placement away from donor and recipient sites, and
positioning and securing the breathing circuit.
Knowledge of surgical sites and proposed surgical
intervention is important in planning placement of
venous or arterial catheters. Thoughtful planning and
communication with the surgical team are
paramount.
Electrocardiogram pads
EKG pads should be placed away from the donor
site without compromising ischemia or arrhythmia
detection. Obtaining a baseline tracing with the
current arrangement of leads is advised to compare
and delineate trends as the case proceeds.
Central venous pressure monitoring
The use of an internal jugular vein catheter is discour-
aged as this might compromise the venous return of
pedicle flaps. Subclavian vein central catheters are likely
to be appropriate for most procedures; however,
femoral vein catheters or peripherally inserted central
catheters (PICCs) are likely to be better options if
central access is necessary. One must bear in mind
the risk/benefit ratio of central lines (i.e., central access,
central venous pressure monitoring) to optimize hemo-
dynamic management along with prevention of poten-
tial complications such as deep vein thrombosis for
PICC lines or infectious complications of femoral lines.
At the authors ' institution peripheral venous pressure
monitoring and trending is sometimes used in lieu of
central venous pressure monitoring [7]. Such values and
trends are interpreted in the context of other parameters
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
154
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012such as blood pressure, heart rate, fluid intake and urine
output as well as systolic blood pressure variability to
ascertain the blood volume status of these patients.
Breathing circuit
As in any other general anesthesia all alarms that
help diagnose accidental disconnection of breathing
circuits or large leaks along with oxygen sensors
should be checked for proper functioning. The
breathing circuit should be long enough to allow the
anesthesia machine to be safely stationed away from
the surgical field to allow room for surgeons, instru-
ments and microscopes. All connections of the
breathing circuits should be tightened to make sure
disconnections do not occur when the circuit is
covered by surgical drapes.
Figure 16.1. The two images show an
example of operating room arrangement in
a lengthy otolaryngologic flap surgery. The
anesthesia and surgical equipment are
arranged in such a way to provide the
surgical team free access not only to the
head of the patient but also to the flap
harvest site. The anesthesia machine is
rotated in a way to allow simultaneous
continuous monitoring of the surgical field,
ventilator, as well as the patient ’s monitor.
Chapter 16: Anesthesia for head and neck flap reconstructive surgery
155
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Thermoregulation
Esophageal temperature monitors are used in most
other surgical procedures, yet might not be the best
option for free flaps in head and neck surgery
patients. The goal is to minimize lines and monitors
around the face and neck area; therefore an axillary
temperature probe is often used. Skin temperature
probes carry the risk of being inaccurate. Thus, clin-
icians have used bladder or rectal temperature moni-
tors instead. Significant hypothermia can develop
during anesthesia for free flap surgeries [8]. Hypo-
thermia can lead to vasoconstriction and development
of flap ischemia. Intraoperative hypothermia is also
associated with increased blood loss, higher wound
infection rates, and pharmacokinetic changes that
prolong anesthetic and other medication effects and
further increase in morbidity [9]. Prevention of hypo-
thermia is especially important during the anesthetic
management for microvascular surgeries. Forced-air
warming devices such as the Bair Hugger ™ can lack
efficacy in these surgeries due to the large skin surface
area involved in the surgical fields. Thus, a small body
surface area is available for forced-air warming
devices to be applied to. Therefore, it is recommended
that other clinical measures are taken to prevent
hypothermia. A combination of underbody and sur-
face forced-air warming blankets, warming of intra-
venous fluids or blood products, increased room
temperature and radiant heat facilitate hypothermia
prevention.
nurse
instrument
table for resection
anesthesiologist
nurse
instrument
table for graft
Figure 16.2. A cartoon illustrating the
organization of the operating room at the
induction phase of free flap surgery.
Reprinted with permission, Cleveland
Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
156
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Anesthetic management
Induction of general anesthesia
Intravenous anesthetic induction can be used safely in
patients who are judged not to have a difficult airway,
or after awake intubation in those with difficult
airway. Inhalational induction can also be safely done
in patients with in situ or freshly placed (under local
anesthesia) tracheostomies.
Anesthesia maintenance
A balanced anesthesia technique is preferred; there is
little role for regional anesthesia techniques in free flap
surgery for head and neck cancer patients. Inhalational
maintenance or total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)
are appropriate. There is a paucity of data indicating
what techniques are most appropriate. However,
anesthetic goals such as amnesia and analgesia must
be accomplished throughout.
A motionless surgical field is important, especially
during the anastomosis of vascular structures when
microvascular techniques are in use. Muscle relaxants
can be used during this time; however, if the surgical
team utilizes a nerve monitoring technique, muscle
relaxants will need to be avoided. Another option to
achieve motionless surgical fields is to increase the
anesthetic depth. Continuous infusions of opioids such
as fentanyl, remifentanil or sufentanil can also be used
to achieve a motionless surgical field and provide
analgesia.
Remifentanil has been prospectively studied for
the prevention of movement during balanced anes-
thesia without muscle relaxation during craniotomy
[10]. Immobility can be reached between doses of
0.1 and 0.21 mg/kg/min. Chances of movement at
instrument
table for resection
instrument
table for graft
surgeon
nurse
nurse
surgeon
surgeon
surgeon
anesthesiologist
Figure 16.3. A cartoon showing the
operating room organization during the
phase of simultaneous graft harvest,
and completion of tumor resection of a
free flap otolaryngologic surgery;
please note the orientation and location
of the anesthesia machine and the
anesthesiologist, allowing for
simultaneous monitoring of the patient 's
monitor, IV fluids, and both surgical fields.
Reprinted with permission, Cleveland
Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 16: Anesthesia for head and neck flap reconstructive surgery
157
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20120.13 mg/kg/min are about 50%. Probability of move-
ment at a dose 0.21 mg/kg/min is about 20%; however,
side effects such as bradycardia and hypotension can
be seen between doses of 0.13 and 0.17 mg/kg/min.
Remifentanil's potency and half-life make it ideal
for easy clinical titration during very stimulating surgi-
cal procedures; however, the hemodynamic profile
provided by it (bradycardia and hypotension) and lack
of prolonged clinical analgesic effect make it less desir-
able during free flap surgery. Postoperative analgesia is
nearly nonexistent after infusion is stopped. Therefore,
opioid infusions of fentanyl or sufentanil are recom-
mended as they provide a smooth analgesic effect that
extends into the postoperative period and can also
provide motionless surgical fields when muscle relax-
ants are not desirable.
The authors' choice is the use of fentanyl infusion
titrated around 2 mg/kg/h. At this dose, fentanyl pro-
vides a motionless field with very stable hemodynamics
(no observed bradycardia or hypotension) as well as
easy titration according to time constraints (i.e.,
unplanned prolongation of surgery or unexpected ter-
mination of surgery). At this dose, fentanyl allows
recovery of spontaneous ventilation promptly after
stopping the infusion in short cases without delay in
extubation. For more prolonged cases– as is usually the
case with free flap reconstruction – if fentanyl infusion
is stopped about 30 minutes before emergence from
anesthesia, patients usually recover from anesthesia
smoothly with appropriate analgesia and full recovery
of spontaneous ventilation without delay of extubation
when feasible. Of note, fentanyl infusions are less costly
than remifentanil or sufentanil infusions.
Due to the length of the flap reconstructions, re-
dosing prophylactic antibiotics every 4 to 6 hours is
needed in addition to routine pre-incision intraven-
ous antibiotic administration.
Fluid management
Judicious use of intravenous fluids (crystalloids or col-
loids) and avoidance of hypovolemia and hypotension
are important to maintain homeostasis and help avoid
ischemia to the flap. On the other hand, too much fluid,
once redistributed, can increase tissue edema formation
within the flap with detrimental consequences in flap
perfusion and survival. Some surgical teams advocate
the use of dextran as a rheologic agent to prevent
thrombosis. Dextran can be initiated intraoperatively
and continued postoperatively for up to 48 hours.
There is paucity of data regarding the choice of
intravenous fluids for flap reconstruction surgery.
Neither crystalloids nor colloids have been studied
prospectively in flap reconstruction surgery patients.
Fluids that maintain the intravascular volume are pre-
ferred. Colloids are more effective for plasma volume
expansion as their contents diffuse poorly into the
interstitial space and create oncotic pressures that
keep water in the intravascular space. Crsytalloids are
used as maintenance fluids and hypotonic solutions
should be avoided. The use of vasoactive drugs
(i.e., phenylephrine, norepinephrine or vasopressin)
is discouraged during microvascular reconstructions.
Vasopressors can worsen or induce ischemia of
the graft by intense vasoconstriction of the micro-
vasculature. A thorough hemodynamic assessment with
invasive monitoring might be necessary when sustained
hypotension (i.e., circulatory shock) and use of vaso-
pressors are needed. While a retrospective study that
compared flap patients who received intraoperative
vasopressors with those who did not reported no differ-
ence in graft outcomes, the authors cautioned against
the use of vasopressors for these surgeries [11].
Blood transfusions
There is usually no brisk and sudden blood loss in
microvascular surgery cases due to the meticulous and
extreme attention on the head and neck surgeons' part
regarding hemostasis and careful dissection; however,
continuous oozing over a long period of time may result
in anemia. Some patients may present at a well-com-
pensated anemic state (of chronic nature) so red blood
cell transfusion is sometimes required. The goal is to
maintain adequate perfusion to end organs and ascer-
tain adequate perfusion of the grafts. A reasonable
target is a hematocrit of 25 –30 secondary to the com-
monly associated comorbidities, and physiological con-
siderations regarding oxygen-carrying capacity in and
to the graft. A higher hematocrit may not prove to be
superior as it might affect blood rheology.
Avoidance of hyperviscosity of the blood is
thought to help decrease the potential for vessel
thrombosis; thus, blood transfusions for hematocrits
above 30 are considered unnecessary.
Flap perfusion considerations
For a comprehensive review on the impact of
anesthetics, vasopressors and blood transfusion on
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
158
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012graft perfusion, the reader is directed to Chapter 23
of this volume.
Emergence
Smooth emergence from general anesthesia is desir-
able. Avoidance of extreme fluctuations in blood pres-
sure, especially hypertension, is advised to minimize
risks of bleeding, disruption of new anastomoses, and
potential flap failure from hematoma formation. Agi-
tation upon emergence should also be avoided due to
its potential to cause accidental dislodgement of
drains and tracheostomy appliances or even disrup-
tion of flaps.
As during maintenance of anesthesia, avoidance
of hypertension, tachycardia or sustained hypoten-
sion during emergence from anesthesia will help pro-
tect the viability of the graft(s).
In general, most patients can be separated from
mechanical ventilation at the end of the procedure if
weaning parameters are met. The decision to extubate
patients after free flap reconstruction should be made
jointly with the surgical team. Even if the patient is
clinically fit for liberation from ventilatory support
there are several other clinical factors that help to
make the decision:
(a) feasibility of reintubation and anticipated difficult
airway even after repair
(b) possibility of severe airway edema from new graft
placement
(c) individual patient monitoring needs
(d) anticipated surgical complications due to
technical difficulties and potential need for
reexploration
(e) medical intraoperative complications that
require admission to intensive care units
with need for postoperative mechanical
ventilation.
In general, lengthy procedures, prolonged emergence
and lack of adequate spontaneous respiratory efforts
or questionable protection of the airway usually call
for a delayed extubation or liberation from mechan-
ical ventilation in the recovery area. If extubation is
decided in the operating room, this should be accom-
plished smoothly to minimize extreme hemodynamic
variations, extreme cough, straining or any clinical
situation (such as hypoxemia) that can jeopardize
the safety of the patients and ultimately the viability
of the grafts.
Postoperative care planning
Individualized care plans might help make a decision
for postoperative ventilatory support. Some patients
will benefit from mechanical ventilation and sedation
postoperatively even if extubation is deemed to be
safe at the end of the procedure. For example, patients
with a history of schizophrenia, severe anxiety dis-
orders, or claustrophobia who can potentially pro-
gress to postoperative delirium and agitation may
pose a clinical challenge to adequately monitor the
viability and survival of the grafts. The need for graft
surveillance and diligent vigilance of the graft post-
operatively has led to the creation of specialized units
in medical centers in order to avoid delayed recogni-
tion of graft complications. Some of these specialized
units have mechanical ventilation capabilities and
enhanced nurse:patient ratios to accomplish post-
operative care.
Postoperative monitoring
The goal of postoperative monitoring of the patient
with flap reconstruction is similar to that seen in
all major head and neck procedures. General homeo-
stasis and adequate organ function secure the basis
of a healthy, viable graft. Monitoring of the flap is
of paramount importance postoperatively. Flap
monitoring is generally achieved with visual checks
(general inspection of color, turgor, edema, and capil-
lary refill) and Doppler ultrasound assessment of the
exposed cutaneous portions of the flap, if available.
These are carried out hourly for the first 24 –48 hours,
then checked every 4 hours or so over the next
3–5 days. The critical period for vessel thrombosis is
the initial 24 –48 hours after the procedure, and early
detection of vessel/flap problems requires rapid
return to the operating room for exploration and
vessel revision if necessary. Flap exploration may be
necessary in up to 10% of flaps, and generally success-
ful resuscitation occurs in 50% of these explorations.
More invasive monitoring such as laser-Doppler
flowmetry, transcutaneous pulsoximetry, duplex
ultrasound, pH monitoring and others is available,
but has potential complications, including disruption
of the flap vessel anastomoses and false-positive
results creating unnecessary postoperative explor-
ations. With flap success rates above 95%, the use of
more invasive monitoring seems ill-advised.
Tracheostomy tubes can be removed when the patient
has a stable airway without significant edema, which
Chapter 16: Anesthesia for head and neck flap reconstructive surgery
159
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012generally is seen within 7 –21 days after the procedure.
The tract heals primarily within 1 week, with a min-
imal secondary scar.
Anticoagulation of the free flap patient postopera-
tively is a highly debated topic. No controlled studies
show a benefit of any particular anticoagulation
regimen in this cohort of patients. Antiplatelet drugs
have been shown effective in increasing flap survival
in traumatic reimplantations, e.g., finger and arm,
but no data exist in the more controlled setting of
microvascular free tissue transfer. Some institutions
advocate infusions of dextran-40 at 25 ml/h for up to
48 hours postoperatively, and give 81 mg aspirin for
21 days postoperatively starting on the morning of
postoperative day 1. However, if there is a contraindi-
cation to anticoagulation, e.g., intracranial cases, then
anticoagulation is avoided.
Complications
Several potential complications can arise during the
care of free flap reconstruction surgery patients and
are related to increased morbidity postoperatively.
The following are considered the most common com-
plications during anesthesia for microvascular
surgery.
Intraoperative
Complications that commonly occur during anesthe-
sia for free flap reconstruction are:
Hypotension: hypotension usually ensues after
induction of general anesthesia and is often related
to hypovolemia. A thorough evaluation of the
patient's hemodynamics and possible causes of hypo-
tension should be carried out. Common causes of
hypotension include cardiac dysrhythmias, myocar-
dial ischemia, hypovolemia, anaphylactic reactions,
and medication side effects. Bleeding is a general
cause of hypotension during free flap reconstruction
and it is usually not brisk but continuous and difficult
to quantify.
Hypothermia: anticipitation and prevention of
hypothermia is a key element of the anesthetic man-
agement for flap reconstructive surgery. Prolonged
surgical times and heat loss from the surgical field
(donor and recipient sites) seem to be the main
reasons associated with hypothermia during free flap
surgery. Lack of warming strategies during these cases
can lead to severe hypothermia and intense vasocon-
striction, which increases the risk of flap ischemia.
A combination of underbody and surface forced-air
warming blankets, warming of intravenous fluids or
blood products, increased room temperature and
radiant heat facilitates hypothermia prevention.
Breathing circuit failure: during anesthesia for free
flap surgery, the breathing circuit is usually hidden under
the surgical drapes to maintain optimal sterile conditions
of both donor and transplant sites. The breathing circuit
should be long enough to ma intain the anesthesia
machine safely away from the surgical sites but close
enough to the patient 's airway. The breathing circuit
should also be compliant enough to allow titration of
tidal volumes and flexible enough to allow easy repos-
itioning of the patient withou t causing disconnections.
Breathing circuit leaks and failure to effectively ventilate
the patient thereby are potential complications that
might be lethal if unrecognized. All connections from
the anesthesia machine to the patient'sa i r w a ys h o u l db e
tightened to ascertain appropriate seals before final pos-
i t i o na n dp r e p a r a t i o no fs u r g i c a ls i t e s .
Dislodgement of vascular catheters: intravenous
and arterial catheters and their tubing connections
can potentially be dislodged during turning or pos-
itioning of the patient. It is recommended that all
catheters are secured to the skin to prevent kinking,
dislodgement, obstruction or extravasation of medi-
cations that are injected. Regardless of the anesthesia
technique, patency of the intravenous line must be
ascertained before infusion of anesthetics starts. All
IV sites should be easily accessible for patency assess-
ment or for blood sampling.
Postoperative
Multiple complications may arise during the recovery
phase after general anesthesia. Most common postopera-
tive complications in this phase include hypoxemia,
hypercarbia, cardiac dysrhythmias, acidosis, prolonged
sedation, uncontrolled pain,hypo- or hypertension, anx-
iety, emergence delirium, hypothermia, shivering, nausea,
and vomiting. Some of these problems can be explained
by the pharmacodynamics and kinetics of anesthetic
agents. Symptoms and signs of postoperative complica-
tions in the recovery area should be addressed promptly
and aggressively as many of these complications tend to
have a “snowball” effect if not immediately addressed
(e.g., upper airway obstruction and respiratory insuffi-
ciency are not resolved until obstruction is addressed).
Specific postoperative complications for free flap
patients include hypothermia, and flap failure due to
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
160
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:38 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012ischemia or hematoma. Hypothermia is a potential
complication that, as mentioned above, can lead
to graft ischemia by intense vasoconstriction. Active
rewarming appears to be an effective intervention
to treat hyperthermia in the recovery phase of anes-
thesia but certainly prevention of hypothermia is
the best clinical approach. The most feared compli-
cation in free flap surgery is the development of flap
ischemia due to hematoma formation or thrombosis
of the vascular grafts [12]. To prevent thrombosis,
many surgical centers advocate the use of low-dose
heparin infusions or dextran-40. There is a scarcity
of data indicating the most effective prophylactic
measure to prevent thrombosis of vascular pedicles.
Early identification of flaps at risk of ischemia
leads to prompt interventions and possible salvage
of the flaps.
Summary
Otolaryngologic flap reconstructive surgery, while
lengthy, risky and complex, can be performed with a
high degree of safety. The anesthetic management
includes careful planning of difficult airway issues
such as tracheostomy if the airway is compromised,
considerations to positioning, understanding of sur-
gical sites (donor and recipient), choice of intraopera-
tive monitoring, considerations related to the length
of surgery and thermoregulation, flap perfusion con-
siderations, planning postoperative care and level of
care. This is in addition to considerations related to
coexisting morbidities in this elderly population, who
commonly present with tobacco and alcohol abuse.
Clear communication with otolaryngology colleagues
will help greatly for proper planning and execution of
these considerations, helping to ensure a favorable
outcome.
Case study
A 62-year-male with a history of tongue cancer pre-
sents for glossectomy, neck dissection and free latissi-
mus myocutaneous flap reconstruction. Past medical
history includes chronic atrial fibrillation for which
he is on warfarin therapy, hypertension treated with
lisinopril, COPD – emphysema type, active smoker,
history of alcohol abuse, type 2 diabetes mellitus on
oral hypoglycemics and SQ glargine insulin. He had
radiation therapy 5 weeks prior to his surgery and has
not been able to eat solids for the past month due to
tongue mass. He continues to smoke cigarettes and
drink vodka daily.
Patient states he was admitted to an emergency
room 7 weeks ago with difficulty breathing and swal-
lowing. He states that he can no longer swallow solids
and liquids are becoming more difficult to swallow in
the past week. He denies any fever, chest pain or
dyspnea on exertion.
Due to anticipated difficult airway resulting from
his large tongue mass, the patient was intubated
awake using a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope.
Sedation for awake intubation was accomplished with
3 mg of midazolam IV in increments of 1 mg, and
50 mg of fentanyl IV. Topicalization was achieved with
atomized 4% lidocaine, using a standard atomizer,
and 2% lidocaine jelly applied to the dorsum of a size
10 Williams airway. In addition, 4% lidocaine was
sprayed to the hypopharynx and supraglottic area
using a syringe attached to a MADgic ® catheter.
Induction of anesthesia was then achieved with
70 mg of propofol, 100 mg of fentanyl and 40 mg of
rocuronium. After induction, an arterial catheter and
an 18G IV catheter were inserted. This catheter was
connected to a pressure transducer to intermittently
measure the peripheral venous pressure, as a surro-
gate to the volume status. A Foley catheter was
inserted as well as a rectal temperature probe. Antith-
rombotic stockings were then applied to the legs and a
forced-air warming blanket applied to the skin except
for the two operative fields (graft recipient and
harvest sites). A fentanyl infusion was started at
2 mg/kg/h. After induction of anesthesia, no additional
muscle relaxant was given. Anesthesia was maintained
with sevoflurane in an air/oxygen mixture and the
fentanyl infusion.
A tracheostomy was performed, and the orally
inserted ETT replaced by a cross-field sterile
reinforced tube.
Lactated Ringer 's solution was used as the main-
tenance fluid, while Hextend ® and albumin 5% were
used for colloid replacement of intraoperative blood
loss. The use of colloid is justified on the basis of
decreasing the amount of total crystalloid adminis-
tered, with the goal of decreasing the amount of tissue
edema globally and locally at the graft site. Arterial
blood gas analysis was followed throughout the sur-
gery; a unit of red blood cells was given in response to
a hematocrit of 26%.
Chapter 16: Anesthesia for head and neck flap reconstructive surgery
161
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:38 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The fentanyl infusion was discontinued 30 min-
utes from the anticipated emergence time, followed
by the discontinuation of the sevoflurane, after which
the patient emerged from anesthesia. The ETT was
then replaced with a #6 Shiley tracheostomy tube,
which was secured with sutures and ties, and a Trach
Collar mask was used to provide supplemental
oxygen. The patient was then discharged to the recov-
ery room, followed by admission to a step-down unit
three hours later for graft monitoring.
Clinical pearls
/C15A clear understanding of proposed donor sites
and the planned surgical intervention is important
to avoid placement of internal jugular vein
catheters in the middle of the surgical field or the
placement of a radial artery line or a peripheral IV
at the donor site.
/C15Careful positioning and careful pressure points
padding is very important in these lengthy
surgeries, together with surgical field avoidance
while allowing for easy monitoring of both patient
monitor and surgical field(s).
/C15Maintenance of normothermia in these
procedures is essential to avoid hypothermia and
its associated complications.
/C15Maintaining normovolemia, together with an
adequate hematocrit ( /C2530%) to ensure
appropriate oxygen-carrying capacity will help
ensure adequate graft perfusion.
/C15The use of colloids is justified on the basis of
decreasing the amount of total crystalloid
administered, with the goal of decreasing the
amount of tissue edema both globally and at the
graft site.
/C15The use of vasoactive drugs (i.e., phenylephrine,
norepinephrine or vasopressin) is discouraged
during microvascular reconstructions.
Vasopressors can worsen or induce ischemia of
the graft by intense vasoconstriction of the
microvasculature.
/C15Careful postoperative care planning is
necessary to ensure proper matching of patient
and graft monitoring needs and the capabilities
of the specialized unit and its nursing staff.
References
1. Wehage IC, Fansa H. Complex
reconstructions in head and neck
cancer surgery: decision making.
Head Neck Oncol 2011;3:14.
2. Clymer MA, Burkey BB. Other
flaps for head and neck use:
temporoparietal fascial free flap,
lateral arm free flap, omental
free flap. Facial Plastic Surg
1996;12(1):81–9.
3. Girod DA TT, Shnayder Y. Free
tissue transfer. In Flint P HB, Lund
V, Niparko J, Richardson M,
Robbins KT, Thomas J, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology Head &
Neck Surgery , Vol. 2, 5th edn.
Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier;
2010. pp. 1080 –99.
4. Coleman SC, Burkey BB, Day TA,
et al . Increasing use of the scapula
osteocutaneous free flap.
Laryngoscope 2000;110(9):
1419–24.
5. Burkey BB, Coleman JR Jr.
Current concepts in
oromandibular reconstruction.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am
1997;30(4):607–30.
6. Correa AJ, Burkey BB. Current
options in management of head
and neck cancer patients. Med Clin
North Am 1999;83(1):
235–46, xi.
7. Munis JR, Bhatia S, Lozada LJ.
Peripheral venous pressure as a
hemodynamic variable in
neurosurgical patients. Anesth
Analg 2001;92(1):172–9.
8. Robins DW. The anaesthetic
management of patients
undergoing free flap transfer.
Br J Plastic Surg 1983;36(2):
231–4.
9. Sessler DI. Mild perioperative
hypothermia. N Engl J Med
1997;336(24):1730–7.
10. Maurtua MA, Deogaonkar A,
Bakri MH, et al . Dosing of
remifentanil to prevent
movement during craniotomy in
the absence of neuromuscular
blockade. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol
2008;20(4):221–5.
11. Chen C, Nguyen MD, Bar-Meir
E, et al . Effects of vasopressor
administration on the outcomes
of microsurgical breast
reconstruction. Ann Plastic Surg
2010;65(1):28–31.
12. Esclamado RM, Carroll WR.
The pathogenesis of vascular
thrombosis and its impact
in microvascular surgery.
Head Neck 1999;21(4):
355–62.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
162
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:31:38 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.019
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
17
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for thyroid
and parathyroid surgery
Twain Russell and Richard M. Cooper
Introduction
Most patients undergoing thyroid surgery have
thyroid cancer, a symptomatic thyroid goiter, or a
contraindication to or failure of medical management
of their hyperthyroidism. The National Cancer Insti-
tute estimates that 37 000 women and 11 000 men
were diagnosed with primary thyroid cancer in the
USA in 2011. It is the fifth most common cancer
among women yet accounts for less than 2% of cancer
deaths. Papillary and follicular thyroid cancers account
for approximately 80% and 15% of cases respectively
and are generally cured by early recognition and sur-
gical excision. Medullary thyroid cancer may produce
calcitonin or be associated with other endocrine ade-
nopathies or familial medullary cancer. The least
common form of primary thyroid cancer is anaplastic
and is associated with a very unfavourable prognosis
with or without surgery (http://www.cancer.gov/can-
certopicswyntk/thyroid; accessed Oct. 28, 2011).
Preoperative assessment for
thyroid surgery
There are several specific issues that significantly
affect the anesthetic management for patients under-
going thyroid surgery. In addition to the general
considerations pertaining to anesthesia, specific atten-
tion should be directed to the assessment of thyroid
function, the size and location of the thyroid gland, its
relationship to the trachea and adjacent vascular
structures, and the co-existence of a multiple endo-
crine neoplasia (MEN1 or 2).
Thyroid function
With very few exceptions, thyroid surgery is elective.
The signs and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis are
nonspecific but include nervousness, heat intolerance
and perspiration, tachycardia, fatigue, insomnia,
weakness and tremulousness, diarrhea and weight
loss. Patients may have anemia, leukopenia or
thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy. Patients with
Graves' disease may have exophthalmos. Patients
should be medically optimized preoperatively with
the goal to achieve a euthyroid state to reduce the risk
of a thyroid storm. Radioactive iodine ablation or an
anti-thyroid drug (propylthiouracil or methimazole)
may be administered for several weeks preoperatively.
In addition, Lugol 's solution may help reduce iodine
uptake and the vascularity of the gland. Readiness for
surgery may be judged by symptom resolution and
normalization of weight and heart rate. Anti-thyroid
drugs can cause agranulocytosis, hepatitis, aplastic
anemia, and lupus-like syndromes.
Patients with uncontrolled hyperthyroidism who
require urgent surgery may have atrial fibrillation,
congestive heart failure and/or myocardial ischemia.
These patients should be treated with anti-thyroid
medications, steroids and b-blockers. The anesthe-
siologist must be prepared to deal with thyroid storm,
a condition that may resemble malignant hyperther-
mia. In such cases, care must be taken to control heart
rate with a titratable b-blocker such as esmolol, espe-
cially in the setting of acute heart failure. Sympathetic
nervous system activation should be minimized with
adequate anesthesia and the avoidance of sympatho-
mimetic drugs. Volatile anesthesia requirements are
unchanged but the clearance and distribution volume
of propofol are increased, resulting in increased drug
infusion requirements. Intra-arterial blood pressure
monitoring and high-dependency care are recom-
mended, especially in patients with uncontrolled
hypertension, patients with poor cardiovascular
status, or cases expected to last a long time. Removal
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
163
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012of the thyroid does not result in the immediate reso-
lution of the thyrotoxic state since the half-life of T 4 is
7 days. Anti-thyroid medication can be ceased but
b-blocker therapy may need to be continued in the
postoperative period.
Hypothyroidism may also be a problem in some
patients. However, it is extremely rare for an
untreated hypothyroid patient to present requiring
urgent thyroid surgery. It should also be borne in
mind that hypothyroid patients with unstable coron-
ary disease may not tolerate full thyroid supplemen-
tation without producing cardiac ischemia.
Airway difficulty
Patients presenting with complaints of hoarseness,
vocal changes, or previous mediastinal, neck or re-
operative thyroid surgery are likely to have had diag-
nostic laryngoscopy (or videostroboscopy) performed
by the surgeon and the findings should be reviewed
along with any relevant diagnostic imaging. The
majority of patients presenting for thyroid surgery
pose little additional risk of difficult ventilation and
intubation [1,2]. Routine airway assessment should be
performed. In a small proportion of patients with
enlarged thyroids it may be difficult to ventilate via
mask or supraglottic airway, to intubate or even to
create an emergency surgical airway. Thyroid enlarge-
ment can be associated with laryngeal deviation,
laryngeal edema, tracheal compression, and an anter-
ior vascular neck mass. Consideration should be
made as to the location or multiple locations of
any potential obstruction as the management
options vary.
Symptoms of dysphagia, recumbent dyspnea, or a
change in voice or stridor should alert the anesthe-
siologist to airway compromise and possible difficul-
ties with airway management following induction.
For patients with a retrosternal goiter and tracheal
compression or superior vena cava syndrome, several
induction strategies have been advocated, including
intravenous induction with neuromuscular blockade
and direct laryngoscopy, inhalational induction, and
awake flexible bronchoscopic intubation [3]. The
management depends on the unique features of the
individual case and the skills of the anesthesia and
surgical staff [3,4].
Deviation of the larynx and compression of the
trachea may occur from a large cervical or retro-
sternal goiter. Stridor in adults implies an airway
narrowing of greater than 50% reduction in diameter
or a diameter less than 4 – 5 mm. The absence of
stridor is reassuring but does not exclude significant
airway narrowing.
Preoperative airway evaluation using multi-slice
3D CT and high-resolution virtual laryngoscopy
based on spiral CT data for patients with severe
tracheal stenosis may be useful. In the setting of a
benign goiter a compressed tracheal segment opens
with endotracheal tube placement.
Retrosternal goiter
There is no universal agreement regarding a defin-
ition of a retrosternal goiter (RSG) although generally
more than 50% of its mass must be below the thoracic
inlet to qualify. Most are outgrowths of the cervical
thyroid but rarely a primary intrathoracic goiter
arises from thyroid tissue located in the mediastinum.
Surgery is usually required since medical therapy
rarely arrests growth and malignancy surveillance is
difficult.
The most common presenting symptoms are
respiratory (dyspnea, choking, inability to sleep com-
fortably), hoarseness and dysphagia. Less common
features include impending airway obstruction,
superior vena cava obstruction and Horner 's syn-
drome. Symptoms of supine presyncope are very rare
but suggest vascular compression. Clinical symptoms
correlate well with the preoperative CT measurements
of tracheal and esophageal displacement, retrotra-
cheal extension and the degree of tracheal compres-
sion [5].
A preoperative neck and chest CT scan is generally
performed in patients suspected of having RSG to
assess trachea deviation or compression, goiter size,
and mediastinal extension. The cervical route is suc-
cessful in removing the majority of RSG but in high-
risk patients the resources to perform a sternotomy
should be available. Factors favoring the need for a
sternotomy include the presence of an ectopic goiter,
adherence to the surrounding mediastinal tissues,
previous thyroid surgery, malignancy, thyroid gland
volume, and extension of the goiter to or below the
aortic arch or tracheal carina or into the posterior
mediastinum [6].
SVC compression
Superior vena cava syndrome results from venous
hypertension causing facial, neck, and mucosal
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
164
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012membrane engorgement, and increased intracranial
pressure including headache and altered mental
status. Elevation of both upper limbs may produce
facial plethora as a consequence of jugular venous
compression (Permberton 's sign). SVC obstruction
may result in airway edema, dependence on spontan-
eous ventilation for venous return, and hemodynamic
instability. Dyspnea and hoarseness may reflect
edema of the vocal cords.
Surgical bleeding is often increased due to
increased central venous pressure. Intravenous access
in the legs rather than in the arms and invasive blood
pressure monitoring should be considered.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes
Hyperparathyroidism due to an adenoma or hyper-
plasia is the most common presenting symptom of
multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 syndrome (MEN1).
The most common tumors associated with MEN1
are parathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, pancre-
atic tumours (gastrinomas and insulinomas), and skin
tumors (angiofibromas, collagenomas, and lipomas).
Medullary thyroid cancer is associated with MEN2
syndrome, of which there are three subtypes: Type 2A is
associated with pheochomocytoma and hyperparathyr-
oidism; Type 2B is associated with pheochromocytoma,
mucosal neuromas, intestinal ganglioneuromas, and
Marfanoid body habitus; and a third subtype, FMTC
or familial medullary thyroid carcinoma.
Anesthesia technique for thyroid
surgery
Patients are commonly positioned supine with both
arms by the side, a sandbag between the scapulae and
the head resting on a padded cushion to enhance head
extension. Reverse Trendelenburg positioning of
15– 25/C14 will assist with venous drainage and surgical
access. Eye protection is of particular importance in
patients with exophthalmos. As with most head and
neck cases, access to the airway will be limited during
the procedure so the endotracheal tube should be
taped securely and padded to prevent pressure areas.
General anesthesia with tracheal intubation and
muscle relaxation is usually employed although
Laryngeal Mask Airway (LMA ®) and other supraglot-
tic airways have been used with both spontaneous
respiration and intermittent positive-pressure ventila-
tion in thyroid surgery. This allows flexible
bronchoscopic assessment of recurrent laryngeal
nerve function and may reduce coughing and
straining on emergence, potentially reducing the risk
of a neck hematoma. A plan should be made in
advance with the surgical team to manage laryngos-
pasm and LMA displacement during the surgery.
Local anesthesia with sedation has been used success-
fully [7].
The surgeon will often infiltrate local anesthetic
and epinephrine 1:200 000 subcutaneously prior to
incision to reduce bleeding and to confer some post-
operative analgesic effect. Acetaminophen, non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or weak opioids
are usually adequate to ensure most patients are com-
fortable. Bilateral superficial cervical plexus blocks
reduce opiate requirements but are rarely required.
These patients are at high risk of postoperative nausea
and vomiting, which can increase the risk of post-
operative neck hematoma. A suitable combination is
a serotonin 5-HT 3 receptor antagonist with dexa-
methasone 4– 8 mg, which may also help reduce post-
operative airway edema. Before wound closure a
Valsalva maneuver for 15 – 20 s is often requested to
assess hemostasis and lymphatic integrity.
Smooth emergence and recovery from anesthesia
are important. Airway manipulation and head and
neck movement should be minimized during emer-
gence to avoid straining. Suctioning of saliva from the
pharynx should be performed during deep anesthesia.
Patients can be extubated, ideally in the semi-sitting
position either fully awake or (in special circum-
stances) in a deep plane of anesthesia. The authors
favor a “no touch” emergence technique with the ETT
removed when the patient responds to commands.
Deep extubation reduces the incidence of coughing,
bucking, and straining but at an increased risk of
airway obstruction and aspiration [8,9]. Alternatively,
a Bailey maneuver may be employed (see Case study)
wherein a supraglottic airway is substituted for the
ETT while the patient is still under neuromuscular
blockade and deep anesthesia [8]. The depth of anes-
thesia, oxygen concentration, ventilatory support, and
sequestration of secretions are all potentially under
control. (Although this technique has several advan-
tages, it should be regarded as “a high-risk maneuver
in high-risk patients ” and is best practiced in low-risk
patients to ensure the requisite skills.)
There are several pharmacological interventions
to suppress cough and smooth emergence. These
can be used routinely or in the patient at increased
Chapter 17: Anesthesia for thyroid and parathyroid surgery
165
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012risk of emergence coughing, such as smokers or patients
at increased risk of neck hematomas. Total intravenous
anesthesia has been shown to lower the incidence
of coughing on emergence for non-thyroid surgery
[10– 12]. Lidocaine topically applied to the ETT cuff
prior to intubation [13], given intravenously 5 minutes
before extubation and intra-cuff alkalinized lidocaine
have also been shown to reduce cough on extubation
[12]. A low-dose remifentanil infusion (0.01 to 0.05mg/
kg/min) throughout the extubation period reduces
cough without prolonging wake-up [14].
Complications of thyroid surgery
Postoperative respiratory distress
Postoperative respiratory distress or compromise in
the setting of neck surgery can be life-threatening,
requiring immediate expert management. While pro-
viding supportive care, early consideration of the
differential is required as the definite therapy depends
on the etiology. Immediate and early complications of
thyroid surgery include neck hematoma, vocal cord
paralysis from recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, tra-
cheomalacia, pneumothorax, airway edema, and thy-
roid crisis. Subsequently, seroma, chyle fistula,
tracheal or esophageal injury and hypocalcemia are
additional concerns. A broader differential diagnosis,
unrelated specifically to thyroid surgery, must also be
kept in mind.
Neck hematoma
The incidence of hematoma post thyroidectomy is
reported in the literature as 0% to 1.6%, with the major-
ity developing within 4 hours of surgery and almost all
within 24 hours [15– 17]. The risk of hematoma forma-
tion increases with bilateral surgery, Graves ' disease,
associated neck dissection, malignancy, and antiplatelet
or anticoagulant therapy. A neck hematoma can pro-
duce life-threatening airway compromise by direct
pressure on the laryngeal structures.
Neck hematomas may present with neck pain or
pressure, swelling, excessive drain volumes, voice
changes, dysphagia, stridor, dyspnea, and agitation.
Symptom progression to airway obstruction is vari-
able and requires very careful vigilance and early
intervention. Progression to obstruction, hypoxia,
and agitation unquestionably compromises outcome.
The order, timing, and location of life-saving
interventions depend on the patient 'sl o c a t i o n ,
severity of symptoms, and availability of resources.
Temporizing management strategies such as eleva-
tion of the head of the bed, helium/O 2, nebulized
adrenaline, and steroids may be useful but must
not delay definite management. Removal of sutures
and hematoma evacuation should be performed
immediately if the patient is in extremis or if
immediate airway management is not available.
Hematoma evacuation ma y assist some patients
by relieving direct hematoma compression but it
will not resolve airway obstruction from perilaryn-
geal edema.
If time permits, an awake endoscopic evaluation
with topical anesthesia but very judicious sedation
should be performed. It is generally well tolerated,
has minimal risks and provides useful information
on laryngeal position and swelling to help plan the
most appropriate airway strategy. There are many
induction and intubation options in the patient with
a neck hematoma, including inhalation induction,
awake bronchoscopic or videolaryngoscopic intub-
ation and tracheostomy under local anesthesia. Each
technique has limitations and the surgical team
should be fully prepared to proceed with a surgical
airway if complete airway obstruction occurs or
intubation and ventilation attempts fail.
The choice of intubation techniques will depend
upon the clinical circumstances, available resources
and local expertise. It is unlikely that an adequately
controlled trial will ever establish the preferred tech-
nique. The authors believe that in the face of life-
threatening obstruction or oxygen desaturation, the
quickest technique is likely to be direct or videolar-
yngoscopy. An inhalation induction in the face of
partial airway obstruction is unlikely to provide suffi-
cient depth of anesthesia to permit airway instrumen-
tation. An awake technique in a struggling, hypoxic,
and uncooperative patient is an extreme test of the
laryngoscopist's technical skill but at some centers
flexible bronchoscopy-assisted intubation would be
the technique of choice. In any case, it is prudent to
be prepared for an emergency (and potentially diffi-
cult) surgical airway.
Thyroid crisis
Thyroid storm is a rare but life-threatening exacerba-
tion of uncontrolled hyperthyroidism precipitated by
medication withdrawal, trauma, infection, medical
illness, intravenous radio-contrast, amiodarone or
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
166
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012surgery, with a mortality of 20 – 30% [18]. Presenta-
tion usually occurs in the postoperative period with
symptoms including extreme anxiety, fever, vomiting,
tachypnea, tachycardia, cardiovascular instability,
cardiac failure, dehydration, electrolyte derangements
(hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, hyponatremia, hypo-
magnesemia), respiratory and metabolic acidosis,
altered consciousness, and hepatic dysfunction. It is
a clinical diagnosis with several important differen-
tials including malignant hyperthermia, sepsis, pheo-
chromocytoma, metastatic carcinoid, malignant
neuroleptic and serotonergic syndromes. This condi-
tion probably results from thyrotropin receptor anti-
bodies stimulating excess thyroidal synthesis and
secretion of T 4 and T 3 [18].
The management of thyroid storm includes: [18]
(i) blocking of the sympathetic response ( b-blockers)
(ii) blocking thyroid hormone synthesis (PTU or
methimazole)
(iii) blocking thyroid home release (dexamethasone,
lopanoic acid or Lugol 's solution)
(iv) blocking T 4 to T 3 conversion ( b-blocker, PTU,
lopanoic acid, steroids)
(v) supportive measures (restoring electrolyte and
fluid status, anti-pyretics and active cooling,
treatment of heart failure, supplemental oxygen,
and ventilation). Dantrolene and magnesium
sulfate have also been used effectively.
Post-thyroidectomy tracheomalacia
Post-thyroidectomy tracheomalacia (PTTM), defined
as dynamic airway collapse of at least 50% of tracheal
diameter, results from longstanding extrinsic tracheal
compression and subsequent removal of the compres-
sive goiter. The true incidence of tracheomalacia is
difficult to determine due to a lack of a universal
definition, the heterogeneity of thyroid disease
and variability in patients ’ access to healthcare [19].
In a review of 12 studies, Bennett et al. found five
patients of 1969 patients (0.3%) suffering PTTM and
Lacoste et al. found none among over 3000 thyroi-
dectomies [20]. Bennett et al. concluded that CT
imaging overestimated the severity of intubation dif-
ficulty and that the risk of PTTM has been exagger-
ated [21]. There is a diversity of “opinions” regarding
this problem [3] but bronchoscopic identification
of dynamic airway collapse has recently been pro-
vided [22]. Identification of this entity by surgical
palpation or post-extubation obstructive symptoms
probably under-diagnoses the disorder but may
accurately reflect those patients who are likely to
require intervention. The risk factors for PTTM are
believed to be longstanding goiter, trachea compres-
sion, and retrosternal extension. Bronchoscopic
examination through a supraglottic airway following
extubation can reveal intrathoracic expiratory col-
lapse with spontaneous ventilation. If the supraglottic
airway is successfully placed, this technique allows for
control of the anesthetic depth and oxygen concen-
tration, sequesters the secretions, and enables the
clinician to assess the severity of respiratory embar-
rassment, at least during quiet respiration [22].
Recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) palsy
The RLN innervates the intrinsic laryngeal muscula-
ture and gives sensory innervation to the larynx.
Unilateral RLN palsy is usually well tolerated but
may result in hoarseness, breathlessness, and an inef-
fective cough. Delayed aspiration may also occur.
Bilateral RLN palsy is generally more dramatic, pre-
senting with early stridor and breathlessness requiring
urgent re-intubation.
Some surgeons advocate preoperative evaluation of
the vocal cords since vocal cord dysfunction may be
asymptomatic. Routine intraoperative identification of
the recurrent laryngeal nerve and good surgical tech-
nique minimizes the risk of nerve injury. RLN palsy
most commonly occurs with an intact RLN rather than
a transsected nerve: 3.45% vs. 0.45% [20,23]. There are
numerous mechanisms of nerve injury including ische-
mia, contusion, stretching resulting from traction,
entrapment, thermal, and transection [23]. The inci-
dence of permanent nerve injury is < 1% [20] and
temporary nerve injury 3 – 4% [23,24], which usually
recovers within 2 weeks to 6 months. The risk of injury
is increased with malignancy [25], anatomical variabil-
ity [26], secondary surgery [24], and inexperienced
operators. Although bilateral RLN palsy is rare, thyroi-
dectomy is the leading cause of this injury.
Intraoperative nerve monitoring is safe and simple
but whether it is effective in reducing RLN damage
remains to be established [27,28]. The benefits may be
greatest in patients at high risk of nerve injury (e.g.,
secondary cancer surgery) or patients with known
RLN palsy on the contralateral side. A 2006 survey
found 13.8% of American endocrine surgeons rou-
tinely used intraoperative electrophysiological moni-
toring while 23.9% used it selectively [28].
Chapter 17: Anesthesia for thyroid and parathyroid surgery
167
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The RLN can be stimulated directly or via the
vagus. The response can be assessed by inspection or
palpation of the cricoarytenoid or vocal cord move-
ment. Alternatively, a silicone, wire-reinforced endo-
tracheal tube with surface or embedded electrodes can
be accurately placed just above the vocal cords, to
provide an intralaryngeal surface EMG recording
[29] (e.g., Medtronic Xomed NIM ™ EMG Endotra-
cheal Tube, Minneapolis, MN; see Figures 17.1 and
17.2). False-negative responses – failure to locate the
nerve – may occur with poor vocal cord contact
(incorrect ETT positioning, electrode/ETT migration,
small ETT or head and neck movement), deep anes-
thesia, muscle paralysis, local anesthesia lubricants or
neuromuscular fatigue from prolonged or repeated
exposure to electrical stimuli. The outer diameter of
these ETTs is approximately 1 mm larger than stand-
ard ETTs of the same internal diameter. Correct
placement of the exposed electrodes can be easily
verified with videolaryngoscopy. These endotracheal
tubes increase cost, require a stylet, cannot be used in
the presence of neuromuscular blockade, and may
suffer from cuff herniation with over inflation.
Postoperative assessment of RLN integrity can be
determined by visualizing vocal fold mobility during
spontaneous ventilation using direct or video- or flex-
ible laryngoscopy, the latter with [25] or without a
supraglottic airway. The management of unilateral
RLN palsy is supportive but some surgeons favor
immediate re-exploration.
Hypocalcemia
Transient hypocalcemia, the most common compli-
cation following total thyroidectomy, occurs in
approximately 5.4 – 20% [30,31] of cases depending
on the type of surgery performed, although perman-
ent hypocalcemia is rare. The cause of hypocalcaemia
may be direct trauma to the parathyroid glands,
devascularization of the glands, or removal of the
glands during surgery. In patients at high risk of
postoperative hypocalcemia, such as total thyroidect-
omy with central neck dissection, parathyroid auto-
transplantation may be considered.
Patients at risk of iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism
should have ionized calcium (or albumin-adjusted
total calcium) levels monitored postoperatively until
calcium levels demonstrate that parathyroid function
is intact. Alternatively, a normal postoperative PTH
level can predict normocalcemia after thyroid surgery.
Hypocalcemia usually presents after 24 hours with
perioral tingling, twitching or tetany and can progress
to seizures or ventricular arrhythmias if left untreated.
Clinical signs include carpopedal spasm during blood
pressure cuff inflation (Trousseau 's sign), facial
twitching by tapping over the facial nerve at the
Figure 17.1. Medtronic Xomed
NIM™ EMG Endotracheal Tube,
Minneapolis, MN. Image courtesy of
Basem Abdelmalak, MD. Reprinted with
permission from Cleveland Clinic Center
for Medical Art and Photography © 2012
all rights reserved.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
168
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012parotid gland (Chvostek 's sign) and the ECG may
show a prolonged QT interval. Patients who have
symptomatic hypocalcemia in the early postoperative
period or whose calcium levels continue to fall require
rapid treatment. Patients with symptoms and serum
calcium lower than 7.0 mg/dl (1.75 mmol/l) or ionized
calcium level lower than 3.6 mg/dl (0.9 mmol/l) can be
treated with 1 g calcium gluconate (10%) by slow
intravenous infusion followed by oral replacement.
Parathyroid surgery
Primary hyperparathyroidism may result from
benign parathyroid adenoma (85%), multiple gland
hyperplasia (15%) and carcinoma of the parathyroid
glands ( < 1%). Most of the clinical manifestations of
primary hyperparathyroidism are due to hypercalce-
mia but the classic description of “moans, groans, and
abdominal pain ” is rare. Most patients have mild or
nonspecific signs and symptoms including skeletal
muscle weakness, nephrolithiasis, polyuria and poly-
dipsia, renal failure, anemia, peptic ulcer disease,
vomiting, pancreatitis, hypertension, prolonged PR
interval, short QT interval, generalized osteopenia,
bone pain, decline in mental function, personality
changes, and mood disturbances [32]. Other condi-
tions can cause hypercalcemia, such as bone metasta-
ses, vitamin D intoxication, milk-alkali syndrome,
sarcoidosis, and prolonged immobilization. An
elevated ionized Ca and urinary Ca in association
with increased parathyroid hormone confirms the
diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism.
Operative intervention remains the only curative
therapy for patients with primary hyperparathyroid-
ism. Surgery is effective with minimal risk so is com-
monly recommended even in asymptomatic patients.
Symptomatic patients with significant hypercalcemia
require medical control with hydration, furosemide
and bisphosphonates (palmidronate or etidronate)
before undergoing surgery. Plicamycin, glucocorti-
coids, calcitonin or dialysis may be required for
refractory or severe hypercalcemia. Avoidance of
hypoventilation (which increases ionized Ca) and
maintenance of hydration and urine output is import-
ant during the perioperative period. Hypercalcemia
may result in cardiac arrhythmias and alter the sensi-
tivity to neuromuscular blockers.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is caused by para-
thyroid gland hyperplasia as a compensatory response
to hypocalcemia from a primary disease process,
commonly chronic renal failure. The initial treatment
is directed at controlling the underlying primary dis-
ease. Parathyroidectomy is indicated when medical
therapy or dialysis fails to relieve the symptoms of
bone pain, pruritus, and malaise or to control calcium
and phosphate levels [32]. Patients with secondary
hyperparathyroidism are more medically challenging.
They require preoperative assessment of the
Figure 17.2. Medtronic Xomed
NIM™ EMG Endotracheal Tube,
Minneapolis, MN. Image courtesy of
Basem Abdelmalak, MD. Reprinted with
permission from Cleveland Clinic Center
for Medical Art and Photography © 2012
all rights reserved.
Chapter 17: Anesthesia for thyroid and parathyroid surgery
169
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012underlying cause and are at risk of postoperative
“hungry bone ” syndrome, which causes acute-onset
severe hypocalcaemia, usually with hypomagnesemia
and hypophosphatemia.
Traditionally parathyroidectomy was performed
with a midline incision and bilateral neck dissection,
although minimally invasive parathyroidectomy
(MIP) is growing in acceptance. With traditional sur-
gery, if an adenoma is detected, the presence of a
normal gland makes further exploration unnecessary,
though some surgeons will attempt to identify and
remove virtually all of the parathyroid glands with
autotransplantation of a small amount of parathyroid
tissue.
MIP can be performed with regional anesthesia, a
smaller skin incision, shorter lengths of stay, a lower
incidence of transient hypocalcemia, low complica-
tion rates and comparable success. Preoperative
localization of abnormal parathyroid glands is
achieved with sestamibi 99mTc scans while inter-
operatively use is made of focused parathyroid
resection and in conjunction with PTH sampling at
5-minute intervals. Resection is considered curative
if there is a greater than 50% decrease in venous or
arterial intraoperative parathyroid hormone (iPTH)
levels at 5, 10, or 15 minutes post resection com-
pared to the baseline sample. If the iPTH level fails
to decrease by 50% the surgeon can re-explore the
neck for a second adenoma or additional hyperplas-
tic tissue before waking the patient [33,34].
There are several possible operative adjuncts for
the MIP operation, including radio-guided gamma
probes, the video-assisted approach, and laparoscopic
techniques. Very small adenomas and those located in
aberrant locations, such as the mediastinum or pos-
terior to the trachea, are not amenable to ultrasound
examination. MIP may not be suitable if the patient
has concomitant thyroid surgery, multi-glandular
parathyroid disease, inadequate preoperative localiza-
tion, or previous parathyroid surgery [34].
Case study
Preoperative evaluation
A 42-year-old female presented for elective total thyr-
oidectomy. She complained of increasing neck
enlargement over 6 months and recent recumbent
dyspnea but no voice changes, dysphagia, odynopha-
gia or symptoms suggestive of hyper- or hypothyroid-
ism. On examination, she was 155 cm, 100 kg (BMI
40 kg/m 2). Elevation of her arms over her head pro-
duced facial plethora and jugular venous distension
(Pemberton's sign). Her oropharyngeal view was a
Mallampati 3, the thyromental distance was 7 cm,
interincisor gap was 4 cm and neck circumference
was 38 cm. Preoperative endoscopy revealed laryngeal
deviation to the right with diminished right vocal
cord mobility. Thyroid function tests and hematology
labs were within normal limits. A CT scan of the neck
with contrast showed a large heterogeneous thyroid
gland, extending 20 cm from above the hyoid to the
level of the aortic valve in the anterior mediastinum.
There was right-ward tracheal deviation and com-
pression to a minimum of 5 mm, 6 cm inferior to
the glottis. The brachiocephalic veins and superior
vena cava were compressed (Figure 17.3).
Induction of anesthesia
An induction and intubation plan was made after
consultation with the ENT and thoracic surgeons.
Plan A was a bronchoscopy-assisted intubation under
topical anesthesia with sedation. Plan B was intraven-
ous induction with tracheal intubation using a video-
laryngoscope or rigid bronchoscope.
A femoral venous catheter and left radial arterial
line were inserted in the semi-recumbent position and
standard anesthesia monitoring was applied. A rigid
bronchoscope, 2 units of red pack cells and the surgi-
cal teams were immediately available.
With the patient in the seated position and the
anesthesia team to the patient 's right, oxygen was
administered by nasal cannulae and sedation
with remifentanil (0.05 mg/kg/min), and midazolam
(1 mg IV) was commenced, monitoring for cardio-
vascular or respiratory stability. A mixture of equal
parts of lidocaine jelly (2%) and lidocaine (2%)
sweetened with added sweetener ( “Pacey's Paste ”,
Figure 17.4) was applied to the oropharynx. The
adequacy of topical anesthesia was assessed and
reinforced by applying lidocaine ointment (5%) to a
laryngoscope blade and slowly advancing this along
the patient 's tongue until the gag was suppressed.
A pre-warmed 6.5-mm wire-reinforced endotracheal
tube was advanced over an adult bronchoscope and
easily passed beyond the tracheal narrowing. The cuff
was inflated with alkalinized lidocaine (40 mg) [12].
Sevoflurane was slowly increased while maintaining
spontaneous ventilation. Then the bed was adjusted to
a supine position and after establishing that manual
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
170
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012positive-pressure ventilation was tolerated, rocuro-
nium and mechanical ventilation were instituted.
Maintenance of anesthesia
General anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane
and fentanyl. Prior to emergence, granisetron and
dexamethasone were administered for PONV
prophylaxis and to decrease postoperative airway
edema. The retrosternal cervical goiter and ectopic
mediastinal goiter were removed via a neck incision
and sternotomy with minimal blood loss and recur-
rent laryngeal nerves identification and protection.
Before wound closure a Valsalva maneuver was per-
formed to assess venous hemostasis and lymphatic
integrity.
Emergence and recovery from anesthesia
At the completion of the case a Bailey 's maneuver
was performed [9]. The oropharynx was suctioned to
remove secretions. A nasogastric tube was advanced
through the drainage tube of a Proseal LMA ®. Under
deep anesthesia with muscle relaxation, a videolaryn-
goscope was used to position the gastric tube behind
the endotracheal tube and into the esophagus. The
Proseal LMA was advanced over the gastric tube and
once proper positioning was established, the cuff of
the ETT was deflated and the latter was removed.
A bronchoscopic adapter was affixed to the LMA
and bronchoscopy confirmed the laryngeal view.
The muscle relaxant was reversed and the absence of
tracheomalacia and laryngeal movement were
assessed as spontaneous ventilation resumed. Emer-
gence with the PLMA was well tolerated and the
patient removed the airway with minimal coughing
after recovering consciousness. She was transferred to
PACU, where a chest X-ray was performed. After an
uneventful 60 minutes in PACU she was transferred
to the high-dependency unit. Her preoperative total
corrected calcium fell from 2.45 mmol/l (normal ¼
2.2– 2.6 mmol/l) to its lowest level of 1.96 mmol/l 6
hours postoperatively before normalizing prior to
discharge on day 5 with supplements. Levothyroxine
0.15 mg daily was commenced.
Clinical pearls
/C15 With very few exceptions, thyroid surgery is
elective. Readiness for surgery may be judged by
symptom resolution and normalization of weight
and heart rate.
/C15 A small proportion of patients with enlarged
thyroids may be difficult to ventilate via mask or
supraglottic airway.
Figure 17.3. The CT scan shows a large
retrosternal thyroid compressing the
intrathoracic trachea and causing
rightward deviation. This image with
contrast shows compression of the left
brachiocephalic vein and a collateral
vessel in the anterior chest wall.
Chapter 17: Anesthesia for thyroid and parathyroid surgery
171
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012/C15 Symptoms of dysphagia, recumbent dyspnea, a
change in voice or stridor should alert the
anesthesiologist to possible compromised airway
and possible difficulties with airway management
following induction of anesthesia.
/C15 For patients with a retrosternal goiter with tracheal
compression or superior vena cava syndrome,
several induction strategies have been advocated,
including intravenous induction with
neuromuscular blockade and direct laryngoscopy,
inhalational induction, and awake flexible
bronchoscopic intubation; specific management
will depend on the unique features of the individual
case and the skills of the clinical staff.
/C15 Superior vena cava syndrome may result in airway
edema, dependence on spontaneous ventilation
for venous return, and hemodynamic instability.
Dyspnea and hoarseness in such patients may
reflect edema of the vocal cords. Surgical bleeding
is often increased due to increased central venous
pressure. Intravenous access in the legs rather
than in the arms and invasive blood pressure
monitoring should be considered.
/C15 Deep extubation reduces the incidence of
coughing, bucking, and straining but at an
increased risk of airway obstruction and
aspiration.
/C15 A Bailey maneuver, wherein a supraglottic airway
is substituted for the ETT while the patient is still
under neuromuscular blockade and deep
anesthesia, may be helpful. The depth of
anesthesia, oxygen concentration, ventilatory
support, and sequestration of secretions are all
potentially under control. Although this technique
has several advantages, it should be regarded as “a
high-risk maneuver in high-risk patients ” and is
best practiced in low-risk patients to ensure the
requisite skills.
/C15 For post-thyroidectomy neck hematoma, removal
of sutures and hematoma evacuation should be
performed immediately if the patient is in
extremis or if immediate airway management is
Figure 17.4. Pacey's paste (described
by Dr. John A. Pacey) consists of 5 ml 2%
lidocaine and 5 ml of lidocaine jelly,
mixed by way of a three-way stopcock.
The sticky suspension can be sweetened
with sugar or a small amount of artificial
sweetener and is applied by catheter to
the posterior oropharynx.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
172
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012not available. Hematoma evacuation may assist
some patients by relieving direct hematoma
compression but it will not resolve airway
obstruction from perilaryngeal edema.
/C15 The management of thyroid storm includes:
/C15 blocking of the sympathetic response
(b-blockers)
/C15 the blocking of thyroid hormone synthesis
(PTU or methimazole)
/C15 the blocking of thyroid hormone release
(dexamethasone, lopanoic acid or Lugol's
solution)
/C15 the blocking of T 4 to T3 conversion (b-blocker,
PTU, lopanoic acid, steroids)
/C15 supportive measures (restoring electrolyte and
fluid status, anti-pyretics and active cooling,
treatment of heart failure, supplemental oxygen
and ventilation). Dantrolene and magnesium
sulfate have also been used effectively.
/C15 A silicone, wire-reinforced endotracheal
tube with surface or embedded electrodes can
be accurately placed at the level of the vocal
cords, to provide an intralaryngeal surface
EMG recording (e.g., Medtronic Xomed
NIM™ EMG Endotracheal Tube, Minneapolis,
MN).
/C15 Postoperative hypocalcemia, should it occur,
usually presents after 24 hours with perioral
tingling, twitching or tetany and can progress to
seizures or ventricular arrhythmias if left
untreated. Clinical signs include carpopedal spasm
during cuff inflation (Trousseau 's sign), facial
twitching by tapping over the facial nerve at the
parotid gland (Chvostek 's sign), and a prolonged
QT interval on the ECG.
References
1. Amathieu R, Smail N, Catineau J,
et al . Difficult intubation in
thyroid surgery: myth or reality?
Anesth Analg 2006;103(4):965– 8.
2. Farling PA. Thyroid disease.
Br J Anaesth 2000;85(1):15– 28.
3. Cook TM, Morgan PJ, Hersch PE.
Equal and opposite expert
opinion. Airway obstruction
caused by a retrosternal thyroid
mass: management and
prospective international expert
opinion. Anaesthesia 2011;
66(9):828– 36.
4. Radauceanu DS, Dunn JOC,
Lagattolla N, Farquhar-Thomson
D. Temporary extracorporeal
jugulosaphenous bypass for the
peri-operative management of
patients with superior vena caval
obstruction: a report of three
cases. Anaesthesia 2009;64
(11):1246– 9.
5. Mackle T, Meaney J, Timon C.
Tracheoesophageal compression
associated with substernal goitre.
Correlation of symptoms with
cross-sectional imaging findings.
J Laryngol Otol2007;121(4):358– 61.
6. White M, Doherty G, Gauger P.
Evidence-based surgical
management of substernal goiter.
World J Surg 2008;32(7):
1285– 300.
7. Spanknebel K, Chabot JA,
DiGiorgi M, et al. Thyroidectomy
using local anesthesia: a report
of 1,025 cases over 16 years.
J Am Coll Surg 2005;201(3):
375– 85.
8. Koga K, Asai T, Vaughan RS,
Latto IP. Respiratory
complications associated with
tracheal extubation. Timing of
tracheal extubation and use of the
laryngeal mask during emergence
from anaesthesia. Anaesthesia
1998;53(6):540– 4.
9. Nair I, Bailey PM. Use of the
laryngeal mask for airway
maintenance following tracheal
extubation. Anaesthesia 1995;
50(2):174– 5.
10. Hans P, Marechal H, Bonhomme
V. Effect of propofol and
sevoflurane on coughing in
smokers and non-smokers
awakening from general
anaesthesia at the end of a cervical
spine surgery. Br J Anaesth
2008;101(5):731– 7.
11. Hohlrieder M, Tiefenthaler W,
Klaus H, et al. Effect of total
intravenous anaesthesia and
balanced anaesthesia on the
frequency of coughing during
emergence from the anaesthesia.
Br J Anaesth 2007;99(4):
587– 91.
12. Estebe JP, Gentili M, Le CP, Dollo
G, Chevanne F, Ecoffey C.
Alkalinization of intracuff
lidocaine: efficacy and safety.
Anesth Analg 2005;101(5):
1536– 41.
13. Minogue SC, Ralph J, Lampa MJ.
Laryngotracheal topicalization
with lidocaine before intubation
decreases the incidence of
coughing on emergence from
general anesthesia. Anesth Analg
2004;99(4):1253– 7.
14. Aouad MT, Al-Alami AA, Nasr
VG, et al . The effect of low-dose
remifentanil on responses to the
endotracheal tube during
emergence from general
anesthesia. Anesth Analg
2009;108(4):1157– 60.
15. Rosato L, Avenia N, Bernante P,
et al. Complications of thyroid
surgery: analysis of a multicentric
study on 14,934 patients operated
on in Italy over 5 years.
World J Surg 2004;28(3):
271– 6.
Chapter 17: Anesthesia for thyroid and parathyroid surgery
173
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201216. Bononi M, Bonapasta SA,
Scarpini M, et al. Incidence and
circumstances of cervical
hematoma complicating
thyroidectomy and its relationship
to postoperative vomiting. Head
Neck 2010;32(9):1173– 7.
17. Rosenbaum MA, Haridas M,
McHenry CR. Life-threatening
neck hematoma complicating
thyroid and parathyroid surgery.
Am J Surg 2008;195(3):339– 43;
discussion 43.
18. Nayak B, Burman K.
Thyrotoxicosis and thyroid storm.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
[Review] 2006;35(4):663– 86, vii.
19. Abdel Rahim A, Ahmed M,
Hassan M. Respiratory
complications after
thyroidectomy and the need for
tracheostomy in patients with a
large goitre. Br J Surg 1999;
86(1):88– 90.
20. Lacoste L, Gineste D, Karayan J,
et al. Airway complications in
thyroid surgery. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 1993;102(6):441– 6.
21. Bennett A, Hashmi S,
Premachandra D, Wright M. The
myth of tracheomalacia and
difficult intubation in cases of
retrosternal goitre. J Laryngol Otol
2004;118(10):778– 80.
22. Lee C, Cooper RM, Goldstein D.
Management of a patient with
tracheomalacia and supraglottic
obstruction after thyroid surgery.
Canadian J Anaesth
2011;58(11):1029– 33.
23. Snyder SK, Lairmore TC,
Hendricks JC, Roberts JW.
Elucidating mechanisms of
recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
during thyroidectomy and
parathyroidectomy. J Am Coll
Surg 2008;206(1):123– 30.
24. Chan W-F, Lang BH-H, Lo C-Y.
The role of intraoperative
neuromonitoring of recurrent
laryngeal nerve during
thyroidectomy: a comparative
study on 1000 nerves at
risk. Surgery 2006;140(6):
866– 73.
25. Maroof M, Siddique M, Khan RM.
Post-thyroidectomy vocal cord
examination by fibreoscopy
aided by the laryngeal mask
airway. Anaesthesia 1992;
47(5):445.
26. Nemiroff PM, Katz AD.
Extralaryngeal divisions of the
recurrent laryngeal nerve: surgical
and clinical significance. Am
J Surg 1982;144(4):466– 9.
27. Angelos P. Recurrent laryngeal
nerve monitoring: state of the art,
ethical and legal issues. Surg Clin
North Am 2009;89(5):1157– 69.
28. Sturgeon C, Sturgeon T, Angelos
P. Neuromonitoring in thyroid
surgery: attitudes, usage patterns,
and predictors of use among
endocrine surgeons. World J Surg
2009;33(3):417– 25.
29. Johnson S, Goldenberg D.
Intraoperative monitoring of the
recurrent laryngeal nerve during
revision thyroid surgery.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am
2008;41(6):1147– 54.
30. Pattou F, Combemale F, Fabra S,
et al. Hypocalcemia following
thryoid surgery: incidence
and prediction of outcomes.
World J Surg 1998;22(7):
718– 24.
31. Bacuzzi A, Dionigi G, Del Bosco
A, et al. Anaesthesia for thyroid
surgery: perioperative
management. Int J Surg 2008;6
Suppl 1:S82 – 5.
32. Mihai R, Farndon JR. Parathyroid
disease and calcium metabolism.
Br J Anaesth 2000;85(1):29– 43.
33. Chen H, Pruhs Z, Starling JR,
Mack E. Intraoperative
parathyroid hormone testing
improves cure rates in patients
undergoing minimally invasive
parathyroidectomy. Surgery
2005;138(4):583– 7; discussion
7– 90.
34. Monchik JM, Barellini L, Langer
P, Kahya A. Minimally invasive
parathyroid surgery in 103
patients with local/regional
anesthesia, without exclusion
criteria. Surgery 2002;131(5):
502– 8.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
174
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:33:28 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.020
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
18
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for obstructive sleep
apnea surgery
Ursula Galway and Alan Kominsky
Introduction
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a sleep-related
breathing disorder that involves periodic, partial or
complete upper airway obstruction despite an
ongoing effort to breathe. It is caused by the repetitive
collapse or partial collapse of the pharyngeal airway
during sleep. This leads to apneas (complete obstruc-
tion of the airway), hypopneas (partial obstruction
leading to desaturation) and respiratory effort-related
arousals (RERAs – partial obstruction leading to
arousal but no significant desaturation). The preva-
lence of OSA is estimated to be 2% in women and 4%
in men [1].
Typically the OSA patient suffers obstruction of
the airway in the presence of continued movement of
the diaphragm. Attempted inspiration continues and
arterial oxygen saturation may fall. This hypoxia leads
to partial arousal from sleep, with a sudden reopening
of the airway and an intake of breath. This may be
followed by brief hyperventilation and the cycle
begins again. These events may cause episodic sleep-
associated oxygen desaturation and hypercarbia. The
severity of the disease is determined by the number of
these respiratory events per hour, known as the RDI
or respiratory disturbance index [2]. Central sleep
apnea is a condition in which the brain 's respiratory
control center is imbalanced during sleep. The brain
does not respond to changing levels of carbon diox-
ide. During periods of apnea there is no effort to
breathe, no chest wall movement and no obstruction
during pauses. Hyperpnea may follow these apneic
spells. Central sleep apnea may be caused by condi-
tions such as heart failure and stroke.
OSA leads to disturbed sleep and possible daytime
sleepiness. Consequently, patients can be a danger to
themselves and others, particularly if driving. More
serious long-term consequences include a rise in sym-
pathetic tone, ischemic heart disease, hypertension,
tachyarrhythmias, deterioration in cognitive function,
pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, congestive
heart failure, cardiovascular accident/stroke and
sudden death. These sequelae are the result of the
physiologic consequences of the respiratory events.
In severe cases, pulmonary hypertension and poly-
cythemia occur due to prolonged hypoxemia. Sys-
temic hypertension occurs due to increased levels of
catecholamines. According to the National Commis-
sion on Sleep Disorders Research, there are 38 000
cardiovascular deaths per year in the United States
secondary to OSA [3]. Untreated, the 15-year mortal-
ity for adults with severe OSA is 30% [4]. OSA in itself
is associated with an increase in postoperative compli-
cations and is an independent risk factor for increased
morbidity and mortality [5,6].
Clinical features that suggest the presence of
OSA include increased neck circumference (> 17 inches
in men > 16 inches in women), body mass index
/C2130 kg/m2, Mallampati score of 3 or 4, retrognathia,
macroglossia, tonsillar hypertrophy, enlarged uvula, high
narrow hard palate, and/or nasal abnormalities [7].
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is
considered the first line of treatment for patients with
OSA; however, surgery may be considered if this
treatment is not tolerated.
Diagnosis
OSA is diagnosed by clinical history and an overnight
sleep study or polysomnography (PSG). OSA is sus-
pected by the occurrence of daytime sleepiness, loud
snoring, witnessed breathing interruptions or awa-
kenings due to gasping or choking. The severity of
OSA cannot be predicted clinically, therefore
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
175
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012objective testing is required. Polysomnography
includes monitoring of chest wall movement, airflow
dynamics, heart rate, blood pressure, arterial oxygen
saturation, electroencephalogram, electrooculogram,
and chin electromyogram during sleep. Obstructive
events are recorded as apnea hypopnea index (AHI)
or respiratory disturbance index (RDI). The Ameri-
can Academy of Sleep Medicine currently recom-
mends the use of RDI in the determination of sleep
apnea severity. RDI is defined as the total number of
apneas, hypopneas, and respiratory effort-related
arousals during sleep divided by the number of hours
of recorded sleep. In contrast the AHI is defined as
the total number of apneas and hypopneas during the
study divided by the number of hours of recorded
sleep. OSA is confirmed if the number of RDIs is >15
events per hour or greater than five events per hour in
a patient who also reports unintentional sleep
episodes during waking hours, daytime sleepiness,
un-refreshing sleep, fatigue, insomnia, waking up,
breath-holding, gasping, choking, or bed-partner
description of snoring and breathing interruptions.
OSA is classified as mild, moderate or severe based
on the respiratory disturbance index [7].
Mild: RDI 5 –14
Moderate: RDI 15 –29
Severe: RDI >30
Medical treatment
Positive airway pressure (PAP) is considered the first
line of treatment for patients with OSA. PAP treat-
ment attempts to maintain a competent airway
through the application of continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP), bi-level positive pressure (BiPAP)
or auto-titrating positive pressure (APAP). It can be
applied via the oral, nasal or oronasal route. PAP is
the treatment of choice for all severities of OSA. PAP
has the potential to reduce cardiac dysrhythmias,
stabilize blood pressure, and improve hemodynamics.
PAP has been found to be protective against cardio-
vascular death and improves survival [8].
Oral appliances (OA) may also be used. Oral
appliances may improve airway patency by enlarging
the upper airway and improving upper airway muscle
tone. They may be used by those intolerant of CPAP
who have mild to moderate OSA.
Behavioral treatment used in the treatment of
OSA includes weight loss, positional therapy, and
avoidance of sedatives and alcohol at bedtime.
Surgical treatment
Despite being the first line of treatment, CPAP is
often poorly tolerated by patients. More than 50% of
patients with OSA are intolerant of CPAP. Patients
turn to surgical correction in an attempt to find a
cure. Surgery may be considered in patients who
have obstructing anatomy that is surgically correct-
able or when PAP or OA are inadequate or poorly
tolerated. It may also be considered as an adjunct
when obstructive anatomy compromises other ther-
apies [4].
Patients who fail medical management or desire
surgical therapy should initially be evaluated for eligi-
bility for surgery. The presence and severity of OSA
must be confirmed before undergoing surgery. Thus,
a preoperative PSG is warranted. Desired outcomes
include resolution of clinical signs and symptoms,
normalization of sleep, AHI, and oxygen saturation
[9]. Indications for surgery depend on the severity of
the sleep apnea, symptoms, and comorbid conditions,
and the anatomical location of the obstruction.
Patients should be counseled on the surgical options,
goals, risk, benefits, and possible complications.
Surgeries can be performed singly or in a staged
manner [4].
Surgical treatment has a variable success rate, with
patients seldom receiving a total cure. Surgical success
has been defined as an AHI less than 20/h and a
reduction of the AHI by 50% or more after surgery.
Surgical cure is defined as AHI <5/h [4]. After any
surgical procedure for OSA, patients should undergo
follow-up evaluation including objective testing as
well as clinical assessment for residual symptoms [9].
Anatomically, resistance can occur anywhere from
one to four places; intranasal, at the level of the palate
(type 1), at the palate and the base of tongue (type 2)
or at the base of the tongue alone (type 3) [10]. The
palate of patients with OSA has increased muscle and
fat content compared with control patients [11]. Any
of these locations may be targeted during surgery in
an attempt to reduce obstruction. Surgical treatment
involves either modification of the obstructing upper
airway or, rarely, total bypass of the upper airway
(tracheostomy) (Table 18.1).
Nasal procedures
The three anatomic areas that can contribute to OSA
as a result of increased nasal resistance include the
alar cartilage/nasal valve area, the septum and the
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
176
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012turbinates [12]. Nasal surgeries aimed at reducing
OSA symptoms include septoplasty, functional rhino-
plasty, turbinate reduction, and nasal polypectomy.
Septoplasty and turbinate reduction are the most
common nasal surgeries. Improvements in OSA post
nasal surgery may only be minimal but can improve
AHI scores and may decrease CPAP pressure
requirements [13,14].
Oral, oropharyngeal and
nasopharyngeal procedures
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) involves removal
of the redundant soft palate, pharyngeal tissues and as
the uvula. This attempts to widen the oropharyngeal
inlet. The tonsils are also removed. Early complica-
tions such as wound dehiscence, bleeding and infec-
tion are rare. Late complications can include
velopharyngeal insufficiency, postnasal secretions,
pharyngeal discomfort, odynophagia, tongue numb-
ness, stenosis, and dysphagia [12]. The success rate is
reported to be between 40% and 60%, with a cure rate
of 16% as it only addresses oropharyngeal obstruction
and not hypopharyngeal obstruction [4]. Newer tech-
niques have been developed that are tissue-sparing
with similar results.
Uvulopalatal flap (UPF)
This procedure is a modification of the UPPP involving
superior suspension of a limitedly resected uvula toward
the hard–soft palate junction. There is no difference in
the outcome between the UFP and UPPP groups; how-
ever, there is less pain in the UFP group [12].
Laser-assisted uvuloplasty
This is an office-based procedure in which the soft
palate is reshaped using a CO 2 laser. This is not
approved as a treatment option for OSA [9].
Radiofrequency ablation of the tongue
Radiofrequency energy is used to reduce the size of the
base of tongue. This procedure is an adjunct to other
treatments and not a primary treatment for OSA [4].
Tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy
Please refer to Chapter 32 for more on tonsillectomy
and adenoidectomy.
Hypopharyngeal procedures
Tongue advancement/stabilization surgeries
Genioglossus advancement (GA)
This surgery involves the pulling forward of the base of
tongue in an attempt to reduce obstruction caused by
the tongue. It is often paired with UPPP and hyoid
suspension. A rectangular osteotomy is performed
intraorally on the mandibular symphyseal bone, which
also contains the geniotubercle. This bone is advanced
anteriorly, rotated to allow bony overlap, and immo-
bilized with a titanium screw. Thus, the genioturbicle
with the genioglossus insertion is moved forward with-
out moving the mandible. This results in the tongue
Table 18.1. Surgical procedures and anesthetic choices for OSA
Anatomical
location
Surgical procedure Anesthesia
Nasal Septoplasty, Functional rhinoplasty,
Turbinate reduction, Nasal polypectomy
Local /C6sedation or general anesthesia with
supraglottic airway or endotracheal tube
Oral/
oropharyngeal/
nasopharyngeal
UPPP, UPF, Tonsillectomy/adenoidectomy General anesthesia with endotracheal tube
Hypopharyngeal GA, Tongue reduction surgery General anesthesia with endotracheal tube
Laryngeal Epiglottoplasty, Hyoid suspension General anesthesia with endotracheal tube
Global airway MMA, Maxillomandibular expansion General anesthesia with nasotracheal tube
Trachea Tracheostomy Local /C6sedation or general anesthesia with
supraglottic airway or endotracheal tube
Chapter 18: Anesthesia for obstructive sleep apnea surgery
177
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012being moved forward. Complications may include
infection, hematoma, injury to the genioglossus
muscle, and paresthesia of the lower teeth [12].
Tongue-reduction surgeries
The tongue size can be reduced via partial glossctomy,
tongue ablation or lingual tonsillectomy.
Laryngeal procedures
Epiglottoplasty
Hyoid suspension
The hyoid bone, located just below the mandible, is
involved in maintaining upper airway patency. The
hyoid bone is identified via an external neck incision
and then surgically repositioned anteriorly by attach-
ing it to the thyroid cartilage or suspending it from
the mandible. Complications may include infection,
seroma, and dysphagia. The procedure is often com-
bined with UPPP or GA [12].
Global airway procedures
Maxillomandibular advancement (MMA)
When abnormalities of the maxillofacial skeleton are
the main contributor to OSA, MMA can be con-
sidered. MMA achieves enlargement of the entire
upper airway. Anatomic abnormalities which may
benefit from MMA include hypopharyngeal and/or
velo-oropharyngeal narrowing. The surgery is
designed to enlarge the velo-orohypopharyngeal
airway without direct exploitation of the pharyngeal
tissue [15]. Intraoral osteotomy of the maxilla and
mandible is performed. A Le Fort 1 is created with
bilateral sagittal split osteotomies of the mandible.
The maxilla and mandible are advanced anteriorly
and are stabilized with titanium plates, screws, or
bone grafts. Advancement of the mandible results in
advancement the tongue and suprahyoid muscles.
Advancement of the maxilla results in advancement
of the velum and velopharyngeal muscles. Transient
vagally mediated bradycardia can occur secondary to
maxillary or mandibular advancement [16]. It is the
most effective OSA surgery available. The surgical
success rate is 86%, with a cure rate of 43% [4].
Intraoperative blood loss can be between 100 and
500 ml. Complications may include infection, bleed-
ing, malocclusion, and permanent numbness [12].
Maxillomandibular expansion
Osteotomies are performed above the roots of the
maxillary teeth, between the roots of the maxillary
central incisors and between the mandibular central
incisor teeth. Distractors are placed and left in place
for 3 months.
They provide stability to the maxilla and man-
dible, allowing for slow expansion until the new bone
has ossified. It is less invasive than MMA; however,
treatment time is lengthened [12].
Tracheostomy
Tracheostomy is the first reported treatment for OSA;
however, it is rarely done these days for OSA. Trache-
ostomy totally bypasses the upper airway. It is the
most effective treatment; however, patient acceptance
is low. It is now used as a temporary measure for
airway protection in the perioperative period (in mor-
bidly obese patients) or as a long-term treatment
option in severely obese patients or patients with
craniofacial anomalies in whom all other forms of
treatment have failed [12]. Complications can include
infection, tissue necrosis, bleeding, recurrent bron-
chitis, granulation tissue, stoma stenosis, and tra-
cheo-innominate fistula formation [4].
Multimodal procedures
Any of the above-mentioned surgical procedures can
be performed singly, multiply or as staged proced-
ures. Often a patient will undergo UPPP/UPF and
GA/HA/radiofrequency tongue base reduction first.
After a 4 –6 month healing period a PSG can be
obtained to assess outcome. If OSA persists, a MMA
can be considered as a phase 2 operation. The surgical
success rate of multimodal procedures is 66% [4].
Anesthetic management of a patient
undergoing OSA surgery
Preoperative management
Optimal care begins with a tailored preoperative
assessment to aid patient risk stratification and opti-
mization [1].
Preoperative history and physical exam
A thorough history and physical exam should be
obtained evaluating all of the patients ' disease pro-
cesses and co-morbidities. Patients with OSA are
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
178
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012more likely to have the comorbidities listed in Table
18.2. These disease conditions need to be optimized as
well as possible prior to undergoing anesthesia and
surgery. Some comorbidities may be the direct seque-
lae of the chronic hypoxia and hypercarbia caused by
the OSA. Consultation with specialists such as cardi-
ology and pulmonology may be warranted, especially
if significant comorbidities exist.
Preoperative testing should be directed by the pre-
existing comorbidities. A preoperative EKG may show
signs of heart strain, ventricular hypertrophy, arrthy-
mia or hypertension. A chest X-ray may show cardio-
megaly or chronic preexisting respiratory conditions.
A preoperative echocardiogram may be warranted
if suspicion of right heart failure or pulmonary hyper-
tension exists. Complete blood count may show signs
of polycythemia if the patient is chronically hypoxe-
mic. A basic metabolic panel should be obtained to
assess any electrolyte abnormalities, particularly if
the patient is on any diuretics for hypertension.
A coagulation panel is not necessary unless the patient
is on chronic anticoagulation or has a history of
bleeding abnormalities.
Airway assessment
A thorough airway exam is of the utmost importance.
Patients with OSA may be difficult to intubate or venti-
late. The upper airway abnormalities which lead to OSA
can be the same abnormalities which lead to a difficult
airway. Snoring and OSA were found to be independent
risk factors for difficult mask ventilation [17]. Difficult
intubation was found to occur eight times more often in
OSA patients than in control patients [18]. An OSA
patient (Figure 18.1) is likely to have tonsil or uvula
hypertrophy, anterior positioning of the larynx, retro-
or micrognathia, nasal obstruction, thick neck, high
Mallampati score (Figure 18.2) and a decreased thyro-
mental distance (Figure 18.3) [2]. Old anesthesia records
if available should be reviewed, looking in particular for
ventilation or intubation difficulties and whether there
has been any interval changes in weight and its impact
on the airway. The patient should be educated regarding
the possibility of an awake intubation.
Table 18.2. Comorbidities associated with OSA [8]
Cardiac Respiratory Metabolic Neurologic Others
Treatment-resistant hypertension Asthma Type 2 diabetes Stroke Alcoholism
Congestive heart failure, cor pulmonale Pulmonary hypertension Metabolic syndrome GERD
Ischemic heart disease Hypothyroidism
Atrial fibrillation, dysrhythmias Morbid obesity
Figure 18.1. Classic appearance of a patient with obstructive sleep
apnea. Image courtesy of Dr. B. Abdelmalak. Reprinted with
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography ©
2012. All rights reserved.
Figure 18.2. Side profile of an obstructive sleep apnea patient
showing a short thyromental distance. Image courtesy of
Dr. B. Abdelmalak. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic
Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 18: Anesthesia for obstructive sleep apnea surgery
179
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Surgical evaluation
The preoperative ENT evaluation will include a direct
visual exam and a fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy to
assess anatomic abnormalities that may be contrib-
uting to OSA [12]. Fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy
allows the surgeon to assess the entire airway from
nose to larynx.
The Muller maneuver (maximal inspiratory effort
against closed nose and mouth) can give some insight
into the level at which the obstruction occurs and the
dimensions of the obstruction.
A CT scan can provide good airway and
bony resolution and an MRI allows evaluation of
the palate, tongue base, and posterior pharyngeal
wall. These tests may sometimes be ordered preopera-
tively [10].
Aspiration prophylaxis
Obese patients, due to their high intraabdominal
pressure, larger gastric fluid volume and lower gastric
pH, may be at risk of aspiration. Consideration
should be given to aspiration prophylaxis with ant-
acid, proton pump inhibitor, and esophageal motility
stimulant prior to induction.
Preoperative sedation
Unsupervised preoperative sedation should be
avoided. OSA patients are at higher risk of obstruc-
tion and apnea after the administration of sedatives. If
sedatives are to be given, it should only be done in a
monitored environment.
Intraoperative management
Special consideration should be given to the OSA
patient with regard to anesthetic technique, choice
of pain medication, airway management, and preven-
tion of airway edema.
Choice of anesthetic technique
General anesthesia with a secured, intubated airway is
preferable because of the risk of aspiration of blood
from the surgical site and the patient 's likelihood of
obstruction when sedated. There is also the risk of
laryngospasm if blood or secretions touch the vocal
cords in an unsecured airway. OSA patients have a
propensity towards airway collapse, sleep deprivation,
and blunting of physiological response to hypoxia and
hypercarbia. This makes them especially susceptible to
the respiratory depressant effects of sedatives, opioids,
and inhaled anesthetics. These drugs reduce the
brain's arousal response and may worsen the number
of respiratory events, leading to hypoxemia and hyper-
carbia [2]. Patients with OSA receiving oral or paren-
teral opioids are 12 –14 times more likely to
have postoperative oxygen desaturations than those
receiving nonopioid analgesic agents [19]. One study
showed that patients receiving 2.9 mg/kg fentanyl
versus 1.7 mg/kg fentanyl intraoperatively had more
obstruction after extubation and other extubation
problems [20]. However, these procedures may be
quite painful and if only short-acting narcotics are
used, additional doses of narcotics may be needed
in PACU, delaying discharge. It may be prudent to
judiciously dose longer-acting narcotics at the begin-
ning of the surgery so that they do not delay extubation
at the conclusion of this relatively short procedure, and
at the same time remain effective while in the recovery
room. With that in mind, careful thought should
be given when selecting intraoperative medications.
Consideration should also be given to the use of
non-narcotic analgesics or short-acting narcotic anal-
gesics. Anesthesia can be maintained using total IV
anesthesia such as a propofol infusion, due to its quick
onset and offset. A short-acting narcotic infusion such
as remifentanil or alfentanil may also be used. Insol-
uble anesthetic agents such as desflurane, which are
more quickly eliminated when discontinued, should be
considered for maintenance of anesthesia. However,
all other inhalational anesthetics may be safely used as
long as they are discontinued at the appropriate time
towards the end of surgery based on their solubility.
Figure 18.3. Mallampati grade 4 oropharyngeal view in
an obstructive sleep apnea patient. Image courtesy of
Dr. B. Abdelmalak. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic
Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
180
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Airway management
As mentioned, patients with OSA may have a difficult
airway and should be managed accordingly. Patients
may have excess oro- and hypopharyngeal soft tissue
leading to significant obstruction during induction of
anesthesia. They may also have mandibular or maxil-
lary deficiencies, macroglossia, lingual tonsil hyper-
trophy, enlarged uvula, redundant pharyngeal tissue,
large neck circumference, an anterior larynx, and a
long airway, making direct laryngoscopy difficult.
Patients ramping from scapulae to head and utilizing
the sniffing position may help improve visualization
of the glottis. The patient should breathe 100%
oxygen for 3 minutes with a tightly fitting mask to
ensure adequate pre-oxygenation. Two-person mask
ventilation with the aid of oral or nasal airways may
be needed. An awake intubation should be considered
if there is any question of difficulty of ventilation or
intubation. Video-assisted laryngoscopy may be
useful in helping visualize the larynx if unable to do
so with direct laryngoscopy [21]. The ASA difficult
airway algorithm should always be followed [22].
Patients undergoing MMA need to be nasally intub-
ated for the surgery. Procedures such as radiofre-
quency ablation of the tongue and laser-assisted
uvuloplasty are often done as an adjunct to other
treatments; however, if performed alone, anesthesia
is not required. After surgery has been completed,
patients should be extubated fully awake with full
reversal of neuromuscular blockade. They should
demonstrate purposeful movement and adequate
strength and tidal volume. If bleeding is a concern
the surgeon may request a deep extubation, as
coughing during emergence may worsen bleeding.
A deep extubation should be performed with extreme
caution. Although the decrease in coughing achieved
with a deep extubation is beneficial, there is a serious
risk of loss of airway or laryngospasm with a deep
extubation. Even if the patient was previously easy to
intubate and ventilate, the postoperative airway has
now been traumatized and may be edematous,
bloody, and very different from the airway that was
there to begin with. Extubation over a tube exchanger
may be appropriate. The stomach can be suctioned
prior to emergence as blood from the surgical site
may have gathered in the stomach, causing stomach
irritation with the resultant nausea and emesis, which
can be a potential aspiration risk. Nasal packing
worsens sleep apnea, and should be avoided after
nasal surgery by using quilting septal sutures, septal
splints, nasal tubes or nasaopharyngeal airways sewn
in place [2].
Preventing airway edema
Postoperative airway edema after upper airway sur-
gery is a concern. Although rare, airway obstruction
leading to reintubation or tracheostomy most com-
monly occurs within hours after surgery. Airway
edema may occur due to the airway surgery itself or
during intubation attempts. Although controversial,
systemic steroids may reduce airway edema and can
be given prior to surgery and several times postopera-
tively. Dexamethasone, 10 –15 mg, is given every 6 –12
hours. Antibiotics prevent infection-induced edema
and may be administered perioperatively. Application
of ice packs postoperatively reduces edema [2].
Postoperative management
Postoperative complications after OSA surgery
include respiratory events, infection, cardiovascular
events, and bleeding. A prospective cohort study util-
ized the Department of Veterans Affairs National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP)
database for the years 1991 –2001 to look at post-
operative complications of 3130 patients undergoing
inpatient UPPP with or without other concurrent
procedures. They found the incidence of 30-day
serious complications including death was 1.6%.
Incidence of death was 0.2%, respiratory complic-
ations 1.1%, cardiovascular complications 0.3% and
hemorrhage 0.3% [23].
Special consideration should be given to the
following.
Analgesia
As mentioned previously, it is best to minimize opioids
and sedatives, which may suppress respiratory drive
and lead to life-threatening hypoxia. Patients should be
warned of postoperative discomfort. Mild pain can be
treated with oral opioids, acetaminophen or tramadol,
best given in the liquid form. Small intravenous doses
of short-acting opioids such as fentanyl can be given.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents should be
used with caution due to their potential to cause plate-
let dysfunction and bleeding. Sedating antiemetics
such as prochlorpromazine should be avoided as they
may cause the patient to obstruct postoperatively.
Chapter 18: Anesthesia for obstructive sleep apnea surgery
181
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Oxygenation and disposition
Postoperatively, OSA patients may have a rebound of
delta or rapid eye movement sleep and may be prone
to more severe sleep apnea. This is likely for the first
24–48 hours [24,25]. Patients with OSA have a greater
increase in AHI after surgery, peaking on postopera-
tive day 3 and returning to preoperative level on night
7 [26]. Most serious complications occur in the first
24 hours. The ASA guidelines state that monitoring of
patients with OSA postoperatively should be for a
median of 3 hours longer than for those without OSA.
Patients with OSA should be monitored for a
median of 7 hours after the last episode of airway
obstruction or hypoxemia while breathing room air
in an un-stimulating environment [1]. These guide-
lines, however, may really not be reasonable as most
patients will continue to have apnea after surgery as
surgery is not initially curative [2]. Airway compli-
cation rate for UPPP ranges from 1.4 –10.3%. [20,27].
Although patients post OSA surgery may have a
higher incidence of respiratory complications, ICU
care may only be appropriate for the sickest of OSA
patients [20,28]. One study suggests that postopera-
tive ICU monitoring is not needed for most OSA
patients and the decision should be made on an indi-
vidualized basis taking into consideration the
patient's other medical comorbidities, the degree of
airway crowding, and the number of simultaneous
surgical procedures being performed as well as the
potential for postoperative edema. Complications
tend to be higher in patients undergoing UPPP along
with other procedures particularly concurrent nasal
procedures [27].
Supplemental oxygen should be given to the
patients until they are able to maintain baseline
oxygen saturation on room air, bearing in mind that
supplemental oxygen may increase the duration of
apneic episodes and may delay the detection of atelec-
tasis, transient apnea and hypoventilation by pulse
oximetry. During hospitalization, patients should
have continuous pulse oximetry until they are at least
back to their baseline. This does not necessarily need
to be done in an ICU but can be done in a step-down
unit or by telemetry. Pulse oximetry should be applied
until the room air saturation is at least above 90%.
Intermittent oximetry monitoring has minimal bene-
fit and is not recommended. Positive airway pressure
devices can be used after most upper airway surgeries,
except for maxillary or mandibular advancement due
to the potential for subcutaneous emphysema [2].
According to the ASA practice guidelines for the
perioperative management of patients with OSA,
those undergoing airway surgery such as UPPP are
not candidates for this surgery on an outpatient basis
[1]. As far as discharge plans go, a reasonable goal
should be that patients ' walking oxygen saturation,
respiratory event frequency, and degree of hypoxemia
should be no worse at discharge than at baseline [2].
Patient positioning
Patients with OSA who sleep in the lateral, prone or
sitting position usually have less apnea/hypopnea epi-
sodes than in the supine position. Although there is
insufficient literature to guide us on optimal position-
ing in the postoperative setting, most agree on the
avoidance of the supine position. In recovery, patients
should be placed in the off-supine position.
Postoperative hemorrhage
Patients may be prone to postoperative bleeding,
especially after tonsillectomy. Good blood pressure
control and perhaps the avoidance of NSAIDS pre-
and postoperatively may help reduce bleeding events.
Summary
The OSA patient presenting for OSA surgery presents
a number of challenges to the anesthesiologist. These
patients may have a number of cardiac and respira-
tory comorbidities as well as very challenging airways.
Consideration should be given to optimization of
medical comorbidities preoperatively, careful airway
management, and minimization of sedating pain
medications intraoperatively. Postoperatively airway
edema, hemorrhage, and respiratory complications
are a concern and the patient should be recovered in
a monitored setting until they return to their baseline.
Case study – anesthesia for OSA surgery
Preoperative management
A 40-year-old male presented to an ENT surgeon for
evaluation for UPPP for OSA. He had a known his-
tory of severe OSA diagnosed by polysomnography.
He was placed on CPAP therapy but does not tolerate
it, and thus wants to explore a surgical option.
He had a BMI of 50 and weighed 160 kg. His vital
signs included blood pressure of 140/75, heart rate 63
and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. He had a
history of type 2 diabetes on oral hypoglycemic agents
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
182
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and a history of hypertension, well controlled on an
ACE inhibitor and b-blocker. He is a current smoker.
Fiberoptic nasopharyngoscopy was performed by his
ENT surgeon and showed excessive redundant oro-
pharyngeal tissue with collapsibility.
Physical exam revealed a morbidly obese gentle-
man with normal cardiovascular, respiratory, and
neurological examinations. Preoperative workup
included a complete blood count (CBC) and basic
metabolic panel (BMP), which were both normal.
EKG showed normal sinus rhythm. An airway exam-
ination revealed normal mouth opening with a Mal-
lampati score of 4, macroglossia, and excessive soft
tissue in the pharyngeal area. He had a normal thyro-
mental distance but an excessively thick neck. The
patient reported no previous anesthetic complica-
tions, except for a broken tooth and sore throat after
undergoing gallbladder surgery 2 years previously. He
was instructed to discontinue smoking and also
instructed to withhold his ACE inhibitor and oral
hypoglycemic agents on the morning of surgery but
to take his b-blocker.
Intraoperative management
The patient was seen and examined by the anesthe-
siologist on the morning of surgery, who decided to
proceed with an awake fiberoptic intubation based on
the airway exam and history of dental trauma with
intubation in the past, indicating a difficult airway.
The patient was given 1 mg of midazolam only after
he was brought into the operating room and monitors
were applied. Glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg was given as an
antisialagogue. He was sedated with a dexmedetomi-
dine infusion with a 1 mg/kg bolus over 20 minutes
followed by an infusion of 0.5 mg/kg/h. His airway
was topicalized with aerosolized 4% lidocaine.
He was successfully intubated with a 7.5 mm ID
endotracheal tube via a flexible fiberoptic intubating
bronchoscope. Anesthesia was then induced with pro-
pofol, fentanyl, and rocuronium. Anesthesia was
maintained with air, oxygen, and desflurane with
intermittent small boluses of fentanyl. Intravenous
antibiotics were given. Dexamethasone 8 mg IV was
given for PONV prophylaxis and to decrease post-
operative airway edema. Surgery proceeded unevent-
fully. Prior to emergence intravenous lidocaine was
given to help prevent coughing and ondansetron was
given as an antiemetic. His neuromuscular blockade
was fully reversed. Only after the patient had been
shown to be breathing spontaneously, with adequate
tidal volume and respiratory rate, strong head lift, and
responding to commands, was he extubated. He was
brought to the recovery room on 10 liters of oxygen
per minute delivered via simple face mask in the
sitting position.
Postoperative management
In the recovery room the patient complained of 6/10
pain. He was treated with small boluses of intraven-
ous fentanyl and an elixir of oxycodone/acetamino-
phen with some relief. He was noted to be somnolent
with episodes of apnea, airway obstruction, and
oxygen desaturation of around 80%. He was placed
on his CPAP mask with some improvement of the
apneic and hypoxic episodes. He was then sent to an
ENT step-down unit with telemetry and continuous
pulse oximetry monitoring on CPAP therapy. On
postoperative day 1 he experienced less pain and was
noted to be more awake, with no daytime apneic or
hypoxic episodes. He was weaned off the CPAP mask
but kept on 2 l/min of oxygen via nasal cannula. The
oxygen was weaned later in the day as he maintained a
room air saturation of 96%. At night the CPAP mask
was placed and no hypoxic episodes were noted. On
postoperative day 2 he was discharged home on oral
pain medications.
Complications
As this case study describes, although patients undergo
surgical procedures in an attempt to cure their OSA
symptoms, these apneic and hypoxic episodes may
continue or possibly worsen in the early postoperative
period. Postoperatively, OSA patients may have a
rebound of delta or rapid eye movement sleep and
may be prone to more severe sleep apnea with a greater
increase in AHI after surgery compared with preopera-
tive AHI, peaking on postoperative day 3. Thus, it is
imperative to monitor the patients ' oxygen saturation
continuously, to be cautious with intravenous narcot-
ics, and to possibly consider the use of CPAP therapy
in the first few postoperative days.
Clinical pearls
/C15Serious long-term consequences of OSA include a
rise in sympathetic tone, ischemic heart disease,
hypertension, tachyarrhythmias, deterioration in
cognitive function, pulmonary hypertension, cor
Chapter 18: Anesthesia for obstructive sleep apnea surgery
183
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:25 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012pulmonale, congestive heart failure,
cardiovascular accident/stroke and sudden death.
/C15Clinical features that increase the likelihood that
OSA is present include increased neck
circumference (>17 inches in men > 16 inches in
women), body mass index 30 kg/m 2 or more,
Mallampati score of 3 or 4, retrognathia,
macroglossia, tonsillar hypertrophy, an enlarged
uvula, a high narrow hard palate, and/or nasal
abnormalities.
/C15OSA is classified according to the respiratory
disturbance index (RDI):
/C14Mild: RDI 5 to 14
/C14Moderate: RDI 15 to 29
/C14Severe: RDI 30 or more
/C15The upper airway abnormalities which lead to OSA
can be the same abnormalities which lead to a
difficult airway; difficult intubation is eight times
more frequent in OSA patients than in control
patients. Snoring and OSA are independent risk
factors for difficult mask ventilation.
/C15Consideration should be given to aspiration
prophylaxis. Unsupervised preoperative sedation
should be avoided.
/C15General anesthesia with a secured, intubated
airway is preferable because of the risk of
aspiration of blood from the surgical site and the
patient's likelihood of obstruction when sedated.
There is also a risk of laryngospasm if blood or
secretions touch the vocal cords in an unsecured
airway.
/C15Systemic steroids may reduce surgery- and/or
intubation-induced airway edema and can be
given prior to surgery as well as postoperatively.
/C15Postoperatively, it is best to minimize opioids and
sedatives, which may suppress respiratory drive;
acetaminophen or tramadol are commonly used
in such a setting. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents should be used with caution due to their
potential to cause platelet dysfunction and
bleeding. Sedating antiemetic agents such as
prochlorperazine should be avoided as well.
/C15Patients with OSA have a greater increase in AHI
after surgery compared with preoperative AHI,
peaking on postoperative day 3 and returning to
preoperative level on night 7. Most serious
complications occur in the first 24 hours. ASA
guidelines state that monitoring of patients with
OSA postoperatively should be for approximately
3 hours longer than for those without OSA.
/C15During hospitalization, patients should have
continuous pulse oximetry (with supplemental
oxygen when needed) until they are at least back
to their baseline.
/C15Posteoperatively, patients with OSA should be
monitored until they reach baseline status. ICU
care may be needed for the sickest of OSA patients.
References
1. Gross JB, Bachenberg KL,
Benumof JL, et al. Practice
guidelines for the perioperative
management of patients with
obstructive sleep apnea: a report
by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Perioperative Management of
patients with obstructive sleep
apnea. Anesthesiology 2006;104
(5):1081–93; quiz 117 –8.
2. Mickelson SA. Anesthetic and
postoperative management of the
obstructive sleep apnea patient.
Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am
2009;21(4):425–34.
3. Office GP. National Commission on
Sleep Disorders Research. Wake up
America; A National Sleep Alert .
Government Printing Office; 1993.
4. Holty JE, Guilleminault C. Surgical
options for the treatment of
obstructive sleep apnea. Med Clin
North Am 2010;94(3):479–515.
5. Liao P, Yegneswaran B,
Vairavanathan S, Zilberman P,
Chung F. Postoperative
complications in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea: a
retrospective matched cohort study.
Can J Anaesth 2009;56(11):
819–28.
6. Marshall NS, Wong KK, Liu PY,
et al. Sleep apnea as an independent
risk factor for all-cause mortality:
the Busselton Health Study. Sleep
2008;31(8):1079–85.
7. Epstein LJ, Kristo D, Strollo PJ Jr,
et al. Clinical guideline for the
evaluation, management and long-
term care of obstructive sleep apnea
in adults. J Clin Sleep Med 2009;
5(3):263–76.
8. Seet E, Chung F. Obstructive sleep
apnea: preoperative assessment.
Anesthesiol Clin2010;28(2):199–215.
9. Aurora RN, Casey KR, Kristo D,
et al. Practice parameters for the
surgical modifications of the upper
airway for obstructive sleep apnea
in adults. Sleep (Rochester) 2010;
33(10):1408–13.
10. McMains KC, Terris DJ. Evidence-
based medicine in sleep apnea
surgery. Otolaryngol Clin North Am
2003;36(3):539–61.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
184
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:25 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201211. Stauffer JL, Buick MK, Bixler EO,
et al. Morphology of the uvula in
obstructive sleep apnea. Am Rev
Respir Dis 1989;140(3):724–8.
12. Li KK. Surgical therapy for adult
obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep Med
Rev 2005;9(3):201–9.
13. Friedman M, Tanyeri H, Lim JW,
et al . Effect of improved nasal
breathing on obstructive sleep
apnea. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2000;122(1):71–4.
14. Verse T, Maurer JT, Pirsig W.
Effect of nasal surgery on sleep-
related breathing disorders.
Laryngoscope 2002;112(1):64–8.
15. Caples SM, Rowley JA, Prinsell JR,
et al. Surgical modifications of the
upper airway for obstructive sleep
apnea in adults: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Sleep (Rochester)
2010;33(10):1396–407.
16. Jaffe R, Samuels S. Anesthesiologist's
Manual of Surgical Procedures , 4th
edn. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2009.
17. Kheterpal S, Han R, Tremper KK,
et al. Incidence and predictors of
difficult and impossible mask
ventilation. Anesthesiology
2006;105(5):885–91.
18. Siyam MA, Benhamou D. Difficult
endotracheal intubation in patients
with sleep apnea syndrome. Anesth
Analg 2002;95(4):1098–102.
19. Bolden N, Smith CE, Auckley D,
Makarski J, Avula R. Perioperative
complications during use of
an obstructive sleep apnea protocol
following surgery and
anesthesia. Anesth Analg 2007;
105(6):1869–70.
20. Esclamado RM, Glenn MG,
McCulloch TM, Cummings CW.
Perioperative complications and
risk factors in the surgical
treatment of obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome. Laryngoscope
1989;99(11):1125–9.
21. Marrel J, Blanc C, Frascarolo P,
Magnusson L. Vidoelaryngoscope
improves intubating conditions
in morbidly obese patients.
Eur J Anesthesiol 2007;24(12):
1405–9.
22. ASA Task Force on Management of
the Difficult Airway: Practice
guidelines for management of the
difficult airway, an updated report.
Anesthesiology 2003;98:1269–77.
23. Kezirian EJ, Weaver EM, Yueh B,
et al. Incidence of serious
complications after
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.
Laryngoscope 2004;114(3):450–3.
24. Johnson JT, Sanders MH.
Breathing during sleep immediately
after uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.
Laryngoscope 1986;96(11):1236–8.
25. Troell RJ, Powell NB, Riley RW,
Li KK, Guilleminault C.
Comparison of postoperative pain
between laser-assisted
uvulopalatoplasty,
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty, and
radiofrequency volumetric tissue
reduction of the palate. Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 2000;122(3):402–9.
26. Chung F, Liao P, Fazel H, et al.
Evolution of sleep pattern and sleep
breathing disorders during first
seven nights after surgery – a pilot
study. Sleep (Rochester) 2009;
32(Suppl. S):A217 –8.
27. Mickelson SA, Hakim I. Is
postoperative intensive care
monitoring necessary after
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty?
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1998;119(4):352–6.
28. Haavisto L, Suonpaa J.
Complications of
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty. Clin
Otolaryngol Allied Sci 1994;
19(3):243–7.
Chapter 18: Anesthesia for obstructive sleep apnea surgery
185
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:35:25 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.021
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
19
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for carotid body tumor resction
Maged Argalious and Sivan Wexler
Introduction
The normal carotid body is a small cluster of chemo-
receptors located on the posterior aspect of the bifur-
cation of the common carotid artery (Figures 19.1
and 19.2) monitors changes in arterial oxygen tension
and pH of the blood and, in turn, influences the rate
and depth of respiration, and to a lesser extent heart
rate. It was first anatomically described in 1743 by
Albrecht von Haller [1].
The carotid body receives its blood supply from
the common or external carotid artery and its innerv-
ation primarily from sensory (afferent) fibers of the
glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve, with lesser contributions
from the vagus (X) nerve and superior cervical gan-
glion of the sympathetic nervous system.
Carotid body tumors (CBTs), also called paragan-
gliomas, are highly vascular tumors (Figure 19.1)
arising from these chemoreceptors cells, which
develop from the neural crest region during
embryogenesis.
While carotid body tumors are rare, diagnosed
with an incidence of about 1:30 000 in the general
population, they account for 60% of head and neck
paragangliomas [2].
There are three distinct types: familial, sporadic
and hyperplastic forms.
The hyperplastic type generally develops in
response to chronic hypoxemia, and thus is common
in patients with a history of COPD, congenital cyan-
otic heart disease and living in high-altitude ( > 5000
feet) areas.
A family history of paraganglioma syndrome
should be considered in all cases particularly if bilat-
eral tumors exist.
CBTs commonly present clinically as a painless
cervical mass. On physical examination, this non-
tender, rubbery, pulsatile lesion is more easily dis-
placed laterally than vertically (Fontaine 's sign).
Although CBTs are usually benign, they can be malig-
nant, with a metastatic rate of 2% to 9%. Malignant
CBTs typically occur in patients between 30 and 60
years of age and are more commonly of the familial
type [3]. Large carotid body tumors ( > 5 cm) can
cause transient or permanent cranial nerve deficits,
most commonly involving the vagus nerve [1]. Most
CBTs are nonfunctioning tumors but norepineph-
rine-, epinephrine-, serotonin- and histamine-secret-
ing tumors have been described.
Shamblin et al. introduced a system to classify
these tumors according to tumor size and the degree
of involvement of the internal carotid artery. Tumors
that do not compress or involve both carotid vessels
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
Carotid body
tumor
Carotid
Bifurcation
Common
carotid
Figure 19.1. Carotid angiogram showing a carotid body
tumor causing splay of internal and external carotid arteries
(image courtesy of Dr. Robert Lorenz, Head and Neck Institute,
Cleveland Clinic).
186
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012are classified as Shamblin I, tumors that compress the
carotid vessels are Shamblin II, and those that involve
the carotid vessels are Shamblin III [4].
Carotid body tumor surgery
Surgery for resection of carotid body tumors
(Figure 19.3) is the only curative treatment; radiother-
apy may be indicated in cases of giant or recurrent
carotid body tumors or in malignant tumors with
metastases to the regional lymph nodes. Surgical
treatment is always associated with the risk of damage
to major vascular structures and to cranial nerves.
Preoperative embolization appears to reduce blood
loss, facilitate surgical resection, and reduce operating
time and morbidity [5].
Preoperative preparation
Preoperative cardiac evaluation for this procedure
should be conducted in the usual fashion, keeping in
mind that carotid body tumor excision is considered
to be an intermediate-risk surgery. The classification
of cardiac risk in noncardiac surgery is based on the
incidence of cardiac death and nonfatal myocardial
infarction (1 –5% in intermediate risk surgeries)
and the ACC/AHA guidelines [6] for preoperative
evaluation.
Airway management
Preoperative airway assessment should focus on
any radiation history to the neck which can reduce
tissue compliance, increase tissue friability as well as
increase intubation difficulty. Large CBTs may cause
marked compression of the pharyngeal wall, making
conventional laryngoscopy as well as endoscopy diffi-
cult. This is especially true when large bilateral CBTs
are present [3].
It is important to note that carotid body tumors
have a tendency to grow longitudinally and have even
been reported to reach the skull base (cephalad exten-
sion), causing a reduction in submandibular space com-
pliance. In such cases where there is concern regarding
the cranial extent of the tumor, mandibular subluxation
may be necessary for adequate exposure and nasoendo-
tracheal intubation should be considered [7].
Consideration should be given to securing the
airway before anesthetic induction when airway
assessment points to a difficult intubation and/or
ventilation.
Figure 19.2. CT scan demonstrating a carotid body tumor at the
carotid bifurcation (arrow) (image courtesy of Dr. Robert Lorenz,
Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic).
Figure 19.3. Carotid body tumor resection (image courtesy of
Dr. Joseph Scharpf, Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic).
Chapter 19: Anesthesia for carotid body tumor resction
187
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Documentation of baseline cranial nerve deficits
and assessment of vocal cord mobility (vagal nerve
involvement) is of paramount importance. Preopera-
tive imaging modalities including CT scan, 3D CT
scan, MRI and MRA are invaluable in assessing the
extent of tumor involvement of major vessels (internal
jugular vein patency) and intracranial tumor exten-
sion, whether extradurally to the posterior fossa or less
commonly to the middle fossa. Rarely, signs of intra-
cranial hypertension can occur, either as a result of
obstruction of venous sinuses and the occurrence of
hydrocephalus, or due to mass effect from the tumor.
While most carotid body tumors are non-
secreting, a proper history-taking is important to
identify patients with a tumor secreting catechol-
amine (hypertension, sweating) or serotonin (diar-
rhea, flushing, headaches) and initiate lab tests
(normetanephrine, 5 HIAA, serotonin). A “type and
screen” of the patient 's blood is essential in ensuring
the availability of blood products intraoperatively [7].
Preoperative assessment helps in optimization of
patients' comorbidities and in formulating an anes-
thetic plan with the goal of reducing perioperative
morbidity.
Intraoperative management goals
The operative field of carotid body surgery is a highly
reflexogenic and vascular one, and thus the provision
of adequate intraoperative analgesia, blood pressure
control and a motionless patient are paramount. As
cranial nerve injury or stroke is a potential compli-
cation of this surgery, anesthetic management should
also aim to achieve a rapid awakening for neurologic
examination. Techniques aimed at preventing
coughing or straining on emergence are equally
important in limiting the risk of hematoma forma-
tion, which, in light of the anatomical location, carries
significant morbidity and mortality in the postopera-
tive period. When carotid artery clamping, recon-
struction or repair is required, optimization of
cerebral perfusion and brain protection are additional
anesthetic considerations.
Monitoring
In addition to standard monitoring, invasive arterial
monitoring and large-bore IV access are essential.
The tumor 's rich vascular blood supply (Figure
19.1), its contact with the carotid arterial system and
its proximity to the jugular venous system can result
in acute massive blood loss, especially in larger CBTs
and those with cephalad intracranial extension. Use of
central venous access should be guided by patient
comorbidities. Femoral or antecubital access sites
are preferable as extensive neck dissection and ipsilat-
eral swelling may render head and neck venous drain-
age dependent on the contralateral internal jugular
vein. Before placement of a central line, tumor
involvement of both the internal jugular vein and
the superior vena cava should be assessed (imaging).
If the internal jugular vein, but not the superior vena
cava, has been invaded by tumor, the contralateral
basilic, external or internal jugular vein can be used
to gain central access. If both have been invaded, the
femoral vein should be used.
A urinary catheter is inserted and a forced-air
warming blanket is placed over the lower extremities
to maintain normothermia.
If the carotid artery is to be occluded intraopera-
tively, monitoring the adequacy of cerebral perfusion
can be done either by periodic neurologic evaluation
in patients undergoing resection under regional anes-
thesia or by the use of electroencephalogram, soma-
tosensory evoked potentials, arterial stump pressure
measurement or transcranial Doppler measurement
of middle cerebral artery flow velocities in patients
under general anesthesia. However, at present, none
of the aforementioned neuromonitoring modalities
has been shown to improve neurologic outcome [8].
Hemodynamic considerations
The goals of intraoperative hemodynamic manage-
ment are to maintain normal “baseline” hemody-
namics, avoiding extreme swings in blood pressure
and heart rate. This can prove challenging especially
during periods of lack of surgical stimulation (post-
induction hypotension) and periods of intense surgi-
cal stimulation (hypertension during surgical
manipulation) and may require the use of short-
acting antihypertensives (nitroglycerin, nicardipine,
clevidipine, esmolol) and vasopressors (phenylephr-
ine, ephedrine, atropine) until a steady state of surgi-
cal stimulation is achieved. Patients with depleted
intravascular volume, especially with concomitant left
ventricular hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction, are
more prone to hemodynamic swings in blood pres-
sure, and judicious fluid loading to achieve euvolemia
should be considered. While mild hypotensive anes-
thesia has been advocated to reduce blood loss, the
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
188
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:51 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012hemodynamic focus should be on maintaining
end-organ perfusion (heart, brain, kidney, liver) by
maintaining a normal intraoperative heart rate, blood
pressure and cardiac output. Hypotensive techniques
risk cerebral hypoperfusion especially in the setting of
carotid artery clamping and are contraindicated in
patients with end organ injury. When clamping of
the carotid artery is contemplated, maintenance of a
high normal blood pressure may be more appropriate
to maintain distal ipsilateral cerebral perfusion pres-
sure through collaterals from the contralateral side.
Surgical manipulation of the carotid sinus may
cause reflex bradycardia, hypotension or even asystole.
When this occurs, surgical stimulation should be dis-
continued. Atropine is effective when bradycardia is
persistent. Conversely, marked hypertension and tachy-
cardia on induction or during tumor manipulation
should raise the suspicion of a previously undiagnosed
functioning CBT [9] or coexisting extra-cervical pheo-
chromocytoma [3]. The anesthetic management of a
functional CBT is similar to the management of a
pheochromocytoma from a physiological and pharma-
cological standpoint and may include preoperative
alpha and beta sympathetic blockade.
Positioning the head and neck above the level of
the heart helps limit blood loss but vigilance is neces-
sary for the increased risk of venous air embolism in
this position, should the integrity of a large neck vein
be violated inadvertently. Maintaining adequate intra-
vascular volume and positive-pressure ventilation
may decrease the risk of this complication.
In the majority of patients transfusion require-
ments are minimal to none. Still, blood loss can be
rapid and substantial and at least 2 units of cross-
matched blood should be available. In large tumors
(> 6 cm) or in those with extensive carotid artery
involvement, consideration should be given to cell-
salvage techniques.
Maintenance of anesthesia
General anesthesia
A balanced technique using a combination of intra-
venous and inhalation anesthetics is commonly
used. As the anatomical location of the tumor is a
highly reflexogenic one, adequate intraoperative
analgesia is an essential component of anesthetic
management. This, coupled with the need to avoid
neuromuscular blocking agents to facilitate intrao-
perative nerve identification, makes an opiate-based
technique advantageous. Highly potent synthetic
opioids such as fentanyl or sufentanil, given as a
loading dose and followed by a continuous infusion,
can aid in maintaining stable hemodynamics, facili-
tate tolerance of the endotracheal tube, and will allow
for a smooth emergence. A continuous infusion of the
synthetic ultra-short-acting remifentanil can also be
used and has the advantage of high potency, easy
titratability and rapid offset, thus allowing for a
smooth and rapid emergence. Regardless of anesthetic
technique chosen, every effort should be made to
prevent coughing or straining on emergence, since
this may provoke bleeding, contribute to hematoma
formation, or disrupt suture lines.
In cases when carotid artery shunting is employed,
avoidance of nitrous oxide prevents the potential
expansion of micro-air emboli in the distal cerebral
circulation.
Particularly in cases where carotid artery cross-
clamping is required, physiological and pharmaco-
logical management may also be important in
improving neurological outcome, as is the case in
carotid artery surgery [10]. A normal-to-high arterial
pressure should be maintained during carotid cross-
clamping to increase collateral cerebral perfusion.
Normocarbia should be maintained, since hypocarbia
can cause vasoconstriction of cerebral artery blood
flow, while hypercarbia can contribute to the occur-
rence of “steal phenomenon ” where blood flow is
diverted from maximally dilated ischemic areas to
other normal cerebral regions. Since hyperglycemia
and hyperthermia are known to worsen neurologic
insults, they should be avoided. Most general anes-
thetics (with the exception of etomidate and possibly
ketamine) have been shown to be protective against
focal cerebral ischemia. Barbiturate therapy before
carotid occlusion has been shown to be protective
against focal ischemic injury but this potential advan-
tage must be weighed against significant cardiovascu-
lar depression and delayed awakening. Among the
volatile anesthetics, isoflurane and sevoflurane have
been shown to reduce the critical cerebral blood flow
below which ischemic EEG changes appear [11,12].
Regional anesthesia
Carotid body tumor resection can be performed
under regional anesthesia. A careful and thorough
explanation to the patient (informed consent) is
essential to ensure that patients understand the steps
Chapter 19: Anesthesia for carotid body tumor resction
189
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:52 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012involved in both anesthetic and surgical management,
since patient cooperation is essential. The decision to
use regional anesthesia should be guided by patients '
preferences and comorbidities as well as by skills and
familiarity of the surgeon and the anesthesiologist
with regional techniques.
A regional technique for open carotid surgery
requires anesthesia of cervical nerves 2 –4, and has
been performed successfully with a superficial or deep
cervical plexus block, and less commonly under cer-
vical epidural anesthesia or local anesthetic infiltra-
tion (or a combination of these methods). Superficial
cervical plexus block is the preferred technique since
it is easy to perform and has a lower risk of serious
complications compared to deep cervical plexus or
cervical epidural blocks [13], which can cause subar-
achnoid or intravascular injections, Horner 's syn-
drome and blockade of the recurrent laryngeal and
vagus nerves [14]. When superficial and deep cervical
plexus blocks are performed together, the incidence of
temporary ipsilateral phrenic nerve paralysis is 55%
[15]. In the absence of severe baseline respiratory
compromise or contralateral diaphragmatic paresis,
unilateral temporary phrenic nerve paralysis is well
tolerated.
Inadequate intraoperative anesthesia is common
after regional techniques [16] and necessitates add-
itional local anesthetic infiltration or sedation. Vigi-
lance for intravascular injection is of paramount
importance in light of the high vascularity of carotid
body tumors [17]. Finally, a high incision or a short
neck may call for mandibular retraction for adequate
surgical exposure. However, none of the above tech-
niques provides anesthetic coverage for this area,
which is innervated by the trigeminal nerve.
The principal advantage of regional anesthesia for
carotid body surgery is that it allows continuous sen-
sitive monitoring of neurological function when
cross-clamping of the internal carotid artery is neces-
sary [18] (see below). An additional advantage is its
utility in high-risk cardiac patients where avoidance
of general anesthesia is preferred [19]. Other reported
advantages of regional anesthesia include a decrease
in shunting requirements, decreased cost, avoidance
of potential postoperative cognitive decline and fewer
blood pressure swings compared with general anes-
thesia. Disadvantages include poor access to the
airway and potential for patient movement. Addition-
ally, acute neurological changes (e.g., stroke or
seizure) during cross-clamping or unpredictable
patient agitation or distress may necessitate emer-
gency airway management and conversion to GA in
non-ideal conditions. Furthermore, pharmacological
cerebral protection is not feasible when regional tech-
niques are employed [20].
Carotid artery occlusion and
cerebral protection
Internal carotid artery clamping, reconstruction or
sacrifice may be required for large grade III tumors
or when the internal carotid artery is inadvertently
injured.
During carotid artery clamping, the use of internal
carotid artery shunting aims to prevent ischemic
stroke by maintaining cerebral blood flow. There is
wide variation in the use of carotid artery shunting
[21]. While some surgeons do not use carotid shunts,
based on the rationale that shunting has a small but
significant risks of embolic stroke or intimal dissec-
tion of the carotid artery [22] and is prone to tech-
nical complications such as kinking or occlusion,
other surgeons use carotid artery shunting routinely
when carotid artery clamping is required [21]. Most
surgeons use carotid artery shunting selectively.
In cases done under regional anesthesia, the
decision to shunt is based on changes in neurologic
examination (gold standard in awake patients) after
carotid clamping, indicating the occurrence of cere-
bral ischemia.
In cases done under general anesthesia, selective
shunting is based on the occurrence of EEG or soma-
tosensory evoked potential (SSEP) changes, a reduc-
tion in cerebral artery flow velocity or a low distal
arterial stump pressure in response to carotid
clamping.
Intraoperative EEG is the most commonly used
modality in cases done under general anesthesia [23].
High-frequency attenuation or development of low-
frequency activity on cross-clamping indicates inad-
equate cerebral perfusion but may be limited by the
inability to detect subcortical ischemic changes [24]
and the need for personnel experienced in its use and
interpretation. Additionally, changes in anesthetic
depth and temperature may mimic ischemia, leading
to unnecessary shunting.
SSEPs, on the other hand, have the advantage of
examining deeper subcortical structures and may be
advantageous in patients with baseline EEG changes.
Unfortunately, studies have not shown a clear benefit
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
190
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:52 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012for SSEP use as a tool to identify cerebral ischemia on
cross-clamping. Additionally, SSEPs are also influ-
enced by anesthetic technique and depth as well as
temperature.
Distal carotid artery stump pressure (the pressure
in the distal internal carotid artery) has been used to
assess collateral flow and cerebral tolerance during
temporary carotid occlusion, with the assumption
that perfusion pressure is an important determinant
of cerebral flow. Studies have shown this to be spe-
cific but not sensitive in identifying those patients
who develop ischemic EEG changes with carotid
artery cross-clamping. A carotid stump pressure of
< 45 mmHg has been used as a threshold for
shunting [25].
Transcranial doppler is used to measure flow vel-
ocity in the middle cerebral artery and is followed as
an indicator of cerebral blood flow during carotid
cross-clamping. Like stump pressure monitoring, sen-
sitivity is poor for identifying patients who could
benefit from shunting. Furthermore, it is operator-
dependent and an acoustic window may not be found
in up to 20% of patients. It is, however, advantageous
in detecting emboli and may alert the surgeon to
avoid further manipulation which may cause stroke.
Despite the large number of methods available for
intraoperative neurologic monitoring, no single
method has been shown to improve neurologic
outcome.
Complications
Postoperative complications after resection of carotid
body tumor are listed in Table 19.1. It is important
to note that cranial nerve involvement predisposing
to postoperative airway obstruction can occur
through several mechanisms, including tumor inva-
sion preoperatively, nerve injury or sacrifice intrao-
peratively or tissue edema causing nerve palsy
postoperatively. In addition, postoperative bleeding
can result in a rapidly expanding neck hematoma
and airway compromise.
Patients undergoing resection of bilateral carotid
body tumors and patients with a history of contralat-
eral carotid surgery should have continuous monitor-
ing of oxygenation, ventilation, and hemodynamics
postoperatively, since bilateral carotid surgery has
been shown to result in the abolition of the normo-
capnic ventilatory response to progressive hypoxia and
can result in apneic episodes [26].
Summary
The perioperative anesthetic management of carotid
body tumor resection includes a comprehensive
preoperative airway assessment, optimization of
patient comorbidities, and identification of symptoms
pointing to secreting tumors. Whether regional or
general anesthesia is used, the goals of perioperative
management are to preserve stable hemodynamics
and maintain end-organ perfusion, to prepare for
resuscitation of acute major blood loss, to utilize
monitoring modalities to identify, avoid, and manage
cerebral ischemia, and to provide a smooth controlled
emergence. In the postoperative period, complica-
tions should be anticipated, diagnosed, and promptly
managed. Patients undergoing bilateral carotid tumor
surgery should be continuously monitored in an
intensive care environment postoperatively
Table 19.1. Postoperative complications after carotid body
tumor resection
Cerebrovascular
Stroke (ischemic or embolic)
Cranial nerve deficits: glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus
(X), hypoglossal (XII) predisposing to airway
compromise, either by causing airway obstruction or
leading to aspiration
Airway obstruction
Vocal cord paralysis (vagus nerve)
Airway edema from neck manipulation during
surgery
Postoperative bleeding leading to expanding neck
hematoma
Pulmonary (especially after bilateral carotid surgery)
Abolition of the normocapnic ventilatory response to
hypoxia
Apneic episodes
Aspiration pneumonitis (slow gastric emptying)
Cardiovascular (especially after bilateral carotid
surgery)
Decreased baroreceptor sensitivity
Temporary baroreceptor failure
Increased blood pressure variability
Orthostatic hypotension
Hypertension
Sick sinus syndrome
Gastrointestinal
Delayed gastric emptying
Postoperative ileus
Chapter 19: Anesthesia for carotid body tumor resction
191
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:52 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Case study
A 61-year-old male arrived in the PACU after a right
carotid body tumor resection. His medical history
included stable coronary artery disease, hypertension,
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. His sur-
gical history included a remote appendectomy and a
cervical spine fusion. His medications included
aspirin, atorvastatin, and amlodipine.
In the operating room, an arterial catheter was
placed in the left radial artery following a smooth
induction of anesthesia using propofol, fentanyl, and
rocuronium, He was intubated with an 8.0 mm endo-
tracheal tube and maintained on oxygen/air in sevo-
flurane with a continuous infusion of remifentanil.
During temporary occlusion of his right carotid
artery, the distal carotid stump pressure was meas-
ured at 55 mmHg and carotid cross-clamping pro-
ceeded without carotid shunting; the total carotid
cross-clamp time was 8 minutes and the patient 's
intraoperative hemodynamics remained close to his
preoperative baseline.
On emergence from anesthesia, and after discon-
tinuation of remifentanil, the patient developed severe
hypertension (190/115) requiring intravenous nitro-
glycerin boluses as well as IV labetalol. His blood
pressure on arrival in the PACU was 150/80 mmHg.
Thirty minutes after arrival in the PACU, the
PACU nurse noticed a swelling at the incision site.
Immediately thereafter, the patient started to com-
plain of shortness of breath despite increased supple-
mental oxygen. The staff surgeon and anesthesiologist
were called to the bedside.
Discussion
While the postoperative dyspnea can be multifactorial
in this patient, the presence of a swelling at the inci-
sion site should alert the perioperative care team to
the possibiity of an expanding neck hematoma. Other
causes of dyspnea in this patient may be cardiac
(myocardial ischemia or acute pulmonary edema
secondary to the acute hypertension on emergence),
pulmonary (atelectasis, or exacerbation of COPD) or
nerve injury related (recurrent laryngeal nerve
injury).
A preformulated plan for management of a post-
operative neck hematoma is outlined in Table 19.2.
In this patient, a continuous expansion of
the neck hematoma despite tight blood pressure
control prompted awake fiberoptic intubation after
topicalization of the airway followed by transfer to
the operating room for surgical exploration. A small
bleeding vessel was secured, and a wake-up test to
assess neurologic status was performed in the operat-
ing room before patient transfer to the intensive care
unit, where he was extubated a few hours later. The
rest of his hospital stay was uneventful.
Table 19.2. Management of postoperative neck
hematoma
1. Apply pressure to bleeding site
2. Notify surgery and anesthesia team (call for help)
3. Consider reversal of any residual anticoagulation
4. Tight blood pressure control
Possible outcomes:
A – No further hematoma expansion
Communication with surgical team
Mark the boundaries of the hematoma for early
identification of further expansion
Close observation and extended (8 – 12 hours)
monitoring in a critical care environment
B – Continuous expansion of hematoma with no
airway compromise
Awake (fiberoptic) intubation either in the PACU or
after immediate transfer to the operating room after
topical anesthesia to the airway followed by general
anesthesia for exploration of wound and drainage of
neck hematoma
Assess neurologic status at the end of the case
Consider maintaining the patient intubated
postoperatively until resolution of reactionary
airway edema
C – Expansion of neck hematoma with rapidly
progressive airway compromise (dyspnea, stridor,
airway obstruction)
Emergency intubation (ASA algorithm)
Cannot intubate/can ventilate: using face mask, oral
or nasal airways, laryngeal mask airway: consider
immediate surgical drainage of the neck hematoma
followed by further attempts to secure the airway
Cannot intubate/cannot ventilate: surgical airway
Evacuation of hematoma and wound exploration
Neurologic assessment
Maintain airway secured postoperatively
Adapted from Maged Argalious, Postoperative hematoma and
airway compromise after carotid endarterectomy Table 29.2. In
Case Studies in Neuroanesthesia and Neurocritical Care , edited
by George A. Mashour and Ehab Farag, Cambridge University
Press, 2011.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
192
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:52 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Clinical pearls
/C15The hyperplastic type of carotid body tumor (CBT)
generally develops in response to chronic
hypoxemia, and thus it is more common in patients
with a history of COPD, congenital cyanotic heart
disease and/or living at high altitude.
/C15Most CBTs are nonfunctioning but
norepinephrine-, epinephrine-, serotonin- and
histamine-secreting tumors have been described.
/C15Radiation history to the neck can reduce tissue
compliance, increase tissue friability, as well as
increase the difficulty of intubation. Large CBTs
may make conventional laryngoscopy as well as
endoscopy difficult, especially when large
bilateral CBTs are present.
/C15The operative field of CBT surgery is a highly
reflexogenic and vascular one, and thus the provision
of adequate intraoperative analgesia, blood pressure
control, and a motionless patient are paramount.
/C15Surgical manipulation of the carotid sinus may
cause reflex bradycardia, hypotension or even
asystole. When this occurs, surgical stimulation
should be discontinued. Atropine is effective when
bradycardia is persistent. Conversely, marked
hypertension and tachycardia on induction or
during tumor manipulation should raise the
suspicion of a previously undiagnosed functioning
CBT.
/C15As cranial nerve injuries or strokes are potential
complications of this surgery, anesthetic
management should also aim to achieve a rapid
awakening to allow early neurological
examination. Techniques aimed at preventing
coughing or straining on emergence are
important to limit the risk of hematoma
formation.
/C15In addition to standard monitoring, invasive
arterial monitoring and large-bore IV access are
crucial. Use of central venous access should be
guided by patient comorbidities.
/C15Monitoring the adequacy of cerebral perfusion
can be done by periodic neurologic evaluation in
patients undergoing resection under regional
anesthesia. Patients under general anesthesia may
benefit from the use of EEG, SSEP, arterial stump
pressure measurement or transcranial Doppler
measurement of middle cerebral artery flow
velocities. However, at present, none of the
aforementioned neuromonitoring techniques has
been shown to improve neurologic outcome.
References
1. Kruger AJ, Walker PJ, Foster WJ,
et al. Important observations
made managing carotid body
tumors during a 25-year
experience. J Vasc Surg
2010;52:1518–24.
2. Mitchell RO, Richardson JD,
Lambert GE. Characteristics,
surgical management, and
outcome in 17 carotid body
tumors. Am Surg 1996;62:1034–7.
3. Connolly RAJ, Baker AB. Excision
of bilateral carotid body tumours.
Anaesth Intens Care1995;23:342–5.
4. Luna-Ortiz K, Rascon-Ortiz M,
Villavicencio-Valencia V,
Herrera-Gomez A. Does
Shamblin's classification predict
postoperative morbidity in carotid
body tumors? A proposal to
modify Shamblin 's classification?
Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
2006;263:171–5.
5. Sajid MS, Hamilton G, Baker DM
on behalf of Joint Vascular
Research Group. A multicenter
review of carotid body
tumour management. Eur
J Vasc Endovasc Surg
2007;34:127e130.
6. Fleisher L, et al . ACC/AHA 2007
guidelines on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation and
care for noncardiac surgery:
executive summary: a report of
the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on
practice guidelines (writing
committee to revise the 2002
guidelines on perioperative
cardiovascular evaluation for
noncardiac surgery). Circulation
2007;116:1971–96.
7. Jensen NF. Glomus tumors of the
head and neck: anesthetic
considerations. Anesth Analg
1994;78:112–9.
8. Rerkasem K, Rothwell PM.
Routine or selective carotid artery
shunting for carotid
endarterectomy (and different
methods of monitoring in
selective shunting). Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2009 Oct 7;(4):
CD000190.
9. Newland MC, Hurlbert BJ.
Chemodectoma diagnosed by
hypertension and tachycardia
during anesthesia. Anesth Analg
1980:59:388–90.
10. Stoneham MD, O Warner. Blood
pressure manipulation during
awake carotid surgery to reverse
neurological deficit after carotid
cross-clamping. Br J Anaesth
2001;87(4):641–4.
11. Messick JM Jr, Casement B,
Sharbrough FW, et al. Correlation
of regional cereberal blood flow
(rCBF) with EEG changes during
isoflurane anesthesia for carotid
Chapter 19: Anesthesia for carotid body tumor resction
193
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:52 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012endarterectomy: critical rCBF.
Anesthesiology 1987;66:344–9.
12. Grady RE, Weglinski MR,
Sharbrough FW, et al. Correlation
of regional cerebral blood flow with
ischemic electroencephalographic
changes during sevoflurane-
nitrous oxide anesthesia for carotid
endarterectomy. Anesthesiology
1998;88:892–7.
13. Guay J. Regional anesthesia for
carotid surgery. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2008;21:638–44.
14. Pandit JJ, Satya-Krishna R, Gration
P. Superficial or deep cervical plexus
block for carotid endarterectomy: a
systematic review of complications.
Br J Anaesth 2007;2:159–69
15. Emery G, Handley G, Davis MJ,
et al. Incidence of phrenic nerve
block and hypercapnia in patients
undergoing carotid
endarterectomy under cervical
plexus block. Anaesth Intensive
Care 1998;26:377–81.
16. Davies MJ, Silbert BS, Scott DA.
Superficial and deep cervical
plexus block for carotid artery
surgery: a prospective study of
1000 blocks. Reg Anesth
1997;26:377–81.
17. Brooker CD, Lawson AD.
Convulsions following
bupivacaine infiltration for
excision of carotid body tumour.
Anaesth Intensive Care
1993;21:877–8.
18. Lawrence PF, Alves JC, Jicha D,
et al. Incidence, timing, and
causes of cerebral ischemia during
carotid endarterectomy with
regional anesthesia. J Vasc Surg
1998;27:329–37.
19. Jones HG, Stoneham MD.
Continuous cervical plexus block
for carotid body tumour excision
in a patient with Eisenmenger 's
syndrome. Anaesthesia
2006;61:1214–8.
20. Erickson KM, Cole DJ. Carotid
artery disease: stenting vs
endarterectomy. Br J Anaesth
2010;S1: i34 –i49.
21. AbuRahma AF, Mousa AY, Stone
PA. Shunting during carotid
endarterectomy. J Vasc Surg
2011;54:1502–10.
22. Salvian AJ, Taylor DC, Hsiang
YN, et al. Selective shunting with
EEG monitoring is safer than
routine shunting for carotid
endarterectomy. Cardiovasc Surg
1997;5:481–5.
23. Isley MR, Edmonds HL Jr, Stecker
M. Guidelines for intraoperative
neuromonitoring using raw
(analog or digital waveforms)
and quantitative
electroencephalography: a
position statement by the
American Society of
Neurophysiological Monitoring.
J Clin Monit Comput 2009;
23(6):369–90. Epub 2009
Sep 16.
24. Rowed DW, Houlden DA,
Burkholder LM, et al. Comparison
of monitoring techniques for
intraoperative cerebral ischemia.
Can J Neurol Sci 2004;31:
347–56.
25. Jacob T, Hingorani A, Ascher E.
Carotid Artery Stump Pressure
(CASP) in 1135 consecutive
endarterectomies under general
anesthesia: an old method that
survived the test of times.
J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino)
2007;48(6):677–81.
26. Timmers HJLM, Karemaker JM,
Wieling W, et al . Baroreflex and
chemoreflex function after
bilateral carotid body tumor
resection. J Hypertens
2003;21:591–9.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
194
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:36:52 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.022
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
20
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for Zenker's diverticulectomy
Ashish Khanna, Benjamin Wood and Basem Abdelmalak
Introduction
First described by Zenker and Von Ziemssen in 1874
as a herniation of pharyngeal mucosa through the
posterior wall of the hypopharynx, Zenker 's diver-
ticulum, is an acquired disorder typically seen in the
sixth to ninth decades of life [1]. Reported incidence
is approximately 1 in 800 upper gastrointestinal
barium studies [2].
The location of Zenker 's diverticulum along with
the inherent risks of aspiration at any given stage of
surgery (pre-, intra- or postoperative periods) adds an
element of unique difficulty in the anesthetic approach
to these patients. In this chapter we explore the anes-
thetic considerations for this unique procedure.
The patient age group involved is also one that
carries increased perioperative cardiovascular risk
which may translate into increased hemodynamic
fluctuations and the need for invasive monitoring.
Surgical anatomy
Anatomically, the outpouching occurs through what
has been named “Killian's dehiscence ”, which is
located below the inferior constrictor and above the
cricopharyngeus muscle on the posterior hypophar-
yngeal wall. Precisely speaking, the area of weakness is
between the oblique and horizontal components of
the cricopharyngeus muscles. This is believed to be a
consequence of spasm or dysfunction of the crico-
pharyngeus muscle [3].
Clinical presentation
The usual Zenker's diverticulum patient presents with
dysphagia, globus, halitosis, coughing and regurgita-
tion of undigested food (more when lying down), the
latter being a very characteristic and almost
diagnostic feature. Chest roentgenogram may show
a widening of the upper mediastinum [4]. X-rays of
the neck may disclose a collection of air anterior to
the fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae.
Confirmatory diagnosis is with a barium swallow
(Figure 20.1), which reveals a pouch in the proximal
posterior esophagus, with a neck usually located
slightly above the level of the cricoid ring, and
an endoscopy which visualizes the pouch in the loca-
tion described above, often filled with undigested
food [4,5].
Surgical approaches
Surgical treatment aims at dividing the cricopharyn-
geus muscle and removing the pouch causing the
symptoms. The surgical procedure is generally cura-
tive and a majority of the patients live symptom-free
for the rest of their lifetime.
The basic surgical approaches may be either open
or endoscopic.
Open surgery
/C15Transcervical surgical approach: the diverticulum
is exposed through a lateral neck incision. The sac
may be resected (diverticulectomy) or tacked
superiorly to the prevertebral fascia
(diverticulopexy). These procedures are usually
done in conjunction with a cricopharyngeal
myotomy (a procedure to surgically weaken the
cricopharyngeus muscle and prevent a recurrence
of the pathology).
Endoscopic
This approach differs from the open surgery in that
no skin incision is required, and the patient is usually
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
195
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012discharged home the same day or the following
morning.
/C15Dohlman procedure: the diverticulum is exposed
with a bivalved (two-blade) endoscope with one
blade in the pouch and the other blade in the
cervical esophagus. Under direct visualization, the
common wall between the pouch and the
esophagus is ablated (usually with a carbon
dioxide laser) [6].
/C15Endoscopic staple diverticulotomy: the redundant
hypopharyngeal mucosa is not removed and the
cricopharyngeus muscle is partially divided.
A bivalved endoscope is placed through the
mouth to expose the cricopharyngeus. Similar
to the Dohlman procedure, one blade is placed
in the ZD and the other in the cervical
esophagus. The common wall separating the
diverticulum from the esophagus is reduced with
an endoscopic stapler, which prevents food
material from collecting within the
diverticulum [7].
/C15Endoscopic harmonic scalpel technique: [8].
Zenker’s
diverticulum
(A)
Esophagus
Air ﬂuid level in 
Zenker’s diverticulum
(B)
Figure 20.1. (A) A lateral view of a modified
barium swallow study showing Zenker 's
diverticulum. (B) Anteroposterior view of a
modified barium swallow study showing
Zenker's diverticulum. Reprinted with
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical
Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
196
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Anesthetic management
Preoperative considerations
The main preoperative considerations for these
patients are:
(1) The diverticulum tends to occur in elderly
patients, the age at which coronary artery disease
is common, the degree of which needs to be
assessed preoperatively.
(2) The pouch contents are alkaline, so aspiration of
such content does not result in acid-related
aspiration pneumonia [4]. Nonetheless, the
condition is not uncommonly associated with
recurrent aspiration pneumonitis or even lung
abscess [9]. A likely explanation is that aspirated
material from the ZD may contain oral pathogens
that may lead to infectious complications.
(3) Malnutrition is a common finding in these
patients as well.
A thorough evaluation in the outpatient setting is
warranted, keeping in mind the elective nature of this
procedure. In addition to the routine preoperative
evaluation, discussion of which is beyond the scope
of this chapter, special emphasis should be given to
the above three considerations [9,10].
The day of surgery
Fasting is always important before induction of any
general anesthetic. It is even more important in
patients with Zenker 's, though a fasting period more
than the usual 6 hours prior to initiation of induction
does not guarantee an empty pouch. Oral premedica-
tion should be avoided because premedicants may
lodge in the pouch (Figure 20.2) and may be aspirated
to the lung. The use of antacids or H 2 blockers is of no
value because the contents of the pouch have an
alkaline pH [4,5,11].
Preparation of the operating room
Preparing the operating room prior to surgery
revolves around the nature of the procedure (open
vs. endoscopic) and whether or not laser is being
used. If the surgery is a laserization it would mean
adoption of the universal protocol for anesthesia
safety during laser procedures, including the use of
laser-safe tubes and other necessary precautions for
the prevention of airway fires. More discussion on
management of lasers is in Chapter 25.
Induction of anesthesia
A main concern during the induction period is to
safely secure the airway without increasing the risk
of aspiration. It has been suggested that decrease the
risk of regurgitation of pouch contents:
(1) the pouch should be emptied preoperatively via
external pressure [5]; however, this is not
commonly performed in clinical practice for fear of
causing iatrogenic regurgitation and subsequent
aspiration as well as its unproven benefit [5];
(2) position the patient in a head-up tilt at the time of
induction of anesthesia [4].
The different options for the induction of anesthesia
and intubation for this procedure are listed below along
with a discussion of the pros and cons of each technique.
Awake intubation
Awake intubation is a very reasonable option [9], as
maintaining the airway reflexes provides a natural
Hypertrophic 
cricopharyngeal bar
Zenker’s diverticulum
Aciphex tablet 
Figure 20.2. An intact pill lodged in a
Zenker's diverticulum, intraoperative
endoscopic view (Weerda diverticuloscope).
Image is courtesy of Dr. Joseph Scharpf of the
Head and Neck Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH.
Chapter 20: Anesthesia for Zenker 's diverticulectomy
197
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012protection against the risk of aspiration of regurgtated
pouch contents. This is especially helpful when man-
aging a patient with a large diverticulum extending to
the mediastinum and/or an orifice above the cricoid
ring as seen on a barium swallow. There are several
caveats to be considered though.
Firstly, ensure adequate topicalization of the
airway; however, an effort should be made to focus
topicalization to the supraglottic region and minimize
local anesthetic application to the trachea (i.e. avoid
transtracheal block) to maintain protective airway
reflexes. It should be noted that this is only a theoret-
ical concern. Many clinicians believe that it takes
multiples of the usual local anesthetic dose used to
topicalize the trachea to abolish such protective
reflexes. Moreover, another concern is that transtra-
cheal injection is known to trigger coughing,
which along with straining could theoretically induce
regurgitation of pouch contents and potential aspir-
ation [12].
Awake intubation can be accomplished using a
variety of airway devices and scopes; however, a flex-
ible fiberoptic scope seems to be the gentlest and least
traumatic.
Rapid sequence induction with
or without cricoid pressure
The use of cricoid pressure has been debated for
many years now in the prevention of aspiration with
a possible full stomach while administering a general
anesthetic. The size of the pouch and the anatomical
position of the orifice of the pouch are some of the
factors to be considered while considering applying
cricoid pressure. Careful preoperative examination of
the barium-swallow results and conferring with the
surgeon are helpful steps in determining whether
cricoid pressure will be effective or harmful. Applica-
tion of cricoid pressure has only been recommended if
the neck of the pouch is below the cricoid cartilage
(Figure 20.3).
In most circumstances, though, the neck of the
pouch is above the cricopharyngeus muscle, and thus
the cricoid ring is always below the neck of the diver-
ticulum [4]. This obviously makes cricoid pressure
more harmful than helpful by squeezing the sac,
which would result in increasing pressure within the
pouch and inducing regurgitation of its contents into
the hypopharynx and increasing the likelihood of
aspiration.
If the sac is large, extending down into the medi-
astinum with its orifice at the level of the cricoid
cartilage and neck below the cricoid, it is likely that
cricoid pressure will obliterate the opening and pro-
tect against regurgitation.
Therefore, the application of cricoid pressure in
the majority of cases where the sac is small may
increase rather than decrease the risk of regurgitation
in patients with Zenker 's diverticulum [4,13].
Smooth induction with upward head tilt
A smooth induction with a 30 /C14upward head tilt
would probably be a safer alternative [4,12]. The
avoidance of coughing and straining is critical. After
adequate pre-oxygenation, an intravenous hypnotic
thyroid
cartilage
cricoid
cartilage
trachea
esophagus
Zenker’s
pouch
cricoid
pressure
Figure 20.3. Anatomical relationships
of the diverticulum to the cricoid cartilage
during application of cricoid pressure.
(Reproduced from Thiagarajah S, Lear E,
Keh M. Anesthetic implications of
Zenker's diverticulum. Anesth Analg
1990;70:109– 11, with permission from
Wolters Kluwer Health.)
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
198
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012supplemented with opioids and/or lidocaine with or
without mask ventilation with O 2 usually results in a
smooth induction.
A non-depolarizing muscle relaxant is adminis-
tered and endotracheal intubation performed after
complete relaxation has been achieved. The cuff of a
single-lumen endotracheal tube must be promptly
inflated to provide adequate sealing of the airway.
The use of succinylcholine is the basis for a traditional
rapid sequence, but it has been questioned here
because if used alone, and not preceded by a small dose
of a non-depolarizing muscle relaxant, it could induce
muscle fasciculation, which may cause compression of
the pouch and deleterious consequences [12].
Intraoperative
While regurgitation and aspiration may occur during
induction of anesthesia and during intubation, they
might still happen even after successful uneventful
intubation [5]. This is thought to be due to the seep-
age of fluid around the single-lumen tube cuff during
surgical manipulations. Intraoperatively, it has been
suggested that a moist gauze pack placed to surround
the endotracheal tube will prevent aspiration during
surgery [5]. Postoperatively, nursing the patient in a
semi-sitting position and avoiding excessive sedation
may decrease the risk .
Perforation of the diverticulum
While this may occur during a difficult intubation, with
blind attempts at intubation of the trachea, it could also
occur during blind placement of a nasogastric tube.
A recommended technique is to insert the nasogastric
tube under surgical guidance once adequate access to
the pouch has been established. Blood loss and air
embolism may occur if major vessels are inadvertently
severed and retraction of the carotid sheath may
cause baroreceptor stimulation that may initiate
tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias [5].
Alternative approaches
Alternatively, the procedure can be performed under
regional anesthesia using deep and superficial cervical
plexus blocks [14]. Decreasing the risk of aspiration,
by preserving protective airway reflexes, is one advan-
tage of regional anesthesia. An awake, alert patient is
able to cooperate with the surgeon and to swallow on
command, allowing the surgeon to view the pathology
in action. After repair of the diverticulum with the
incision still open, the patient is fed small spoonfuls of
gelatin so the surgeon can ensure the adequacy of
correction under direct vision [15]. That said, the
majority of Zenker 's diverticulum surgery continues
to be done today under general endotracheal
anesthesia.
Another approach that is now increasing in
common practice is that of flexible endoscopic crico-
pharyngeal myotomy using an endoscopic needle
knife and electrocautery without diverticulectomy,
performed by the endoscopist/gastroenterologist
without the use of general anesthesia. The procedure
is usually performed with moderate sedation using
midazolam/meperidine and/or fentanyl, after careful
preprocedure patient selection. Potential advantages
include avoiding general endotracheal anesthesia. In
addition, it is performed in an outpatient setting, and
resumption of oral intake is faster. Local injection of
1:10 000 epineherine controls bleeding and if a per-
foration in the wall of the posterior esophagus results
from the cricopharnygeal myotomy an endoclip is
placed over it. It is a relatively recent procedure, first
reported in 1995, as an alternative to open surgical
and rigid endoscopically guided cricopharyngeal
myotomy with or without myotomy. Outcome data
are limited at this stage. However, preliminary data
suggest that this is a relatively safe procedure with
similar success rates to the standard open surgical and
rigid endoscopic procedures in addition to low recur-
rence rates, and minimal complications [16,17].
Postoperative issues
Desirable as always in neck surgery is a smooth extu-
bation with an awake patient adequately reversed
from muscle paralysis, to avoid the risks of neck
hematoma compromising the airway. While different
approaches to accomplish this goal are described in
other chapters, the authors of this chapter utilize a
narcotic technique in which a full dose of long-acting
narcotic, hydromorphone for example, is given with
the incision (0.01 –0.02 mg/kg) in 0.4 mg increments
5 minutes apart as blood pressure allows. This
approach allows for a smooth wake up, without much
cough or strain. Care in the post anesthesia care unit
(PACU) should include nursing in the semi-upright
position, more so in patients with Zenker 's undergo-
ing another surgery in which the sac has not been
excised. Most of the surgeons will have the nasogastric
Chapter 20: Anesthesia for Zenker 's diverticulectomy
199
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012tube on gravity drainage for a prolonged period of time
and oral feeding will be initiated only after the closure
of the surgical anastomoses has been confirmed.
Complications
Fistula
Perforation
Recurrent laryngeal nerve injury
Neck hematoma
Infection
Aspiration pneumonia
Mortality (very rare)
Patients with Zenker's diverticulum for
other surgical procedures
The presence of a Zenker 's diverticulum in a patient
having other elective surgery should not be over-
looked because this will increase the risk of regurgi-
tation and pulmonary aspiration during the
intraoperative and the postoperative periods. It might
be wise to consider excising the pouch before any
other elective procedure if possible to prevent silent
aspiration.
Summary
Zenker'sd i v e r t i c u l u m– as t o r yo fd o s ,
don'ts, and maybes
In conclusion, a Zenker 's diverticulum is very much
an enigma, a story of dos, don 'ts, and maybes which
confronts the anesthesiologist prior to every induc-
tion. Some things which stand out as the clear do 's
are preoperative fasting, smooth induction in a 10 –
30/C14head-up tilt or awake intubation. Pertinent peri-
operative evaluation should include detailed cardio-
vascular and nutritional status evaluation and
optimization. The things not to do would be use of
particulate antacid premedication, application of
cricoid pressure if the neck of the pouch is above
the cricoid ring and blind insertion of a nasogastric
tube. Maybes include regional anesthesia techniques
utilizing superficial and deep cervical plexus blockade,
which have the advantages of an awake and respon-
sive patient with preserved reflexes. However, there
are technical difficulties with a variable failure rate
and patients acceptability.
All in all, anesthesia for a patient with a Zenker 's
diverticulum is a fascinating interplay of several sur-
gical and non-surgical issues and is testament to the
fact that a relatively simple surgical procedure can
never be equated to a straightforward anesthetic
course.
Case study
A 70-year-old male presented with a symptomatic
Zenker's diverticulum for an open surgical diverticu-
lectomy along with cricopharyngeal myotomy.
Preoperative evaluation
/C15Comorbidities: COPD on home nocturnal oxygen
2 l/min, baseline oxygen saturation on room air
93–95%, diabetes mellitus well controlled on oral
medication, hypertension well controlled.
/C15Airway: Mallampatti classification III, thyromental
distance 2.5 fingers, adequate neck range of
motion, circumference 18 inches, dentition intact.
/C15Vitals: BP 150/78 mmHg; HR 85/min; weight
150 kg; height 180 cm; BMI 46.29 kg/m 2.
Intraoperatively
On the morning of surgery, the patient was NPO >8
hours. Upon arrival to the operating room he was
premedicated with midazolam 1 mg IV. Standard
ASA monitors were applied. He was positioned with
head up at about 10 –20/C14and 4 l/ml of oxygen was
applied via a nasal cannula. Awake intubation was
elected for an airway exam consistent with a poten-
tially difficult airway, and as a precaution against
aspiration as well as utilizing the patient 's own airway
protective reflexes.
Another 1 mg of midazolam IV was given
followed by 50 mg of fentanyl IV. Airway topicaliza-
tion was started by applying atomized 4% lidocaine to
the oropharyngeal mucosa, after which an Ovasap-
pian airway was introduced. At this point another
1 mg of midazolam was given IV to augment his
sedation for awake intubation. Then 2 ml of 4%
lidocaine were sprayed through a MADgic ® catheter
introduced through the Ovassapian airway after being
formed into the shape of the airway (almost a hockey
stick shape). This last spray induced a limited and
expected cough as the local anesthetic reached the
upper surface of the vocal cords and upper endotra-
cheal mucosa.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
200
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012A flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope (FFB) pre-loaded
with a size 7.5 Parker ® flextip tube (the FFB had been
pre-warmed through immersion in a warm bottle of
saline to avoid lens fogging) was introduced into the
airway through the Ovassapian airway. Once the vocal
cords were visualized, the FFB was introduced through
them, and was advanced for approximately 2.5 inches
(6.5 cm), then the ETT was railroaded over it into the
trachea. The FFB was then withdrawn, and the anes-
thetic circuit was connected to the ETT, after inflating
its cuff. After confirmation of ETCO2,g e n e r a la n e s t h e -
sia was induced with 120 mg of propofol and 150 mgo f
fentanyl. Sevoflurane inhalational anesthetic vaporizer
was dialed to 2.5%. Muscle relaxation was then induced
with 80 mg of rocuronium. The Ovassapian airway was
peeled off the ETT and removed from the airway, and
the tube was secured with tape.
Had the patient not had an airway exam consist-
ent with a diffficult airway, general anesthesia could
have been induced with 150 mg of fentanyl, 40 mg of
lidocaine (to lessen the burning sensation associated
with propofol injection), and 250 mg of propofol IV
in gradual titrated doses, followed by IV rocuronium
100 mg and gentle positive-pressure ventilation, and
intubation. A rapid sequence approach with cricoid
pressure would not have been an option because pre-
operative imaging had visualized the neck of the
diverticulum above the cricoid ring. In such a case
cricoid pressure would have squeezed the contents of
the bag and actually increased the chances of regurgi-
tation and aspiration. Cricoid pressure may be useful
when the neck of the sack is below the cricoid ring
and the size of the diverticulum is not very large.
Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane in a
mixture of air and oxygen. Muscle relaxation was
maintained with intermittent boluses of IV rocuro-
nium and analgesia was maintained with IV fentanyl.
An orogastric tube was placed in the esophagus under
direct vision to help in identification of the diverti-
culum. The resection was carried out through an
incision in the neck. After excising the diverticular
sac, the suture lines on the pharyngeal wall were
tested for air leaks.
At the end of surgery, with the patient awake,
responsive and demonstrating adequate reversal of
neuromuscular blockade, the trachea was extubated.
Postoperative care
The patient was then admitted to PACU, where a
chest X-ray was found to be negative for any acute
changes. In the PACU he was nursed in the semi-
upright position and was kept NPO. He spent an
uneventful 120 minutes during which his oxygenation
was stable and vitals remained unremarkable in the
PACU and was then discharged to the floor, once he
met the PACU discharge criteria.
Clinical pearls
/C15Fasting prior to the induction of anesthesia does
not guarantee an empty pouch. Oral
premedication should be avoided because
premedicants may lodge in the pouch.
/C15Options for induction of general anesthesia
include: awake intubation, rapid sequence
with cricoid pressure and smooth induction
with upward head tilt. However, the
application of cricoid pressure during induction of
anesthesia for Zenker 's diverticulum patients is
only recommended if the neck of the pouch is at or
below the cricoid cartilage.
/C15Perforation of Zenker 's diverticulum may occur
during a difficult intubation, or during blind
placement of a nasogastric tube.
/C15It might be wise to excise a Zenker 's diverticulum
before proceeding with any other elective surgery
as its presence may increase the risk of
regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration
perioperatively.
References
1. Zenker F, Von Ziemssen H,
Krankheiten O. Handbuch der
speciellen Pathologie und
Therapie. Supplement Leipzig:
Vogel 1874;7, Part 1:50 –87.
2. Dorsey JM, Randolph DA. Long-
term evaluation of pharyngo-
esophageal diverticulectomy. Ann
Surg 1971;173(5):680–5. Epub
1971/05/01.
3. Last R. The Pharynx, Anatomy,
Regional and Applied . Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone; 1973.
pp. 643–9.
4. Aouad MT, Berzina CE,
Baraka AS. Aspiration pneumonia
after anesthesia in a patient
with a Zenker diverticulum.
Anesthesiology 2000;92(6):
1837–9.
5. Thiagarajah S, Lear E, Keh M.
Anesthetic implications of
Zenker's diverticulum.
Anesth Analg 1990;70(1):
109–11.
Chapter 20: Anesthesia for Zenker 's diverticulectomy
201
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20126. Verhaegen VJ, Feuth T, van den
Hoogen FJ, Marres HA, Takes RP.
Endoscopic carbon dioxide laser
diverticulostomy versus
endoscopic staple-assisted
diverticulostomy to treat
Zenker's diverticulum. Head
Neck 2011;33(2):154–9. Epub
2010/09/18.
7. The UC Davis Health System
CfVaS. Available from: http://
www.ucdvoice.org/zenkers.html.
8. May JT, Padhya TA, McCaffrey TV.
Endoscopic repair of Zenker's
diverticulum by harmonic scalpel.
Am J Otolaryngol 2011. Epub 2011/
02/11.
9. Payne WS, King RM.
Pharyngoesophageal (Zenker 's)
diverticulum. Surg Clin North Am
1983;63(4):815–24.
10. White IL. Severe complication of a
Zenker's diverticulum with
endoscopic diverticulotomy
rescue. Laryngoscope 1981;91
(5):708–19. Epub 1981/05/01.
11. Baron SH. Zenker 's diverticulum
as a cause for loss of drug
availability: a “new” complication.
Am J Gastroenterol 1982;
77(3):152–3.
12. Cope R, Spargo P. Anesthesia
for Zenker 's diverticulum.
Anesth Analg 1990;71(3):312.
13. Estafanous F. Anesthesia for
Pulmonary and Mediastinal
Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2001.
14. Naja ZM, Al-Tannir MA,
Zeidan A, et al. Bilateral guided
cervical block for Zenker
diverticulum excision in a patient
with ankylosing spondylitis.
JA n e s t h2009;23(1):143–6. Epub
2009/02/24.
15. Adams CF. Regional anesthesia
for repair of Zenker 's
diverticulum. Anesth Analg
1990;70(6):676.
16. Case DJ, Baron TH. Flexible
endoscopic management of
Zenker diverticulum: the Mayo
Clinic experience. Mayo Clinic
Proc 2010;85(8):719–22. Epub
2010/08/03.
17. Tang SJ, Jazrawi SF, Chen E,
Tang L, Myers LL. Flexible
endoscopic clip-assisted Zenker 's
diverticulotomy: the first case
series (with videos). Laryngoscope
2008;118(7):1199–205. Epub
2008/04/11.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
202
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.023
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
21
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for parotid surgery
Mauricio Perilla, Biao Lei and Daniel Alam
Introduction
The paired parotid glands are the largest among
the three major salivary glands in the human body
(the other two are the submandibular and subglottic
glands). They are located on the side of the cheeks,
anterior and inferior to the external ear, resembling
an inverted pyramid in shape, with their base
extending from the zygomatic arch and their apex
overlying and wrapping around the mandibular
angle. Because of their superficial localization, they
can be palpated. The saliva secretion drains through
the Stensen 's duct into the parotid papilla, which is
located on the buccal mucosa opposite the upper
second molar.
The parotid gland is encapsulated between the
superficial and deep layers of the parotid gland fascia
(PGF). The superficial PGF is thick and covers the
parotid gland, extends over the masseter muscle and
attaches to the zygomatic arch. There is a lax space
between the superficial PGF and the gland, which allows
for easy separation. The deep layer of the PGF is thin
and underlies the deep lobe of the parotid gland [1].
The facial nerve (extratemporal segment) crosses
lateral to the styloid process and approaches the par-
otid gland posteriorly. It penetrates the parotid gland,
and runs in the body of the gland separating the deep
and superficial lobes. Here the nerve divides into two
major divisions, the superiorly directed temporal-
facial and the inferiorly directed cervico-facial
branches [2]. Because of the important function of
the facial nerve, its preservation is always an import-
ant goal of parotid surgery, and will be discussed in
detail later.
The great auricular nerve (GAN) is also an
important neighboring structure. After emerging
from the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle, the GAN runs under the platysma towards
the mandibular angle, where it divides into three
branches. These branches mostly run within the
superficial PGF; however, some bundles may pene-
trate the fascia and run deeply into the gland paren-
chyma [3 –5]. Sacrifice of the GAN branches during
parotid surgery is thought to be responsible for the
common complication of postoperative ear lobe
dysesthesia.
Pathology of the parotid gland
Neoplasm is the most common parotid pathology
that warrants surgery. Fortunately, the majority of
parotid gland tumors are benign. The most common
type is pleomorphic adenoma (also known as benign
mixed tumor, 60 –70%), followed by Warthin 's tumor
(also known as papillary cystadenoma lymphomato-
sum, 14 –20%) [6]. Pleomorphic adenoma has a high
rate of cure with surgery; however, if left untreated for
a prolonged time there is a small but certain rate of
degeneration into malignancy [6]. Pleomorphic aden-
oma most often derives from the superficial lobe,
whereas the deeper lobe is involved only 10% of the
time [7]. Histologically, pleomorphic adenoma is cir-
cumscribed, with either a complete or partial capsule.
The capsule itself may contain lesions such as satellite
nodules or pseudopodia (fingerlike formations) [7].
Before the 1950s, tumor enucleation was the proto-
type of surgery for pleomorphic adenoma, with the
purpose of minimizing injury to the facial nerve.
However, the recurrence rate was reported as high
as 23 –31%, sometimes even long after the initial sur-
gery [1]. Although controversies still exist, factors
such as tumor non-encapsulation, incomplete exci-
sion and implantation are currently viewed as respon-
sible for recurrence. For these reasons, currently the
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
203
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012most commonly performed procedure is superficial
parotidectomy [7].
Warthin tumor is the second most common
benign neoplasm of the parotid gland, accounting for
14–30% of all parotid tumors. It is encapsulated, has a
slow growth rate and a low rate (0.3%) of degeneration
into malignancy. For that reason, conservative man-
agement is often the chosen line of treatment. How-
ever, surgery is still the most commonly chosen option
(either superficial parotidectomy or enucleation) [8].
Malignant tumors of the parotid gland include
mucoepidermoid carcinoma and carcinoma ex pleo-
morphic adenoma, etc. Surgery, usually parotidectomy,
is the most commonly used treatment. Adjuvant ther-
apies include radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
Sialolithiasis is a common obstructive disease of
the major salivary glands, which can cause superim-
posed infection and sialoadenitis. The surgical treat-
ment and anesthesia of sialolithiasis will be briefly
discussed below.
Surgical considerations
Brief description of superficial parotidectomy
Complete or limited superficial parotidectomy with
facial nerve dissection is still the most commonly
performed procedure for benign parotid neoplasm.
It gives the surgeon the opportunity to completely
remove the parotid tumor with a safe margin of
normal gland tissue. The operating procedure is pri-
marily the identification of the facial nerve and its
dissection anteriorly along the branches. The “cuff” of
the normal parotid tissue surrounding the tumor is
thereby preserved. After anesthesia, the patient is
placed in a supine position with the head hyperex-
tended and laterally rotated to expose the lesion side
upwards. Classically, an S-shaped incision, called the
Blair incision, is used, extending from the preauricu-
lar to the submandibular region. A skin flap is raised
to the anterior parotid border to expose the parotid
gland. The facial nerve and its branches are identified
and are preserved carefully. The portion of the par-
otid lateral to the facial nerve is removed [1]. There
have been various modifications of surgical tech-
niques, which are beyond the scope of this chapter.
Facial nerve monitoring
Because of its intimate anatomical location and
important function, facial nerve injury has always
been a common but dreaded complication of parotid
surgery. The incidence of postoperative transient
facial nerve paresis was reported to be between 20%
and 40%, whereas that of permanent paralysis was
about 0 –4% [9]. Intraoperative facial nerve monitor-
ing thus became an important technique. The earliest
technique in the 1970s relied on mechanical detection
of actual facial movements. It was soon abandoned
because of the requirement for large supra-threshold
stimuli. A more sensitive technique based on
electrophysiology stimuli and electromyography
(EMG) recording was first developed by Delgado in
1979 [10]. Since then, it has been modified into a
sophisticated technique and applied in various sur-
gery fields as well, such as neurosurgeries and oto-
logical surgeries. Rea et al. first developed the
technique during parotidectomy in 1990 [11]. There
are various types of monitors commercially available,
usually with multi-channel monitoring. The elec-
trodes are typically placed in the four areas innervated
by the facial nerve (frontal, zygomatic, buccal, and
marginal mandibular) to monitor two of the muscles
groups innervated by the facial nerve, i.e. orbicularis
oculi and orbicularis oris [9]. EMG activity in
response to continuous neurotonic discharges is
monitored, while direct electrical stimuli are intermit-
tently applied through monopolar or bipolar stimu-
lating probes. Both visual and audio signals are
generated. To eliminate the nonspecific signals (back-
ground noises), additional recording electrodes are
also placed in the contralateral side orbicularis oculi/
oris. Of note, the nonspecific signals decrease in amp-
litude as the depth of anesthesia increases [12]. Sur-
geons use this technique to identify the facial nerve
and its branches, to map its contour, and to evaluate
nerve integrity and function. The electrodes are
inserted near the facial midline and the connections
are kept to the side contralateral to surgery to minim-
ize interference with the surgical field. Although these
techniques are precise and accurate, most surgeons
use neurostimulators with direct observation of facial
movement.
Anesthesia for parotidectomy
Preoperative considerations
Preoperative evaluation of patients for parotid sur-
gery should be conducted in the usual fashion. Special
attention should be paid to the patient 's past medical
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
204
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012history. Head and neck cancer has been associated
with alcohol and tobacco abuse. Patient interrogation
should focus on the patient 's history of previous head,
neck or facial surgery and history of radiation
therapy. Past intubations should be investigated and
studies and images such as office-based airway fibro-
laryngoscopies and CT or MRI images of head and
neck should be reviewed and discussed with the sur-
gical team in order to establish an airway access plan.
The patient 's physical exam will focus on tumor
displacement of the airway as well as temporoman-
dibular joint mobility; other factors such as mouth
opening, sub-mandibular space compliance, thyro-
mental distance, neck diameter, and neck range of
motion should be evaluated. Previous radiation has
been considered as an independent factor for difficult
mask ventilation [13]. Interestingly parotid enlarge-
ment has been reported secondary to general anesthe-
sia: “anesthesia mumps ” [14].
Intraoperative
During parotidectomy the anesthesiologist has little
access to the patient 's head, whereas the surgical field
is close to the patient 's airway. Absolute immobility
of the patient is highly desirable during delicate parts
of the surgery such as microsurgical manipulation.
For these reasons, general anesthesia with endotra-
cheal intubation is usually required. The patient 's
comfort is another factor to consider, although cases
done with local anesthesia have been reported.
The use of muscle relaxants is an important issue
in parotidectomy anesthesia. The basis of the EMG
recording requires that neurological signals are able
to cross the functional neuromuscular junctions,
therefore demanding that neuromuscular junctions
be least affected by muscle relaxants. On the other
hand muscle relaxants are commonly used for general
anesthesia, especially for induction to facilitate endo-
tracheal intubation to reduce laryngeal and tracheal
damage. Therefore in practice the long-acting muscle
relaxants are generally avoided for intubation.
Succinylcholine is a commonly used short-acting
depolarizing muscle relaxant. It has rapid onset (30 –
60 s), quick metabolism by plasma pseudocholinester-
ase and thus short duration (typically less than 10 min)
in the normal population. However, in a few patients
with a genetic background of atypical pseudocholines-
terase (either heterozygous, 1/50 incidence; or homo-
zygous, 1/3000 incidence), neuromuscular blockade
can be prolonged from 20 –30 min up to 4 –8 hours.
In those situations, blockade cannot be reversed
because cholinesterase inhibitors further inhibit
pseudocholinesterase and paradoxically prolong the
blockade. Other side effects of succinylcholine, such
as bradycardia (particularly in children), muscle fasci-
culation and muscle pain, hyperkalemia (usually
increases by 0.5 –1 mEq/l in normal population, but
can reach life-threatening levels in burn, crush injury,
paraplegia, or renal failure patients), increase of
intraocular and intracranial pressure, etc., have to be
considered carefully before administration. Routine
use of succinylcholine is contraindicated in children
and adolescents because there are reports of cardiac
arrest due to undiagnosed myopathies.
Mivacurium is a non-depolarizing muscle relaxant
with short duration of action (reported 95% recovery
time is about 14 min). Similar to succinylcholine,
mivacurium is also metabolized by pseudocholines-
terase; its duration can be prolonged in patients with
atypical pseudocholinesterase. However, cholinester-
ase inhibitors can reverse blockade from mivacurium
once muscle contraction to neural stimulation is par-
tially recovered. Thiede et al. studied the use of miva-
curium in a small group of 21 patients undergoing
parotidectomy [15]. A single dose (0.2 mg/kg IV) of
mivacurium was used for intubation. Train-of-four
(TOF) of peripheral muscle (adductor pollicis)
recovered to 4/4 after the mean time of 19.7 min,
whereas the mean time to incision and identification
of facial nerve was 31.6 and 61.2 min, respectively.
Although none of their patients developed transient
facial paresis postoperatively, at the recorded earliest
time to incision (21 min), still 14.3% of their patients
would have TOF less than 2/4 and thus would be at
risk. Considering that the recovery of orbicularis oculi
might be sooner than that of adductor pollicis, as
reported before [16], there might be fewer patients
at risk. In the so-called worst-case scenario, earliest
incision on a patient with slowest mivacurium recov-
ery, false-negative responses from the EMG recording
cannot be ruled out and must be taken into consider-
ation. Mivacurium is no longer available in North
America but is still used in other parts of the world.
We have to keep in mind that light anesthesia and
patient arousal can be dangerous and cause serious
complications, especially in the absence of neuromuscu-
lar blockade. Sufficient anesthesia depth and patient
immobility are usually achieved by a balanced anesthetic
technique employing a relatively large dose of opioid
Chapter 21: Anesthesia for parotid surgery
205
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and inhalational agents. Maintenance with remifentanil,
sufentanil or fentanyl combined with isoflurane or des-
flurane inhalation is also a reasonable option. In certain
patients with poor hemodynamic stability, deep anesthe-
sia by opioids and inhalational agents may excessively
depress the cardiovascular system. Kizilay et al. thus
probed the role of reported partial neuromuscular block-
ade in the situation of facial nerve monitoring [17]. In
their small study of otological surgery, they found that
by using atracurium as high as 50% of full neuromuscu-
lar blockade would still allow for successful facial nerve
monitoring. Whether their result can be applied to par-
otid surgery has not been proven. It has been reported
that the distal segment of the facial nerve is different
from the central (cerebellopontine angle and labyrin-
t h i n e )s e g m e n ti nh i s t o l o g y ,t h a tt h ed i s t a ls e g m e n ti s
surrounded by denser epineurium and therefore has a
higher stimulation threshold.
Interestingly, because the nonspecific facial nerve
EMG signal decreases in amplitude as anesthesia
deepens, it could be used as a means of monitoring the
anesthesia depth. Jellishet al. compared the facial nerve
EMG vs. BIS in the setting of craniofacial and skull-base
surgeries under either TIVA (using propofol and remi-
fentanil) or inhalational general anesthesia (using des-
flurane). They found that in terms of predicting patient
stillness during surgery, the facial nerve EMG has a
better negative predictive value than BIS. They also
found that TIVA provides more hemodynamic stability
compared to desflurane inhalational anesthesia [12].
The introduction of sugammadex seems to pro-
vide another interesting strategy for brief muscle
relaxation. Sugammadex is a specially designed cyclo-
dextrin compound with a ring-shaped molecular
structure. The lipophilic cavity inside the ring binds
to aminosteroid compounds such as rocuronium or
vecuronium, which are two commonly used non-
depolarizing muscle relaxants of intermediate dur-
ation. The encapsulation of rocuronium/vecuronium
makes them unavailable to diffuse through the neuro-
muscular junction, creates a reversed concentration
gradient to pull out bound rocuronium/vecuronium
molecules, and therefore effectively terminates their
paralytic effect [18]. In a case report of parotid sur-
gery by Sasakawa et al. [19], rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg
was used for intubation for general anesthesia,
followed immediately by sugammadex 2 mg/kg to
allow for effective facial nerve stimulation. The FDA
does not yet approve sugammadex due to concerns
about hypersensitivity/allergic reactions.
For parotidectomy in patients with a family his-
tory of malignant hyperthermia [20] or affected by
myotonic dystrophy [21], total intravenous anesthesia
(TIVA) has been reported using awake intubation
with 0.2% tetracaine topicalization followed by keta-
mine bolus, or carefully administered propofol-
ketamine boluses maintained with ketamine infusion,
or combined propofol-ketamine infusion supple-
mented with fentanyl.
Complications of parotidectomy
Airway management after parotidectomy with radical
neck dissection can be a challenging situation due to
aggravating factors like previous neck interventions,
radiation therapy, large fluid shift, intraoperative
airway manipulation, swollen tissue and residual
anesthetic effect. Extubation might be deferred until
the airway patency can be guaranteed. Expanding
hematoma in the immediate postoperative period is
a complication that should be suspected in patients
who present with postoperative respiratory failure
after this surgical procedure.
As mentioned above, other common complications
of parotidectomy include transient facial paresis
or permanent facial paralysis due to unintentional iat-
rogenic facial nerve injury, and ear lobe dysesthesia
due to injury to GAN branches. Frey 's syndrome is
another common complication manifested as “gusta-
tory sweating” on the affected side in response to food
intake. It is thought to be secondary to erroneous regen-
eration of parotid sympathetic nerves into the sweat
glands [22]. Different surgical techniques have been
attempted to minimize or treat these complications.
Obstructive salivary diseases
of parotid glands
Ductal stone formation (sialolithiasis) and ductal
stenosis are common causes of obstructive salivary
diseases of the parotid glands. Traditionally, sialo-
lithiasis was managed by duct dilatation or papillot-
omy, which can be performed under local anesthesia.
Distal stones may need ductal dissection; resistant
cases or intraparenchymal stones may even require
sialoadenectomy (e.g., total parotidectomy). Ductal
abnormalities are usually treated with bypass or duc-
tal sialodochoplasty [23]. These surgeries are usually
performed under general anesthesia, where nasal
intubation may be required.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
206
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012In recent years, with the advance of modern
technologies and availability of specially designed
small-caliber endoscopes, procedures such as extra-
corporeal shock-wave lithotripsy, sialoendoscopy,
laser intra-corporeal lithotripsy, and video-assisted
conservative removal of calculi have all been
applied in practice with high success rates. These
minimally invasive surgeries have shaped the
modern management of obstructive salivary dis-
eases of the parotid gland. These procedures can
usually be performed on outpatients, under local
anesthesia, or supplemented with sedatives and
analgesics if necessary [23].
Case study
A 51-year-old woman presented for left parotidect-
omy and radical neck dissection. Her medical history
included morbid obesity, diabetes, hypertension,
asthma, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and severe
cervical myelopathy. Her past surgical history is con-
sistent with cervical fusion (C5 –C6).
Preoperative evaluation
The patient had no apparent distress, body mass
index (BMI) 38, BP 160/85, HR 88, respiratory rate
22, oxygen saturation (SpO 2) 92% at room air. Airway
exam: Mallampati score of 3, short thyromental dis-
tance (less than 6 cm), limited neck range of motion,
neck circumference 40 cm and a left parotid mass
compromised an extensive area of face and neck
(Figure 21.1). An MRI of the neck is presented in
Figure 21.2.
Comorbidities
Diabetes mellitus type 2
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
Asthma
Cervical myelopathy
Anesthesia technique
The patient was positioned in supine position on
the OR table. ASA standard monitors were applied.
Noninvasive blood pressure measurements, heart
rate, SpO 2, capnography, respiratory rate, tempera-
ture and sedation score were recorded. A preopera-
tive dose of glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg IV was given in
order to reduce secretions and improve local anes-
thetics effect, midazolam 1 mg IV for sedation was
given followed by an infusion of remifentanyl (0.05
mg/kg/min). Topicalizati on of the airway was per-
formed initially, using a small-volume nebulizer
(VixOne TM Westmed, AZ) with 4% lidocaine for
8 min followed by oxygen administration and add-
itional oral airway transport topicalization using a
multiport system (MADgic Airway, Wolfe Tory
Medical Inc., Salt Lake City, UT). The flexible bron-
choscope (FOB) was used in order to achieve
Figure 21.1. Left large parotid tumor
extending into the neck. Please note the
additional signs of potential difficult
airway, including retracted mandible and
short thyromental distance. Reprinted
with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center
for Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All
rights reserved.
Chapter 21: Anesthesia for parotid surgery
207
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012additional trans-vocal cord anesthesia with add-
itional lidocaine 1% injected through the work
channel. The patient was intubated orally with a
Parker tube (Parker Flex-Tip PFHV, Parker Med-
ical), 7.0 mm ID, via the flexible fiberoptic scope.
Oral intubation was confirmed clinically and endo-
scopically. After intubation the patient was able to
place her head in the most confortable neck pos-
ition for surgery. An initial dose of propofol was
administered for induction and anesthesia was
maintained with sevoflurane, supplemented with
remifentanil infusion (0.1 –0.2 mg/kg/min). During
the procedure no muscle relaxation was given in
order to facilitate facial nerve monitoring. After 6
hours of surgery and before the emergence from
anesthesia, the clinical assessment of the airway
showed no cuff leak. The oral fiberoptic exam con-
firmed the airway to be severely swollen. The patient was
transported intubated to the post-anesthesia care unit.
A few hours later, a positive airway leak and a decrease of
airway swelling were confirmed. Due to prominent risk
factors, extubation was planned using a tube exchanger
as a temporary bridge. These factors were obesity, short
thyromental distance, previous spine fusion and exten-
sive neck surgery. The patient was successfully extubated
and the tube exchanger removed in the post-anesthesia
care unit.
Clinical pearls
/C15For parotidectomy procedures, general anesthesia
with endotracheal intubation is usually required,
although cases done with local anesthesia have
been reported.
/C15While mildly to moderately enlarged parotid
glands rarely impact the airway, very large glands
can extend into the neck, displacing the trachea
and causing airway distortion and making airway
management difficult.
/C15Because of the importance of the facial nerve, its
preservation is a central goal of parotid surgery.
This usually requires EMG monitoring and
muscle relaxant avoidance.
/C15Sufficient anesthetic depth and patient immobility
are usually achieved by a balanced anesthetic
technique employing relatively large doses of
opioid and inhalational agents. Light anesthesia
and patient movement lead to serious
complications, especially in the absence of
neuromuscular blockade.
Figure 21.2. MRI of the patient 's neck. Axial view (left). Coronal view (right). Note the relationship between the parotid tumor and the
parapharyngeal structures compromising the left temporomandibular joint. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical
Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
208
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012References
1. Hegazy MA, El NW, Roshdy S.
Surgical outcome of modified
versus conventional
parotidectomy in treatment of
benign parotid tumors. J Surg
Oncol 2011;103:163–8.
2. Laing MR, McKerrow WS.
Intraparotid anatomy of the facial
nerve and retromandibular vein.
Br J Surg 1988;75:310–2.
3. Colella G, Rauso R, Tartaro G,
Biondi P. Skin injury and great
auricular nerve sacrifice after
parotidectomy. J Craniofac Surg
2009;20:1078–81.
4. Zumeng Y, Zhi G, Gang Z,
Jianhua W, Yinghui T. Modified
superficial parotidectomy:
preserving both the great
auricular nerve and the parotid
gland fascia. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 2006;135:458–62.
5. Porter MJ, Wood SJ. Preservation
of the great auricular nerve during
parotidectomy. Clin Otolaryngol
Allied Sci 1997;22:251–3.
6. Biorklund A, Eneroth CM.
Management of parotid gland
neoplasms. Am J Otolaryngol
1980;1:155–67.
7. Emodi O, El-Naaj IA, Gordin A,
Akrish S, Peled M. Superficial
parotidectomy versus retrograde
partial superficial parotidectomy
in treating benign salivary gland
tumor (pleomorphic adenoma).
J Oral Maxillofac Surg
2010;68:2092–8.
8. Yoo GH, Eisele DW, Askin FB,
Driben JS, Johns ME. Warthin 's
tumor: a 40-year experience at
The Johns Hopkins Hospital.
Laryngoscope 1994;104:799–803.
9. Eisele DW, Wang SJ, Orloff LA.
Electrophysiologic facial nerve
monitoring during
parotidectomy. Head Neck
2010;32:399–405.
10. Delgado TE, Bucheit WA,
Rosenholtz HR, Chrissian S.
Intraoperative monitoring of
facial muscle evoked responses
obtained by intracranial
stimulation of the facial nerve: a
more accurate technique for facial
nerve dissection. Neurosurgery
1979;4:418–21.
11. Rea JL. Use of a hemostat/
stimulator probe and dedicated
nerve locator/monitor for parotid
surgery. Ear Nose Throat J
1990;69:566, 570, 573.
12. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Buoy CM,
et al . Facial nerve
electromyographic monitoring to
predict movement in patients
titrated to a standard anesthetic
depth. Anesth Analg
2009;109:551–8.
13. Kheterpal S, Martin L, Shanks
AM, Tremper KK. Prediction and
outcomes of impossible mask
ventilation. A review of 50,000
anesthetics. Anesthesiology
2009;110:891–7
14. Reilly DJ. Benign transient
swelling of the parotid glands
following general anesthesia:
“anesthesia mumps ”. Anesth
Analg 1970;49:560–3.
15. Thiede O, Klusener T,
Sielenkamper A, et al. Interference
between muscle relaxation and
facial nerve monitoring during
parotidectomy. Acta Otolaryngol
2006;126:422–8.
16. Caffrey RR, Warren ML, Becker
KE Jr. Neuromuscular blockade
monitoring comparing the
orbicularis oculi and adductor
pollicis muscles. Anesthesiology
1986;65:95–7.
17. Kizilay A, Aladag I, Cokkeser Y,
et al . Effects of partial
neuromuscular blockade on facial
nerve monitorization in otologic
surgery. Acta Otolaryngol
2003;123:321–4.
18. Baldo BA, McDonnell NJ, Pham
NH. Drug-specific cyclodextrins
with emphasis on sugammadex,
the neuromuscular blocker
rocuronium and perioperative
anaphylaxis: implications for
drug allergy. Clin Exp Allergy
2011.
19. Sasakawa T, Iwasaki H, Kurosawa
A, et al . A case report: a normal
dose of rocuronium achieved the
desired effect in a short time after
the administration of
sugammadex during reoperation.
Masui 2011;60:621–4.
20. Wadhwa RK, Tantisira B.
Parotidectomy in a patient with a
family history of hyperthermia.
Anesthesiology 1974;40:191–4.
21. Yasuda T, Otomo N, Matsuki A,
et al . Total intravenous
anesthesia for two patients
complicated with myotonic
dystrophy. Masui 1999;48:
181–4.
22. Sood S, Quraishi MS, Bradley PJ.
Frey's syndrome and parotid
surgery. Clin Otolaryngol Allied
Sci 1998;23:291–301.
23. Nahlieli O, Baruchin AM.
Endoscopic technique for the
diagnosis and treatment of
obstructive salivary gland diseases.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg
1999;57:1394–401.
Chapter 21: Anesthesia for parotid surgery
209
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:37:40 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.024
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
22
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland,
mandibular and temporomandibular
joint surgery
Gail I. Randel and Tracey Straker
The maxilla
Introduction
Surgery of the maxilla straddles the expertise of oto-
rhinolaryngology and oromaxillofacial surgeons. This
section of the chapter will focus on non-traumatic
maxillary procedures and endoscopic maxillary sinus
surgery. The maxilla is composed of two fused bones
along the palatal fissure that form the upper jaw. The
body of the maxilla is a component of three cavities –
the roof of the mouth, the wall of the orbit and the
floor and lateral wall of the nasal antrum. The maxil-
lary sinus is housed in the body of the maxilla and is
the largest of the paranasal sinuses [1].
Surgical procedure
Maxillectomy surgery may encompass many vari-
ations – total maxillectomy with and without orbital
exenteration, partial (subtotal) maxillectomy and
limited maxillectomy. Limited maxillectomy is
defined as surgery that removes one wall of the
antrum. An example of a limited maxillectomy is a
medial maxillectomy. Subtotal maxillectomy is
defined as removal of two walls of the antrum. Total
maxillectomy is defined as removal of the total max-
illa [2]. Indications for maxillectomy include tumors
of the palate, nasal cavity and sinus pathology,
salivary gland pathology, fungal infection (mucor-
mycosis), papilloma, angiofibroma and granuloma-
tous disease. A maxillectomy may also be performed
for skull base pathology [3]. Benefits of endoscopic
maxillectomy include access to ethmoid and
sphenoid sinuses, no external scarring, and no loss
of bony nasal or anterior maxillary support struc-
tures [4].
Anesthetic management
Preoperative evaluation
In addition to the general principles discussed in
Chapter 3 a thorough hemostatic assessment should
be taken from the patient. Questions regarding liver
disease, bleeding from previous surgeries, antiplatelet
and anticoagulant medications, herbal medications
and a family history of blood dyscrasias should be
asked. Baseline screening lab work should include
hematocrit and type and screen. Imaging studies such
as MRI and CT scan can be of immense help in
planning airway management.
Discussions regarding airway management should
occur with the patient if an awake technique is to be
utilized. Likewise, if there is a strong possibility of
postoperative ventilation or tracheostomy, these
issues should be discussed. If you will be placing an
arterial line, explain the reason for its use.
Jehovah's Witness patients should have a detailed
discussion regarding preoperative anemia, possible
hemorrhage, and options for cardiovascular
resuscitation.
Intraoperative management
These surgeries are performed under general anesthe-
sia. An arterial line is generally needed to facilitate
deliberate hypotensive technique and for measuring
serial hematocrits. A short-acting muscle relaxant
should be used if cranial nerves or SSEPs are
monitored.
Airway management usually consists of oral
intubation and is not usually an issue. Occasionally,
depending on the extent of the tumor, oral intubation
may not be possible. Securing the airway nasally
or by tracheostomy may be viable alternatives.
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
210
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The endotracheal tube should be taped to the lower
lip and on the opposite side of the incision site. If the
airway is difficult, consider an awake technique to
secure the airway.
Stomach decompression of swallowed blood
should be considered at the end of the surgery. Two
large-gauge intravenous lines, blood warmer,
warming device and Foley catheter may be necessary
in lengthy maxillectomy procedures.
Consider transporting the intubated patient with a
propofol infusion to prevent hypertensive episodes
and the formation of hematoma, particularly in
patients who have had a flap reconstruction.
Postoperative care
Maintaining a normal blood pressure to prevent
excessive bleeding or hematoma formation is pru-
dent. Depending on the extent of the surgery, edema
formation and possible flap reconstruction, post-
operative spontaneous/controlled ventilation through
the ETT or tracheostomy tube may be safer options
than immediate extubation.
Bridge to extubation techniques may be con-
sidered if there are concerns regarding successful
extubation. Maintaining continuous access to the dif-
ficult airway post extubation is a significant consider-
ation in an algorithm. Extubation over an airway
exchange catheter may be considered. The airway
exchange catheter is passed down the endotracheal
tube. The endotracheal tube is removed over the
exchange catheter and the catheter is left in situ in
the airway. The airway exchange catheter has been left
in place as long as 72 hours post extubation [5].That
said, airway management post maxillectomy is usu-
ally not a challenge [6].
Cranial nerves V, VI, VII, IX, X and cervical
components of the spinomesencephalic tract are
responsible for acute and chronic pain of the head,
face and neck [7]. Pain can be characterized as either
nociceptive (somatic or visceral) or neuropathic (par-
oxysmal, lancinating pain). Pain management con-
sists of many modalities – pharmacological, herbal,
physiotherapy and interventional pain techniques.
Cancer pain responds well to opioids, while neuro-
pathic pain responds more readily to tricyclic anti-
depressants and anticonvulsants. Pain management
should be guided by the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the American Pain Society guidelines.
A three-step ladder approach composed of non-ster-
oidal anti-inflammatory drugs, opioids, and adjuvant
medications encompasses the framework of the WHO
pain treatment regimen. Adjuvant drugs enhance the
effects of analgesics or lessen other symptoms that
exacerbate pain. Examples of adjuvant drugs include
tricyclics, antidepressants, anticonvulsants, cannabi-
noids, antispasmodics, biphosphonates, a-adrener-
gics, steroids, and calcitonin [8,9].
Chronic pain management in head and neck
pathology yields variable results. Many of the neu-
rolytic and neuroablative procedures damage pain
signals, but can result in motor loss. It should be
noted that chronic pain and accompanying changes
may manifest as reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
Repeated stellate ganglion blocks supplemented by
trigeminal nerve blocks have shown some efficacy in
chronic pain relief. Rhizotomy of cranial nerves V,
IX, X and gamma knife treatment also yield variable
results. Favorable results have been reported for
spinal cord stimulators in head and face
procedures [10,11].
Complications
Maxillectomy procedures have the following associ-
ated complications:
1. Hemorrhage – significant blood loss can occur in
maxillectomy. The blood loss increases as the
dissection goes in an anteroposterior direction.
The pterygoid plexus is usually the cause of
significant blood loss.
2. Reconstruction may be necessary if the orbital
floor is violated in maxillectomy surgery. Orbital
exenteration may be needed when the intraorbital
contents are violated by tumor. Other ocular
complications include enophthalmos, diplopia,
ectropion, blepharitis, conjunctivitis, exposure
keratopathy, epiphora, and optic atrophy.
3. Swallowing may be compromised, though it is
acceptable in most patients.
4. Speech changes are common in maxillectomy as a
result of loss of palatal competence and increased
speech resonance.
5. Infection and multiple cranial nerve palsies are
possible. The optic nerve, maxillary branch of the
trigeminal nerve and the sphenopalatine nerve are
at risk during maxillectomy resection.
6. Radiation-induced cataracts, blindness, hearing
loss, pituitary insufficiency, brain necrosis, nasal
crusting, and frontal sinus mucocele formation
are also seen following maxillectomy.
Chapter 22: Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland, mandibular and temporomandibular joint surgery
211
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20127. Airway management post maxillectomy is usually
not a challenge and cerebrospinal fluid leaks are
not common. It has been reported that only 7.7%
of patients required a tracheostomy after free flap
reconstruction [12].
8. Chronic facial pain syndromes as discussed
above.
Conclusion
Maxillectomy procedures provide challenges for
anesthesiologists. Among these challenges are blood
loss management, cranial nerve monitoring, and at
times airway management. Successful surgery
involves open dialog between the anesthesiologist,
ENT surgeon, and at times the plastic surgeon. The
principles set forth above for the perioperative man-
agement of the maxillectomy patient aid in a collab-
orative and successful treatment plan for these
patients.
Salivary glands
Introduction
Salivary glands consist of two parotid glands, two
submandibular glands, two principal sublingual
glands and a large amount of minor salivary glands.
The function of the salivary glands is to produce
serous secretions, mucous secretions, digestive
enzymes, lubrication, and hygienic and bacteriostatic
functions [13]. Approximately 80% of salivary gland
tumors are found in the parotid gland and are usually
benign. Fifty to sixty percent of submandibular
tumors are benign [14].
Pleomorphic adenomas constitute about two-
thirds of all salivary gland tumors. Malignant tumors
include mucoepidermoid carcinomas and adenocystic
carcinoma. These tumors cause ulceration and
nerve invasion resulting in numbness and facial
paralysis [15].
The reader is directed to Chapter 21 on anesthesia
for parotid surgery; scant information regarding par-
otid glands will be included in this chapter. The
following sections will deal with submandibular
glands.
Surgical procedures
Surgical procedures of the salivary glands are tech-
nically challenging procedures. Close proximity to
vascular vessels and nerves, anatomic variability, pre-
vious surgeries, infection and radiation all contribute
to the challenge. Indications for submandibular
gland surgery include neoplasm, chronic sialadenitis
refractory to medical management, and impacted
stones in the hilum of the gland. Benign tumors
are usually embedded in the gland and require gland
excision, while malignant tumors extend into sur-
rounding tissues. Gland excision and the resection
of the contents of the submandibular triangle are
usually the appropriate treatment for malignant
tumors [16].
Anesthetic management
Preoperative assessment
A thorough assessment of the physical examination
and corresponding laboratory values should be done.
All comorbidities should be elicited from the patient
and optimization established. Discussion between the
anesthesiologist and surgeon should include the plans
for using neuromuscular blockade and the possibility
of hemorrhage. The operating room table is some-
times turned away from the anesthesiologists, and
appropriate circuit connections and intravenous
extensions should be considered. Submandibular
gland surgery is usually a “clean” procedure. In the
case of an infection, the need for antibiotics should be
discussed.
Intraoperative management
The neoplasm is usually well localized and lateralized
from the midline. Impingement on airway structures
is usually not a factor. Antibiotics, if needed, should
be given 30 minutes to 1 hour prior to incision.
Muscle relaxant is usually withheld to facilitate
intraoperative monitoring of nerves. There is a possi-
bility of hemorrhage from the facial artery and the
anterior fascial vein. While an arterial line is usually
not needed for this surgery, a large-bore intravenous
line should be considered. Emergence from anesthesia
should be planned to be smooth and free from
“bucking” to prevent potential neck hematoma.
Postoperative care
Appropriate pain management medication should be
ordered. Unless there is an intraoperative complica-
tion, disposition to a regular floor bed after the post-
anesthesia care unit is appropriate.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
212
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Complications
Submandibular gland resection has the following
associated complications:
1. Hemorrhage from the facial artery and the
anterior facial vein may occur.
2. Infection can occur postoperatively in 2 –9% of the
patient population.
3. Nerve injury – injury to the marginal mandibular
branch of the facial nerve. Injury to this nerve
results in lower lip depression. Injury to the
lingual nerve results in sensory loss of the anterior
two-thirds of the ipsilateral tongue. This injury
occurs in 3 –6% of cases. Hypoglossal nerve injury
causes ipsilateral tongue paralysis.
4. Other complications are xerostomia, gustatory
sweating, toxic shock syndrome, and mylohyoid
nerve injury [16].
Conclusions
Salivary gland resection poses technical challenges to
both the surgeon and the anesthesiologist. The anes-
thetic management of these procedures mainly
involves preservation of motor function of the face.
This will allow the surgeon to continuously test and
monitor neural integrity. Knowledge of the needs of
the surgeon and the safety of the patient chart the
clinical pathway of the anesthesiologist. Salivary gland
resection is an example of the integrated efforts of
both surgeon and anesthesiologist.
Mandible
Introduction
Surgery of the mandible and temporomandibular
joint (TMJ) may involve the expertise of several sur-
gical specialties – otorhinolaryngologists and oromax-
illaryfacial and plastic surgeons depending on the
extent of surgery. This section of the chapter involves
surgery of the mandible and temporomandibular
joint.
The mandible is composed of the body and two
rami that form the lower jaw. The lower teeth are
located in the alveolar ridge in the upper part of the
body. The quadrangular-shaped ramus continues lat-
erally and upward from the body. The superior aspect
of the ramus has two protuberances: anteriorly
known as the coronoid process, and posteriorly
known as the condylar process.
The temporomandibular joint is a synovial joint
divided into two compartments by a disc that articu-
lates with the temporal bone superiorly and inferiorly
with the condylar process of the mandible [1].
Surgical procedure
Surgery for the mandible can range from biopsy to
radical mandibular resection (Table 22.1). Often,
reconstruction of a major mandibular defect is per-
formed during the initial removal of the lesion. The
options for repair of mandibular defects may include
screw and plating, pedicled flaps with the osseous
component originating from ribs, scapulae, clavicles,
or calvarium or free osteocutaneous flaps from the
fibula, iliac crest, scapula, radial forearm or clavicle
[17]. The associated soft tissue defect requires soft
tissue replacement for the resultant defect with a
myocutaneous flap (pectoralis major or trapezius
flap) or free microvascular composite tissue transfer.
Stabilization for the resection defects may include
maxillo-mandibular fixation, bone transfer, or exter-
nal fixator applied to the facial bones [18].
Anesthetic management
Preoperative evaluation
For the preoperative assessment, routine history and
physical examination are sufficient in patients with-
out comorbidities. Detailed questioning of patients
with head and neck cancer or prior exposure to
Table 22.1. Indications for various kinds of mandibular surgery
Mandibular surgery Indication
Bilateral sagittal split
osteotomy (BSSO)
Mandibular deficiency
Malocclusion of teeth
BSSO and lower border
osteotomy
Facial asymmetry
Mandibular set back
with bimaxillary
surgery
Mandibular prognathism
Mandibular excess
Mandibular asymmetry
Maxillo-mandibular
advancement
Obstructive sleep apnea
Radical
mandibulectomy with
reconstruction
Advanced tumor (squamous
cell carcinoma with boney
invasion), odontogenic
tumors, osteosarcoma,
chondrosarcoma
Chapter 22: Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland, mandibular and temporomandibular joint surgery
213
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012radiation therapy may aid in choices of airway man-
agement. On the other hand, existing comorbidities
and decreased exercise tolerance may aid in deciding
on the need for invasive monitoring. It is critical to
review anesthesiology records from prior surgeries,
laboratory values, and imaging studies to delineate
the extent of the lesion. Discussion with the surgeon,
patient and family regarding airway management,
complications and disposition post procedure is
essential. Many practitioners utilize an antisialogogue
to be administered 30 minutes prior to the procedure,
particularly if a difficult airway is anticipated. Usually,
nasal intubation is a part of the airway management.
A vasoconstrictor is used to prepare the nares by
shrinking the nasal mucosa to minimize bleeding with
nasal intubation. Midazolam sedation may be pro-
vided to achieve a much-needed anxiolysis in these
commonly very anxious patients.
Intraoperative management
The introduction of “time out ” finalizes the commu-
nication regarding surgical requirements during dif-
ferent phases of the procedures (patient position, use
of muscle relaxants, order of surgical procedures,
antibiotic redosing, temperature of the room and
potential requirement for red cell, and blood com-
ponents transfusion). The nasal intubation may be
performed under general anesthesia by direct laryn-
goscopy or videolaryngoscopy with Magill forceps
when an adequate mouth opening is apparent. Nasal
fiberoptic intubation with an assistant providing jaw
thrust and tongue pull is an alternative airway man-
agement technique. If a difficult airway is anticipated,
then it is prudent to perform an awake intubation.
When a mature tracheostomy exists, the tracheot-
omy tube is removed and an armoured (anode) tube
is inserted into the tracheostoma. The tube is secured
by being sutured in place to provide an uninterrupted
access to the operative field and minimized contamin-
ation with the use of adhesive tape. A minimum of
two large-bore intravenous lines with extensions are
used. An arterial line is indicated when rapid response
to hemodynamic changes is essential, for close moni-
toring of patients with multiple comorbidities.
Anesthetic management usually incorporates
inhaled agents. Deliberate hypotensive anesthesia is
used to maintain the mean blood pressure around 60
mmHg for orthognathic procedures to minimize
blood in the operative field. For cases longer than 3
hours, Foley catheters, fluid warmers and warming
devices are used. Antiemetics are administered to
minimize postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Extubation may occur in the operating room if the
patient meets extubation criteria and bleeding and
airway swelling are not concerns [5]. Extubation
may be delayed due to patient comorbidities. If extu-
bation fails and reintubation is required, then trache-
ostomy may be warranted for failure to extubate and
prolonged intubation greater than 7 days.
Postoperative care
Postoperative management of major reconstruction
surgeries may involve care in a monitored setting
for postoperative ventilation and monitoring of flap
viability. In the postoperative period, humidified
oxygen is provided. The patient 's head is elevated
and ice packs are placed at the surgical area to
decrease swelling for orthognathic procedures. Anal-
gesia is provided for pain relief.
Complications
BSSO has the following associated complications:
1. Hemorrhage from the retromandibular vein,
inferior alveolar vessels and rarely facial vessels
can be managed intraoperatively. If blood enters
the stomach, it may cause postoperative nausea
and vomiting. A nasogastric tube is placed at
induction to facilitate removal of blood prior to
extubation and may remain in place in the
postoperative phase.
2. Facial edema may occur and can be managed with
ice packs, corticosteroids and head elevation.
3. Neurosensory deficits may be associated with
the inferior alveolar nerve, lingual nerve and
rarely the facial nerves from direct trauma or
indirect compression during surgery. Patients
temporarily present with numbness of the lower
lip and chin.
4. TMJ dysfunction may cause limited mouth
opening lasting up to 6 months post-surgery.
5. Difficult reintubation may be caused by bleeding,
TMJ dysfunction and facial edema. This can be
minimized by preparing for extubation using
extubation catheters [5].
Conclusions
Orthognathic procedures pose several potential chal-
lenges, tight management of blood pressure to
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
214
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012facilitate a bloodless surgical field, extubation in
the face of edema and hematoma formation, and
preemptive management of nausea and vomiting.
An example of an anesthetic management for recon-
structive mandibular cancer surgery is discussed in
the case presentation at the end of this chapter.
Temporomandibular joint
Introduction
The prevalence of temporomandibular joint dysfunc-
tion (TMJ) ranges from 20% to 25% in the general
population. Surgery is indicated for TMJ intra-articu-
lar pathology such as osteoarthritis, synovitis, fibrosis,
ankylosis, recalcitrant pain and reduced interincisor
distance. Temporomandibular arthroscopy is pre-
ferred over arthrotomy for its less invasive nature
and quicker recovery. Significant dysfunction of the
TMJ presents as pain and decreased interincisor dis-
tance. TMJ dysfunction may be recognized for the
first time during laryngoscopy, when the patient 's
mouth cannot be opened [19,20].
Surgical procedure
Surgical intervention for the TMJ may involve arthro-
centesis, arthroscopy, arthroplasty or an open joint
procedure. If joint space is adequate then arthroscopy
is performed, otherwise arthrotomy is reserved for
presence of a tumor or lack of joint space.
Anesthetic management
TMJ surgery is often performed in patients between
20 and 40 years old as an outpatient procedure. The
arthroscopy procedure can be performed with an
auriculotemporal nerve block and sedation. Most pro-
cedures are performed under general anesthesia with
nasal intubation to enable the surgeon to evaluate all
mandibular positions without interference from the
airway [21]. A single 18-gauge intravenous line is
appropriate. The patient is positioned supine. The
operating room table may be turned away from the
anesthesiologist to allow the surgeon access to the
surgical field.
Preoperative evaluation
Evaluation of the airway is essential, with additional
focus on the patency of the nares. Tip: when a devi-
ated septum is present, the nares with the smallest
opening is associated with the larger opening into the
nasopharynx. Ideally, one should examine the internal
aspect of the nares with a nasoscope to ensure patency
from nasal polyps. In a busy practice, this may not be
feasible. Instead, check clinically for nasal patency
by asking the patient which nostril allows easier
breathing. Instruct the patient to compare and con-
trast patency of the nasal passageways by occluding
one nostril with his/her finger pressing the nasal ala
against the nasal septum. This exam is performed
while exhaling and then repeated for the other nostril.
The patient 's nares are further prepared with a
nasal vasoconstrictor. Several options exist: 0.05%
neosynephrine nasal spray, 0.05% oxymetazoline
nasal spray, 4% cocaine. Oxymetazoline has the
longest half-life, up to 12 hours, and aids in maintain-
ing patient nares for extubation. If the patient
requires an awake nasal intubation, then an antisialo-
gogue (glycopyrrolate or atropine) to be administered
30 minutes prior to surgery is considered.
Intraoperative management
Nasal intubation is further prepared by local anes-
thetic and a vasocontricter by cotton-tipped applica-
tors soaked with either cocaine 4% or lidocaine 4%
with neosynephrine 0.25% inserted nasally 3 –5 min-
utes prior to intubation. Tip: when four cotton-tipped
applicators fit in the nares, it indicates that a 7.5
endotracheal tube will also fit in the nares. This step
can be done with the patient awake or after general
anesthesia is induced. The following endotracheal
tubes have been used: nasal RAE tube, standard endo-
tracheal tube with a curved metal adaptor or
reinforced armored tube with tube extension. At our
institution, we ascribe to a particular way to protect
the eyes and nose and secure the nasoendotracheal
tube, as shown in Figure 22.1. Minimal opioids are
required since the surgeon often performs auriculo-
temporal blocks as well as local infiltration of the
surgical site. At the end of the procedure, the surgeon
may elect to inject 2 mg of dexamethasone and or
sodium hyaluronate into the joint space [21,22].
Postoperative care
Recovery requires continued reduction of joint
overloading, inflammation, pain, and maximizing
joint mobility [23]. Postoperative pain has been
significantly reduced by injection of botulin
A (Botox) [21].
Chapter 22: Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland, mandibular and temporomandibular joint surgery
215
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Complications
TMJ surgery has the following associated complica-
tions [21,24]:
(1) otologic injuries (8.6%) involve blood clot,
perforation of tympanic membrane;
(2) laceration of external auditory canal, partial
hearing loss, vertigo;
(3) neurologic injury (1.7%) may involve cranial
nerves V and VII;
(4) arrhythmia, reflex bradycardia;
(5) pulmonary edema.
Conclusions
TMJ arthroscopy is an effective minimally invasive
technique to reduce pain and improve the mandibular
range of motion that can be done safely on an outpa-
tient basis.
Case study: anesthesia for
mandibular cancer
The patient is an 82-year-old male, 5 0900 (175 cm) in
height and weighing 85 kg, ASA III physical status,
with a verrucous cancer of the oral cavity. He is
scheduled for resection of a left mandibular cancer
with free flap reconstruction and plating.
Preoperative evaluation
/C15 Comorbidities: oral cancer, obesity, hypertension,
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, a few
years previously (chemically converted and
resolved with toprol and verapamil),
Figure 22.1. Nasal intubation. Safety concerns addressed with lubricant placed in the eyes with ocular occlusive dressing and eye pads.
Nasal RAE tube softened in warm water prior to placement. Vaseline gauze is placed around endotracheal tube near the nares to
minimize nasal necrosis from ETT pressure. Head wrap and surgical sponge is in place prior to securing the ETT with tape that is secured
circumferentially around the head. The head is placed on a foam donut to pad the head.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
216
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012hyperlipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux
(asymptomatic with medication), anemia,
arthritis, cervical spine disease, restless leg
syndrome and benign prostatic hypertrophy.
/C15 Past surgical history included wide local excision
of an oral soft tissue lesion, debridement of left
mandible, radical alveolarectomy, hernia with
mesh repair, and TURP.
/C15 Past intubation history: general anesthesia, oral
intubation with 7.5 oral RAE ETT with MacIntosh
#4 blade, one attempt with Cormach –Lehane view
2, Glidescope large blade 7.5 oral ETT with good
view. Mask ventilation not attempted.
/C15 Airway examination: MP III airway, intercisor
distance 5 cm, thyromental distance 5 cm, six
teeth remaining on left lower mandible, neck
extension greatly limited.
Induction of anesthesia
On the day of the procedure, the NPO status was
verified. In the preoperative area, the patient was
premedicated with intravenous (IV) glycopyrrolate
0.2 mg, 30 minutes prior to induction, and received
midazolam 2 mg IV en route to the operating room
suite. The anesthesiologist and the surgeons discussed
the airway management plan, procedure order and
post-surgical recovery location.
After applying standard monitors, the patient was
pre-oxygenated with 100% oxygen by face mask. Gen-
eral anesthesia was then induced with 150 mgo ff e n t a -
nyl, 150 mg of propofol followed by rocuronium 10 mg
IV for a defasiculating dose prior to 120 mg of succhi-
nylcholine. Easy face-mask ventilation was verified by
chest rise and capnography. The patient was intubated
using a Glidescope ™ (Verathon, Canada) with a 7.5
mm ID nasal RAE endotracheal tube (ETT) through
the right nares. The intubation was confirmed by
observing the tube passing through the vocal cords,
chest rise, the presence of bilateral breath sounds, and
capnography. Special notes: the nares were topicalized
with cotton tip application of neosynephrine 0.25% and
lidocaine 4% mixtures for several minutes after induc-
tion was initiated. Using the Glidescope stylet was not
an option for nasal intubation. The following steps were
taken for preparing for the intubation:
(1) the ETT was prewarmed in warm water and
lubricated with jelly;
(2) the cuff was flattened by inflating once to test cuff
integrity and deflating the cuff completely.
During intubation and while the Glidescope and ETT
were in the oropharynx, the pilot balloon was inflated
to raise the bevel of the ETT to the glottic opening.
The cuff was deflated as the tube passed through the
vocal cords. As an alternative Magill forceps could
have been used to assist with directing the tube into
the glottis. A 20-gauge right radial arterial line, a
second large-bore intravenous line with additonal
extensions, was placed while the surgeons placed a
Foley catheter. During the time the patient was
prepped, the room was warmed, and the patient was
padded meticulously. In particular, the surgeon
packed a petrolatum gauze around the endotracheal
tube at the nares to avoid potential nasal pressure-
induced ischemic necrosis (Figure 22.1). The head
was wrapped with a blue towel like a turban and a
surgical scrub sponge was placed in the center with
the ETT resting on the sponge. The ETT is secured by
placing tape circumferentially around the head. This
step avoids tension of the ETT on the nares during
the case.
Maintenance of anesthesia
General anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane
approximately 1.7–2.2%, continued muscle relaxation
and opioid analgesia. The case proceeded unevent-
fully for 12 hours with a total blood loss of 600 ml.
Dexamethasone 10 mg IV was given for postoperative
nausea and vomiting prophylaxis and to decrease
postoperative airway edema.
Emergence and recovery from anesthesia
By the end of the case, the patient was given a total of
700 mg of fentanyl and 4 mg of dilaudid, and a
propofol infusion was started at 50 mg/kg/min for
planned postoperative continued intubation and
mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit.
Postoperative intubation and sedation were main-
tained in order to support the airway until edema
subsided and the flap viability was ensured.
On postoperative day 7, the patient received a
tracheostomy since he failed extubation twice due to
upper airway obstruction.
Potential complications
/C15 Shared airway surgeries require meticulous
attention to securing the airway and using long
extensions to allow surgeons room to work and
Chapter 22: Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland, mandibular and temporomandibular joint surgery
217
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:03 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012allow the anesthesiologist access to the patient for
administration of medications. In addition, the
eyes were lubricated with ointment, and taped
with ocular adhesive and padded eye pads. This
was precautionary since surgical instruments were
near the face area.
Other complications
/C15 Bleeding is a potential challenge. Reassessing
intravenous access during the case is essential. An
arterial line should be used for timely detection of
cardiovascular changes and to access metabolic
status.
/C15 Nasal necrosis from prolonged nasal intubation.
Care was taken to prevent pressure on the nares by
placement of the vaseline gauze and taping the
tube without tension.
/C15 Nasal epistaxis with the nasal intubation is
minimized with a softened, warmed ETT and
application of vasoconstrictor to the nares.
/C15 Skin breakdown: padding was placed on all
prominent boney parts since this was anticipated
to be a long procedure in an elderly patient. In this
case, the adhesive pulse oximeter probe was used
instead of the clip-on since both of the patient 's
arms were not available. Since the patient 's arms
were not readily available during the procedure,
the intravenous line was draped over his arm and
easy access to the line was maintained when
tucking the arm.
Clinical pearls
/C15 Occasionally, depending on the extent of the
tumor, oral intubation may not be possible;
securing the airway nasally or by tracheostomy
may be needed.
/C15 Minimizing epistaxis with nasal intubation can be
achieved with a softened, warmed ETT and
application of vasoconstrictor to the nares.
/C15 For nasal intubation, choices of endotracheal
tubes include standard endotracheal tubes with a
curved metal adaptor, nasal RAE tubes, or a
reinforced armored tube.
/C15 Blood entering the stomach may cause
postoperative nausea and vomiting. A nasogastric
tube will facilitate removal of blood prior to
extubation and may remain in place in the
postoperative phase.
/C15 In some cases postoperative spontaneous/
controlled ventilation through the ETT may be
safer than immediate extubation, particularly with
surgical flaps or where edema is a concern.
/C15 The operating room table is sometimes turned
away from the anesthesiologists, and appropriate
circuit connections and intravenous extensions
should be considered.
/C15 Submandibular gland resection has the following
associated complications: hemorrhage from the
facial artery or the anterior facial vein, injury to
the marginal mandibular branch of the facial
nerve (resulting in lower lip depression), injury to
the lingual nerve (resulting in sensory loss of the
anterior two-thirds of the ipsilateral tongue) and
hypoglossal nerve injury (causing ipsilateral
tongue paralysis).
/C15 Deliberate hypotensive anesthesia for
orthognathic procedures is sometimes used to
minimize blood in the operative field; the mean
blood pressure is usually kept to around 60
mmHg.
/C15 Facial edema may occur in such cases and can be
managed with ice packs, corticosteroids and head
elevation.
References
1. O 'Rahilly R. Head and neck. In
Gardner E, Gray D, O 'Rahilly R,
eds. Anatomy. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders; 1975. pp. 558 –9, 665–7.
2. Spiro RH, Strong EW, Shah JP.
Maxillectomy and its
classification. Head Neck 1997;
19(4):309–14.
3. Carrau R. Maxillectomy. 2011;
available from: http://emedicine.
medscape.com/article/1890955-
overview. Accessed June 1, 2011.
4. Bhatki A, Goldberg A.
Complications of surgery of the
paranasal sinuses. In Eisele D,
Smith R, eds. Complications in
Head and Neck Surgery , 2nd edn.
Philadelphia: Mosby/Elsevier;
2009. pp. 543 –58.
5. Cooper RM. Extubation and
changing endotracheal tubes. In
Hagberg C, ed. Benumof'sA i r w a y
Management. Philadelphia: Mosby
Elesevier; 2007. pp. 1146 –80.
6. Lin HS, Wang D, Fee WE, Goode
RL, Terris DJ. Airway
management after maxillectomy:
routine tracheostomy is
unnecessary. Laryngoscope
2003;113(6):929–32.
7. Practice guidelines for cancer pain
management. A report by the
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
218
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:04 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Pain Management, Cancer Pain
Section. Anesthesiology 1996;
84(5):1243–57.
8. Straker T. Pain Management for
head and neck surgery. In Eisele
D, Smith R, eds. Complications in
Head and Neck Surgery , 2nd edn.
Philadelphia: Mosby/Elsevier;
2009. pp. 189 –94.
9. Martins TL, Kahvegian MA, Noel-
Morgan J, et al . Comparison of
the effects of tramadol, codeine,
and ketoprofen alone or in
combination on postoperative
pain and on concentrations of
blood glucose, serum cortisol,
and serum interleukin-6 in dogs
undergoing maxillectomy or
mandibulectomy. Am J Vet Res
2010;71(9):1019–26.
10. Carpenter RL, Rauck RL.
Refractory head and neck pain.
A difficult problem and a new
alternative therapy. Anesthesiology
1996;84(2):249–52.
11. Iwade M, Fukuuchi A,
Kawamata M, et al. [Management
of severe pain after extended
maxillectomy in a patient with
carcinoma of the maxillary sinus].
Masui 1996;45(1):82–5.
12. Little J, Bumpous J.
Complications of maxillectomy.
In Eisele D, Smith R, eds.
Complications in Head and
Neck Surgery , 2nd edn.
Philadelphia: Mosby/Elsevier;
2009. pp. 577 –80
13. Butt FY. Benign diseases of the
salivary glands. In Lalwani AK, ed.
Current Diagnosis & Treatment in
Otolaryngology – Head & Neck
Surgery, 3rd edn. McGraw-Hill;
available from: http://
accessmedicine.com/content.
aspx?aid=55766963.
14. Lustig L, Schindler R. Ear, nose and
throat disorders. In McPhee SJ,
Papadakis MA, eds. Current
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment
2012. McGraw-Hill; available from:
http://accessmedicine.com/
content.aspx?aid=2356.
15. Durso S. Oral manifestations of
disease. In Fauci AS, Braunwald E,
Kasper DL, eds. Harrison's
Principles of Internal Medicine ,
18th edn. 2011; available from:
www.accessmedicine.com/
content.aspx?aID¼9097184.
16. Gillespie M, Easel D.
Complications of surgery of the
salivary glands. In Eisele D, Smith
R, eds. Complications in Head and
Neck Surgery . Philadelphia:
Mosby/Elsevier; 2009. pp. 221 –50.
17. Rassekh CH, Seikaly H.
Oropharyngeal cancer. In Bailey
BJ, Johnson JT, eds. Head & Neck
Surgery - Otolaryngology , 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins; 2006. pp. 1686 –7.
18. Lutcavage GJ, Finkelstein MW.
Sarcomas of the jaw in oral and
maxillofacial surgery. In Robert
M, edr. Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, 2nd edn. St. Louis:
Saunders Elsevier; 2009.
pp. 680–706.
19. Small RH, Ganzberg SI,
Schuster AW. Unsuspected
temporomandibular joint
pathology leading to a difficult
endotracheal intubation. Anesth
Analg 2004;99(2):383–5.
20. Patane PS, Ragno JR Jr,
Mahla ME. Temporomandibular
joint disease and difficult tracheal
intubation. Anesth Analg 1988;
67(5):482–3.
21. Donlon W. Temporomandibular
disorders and surgery. In Bailey BJ,
Johnson JT, eds. Head & Neck
Surgery - Otolaryngology , 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins; 2006. pp. 631 –43.
22. Furst IM, Kryshtalskyj B,
Weinberg S. The use of intra-
articular opioids and bupivacaine
for analgesia following
temporomandibular joint
arthroscopy: a prospective,
randomized trial. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 2001;59(9):
979–83
23. Israel HA. Part I: The use of
arthroscopic surgery for treatment
of temporomandibular joint
disorders. J Oral Maxillofac Surg
1999;57(5):579–82.
24. Tsuyama M, Kondoh T, Seto K,
Fukuda J. Complications of
temporomandibular joint
arthroscopy: a retrospective
analysis of 301 lysis and lavage
procedures performed using the
triangulation technique. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 2000;58(5):
500–5.
Chapter 22: Anesthesia for maxillary, salivary gland, mandibular and temporomandibular joint surgery
219
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:04 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.025
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
23
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for face transplantation
Jacek B. Cywinski, Thomas Edrich and D. John Doyle
Introduction
Face transplantation (Figure 23.1) remains a very rare
procedure. Only about 15 cases, including total and
partial face transplantation, have been done world-
wide at the time of writing this chapter. Each proced-
ure has been unique with respect to indications and
the nature and extent of the transplanted tissue. There
has been one case report detailing the anesthesia
management during face transplantation in the set-
ting of coagulopathy [1]. However, there has been no
systematic description of the anesthesia management
for face transplantation. This chapter will outline
anesthetic considerations for this unique and complex
procedure based on the experience of two hospitals
where the first face transplants in the United States
took place as well as preliminary data from three
international centers (personal communication).
Management of the donor during face
tissue and multiorgan harvest
The details of anesthetic care for the multiorgan
donor has been outlined in the literature [2 – 5]. Simi-
lar principles to conventional organ procurement
apply, however, when consideration is given to the
harvest of a composite facial graft, one has to keep in
mind that due to the surgical complexity and long
duration of procurement, harvesting of the facial graft
should ordinarily be performed before other organs
are retrieved. Maintenance of adequate tissue perfu-
sion and donor hemodynamic stability during this
long procurement period can have a significant
impact on the quality of the graft and organs to be
procured later [6].
Since each case of face transplantation is dif-
ferent, detailed planning of the harvesting strategy is
extremely important: in many instances a practice
“mock harvest ” is performed in a cadaver lab to
solidify the surgical approach. In order to avoid inter-
ference with the surgical field, a donor tracheostomy
can be performed first [6]. Communication with the
procurement team is very important during dissec-
tion of the graft: frequently a nerve stimulator is used
to identify motor branches of the facial nerve. For this
reason muscle relaxants need to be avoided until
dissection and isolation of the nerves is completed.
To achieve a motionless surgical field a combination
of a volatile anesthetic and intravenous infusion of an
opioid (for example, fentanyl, remifentanil or sufen-
tanil) or total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) can be
used. Because of frequent hypotension in such a set-
ting, circulatory function must often be supported
with intravascular volume expansion and/or vaso-
active drugs. However, it is important to realize that
high doses of vasoconstrictors can make it difficult for
the surgeon to identify small facial blood vessels
during the tissue dissection and may also compromise
tissue perfusion through vasoconstriction. Conse-
quently, intravascular fluids infusion may be a better
choice as a first-line approach to restore blood pres-
sure. Not uncommonly brain-dead donors arrive in
the operating room already on significant pharmaco-
logical circulatory support, which makes it even more
challenging to maintain adequate perfusion pressure
to avoid compromise to any other organs that are to
be eventually procured during long dissection of the
facial graft [6].
Preoperative assessment
of the recipient
The anesthetic assessment of candidates for face trans-
plantation is an important part of the pre-transplant
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
220
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012process; similar to the evaluation of any other surgi-
cal patient, the major goal is to identify and optimize
clinical conditions which might adversely impact
postoperative outcomes [6]. Based on experience
from different centers where face transplants have
been performed, there is no uniform set of preopera-
tive tests; each program tailors evaluation to each
individual patient and his or her comorbid condi-
tions. Universal criteria for approval or disqualifica-
tion of the face transplant candidate do not yet exist;
(B)
(A)
Figure 23.1. Ms. Connie Culp before and after the two stages of her face transplant at Cleveland Clinic. Stage 1 was carried out in December
2008 (lead surgeon: Dr. Maria Siemionow). Images courtesy of Cleveland Clinic. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 23: Anesthesia for face transplantation
221
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012however, there is a general consensus that the patient
needs to be sufficiently fit to undergo a very pro-
longed anesthetic and surgery. Such a candidate
should be free from any significant comorbidity,
which could impact the perioperative course in a
negative way.
Anesthetic evaluation begins with a comprehen-
sive review of the medical history and physical exam-
ination: an identification of comorbid conditions
helps to determine the patient 's surgical risk as well
as help tailor pre-transplant testing. Detailed evalu-
ation of face injury and past reconstructive efforts is
of utmost importance, because they may greatly influ-
ence airway management plans [6]. As most face
recipients have undergone several general anesthetics
during past reconstructions, close attention should be
paid to the previous anesthesia records; in particular,
details of the airway management during the past
surgeries can be very helpful in developing a future
anesthetic plan. Any past hemodynamic instability or
cardiac complication should be clarified and investi-
gated. Cardiac testing including echocardiography
and stress testing may be necessary to exclude signifi-
cant coronary or valvular disease. Some centers
perform the same cardiac testing as for liver trans-
plantation candidates [6]. Keeping in mind that facial
transplantation must be considered an elective pro-
cedure, that is, not life-saving, the risk of proceeding
in the presence of significant undetected cardiac
comorbidity should be weighed carefully. Evaluation
of respiratory function focuses on assessment of pul-
monary reserve and may include chest radiographs
and lung function testing.
Careful examination of a patient ’s airway is crit-
ical since it dictates intraoperative airway manage-
ment plan. All candidates for face transplantation
have significant facial disfigurement; this comprom-
ises the upper airway, making mask fit and positive-
pressure ventilation through it after the induction of
general anesthesia difficult or impossible. Oral awake
fiberoptic intubation the best choice to secure the
airway although one must keep in mind that
the ability to topicalize oropharyngeal mucosa
may be limited due to distorted anatomy. After oral
intubation, the surgical team will proceed with
tracheostomy, so that the endotracheal tube is out of
the surgical field [6]. Some patients may present with
a tracheostomy (with or without tracheostomy tube),
which can be cannulated with a reinforced endotra-
cheal tube sutured to the chest wall. A detailed review
of head and neck imaging studies (computed tomog-
raphy, magnetic resonance) may be helpful in defin-
ing airways anatomy and developing a plan for airway
management. In selected patients flexible fiberoptic
evaluation of the airway may be usepful in revealing
further pertinent anatomic details and plan the strat-
egy of securing the airway during transplantation [6].
Intraoperative management
Monitoring
Since the majority of the face transplant candidates
are free of significant comorbidities, in most cases
standard ASA monitors [7] along with an arterial line
and central venous access will be sufficient. Because
maintenance of adequate intravascular volume is
important in both the recipient and the donor in
order to assure adequate graft perfusion central
venous pressure trends and the response to fluid
challenges can be very helpful in assessing fluid status.
Although not yet reported in cases of face transplant-
ation, monitoring of systolic pressure variation
during the respiratory cycle of a mechanically venti-
lated patient to guide “goal-directed” therapy may be
helpful as well [8].
Airway management
The donor will have an endotracheal tube in place
(oral or nasal) at the time of tissue procurement [6].
However, a tracheostomy may be performed first to
avoid interference with the surgical field. To prevent
accidental kinking, a wire-reinforced endotracheal
tube is often used in this setting. Airway management
in the recipient is dictated by the extent and nature of
the facial injuries; in many cases the patient presents
with a tracheostomy and airway management is
limited to the insertion of an appropriate reinforced
endotracheal tube into the tracheal stoma [6]. If the
tracheostomy has been decanulated and has started to
close, extension under local anesthesia may be per-
formed by the surgeon to fit the endotracheal tube.
Recipient patients who do not have a tracheostomy
may first require awake fiberoptic oral intubation,
followed by a tracheostomy subsequently cannulated
with a wire-reinforced endotracheal tube.
Vascular access
Face transplant procedures can be very lengthy in
duration and entail significant blood loss necessitating
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
222
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012transfusion of multiple blood products in a relatively
short period of time. In a preliminary survey of five
medical centers that have performed 13 face tran-
plants, the duration of surgery has ranged from 14 to
24 hours (average 19 hours). The blood loss has varied
greatly depending on the underlying pathology of the
recipient. Resuscitation has required between 2 and 60
packed red blood cell units (average 20.5 units) and
zero to 60 fresh-frozen plasma units (average 14.5
units). Two centers placed large-bore central venous
catheters to facilitate reliable high-volume resuscita-
tion (personal communication with A. Gilton,
M. Colomina, I. Lopez, J. Cywinski and T. Edrich).
Alternatively, several large-bore peripheral intraven-
ous catheters may serve as venous access for rapid
resuscitation. A central line may be useful to monitor
and trend central venous pressures and it may become
necessary in the ICU if venous access is limited. The
nature and extent of the facial injury, previous recon-
structive procedures as well as planned planes of sur-
gical dissection may help to predict the risk of
intraoperative bleeding and the need for special vascu-
lar access. The location choice of the central line place-
ment has to be discussed with the surgical team: a
subclavian vein may be preferable to the internal jugu-
lar vein in order to avoid the surgical field. However,
there is a valid concern that placement of a central
venous catheter in the internal jugular vein or in the
subclavian vein will compromise adequate venous out-
flow from the graft in case of venous thrombosis. The
femoral vein in some cases may be the only central
access site if conventional central venous access loca-
tion is deemed to be inappropriate [6]. The strict
sterile technique with central line insertion is
extremely important, since after face transplantation
immunosuppression is started immediately, so the risk
of infection is increased [6,9]. Real-time ultrasound
guidance should be used during central line insertion
in order to limit unnecessary needle passes and dimin-
ish risk of complications (arterial puncture,
pneumothorax) [6,10].
Choice of the anesthetic (volatile agent vs.
TIVA)
Limited data is available in the literature regarding the
best choice of anesthetic technique for long and
extensive surgical procedures. Both volatile agents as
well as total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) have been
successfully used; however, avoidance of nitrous oxide
with its adverse effects following prolonged adminis-
tration [11] would seem to be justified, although there
is no definitive evidence to quantify its risk. Muscle
relaxants are part of the balanced anesthesia tech-
nique; however, during certain portions of the pro-
cedure, where nerve monitoring is required, they
must be avoided [6]. The use of a remifentanil infu-
sion can be helpful in reducing movement in these
instances but, unfortunately, its use is often compli-
cated by hypotension and bradycardia (at high infu-
sion rates). Volatile anesthetic agents are believed to
protect against intraoperative awareness more reliably
than intravenous anesthetics used during TIVA. Since
the electroencephalographic monitoring of depth of
anesthesia may be impossible in patients undergoing
face transplantation, the use of a volatile anesthetic
agent may be advantageous. Finally, as noted below,
anesthesia achieved with volatile anesthetics appears
to improve peripheral tissue perfusion [6].
The choice of anesthetic agent for the transplant of
composite tissue grafts may be quite important and
affect the outcome of the graft. Experimental models
demonstrated that some anesthetic agents improved
blood flow in the microcirculation of free flaps and the
flow through micro- and macrovascular anastomoses
[12]. The effect of halothane on free flap microcircula-
tion has been studied extensively in animal models, in
particular its effect on postcapillary venules [13]. Since
other halogenated volatile anesthetics have similar
effects on microcirculation to halothane these labora-
tory findings can be extrapolated [14]. Based on
experimental data, exposure to a halogenated volatile
anesthetic may improve free flap survival by reducing
the number of leukocytes flowing through microcir-
culation, as well as by decreasing the number of
leukocytes adhering to the endothelium of vessel wall,
and migrating outside the vessel. During reperfusion,
these leukocytes can potentially cause tissue injury
related to the release of proinflammatory mediators
(via degranulation). The edema of endothelium related
to the leucocyte degranulation process and the pres-
ence of leukocytes adhering to the endothelial wall of
venules can cause decreased capillary blood flow due to
impaired blood drainage. Other halogenated volatile
anesthetics may offer a similar protective effect on
microcirculation, although the effect may be smaller
[6,13,15,16].
Propofol infusion in experimental models of free
musculo-cutaneous flaps has been shown to cause
significant endothelial edema, with a decrease in the
Chapter 23: Anesthesia for face transplantation
223
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012number of rolling leukocytes and lymphocytes pass-
ing through postcapillary venules [17]. Also, the
numbers of leukocytes and lymphocytes adhering
to the endothelial wall and migrating outside the
postcapillary venule were significantly increased.
Release of proinflammatory mediators from the
leukocytes upon graft reperfusion potentiate the
activity of free oxygen radicals and, for these
reasons, prolonged propofol infusions may be less
than ideal in patients undergoing composite tissue
grafts. It is worth mentioning that experimental
models propofol demonstr ated immunomodulatory
p r o p e r t i e sr e s u l t i n gi ni n h i b i t i o no fl y m p h o c y t e
activity [6,17,18].
Limited data from animal model experiments
demonstrated that opioids decrease the diameter of
the arterioles in skeletal muscle, which decreases
blood flow in the free flap, which can be detected by
increased velocities of the blood flow measured with
Doppler flow meter [13,19].
Fluid management
The goals and principles of intraoperative fluid
management in face transplantation are similar to
any other long surgical procedure involving micro-
vascular free flaps. Adequate graft perfusion is
difficult to assess directly; however, careful moni-
toring of the patient 's urine output, changes in
central venous pressure, as well as changes in sys-
tolic pressure as a consequ ence of positive-pressure
ventilation (pulse pressure variations) can guide
intraoperative fluid m anagement. The risk of
impaired coagulation must be considered when
using hetastarch formulations; however, other col-
loids (albumin) may be helpful to maintain
adequate intravascular volume [20].
Transfusion of blood products
Although the general guidelines for the transfusion
of blood components are well defined in the pub-
lished literature; in the face transplant recipient,
transfusion practice needs to be highly individualized
and guided by the clinical situation [21 – 23]. In the
general population, transfusion of red blood cells is
not indicated in relatively healthy, asymptomatic
individuals until the hemoglobin level drops below
approximately 7 gm/dl. However, in the case of acute
intraoperative blood loss (as has been reported in
some of the face transplants – personal
communication), appropiate blood products would
be transfused before reaching this threshold to avoid
excessive anemia and coagulopathy. In addition, in
face transplant recipients the threshold for transfu-
sion of red cells may be slightly higher to provide
adequate oxygen-carrying capacity to the graft [6].
Excessive increases in hematocrit should be avoided
because high hematocrit compromises the rheologic
properties of blood and microcirculation as well.
Coagulopathy can cause microvascular bleeding and
hematoma formation, which are potentially devastat-
ing postoperative complications; therefore, coagula-
tion status of the recipient must be closely
monitored, especially in cases complicated by large
blood loss ( > one blood volume). Tests which pro-
vide whole blood clotting assessment, such as
Thromboelastograph® (TEG) and Sonoclot ®, can
facilitate the decision on which blood clotting com-
ponents need to be transfused in order to correct
ongoing coagulopathy. In a general population, evi-
dence-based data supporting administration of fresh
frozen plasma in patients with INR values < 2.0 is
lacking [22]; however, lower thresholds may be
appropriate during the face transplantation, where
the consequences of surgical bleeding from impaired
coagulation could be disastrous. The need for admin-
istration of platelets should be driven by the assess-
ment of the clinical situation rather then specific
platelet count threshold; however, platelet transfu-
sion is rarely indicated if the platelet count is greater
than 100 /C2109/liter [21]. Transfusion of the blood
products is associated with well-defined risks and
should be used judiciously: [23] transfusion-related
acute lung injury (TRALI) is the most common life-
threatening adverse effect, [24]; transfusion-associ-
ated graft-versus-host disease (TA-GVHD) and
immunomodulation are other well-documented
complications.
Pressors
Direct sympathetic a-receptor agonists (such as
phenylephrine or norepinephrine) are commonly
used in clinical practice to treat hypotension; how-
ever, in situations where microvascular surgery is
involved (such as face transplant), they should be
avoided because of the risk of vasoconstriction that
can potentially compromise graft perfusion. Also,
vasoconstriction can mak e it difficult for the sur-
geon to identify and handle small vascular
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
224
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012structures in the graft-procurement phase of the
operation [6].
Muscle relaxants
Muscle relaxation may be needed at various phases of
both the donor and recipient operations; during con-
struction of microanastomoses (blood vessels,
nerves), a motionless surgical field is quite desirable.
However, both the donor and recipient operations
may at times require use of a nerve stimulator to
identify various nerves and at that times conduction
at the neuromuscular junction has to be restored.
Shorter-acting muscle relaxants like rocuronium or
atracurium are preferable to a longer-acting drug like
pancuronium for this very reason. Communication
with the surgical team is important to facilitate proper
timing and dosing of the muscle relaxants [6].
Postoperative sedation
During the postoperative period the face transplant
recipients are ventilated through a tracheostomy tube
which replaces reinforced endotracheal tube at the
end of the surgical procedure in the majority of cases.
The need for postoperative sedation and ventilatory
support is individualized: in some situations post-
operative sedation is deemed necessary to avoid
mechanical compromise of the graft from patient
movement [6]. Adequate sedation can be achieved
by a variety of means: an infusion of propofol in
conjunction with an opiate such as fentanyl or an
infusion of dexmethetomidine may be considered as
well, depending on the anticipated duration of post-
operative sedation and need for mechanical ventila-
tion. Sedation should be gradually withdrawn to avoid
agitation, coughing, and straining, all of which can
potentially compromise graft tissue [6].
The anesthetic team
Anesthetic care for face transplant operations is
usually provided by the anesthesia team, which con-
sists of an attending anesthesiologist(s) in conjunc-
tion with a resident doctor(s) and/or certified
registered nurse anesthetist(s) (CRNA). The long dur-
ation of the procedure and the unpredictable timing
frequently require multiple teams to be involved. To
ensure smooth and safe transfer of care from one
team to the other, good communication and docu-
mentation are vital.
Providing anesthetic care to face
transplant recipients for subsequent
surgical procedures
Face transplant recipients may require subsequent
surgical procedures, related or unrelated to the face
transplant. Airway management in cases where the
composite graft involves maxillary or mandibular
structures may present a significant challange: the
forces associated with direct laryngoscopy for intub-
ation could conceivably cause damage to incompletely
healed bony structures. Discussion with the surgical
team which performed the face transplant can help to
clarify the safest way to manage the airways. In some
cases where the tracheostomy has healed over and the
risk of the disruption of bony structures during direct
laryngoscopy is high, reopening of the tracheostomy
under local anesthesia may be considered. Alterna-
tively, one can perform awake fiberoptic intubation [6].
Summary
Face transplantation is a quite rare procedure that
is best approached by a collaborative team of anesthe-
siologists, surgeons and transplant coordinators. Pre-
viously performed transplants have required detailed
planning that must be tailored to the specific patient.
Often, airway access involves tracheostomy. The loca-
tion and type of intravascular access line need to be
balanced against the risk of rapid blood loss and the
concern for complications such as impairment of the
blood drainage from the facial graft causing venous
stasis. Fluid management is especially important in
ensuring good graft perfusion in both donor and
recipient; avoidance of direct vasoconstrictors seems
to be justified [6]. In addition, during some periods of
donor and recipient operations, muscle relaxation
should be avoided to facilitate nerve identification
using electrical stimulation. The duration and com-
plexity of the face transplant operation requires par-
ticipation of multiple teams, including more than one
anesthesia team.
Clinical pearls
/C15Although detailed criteria for approval do not yet
exist, a general consensus exists that the patient
must be sufficiently fit to undergo a very
prolonged anesthetic and surgery in order to be
considered for face transplantation. Additionally,
Chapter 23: Anesthesia for face transplantation
225
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012facial transplantation must be considered to be an
elective procedure that is not life-saving.
/C15Face transplant procedures can be very lengthy in
duration and entail significant blood loss,
necessitating transfusion of multiple blood
products in a relatively short period of time.
/C15Oral awake fiberoptic intubation may be the best
choice to secure the recipient airway in the
absence of an existing tracheostomy. Following
successful intubation, the surgical team will
usually proceed with tracheostomy if one is not
already present. In order to avoid interference
with the surgical field, a donor tracheostomy can
be performed first.
/C15Harvesting of the facial graft should be usually
performed before other organs are retrieved.
Maintenance of adequate tissue perfusion during
the long procurement period can have a
significant impact on the quality of the procured
material. Intravascular volume expansion may be
needed to restore blood pressure.
/C15Communication with the procurement team is
very important during dissection of the graft:
frequently a nerve stimulator is used to identify
the facial nerves. For this reason muscle relaxants
should be avoided until dissection of the nerves is
completed.
/C15In most cases standard ASA monitors, an arterial
line and central venous access will be sufficient.
A subclavian vein for the central venous access
may be preferable over the internal jugular vein in
order to avoid impinging on the surgical field.
Strict sterile technique with these procedures
should be applied, since after face transplantation
immunosuppression is started immediately.
/C15While both volatile agents and TIVA are
adequate as anesthetic technique, because
electroencephalographic monitoring of the depth
of anesthesia may not be feasible in these patients,
the use of a volatile anesthetic agent may be
advantageous. Given the long duration of the
surgery, avoidance of nitrous oxide would
seem to be justified.
/C15During certain portions of the procedure, where
nerve monitoring is required, so muscle relaxant
use must be avoided.
/C15Free flap perfusion-related issues, e.g., transfusion
threshold, avoidance of pressors, and volume
monitoring and resuscitation, apply to the face
transplant recipient as well.
/C15Multiple anesthesia care teams may be involved;
consequently good communication and
documentation are vital when care is transferred
from one team to another.
/C15Postoperatively, the majority of the face transplant
recipients will be mechanically ventilated through
a tracheostomy tube and may require sedation for
some period of time in an intensive care setting.
References
1. Pomahac B, Pribaz J, Eriksson E,
et al . Three patients with full facial
transplantation. N Engl J Med 2011
Dec 28. [Epub ahead of print]
PubMed PMID: 22204672.
2. Hevesi ZG, Lopukhin SY, Angelini
G, et al. Supportive care after
brain death for the donor
candidate. Int Anesthesiol Clin
2006;44:21– 34.
3. Venkateswaran RV, Patchell VB,
Wilson IC, et al. Early donor
management increases the retrieval
rate of lungs for transplantation.
Ann Thorac Surg 2008;85:278– 86.
4. Shah VR. Aggressive management
of multiorgan donor. Transplant
Proc 2008;40:1087– 90.
5. DuBose J, Salim A. Aggressive
organ donor management protocol.
J Intensive Care Med
2008;23:367– 75.
6. Cywinski JB, Doyle DJ, Kusza K.
Anesthetic care for face
transplantation. In Siemionow MZ,
ed. The Know How of Face
Transplantation. London: Springer;
2011. pp. 95 – 102.
7. American Society of
Anesthesiologists (2005) Standards
for basic anesthetic monitoring.
American Society of
Anesthesiologists. http://www.
asahq.org/publicationsAndServices/
standards/02.pdf; available from
http://www.asahq.org/
publicationsAndServices/standards/
02.pdf. Accessed May 14, 2010.
8. Marik PE, Cavallazzi R, Vasu T,
et al. Dynamic changes in arterial
waveform derived variables and
fluid responsiveness in
mechanically ventilated patients: a
systematic review of the literature.
Crit Care Med 2009;37:2642– 7.
9. Maki DG, Kluger DM, Crnich CJ.
The risk of bloodstream infection in
adults with different intravascular
devices: a systematic review of 200
published prospective studies.
Mayo Clin Proc 2006;81:1159– 71.
10. Gann M Jr, Sardi A. Improved
results using ultrasound guidance
for central venous access. Am Surg
2003;69:1104– 7.
11. Renard D, Dutray A, Remy A, et al.
Subacute combined degeneration of
the spinal cord caused by nitrous
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
226
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012oxide anaesthesia. Neurol Sci
2009;30:75– 6.
12. Adams J, Charlton P. Anaesthesia
for microvascular free tissue
transfer. Br J Anaesth (CEPD
Reviews) 2003;3:3 3– 7.
13. Kusza K, Siemionow M,
Nalbantoglu U, et al.
Microcirculatory response to
halothane and isoflurane
anesthesia. Ann Plast Surg
1999;43:57– 66.
14. Sigurdsson GH, Banic A,
Wheatley AM, et al. Effects of
halothane and isoflurane
anaesthesia on microcirculatory
blood flow in musculocutaneous
flaps. Br J Anaesth 1994;73:826– 32.
15. Hagau N, Longrois D. Anesthesia
for free vascularized tissue transfer.
Microsurgery 2009;29:161– 7.
16. Liu X, Peter FW, Barker JH, et al.
Leukocyte-endothelium
interaction in arterioles after
ischemia and reperfusion. J Surg
Res 1999;87:77– 84.
17. Kusza K, Blaszyk M,
Siemionow M, et al. Alteration in
peripheral microcirculatory
haemodynamics of muscle flaps
during propofol infusion
anaesthesia. Anesth Intens Care
2002;34:187– 93.
18. Holzmann A, Schmidt H,
Gebhardt MM, et al. Propofol-
induced alterations in the
microcirculation of hamster
striated muscle. Br J Anaesth
1995;75:452– 6.
19. Brookes ZL, Brown NJ, Reilly CS.
The dose-dependent effects of
fentanyl on rat skeletal muscle
microcirculation in vivo. Anesth
Analg 2003;96:456– 62.
20. Marx G, Schuerholz T. Fluid-
induced coagulopathy: does the
type of fluid make a difference?
Crit Care 2010;14:118.
21. American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Perioperative Blood Transfusion
and Adjuvant Therapies. Practice
guidelines for perioperative
blood transfusion and adjuvant
therapies: an updated report by
the American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Perioperative Blood Transfusion
and Adjuvant Therapies.
Anesthesiology 2006;105:
198– 208.
22. Triulzi DJ. The art of plasma
transfusion therapy. Transfusion
2006;46(8):1268– 70.
23. American Society of
Anesthesiologists Committee on
Transfusion Medicine. Questions
and Answers About Blood
Management, 4th edn. American
Society of Anesthesiologists; 2008;
http://www.asahq.org/
publicationsAndServices/
transfusion.pdf.
24. Bux J. Transfusion-related acute
lung injury (TRALI): a serious
adverse event of blood
transfusion. Vox Sang 2005;
89(1):1– 10
Chapter 23: Anesthesia for face transplantation
227
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:38:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.026
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
24
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for airway panendoscopy
Louise Ellard and David T. Wong
Introduction
Procedure overview
Panendoscopy or “triple endoscopy ” encompasses
rigid laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy, and esophago-
scopy. It is primarily used to evaluate the patient with
head and neck cancer, in order to document the
extent of a tumor, obtain a biopsy for tissue diagnosis,
search for a synchronous primary tumor or to look
for recurrence post treatment. Other indications
include vocal cord lesions and pathology involving
the pharynx, larynx or tongue.
Following induction of general anesthesia, the
patient is placed in the “Jackson position ” to maxi-
mize laryngeal exposure, with the neck flexed and the
head extended. A shoulder roll assists with obtaining
this position and a head ring stabilizes the head. If the
neck cannot be extended due to arthritis or a fixed
flexion deformity, or there is a contraindication to
neck extension such as an unstable cervical spine or
myelopathy, correct placement of the laryngoscope is
hindered [1]. In these patients a flexible bronchoscope
should be considered.
The eyes are covered and the upper dentition is
protected with a mouth guard or folded gauze. The
laryngoscope is inserted and the surgeon completes an
examination of the pharynx and supraglottic larynx.
The vocal cords are exposed and examined. Next, the
laryngoscope is exchanged for a rigid bronchoscope,
which is guided past the base of the tongue under the
epiglottis and through the vocal cords into the trachea.
Esophagoscopy usually proceeds next. Biopsies are
deferred until after the examination as bleeding can
render visualization more difficult [2]. Sometimes the
laryngoscope is fixed in position by suspension so the
surgeon's hands are free to operate, and the operating
microscope can be brought in as necessary.
Equipment
The rigid laryngoscope consists of a metal tube, the
working channel, with a light source attached to a
fixed handle in an “L” or “C” shape configuration
(Figure 24.1). The working channel is the access port
for surgical instruments, suction and for jet ventilation.
Many different laryngoscopes are available, which differ
primarily in the shape, taper, and size of the working
channel. The anterior commissure scope is one example.
The rigid bronchoscope is a tapered metal tube,
longer (40 cm) and narrower than the rigid laryngo-
scope; standard adult sizes range between 7 and 9 mm
in diameter. The proximal end usually has three open-
ings – the working channel in line with the rest of the
scope, a light source connection and a third port to
connect the anesthetic circuit. A removable eyepiece
on the working channel opens to allow passage of
surgical instruments and closes to permit ventilation.
Anesthetic management
Preoperative assessment
The anesthesiologist should consider some specific
questions for the patient presenting for panendoscopy:
1. What is the pathology?
2. Is there anticipated difficulty with ventilation,
intubation or cricothyroid access?
3. Is there any coexisting disease?
4. What is the surgeon 's preference for airway
management?
The underlying pathology, if known, is of importance
to the anesthesiologist. A supraglottic lesion can
obstruct the airway, hinder ventilation and make
visualization of the larynx difficult. A subglottic lesion
may impede passage of the endotracheal tube or rigid
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
228
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012bronchoscope. Compression or invasion of the
airway, vessels or nerves should be carefully noted.
More than 80% of laryngeal cancers are found in
men 40 – 75 years old [3] and many patients present-
ing for panendoscopy will have a history of smoking
and/or heavy alcohol intake. Pulmonary disease or
obesity causing poor lung compliance may interfere
with jet ventilation. Cardiovascular disease commonly
coexists and can be exacerbated by the sympathetic
stimulation that accompanies panendoscopy. Reflux
history and potential for aspiration should be care-
fully noted. Liver disease, malnutrition and electrolyte
abnormalities can be a consequence of heavy alcohol
use or swallowing difficulty associated with oral
tumors.
Intraoperative management
The choice of airway, method of ventilation and anes-
thetic technique are important considerations; how-
ever, no single airway device, ventilation technique
or anesthetic method is ideal for all patients or
pathologies.
During panendoscopy, the anesthesiologist and
surgeon must share the airway, with different object-
ives. The anesthesiologist must deliver oxygen,
remove carbon dioxide, provide anesthesia and pro-
tect the airway from soiling or aspiration. The sur-
geon requires an immobile, unobstructed surgical
field and adequate time for diagnostic evaluation
and intervention. Regardless of the chosen technique,
continued communication with the surgeon through-
out the procedure is vital.
Which airway?
The presence of a traditional endotracheal tube (ETT)
during panendoscopy compromises visualization of
and access to the larynx. The three airway options
for panendoscopy are a tubeless technique, supraglot-
tic airway or modified ETT (e.g. microlaryngeal tube.)
A tubeless technique implies ventilation using a bag
and mask, or via the rigid laryngoscope. A supraglottic
airway can be used prior to the commencement of
surgery whilst the surgeon is preparing to insert the
laryngoscope, or at the completion of surgery to facili-
tate smooth emergence [4]. A microlaryngeal tube
(MLT) is a long polyvinyl chloride ETT with a high-
volume, low-pressure cuff. Compared to a standard size
5 cuffed ETT, a size 5 MLT is longer (320 mm) and
has the same internal (5.0 mm) and external diameter
(6.9 mm) with a larger volume cuff, permitting tracheal
occlusion in an adult. An MLT fits between the aryte-
noid cartilages leaving an unobscured view of the anter-
ior two-thirds of the glottis and can be lifted anteriorly
for visualization of the posterior glottis. However, even
the small-diameter MLT can obscure the surgical field,
especially the posterior commissure of the larynx [5]
and when panendoscopy is combined with laser
surgery, the presence of any endotracheal tube increases
the risk of airway fire.
The difficult airway
There are three main options for the patient with a
known or suspected difficult airway who presents
for panendoscopy – awake intubation, prophylactic
placement of a cricothyroid cannula or awake trache-
ostomy. A discussion with the ear-nose-and-throat
surgeon and a preoperative nasal endoscopic examin-
ation of the upper airway may assist with this deci-
sion-making [6].
If an awake intubation is chosen, the carefully
placed ETT will lie within the surgical field, hindering
laryngoscopy and completely preventing rigid bron-
choscopy. However, the surgeon can move the ETT
anteriorly, posteriorly or side-to-side during surgery,
so this should not be considered an absolute
contraindication.
Another option is the elective placement of a trans-
tracheal jet ventilation catheter prior to induction.
Several specially designed cannulae are available,
including the 13G Ravussin jet ventilation catheter [7]
(VBM Medical, Germany) or the 15G Cook transtra-
cheal jet ventilation catheter (Cook Critical Care,
working channel
Figure 24.1. Rigid laryngoscope and bronchoscope Upper picture:
Holinger anterior commissure laryngoscope. Lower picture: rigid
bronchoscope size 7.5.
Chapter 24: Anesthesia for airway panendoscopy
229
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Bloomington, IN), which is wire-reinforced and kink-
resistant [8]. The jet ventilation catheter is inserted
through the cricothyroid membrane using local anes-
thesia and placement is confirmed with capnography.
The patient is then induced and if there is any difficulty
with airway access or ventilation, the catheter allows
temporary oxygenation whilst a more secure perman-
ent airway, usually a surgical tracheostomy, is estab-
lished. Disadvantages include risk of bleeding or the
possibility of tumor seeding if the cannula is placed
through underlying tumor. It is important to carefully
secure the cannula to ensure it remains within the
airway, to avoid subcutaneous emphysema.
Some patients requiring panendoscopy will pre-
sent with critical airway obstruction and in these
circumstances the safest approach is to proceed to
elective tracheostomy under local anesthesia prior to
any further endoscopic evaluation.
Which ventilation technique?
Ventilation techniques can be considered in terms of
“open” and “closed” systems. A closed system implies
ventilation via a cuffed ETT. An open system without
an ETT is more commonly used for panendoscopy
(Table 24.1).
Table 24.1. Advantages and disadvantages of ventilation methods for panendoscopy
Technique Advantages Disadvantages
Spontaneous
ventilation
/C15 Ideal surgical access /C15 No airway protection
/C15 ETCO2 measurement inaccurate
/C15 Vocal cords may move unexpectedly
/C15 Difficult to control depth of anesthesia
/C15 Risk of laryngospasm
Intermittent apnea /C15 Unobstructed view of larynx
/C15 No need for jet ventilation
/C15 No movement of vocal cords
/C15 Trauma from repeated intubations
/C15 Interrupted ventilation and surgery
Positive-pressure
ventilation via MLT
/C15 Familiar to all anesthesiologists
/C15 Control of ventilation
/C15 Protection against aspiration
/C15 ETCO2 measurement
/C15 Ability to use volatile anesthesia without OR
pollution
/C15 Hindered surgical access
/C15 Risk of airway fire if laser used
/C15 May obscure a glottic lesion
Supraglottic jet
ventilation
/C15 Optimal access for the surgeon – especially for
posterior commissure lesions
/C15 Inability to measure ETCO 2
/C15 Vocal cord movement with each jet
/C15 Risk of aspiration and barotrauma
/C15 Potential for tumor seeding
/C15 Need for TIVA
Subglottic jet
ventilation
/C15 Some ability to monitor ETCO 2
/C15 More efficient than supraglottic ventilation
/C15 Minimal vocal cord movement
/C15 Greater risk of barotrauma compared
to supraglottic technique
/C15 Need for TIVA
Transtracheal jet
ventilation
/C15 Assists in management of difficult airway if
placed prior to induction
/C15 Catheter may kink, block or dislodge
/C15 Bleeding
/C15 Barotrauma
/C15 Tumor seeding
High-frequency jet
ventilation
/C15 Lower peak airway pressure
/C15 Less hemodynamic compromise than IPPV
/C15 Minimal movement of surgical field
/C15 Excellent surgical conditions
/C15 Laser compatible
/C15 Requires specialized ventilators
/C15 Risk of gas trapping and barotrauma
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
230
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Spontaneous ventilation
A spontaneously breathing patient negates the diffi-
culty associated with providing artificial ventilation;
however, this is a challenging technique to perfect.
A deep plane of anesthesia is required to produce
laryngeal immobility in an un-paralyzed patient,
which can result in apnea or cardiovascular instabil-
ity. This technique is usually most suitable for pediat-
ric patients.
A standard intravenous induction or gaseous
induction is performed before using direct laryngo-
scopy to apply lidocaine to reduce airway reactivity.
A shortened ETT is placed via the nose into the
nasopharynx, to allow insufflation of gases, or the
anesthesia circuit can be connected to the side arm
of the rigid bronchoscope for gas delivery. Alterna-
tively, intravenous anesthesia can be titrated to main-
tain spontaneous ventilation.
A benefit of spontaneous ventilation is the ability
to determine dynamic airway movement in order to
assess vocal cord movement and tracheomalacia.
Positive-pressure ventilation
When using a microlaryngeal tube, positive-pressure
ventilation can proceed in the usual manner. Alterna-
tively, by connecting the anesthetic circuit to the side
arm of the rigid bronchoscope, positive-pressure ven-
tilation can be used; however, a large leak around the
bronchoscope necessitates the use of high fresh gas
flows. Additional leaks occur from the proximal end
of the bronchoscope whenever the working channel
is open.
Jet ventilation
Jet ventilation involves the delivery of high-pressure
gas boluses through a narrow cannula or needle. When
each bolus of gas is released, it entrains room air,
increasing the volume of the bolus [5] and diluting
the FiO 2 to approximately 0.8 – 0.9 [9]. The entrain-
ment of ambient air is due to the drop in pressure that
occurs as a gas stream exits a narrow tube, known as
the Venturi effect. Central wall high-pressure oxygen
at 50 psi is passed through a pressure-reducing valve
and is further adjusted, by a regulator on a hand-
triggered device, to 20 – 50 psi. Short tubing connects
the hand piece to the jet ventilation cannula via a
luer-lock connection. Manual depression of the nozzle
or lever on the hand-held device expels a jet of gas
(Figure 24.2). Two examples of hand-held jet
ventilators are the Sanders injector and the Manujet
III. Adult ventilation is usually achieved with 20 psi
pressure and it is prudent to start with the lowest
possible pressure that achieves chest expansion.
Jet ventilation can be supraglottic, subglottic or
transtracheal.
Supraglottic ventilation
Supraglottic ventilation is achieved by attaching the
jetting cannula to the proximal end of the laryngo-
scope, via the side channel or clamped in such a way
that the needle is directed along the long axis of the
laryngoscope lumen [10]. A simpler set-up involves
the anesthesiologist holding the jetting cannula in the
proximal end of the working channel. It is important
that the surgeon aligns the laryngoscope with the
vocal cords and the anesthesiologist aligns the jetting
cannula along the axis of the laryngoscope. Failure
to do both of these things can result in ineffective
ventilation or gastric distension [9]. The manual jet
Figure 24.2. Manual jet ventilator Typical components of the
manual jet ventilator: high-pressure oxygen tubing (A), pressure
regulator (B), manual on/off trigger (C), pressure gauge (D), luer
lock (E) and 14G cannula (F).
Chapter 24: Anesthesia for airway panendoscopy
231
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012injector trigger is depressed, ensuring bilateral chest
expansion. Sufficient time must be allowed for full
expiration prior to the next jet to avoid air-trapping.
Subglottic ventilation
To facilitate subglottic jet ventilation, a narrow tube is
inserted 5 – 7 cm below the vocal cords using direct
laryngoscopy. Several versions of this tube exist,
including the Hunsaker monjet tube (Medtronic
Xomed, Jacksonville, FL, USA) and the Ben-jet tube
(Baldwin Medical, Melbourne, Australia.) The Hun-
saker monjet tube is 33 cm long with an outside
diameter of 2.9 mm, incorporating an integral line
for monitoring end-tidal CO 2 [11]. The Ben-jet tube
is 30 cm long with a proximal luer-lock connection.
Both tubes have distal petals to keep them centered in
the airway. Compared to supraglottic jet ventilation,
there is less vocal cord movement hence less need to
interrupt ventilation; however, there is an increased
risk of gas trapping, particularly in patients with
upper airway obstruction, as egress of air depends
on a patent upper airway.
Transtracheal ventilation
Transtracheal jet ventilation can be facilitated using a
jet ventilation catheter as discussed in management of
the difficult airway.
High-frequency jet ventilation
High-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) requires spe-
cialized ventilators capable of administering high
respiratory rates that are not universally available
within the OR setting. Typically, the high-frequency
jet ventilator is set to a respiratory rate of approxi-
mately 100 breaths/min, a driving pressure of 30 psi
and inspiratory time 30 – 50%. HFJV can be applied
supraglotically by the side arm attachment of the rigid
laryngoscope. Gas exchange during high-frequency
jet ventilation occurs through several mechanisms,
including molecular diffusion and cardiogenic mixing
[9]. In addition, there is a difference in velocity
between gas in the center of the airway and that close
to the walls, which becomes exaggerated during
HFJV, resulting in a spike of rapidly moving gas
down the center of the airway [9].
Benefits of HFJV include minimal movement of
the vocal cords and surgical field due to the use of
small tidal volumes. It is also suitable for use in
patients with poor lung compliance and can be
superimposed during resumption of spontaneous
ventilation at the completion of surgery [12].
Disadvantages of jet ventilation include the need
for specialized equipment and potential complications
including pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum and
subcutaneous emphysema. Gastric distension or rup-
ture can occur if the catheter and/or laryngoscope
are misaligned. Drying of airway mucosa occurs if
humidification is not used. Gas exchange during low-
frequency jet ventilation can be difficult in patients
with poor chest wall or lung compliance. A mobile or
pedunculated tumor can act like a ball-valve obstruc-
tion to expiration, resulting in gas trapping and baro-
trauma [10]. There is the potential for seeding of
tumor or papilloma down the tracheobronchial tree.
Apneic ventilation
In this approach the surgeon and anesthesiologist take
turns instrumenting the airway. The anesthesiologist
intubates and hyperventilates the patient before extu-
bating and handing the airway over to the surgeon.
When ventilation is required again, the anesthesiolo-
gist reintubates, or returns to bag/mask ventilation
and the cycle continues. This is preferred in some
instances as there is an unobstructed, immobile sur-
gical field during the apneic period. An obvious dis-
advantage is the potential for airway trauma due to
repeated intubations.
Table 24.1 summarises the advantages and disad-
vantages of different methods of ventilation for
panendoscopy.
Which anesthetic?
Panendoscopy is a brief yet highly stimulating pro-
cedure that requires deep anesthesia, obtunded hemo-
dynamic reflexes, an immobile surgical field and
rapid emergence with early return of protective
airway reflexes. Prior to induction an antisialogogue
(i.e. glycopyrrolate 0.2 mg IV or IM) can be given to
minimize secretions. Typically a routine intravenous
anesthetic induction is chosen with application of
local anesthetic (i.e. lidocaine 4%) to the vocal cords
prior to further airway manipulation. Confirm with
the surgeon if local anesthesia will interfere with their
planned procedure.
TIVA vs. volatile agents
If a closed system utilizing a microlaryngeal tube is
chosen, volatile agents can be delivered via the
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
232
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012anesthetic circuit. A spontaneously breathing patient
can have volatile agents delivered via a shortened
endotracheal tube placed through the nostril into the
nasopharynx. Volatile anesthesia can also be used
when ventilating via the side arm of the rigid bron-
choscope, but in the latter two scenarios pollution of
the operating room will occur. Depth of anesthesia
can vary due to interrupted volatile delivery and there
is a limited ability to measure end-tidal anesthetic
concentrations.
A more reliable anesthetic for panendoscopy is a
total intravenous technique using an intravenous hyp-
notic agent and opioid. Propofol in combination with
alfentanil or remifentanil is an ideal choice. TIVA
utilizing propofol with remifentanil resulted in a
superior recovery profile compared with alfentanil-
based TIVA [13]. Alfentanil was used with a loading
dose of 50 mg/kg and a maintenance infusion of 1 mg/
kg/min. For remifentanil a loading dose of 1 mg/kg
and infusion rate of 0.25 mg/kg/min were used. Both
groups were combined with propofol 2 mg/kg
followed by infusion of 100 mg/kg/min [13].
The balance of hypnosis vs. analgesia has also
been studied to see if the respective doses of propofol
and remifentanil influenced recovery. “Propofol pro-
nounced” anesthesia (100 mg/kg/min propofol þ
remifentanil 0.15 mg/kg/min) was compared with a
“remifentanil pronounced ” regime (50 mg/kg/min
propofol þ remifentanil 0.45 mg/kg/min.) Both
regimes were satisfactory, with little difference
between the groups [14].
The use of an Entropy (GE Healthcare, Helsinki,
Finland) or Bispectral index (BIS, Aspect Medical
Systems, Newton, MA, USA) monitor can assist with
optimizing anesthetic depth and to reduce the risk of
awareness.
Other agents, including local anesthetics and b-
blockers, can be used to minimize the hemodynamic
response. Lidocaine sprayed onto the larynx and
upper trachea under direct laryngoscopy reduces the
rise in BP and HR from baseline following the intro-
duction of a rigid bronchoscope [15], and also
reduces the risk of laryngospasm.
Short acting b-blocking agents such as esmolol
have been shown to limit the increases in HR and
BP throughout panendoscopy [16].
Muscle relaxants
Panendoscopy is very brief; however, muscle relax-
ation wearing off mid-way through the procedure
can result in trauma. Succinylcholine is unlikely to
have sufficient duration of action for all but the
briefest of procedures; however, repeated doses of
0.3– 0.5 mg/kg or a continuous infusion of 100 mg/
kg/min can be used. A phase 2 block is unlikely
if the total dose is < 4– 6 mg/kg [17]. Alternatively,
an intermediate-duration non-depolarizing muscle
relaxant can be chosen, including mivacurium 0.25
mg/kg, rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg or cisatracurium
0.15– 0.25 mg/kg.
When monitoring depth of neuromuscular block-
ade for panendoscopy, it is best to stimulate a periph-
eral nerve whose onset/offset characteristics more
closely resemble that of the larynx. Orbicularis oculi
has fast onset of neuromuscular blockade and is
resistant, similar to the larynx, therefore is a good
choice for monitoring [18].
Antiemetics and dexamethasone
Nausea and vomiting is a common reason for pro-
longed recovery room stay and prophylactic use of
antiemetics should be considered. If dexamethasone is
chosen, it has the additional benefit of reducing post-
surgical airway swelling that can result from
instrumentation.
“Tips and tricks”
/C15 A reliable intravenous line on the side where the
anesthesiologist is standing allows monitoring for
patency and easy access, when using TIVA.
/C15 Consider an arterial line if there is significant
coexisting disease to permit closer hemodynamic
monitoring and blood gas sampling to
determine adequacy of ventilation.
Transcutaneous CO 2 measurement is an
alternative, if available.
/C15 The anesthesiologist should position themselves
to one side at the head of the bed, to deliver
jet ventilation and watch the patient 's chest
for adequate excursion and expiration,
with the anesthetic monitor easily visible
(Figure 24.3).
/C15 Delivery of propofol and remifentanil/alfentanil,
ideally via infusion pumps, should be within reach
for titration.
/C15 Any additional medications that may be
required – e.g., additional muscle relaxant –
should be drawn up and within arm ’s reach.
Chapter 24: Anesthesia for airway panendoscopy
233
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Postoperative care
Emergence phase
The emergence phase can be managed in several
ways. At the completion of panendoscopy, muscle
relaxation is reversed if non-depolarizing agents have
been used and the intravenous or volatile anesthetic
is stopped. The patient can be managed with bag/
mask ventilation or by insertion of a supraglottic
airway until spontaneous ventilation resumes.
Alternatively, in patients with a “difficult
airway” the surgeon can pass a bougie or introducer
via the laryngoscope/bronchoscope under direct
vision [19]. The laryngoscope is then removed
and an endotracheal tube is railroaded over the
introducer to ensure a secure airway during
emergence. If subglottic ventilation via a ben-jet or
monjet tube has been used, this could be left in situ
to facilitate subglottic ventilation if necessary.
In extreme circumstances, an intraoperative trache-
ostomy may be performed to prevent postoperative
airway compromise when the airway is obstructed
by tumor or other pathology.
If there is anticipation of postoperative pain, a
small dose of longer-acting opiate, i.e. fentanyl 25 –
100 mg IV, is given. Often this is unnecessary and
acetaminophen and anti-inflammatory medications
could be substituted.
Complications
Complications of panendoscopy that present intrao-
peratively include arrhythmia, hypercarbia due to inad-
equate ventilation, and bleeding [17]. Direct trauma to
the tracheobronchial tree including lacerations, hemor-
rhage or arytenoid dislocation can occur [1]. However,
most complications become evident during emergence
or the early postoperative period, including dental
injury, eye trauma and injury to the lips and tongue.
Surgical manipulation can result in edema or bleeding
causing laryngospasm or airway obstruction [17].
Neurological injury related to neck extension, especially
in patients with atlanto-axial instability, is a disastrous
consequence. A postoperative chest X-ray should be
performed if there is any suspicion of pneumothorax
or pneumomediastinum [17].
Summary
Although usually brief, panendoscopy is not a trivial
procedure and can be associated with pulmonary,
cardiovascular or airway complications. It requires
the anesthesiologist to be “hands-on”, familiar with
surgical needs, airway and ventilation techniques;
proficient in maintenance of appropriate depth of
anesthesia during surgical stresses; vigilant for the
development of complications and in constant com-
munication with the surgeon.
Case study
A 60-year-old man with a 6-month history of pro-
gressive hoarseness was booked for panendoscopy
and vocal cord biopsy. He had a history of hyperten-
sion, smoking, and COPD. His medications included
bisoprolol, ramipril, and inhaled salbutamol (albu-
terol). He was 175 cm tall, weighed 70 kg and had
preoperative BP 160/100 and heart rate 64 bpm.
Airway examination revealed a Malampatti score of
3, adequate mouth opening and thyromental distance
and poor dentition. His ECG showed left ventricular
hypertrophy and pulmonary function tests, an FEV 1/
Figure 24.3. Typical panendoscopy set-up. AM: Anesthesia
Machine; S: Surgeon; A: Anesthesiologist; N: Surgical nurse;
IV: Intravenous pole and bag.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
234
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012FVC ratio 60% predicted. Nasal endoscopy by the
ENT surgeon diagnosed a 4 mm lesion on the poster-
ior third of the left vocal cord, suspicious for glottic
carcinoma. A CT scan of the neck did not reveal any
suspicious nodes or lesions.
Preoperative assessment is therefore summarized
as a patient with an isolated left vocal cord lesion
suspicious for carcinoma with no obvious spread
and unlikely to present difficulties with intubation.
The surgeon indicated a preference for no ETT, jet
ventilation via the rigid laryngoscope, and immobility
of vocal cords during the procedure.
In the operating room, standard monitors were
placed and intravenous access obtained. Room air
oxygen saturation of 94% improved to 100% with pre-
oxygenation. Airway equipment including an LMA
ClassicTM (LMA), Glidescope® and a flexible broncho-
scope were available. After intravenous induction with
midazolam 1 mg, fentanyl 100mg, propofol 150 mg, and
rocuronium 35 mg, a size 4 LMA was inserted. Infusions
of propofol 100mg/kg/min and remifentanil 0.25mg/kg/
min were started. After 2 min of ventilation, the LMA
was removed, the patient positioned using a shoulder
roll to extend the head and a rigid laryngoscope was
inserted with the tip just above the glottis. Wall-source
oxygen at 50 psi was pressure-reduced to 20 psi via a
hand-operated jet ventilator, connected to a 14G can-
nula. The patient was intermittently jet ventilated by
holding the 14G cannula in the working channel of the
rigid laryngoscope. Oxygen saturation was maintained
between 92% and 100%. Propofol and remifentanil infu-
sions were titrated according to hemodynamic changes.
After bronchoscopy and esophagoscopy, four biopsies
were taken from the left glottic lesion. Hemostasis was
obtained. Prior to removal of the rigid laryngoscope, the
surgeon sprayed 4% lidocaine onto the vocal cords to
reduce the risk of laryngospasm.
After removal of the rigid laryngoscope, the LMA
was re-inserted, and mechanical ventilation resumed.
Nerve stimulation showed a train-of-four count of 4
with fade; neostigmine 2.5 mg and glycopyrrolate
0.4 mg were given and intravenous anesthesia was
stopped. Dexamethasone 4 mg and granisetron 1 mg
were given for antiemesis and reduction of
postoperative swelling. The patient regained spontan-
eous ventilation and upon awakening the LMA was
removed uneventfully. The patient returned home later
that day.
Clinical pearls
/C15 Although usually brief in duration, a
panendoscopy is not a trivial procedure and can
be associated with significant pulmonary,
cardiovascular or airway complications.
/C15 A supraglottic lesion can obstruct the airway,
hinder ventilation and make visualization of the
larynx extremely difficult. A subglottic lesion
may impede passage of the endotracheal tube or
rigid bronchoscope. Compression or invasion of
the airway, vessels or nerves should be carefully
noted.
/C15 No single airway device, ventilation technique or
anesthetic method is ideal for all patients or
pathologies.
/C15 The three airway options for panendoscopy are a
tubeless technique (a bag and mask, or via the
rigid laryngoscope), use of a supraglottic airway
(can be used prior to the commencement of
surgery whilst the surgeon is preparing to insert
the laryngoscope, or at the completion of surgery
to facilitate smooth emergence) or modified ETT
(e.g., MicroLaryngeal Tube – MLT).
/C15 If a closed system utilizing a MicroLaryngeal Tube
is chosen, volatile agents can be delivered via the
anesthetic circuit. A more popular anesthetic
technique for panendoscopy is a total intravenous
technique using an intravenous hypnotic agent
(e.g., propofol) and opioid (e.g., remifentanil).
/C15 A reliable intravenous line on the side where the
anesthesiologist is standing allows monitoring for
patency and easy access, an especially important
consideration when using TIVA.
/C15 Consider an arterial line if there is significant
coexisting disease so as to allow close
hemodynamic monitoring and blood gas
sampling. Where available, transcutaneous CO 2
monitoring is a potential alternative.
References
1. Pereira K, Hessel A. Performance
of rigid bronchoscopy. In Hagberg
C, ed. Benumof's Airway
Management, 2nd edn.
Philadelphia: Mosby Elsevier;
2007. pp. 631 – 9.
2. Hillel A, Sie K. A reliable method
to maintain an airway after
bronchoscopy. Laryngoscope
1988;98:1353– 5.
3. Feldman MA, Patel A. Anesthesia
for eye, ear, nose and throat
surgery. In Miller RD, ed. Miller's
Anesthesia, 7th edn. Philadelphia:
Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier;
2009. pp. 2357 – 88.
Chapter 24: Anesthesia for airway panendoscopy
235
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 20124. Nair I, Bailey PM. Review of uses
of the laryngeal mask in ENT
anaesthesia. Anaesthesia
1995;50:898– 900.
5. Borland L. Airway management
for CO 2 laser surgery on the
larynx: venturi jet ventilation and
alternatives. Int Anesthesiol Clin
1997;35:99– 106.
6. Rosenblatt W, Ianus AI,
Sukhupragarn W. Preoperative
endoscopic airway examination
provides superior airway
information and may reduce the
use of unnecessary awake
intubation. Anesth Analg
2011;112:602– 7.
7. McLellan I, Khawaja S, Thomas A.
Percutaneous trans-tracheal high
frequency jet ventilation as an aid
to difficult intubation. Can
J Anaesth 1988;35:404– 5.
8. Rosenblatt W, Benumof J.
Transtracheal jet ventilation via
percutaneous catheter and high-
pressure source. In Hagberg C, ed.
Benumof's Airway Management ,
2nd edn. Philadelphia: Mosby
Elsevier; 2007. pp. 616 – 30.
9. Evans E, Biro P, Bedforth N. Jet
ventilation. CEACC Pain 2007;
7:2– 5.
10. Crockett D, Scamman F, McCabe
B, et al. Venturi jet ventilation for
microlaryngoscopy: technique,
complications, pitfalls.
Laryngoscope 1987;97:1326– 30.
11. Vadodaria B, Cooper C. The
anesthetic management of a case
of severe upper airways
obstruction due to an enlarging
subglottic benign polyp. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2001;18:766– 9.
12. Babinski M, Smith RB, Klain M.
High-frequency jet ventilation for
laryngoscopy. Anesthesiology
1980;52:178– 80.
13. Wuesten R, Van Aken H, Glass P,
et al. Assessment of depth of
anesthesia and postoperative
respiratory recovery after
remifentanil-based versus
alfentanil-based total intravenous
anesthesia in patients undergoing
ear-nose-throat surgery.
Anesthesiology 2001;94:211– 7.
14. Hackner, Detsch O, Schneider G,
et al. Early recovery after
remifentanil-pronounced
compared with propofol-
pronounced total intravenous
anaesthesia for short painful
procedures. Br J Anaesth
2003;91:580– 2.
15. Gaumann D, Tassonyi E, Fathi F,
et al. Effects of topical laryngeal
lidocaine on sympathetic
response to rigid panendoscopy
under general anesthesia. J Oto
Rhino Laryngol Relat Spec
1992;54:49– 53.
16. Ayuso A, Luis M, Sala X, et al.
Effects of anesthetic technique on
the hemodynamic response to
microlaryngeal surgery. Ann Otol
Rhinol Laryngol 1997;106:
863– 8.
17. Kaplan MJ, et al.
Otolaryngology – head and neck
surgery. In Jaffe R, Samuels SI,
eds. Anesthesiologist's Manual of
Surgical Procedures , 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins; 2009. pp. 173 – 85.
18. Donati F, Meistelman C, Plaud B.
Vecuronium neuromuscular
blockade at the adductor muscles
of the larynx and adductor
pollicis. Anesthesiology
1991;74:833– 7.
19. Nekhendzy V, Simmonds P.
Rigid bronchoscope-assisted
endotracheal intubation: yet
another use of the gum elastic
bougie. Anesth Analg
2004;98:545– 7.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
236
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:09 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.027
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 3
Chapter
25
Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
Anesthesia for ENT laser surgery
D. John Doyle
Introduction
Lasers are commonly used in otolaryngologic surgery
(Table 25.1), in plastic surgery (for instance, in the
removal of port wine birthmarks), in gynecologic
surgery (for instance, in the treatment of endometri-
osis), in ophthalmic surgery (for instance, in retinal
surgery) and elsewhere [1,2]. Depending on the clin-
ical circumstances, various laser types producing light
(photons) of different wavelength (color) are
employed (Table 25.2).
The most widely utilized laser in ENT surgery is
the carbon dioxide (CO 2) laser. It allows precise cut-
ting with a particularly fine zone of coagulation that
helps reduce surgical bleeding. It can be especially
useful in the removal of obstructing laryngeal carcin-
omas, the removal of lingual tonsillar tissue, the abla-
tion of hemangiomas, and the resection of small
oropharyngeal malignant lesions. The carbon dioxide
laser can be used either as a precision cutting instru-
ment or as a tissue vaporizer depending on the extent
to which the beam is focused. Tissue vaporization is
particularly efficient with the carbon dioxide laser
because of the excellent absorption of the produced
far infrared photons (10 600 nm wavelength) by water
present in tissue.
Another popular laser in ENT surgery is the Nd:
YAG laser. This laser emits photons with a wave-
length of 1064 nm. These photons are poorly
absorbed by water and thus tend to penetrate tissue
much more deeply than those from a carbon dioxide
laser. In addition, light (photons) from a Nd:YAG
laser can be transmitted through flexible quartz fibers
that can be used in conjunction with a flexible fiber-
optic bronchoscope for use in treating lesions in tra-
cheobronchial structures.
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
Table 25.1. Some otolaryngologic clinical situations where
laser techniques can be useful
Nose
Turbinate reduction
Septoplasty
Removal of nasal obstructions, polyps, synechiae
Treatment of rhinophyma
Treatment of keloids and hypertrophic scars
Oropharynx/pharynx
Vaporization of papillomas, leukoplakias and
hemangiomas
Tumor surgery (e.g., partial glossectomy)
Laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty
Tonsillectomy
Larynx
Removal of vocal cord polyps and granulomas
Epiglottectomy
Cordectomy
Arytenoidectomy
Tracheobronchial tree
Treatment of tracheal stenosis
Removal of nodules, polyps, tumors and fibromas
Ear
Surgery of the stapes
Laser-assisted myringotomy
Cholesteatoma
237
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Laser physics
The following is a capsule summary of basic laser
physics. “Laser” is an acronym for light amplification
by stimulated emission of radiation. Lasers control
the manner in which energized atoms release coher-
ent monochromatic light (photons). While the con-
cept dates back to Einstein, in 1960 the American
physicist Theodore Maiman made the first working
laser from a ruby rod.
Laser light is very different from the light that we
experience every day [3,4]. Ordinary light consists of
a number of colors, i.e., is polychromatic. In addition,
ordinary light is noncoherent, that is, it contains
multiple wave fronts and is multidirectional. Laser
light is different from ordinary light in that (1) it is
“monochromatic” (consisting of only one particular
wavelength of light), (2) it is “coherent” (organized so
that each photon moves in step with the others), and
(3) it is directional, presenting a very tight beam that
this does not widen significantly as it travels.
If we apply energy to an atom, electrons will leave
the ground state energy level and go to an excited
level. When the electrons subsequently move back to
the ground state they do so by releasing energy as a
photon – a particle of light. If the released photon
encounters another atom that has electrons in an
excited state, “stimulated” emission of another
photon can occur; this newly emitted photon will
vibrate with the same frequency and direction as the
stimulating photon [3,4].
The laser type is named after the atoms that are
energized (lasing medium). For example if it is carbon
dioxide atoms that are energized, it is known as a CO 2
laser, and the photons emitted from this laser have a
wavelength of 10 600 nm. This wavelength is in the
far infrared region and is not visible. By contrast, a
helium-neon laser emits photons with a wavelength
of 633 nm, which appears red to the human eye.
Because CO 2 laser beams are invisible, they often
incorporate a helium-neon laser as an aiming beam.
Table 25.2 lists various other kinds of lasers and their
characteristics.
Laser safety
Surgical lasers involve high amounts of energy and
have the potential for unintended tissue damage as
well as for causing operating room fires. Instruments
with a polished surface can reflect laser beams to an
unintended destination and thus cause injury. To
warn passersby that lasers are in use, one should
place warning signs outside the operating room
(Figure 25.1). Opaque coverings on any operating
room windows will prevent stray laser beams from
exiting. It is also customary to provide extra goggles
for visitors near the entrance to the operating room
(Figure 25.2).
Another concern is that stray laser beams can
ignite surgical drapes. Since the presence of high
levels of oxygen around the patient 's face can facili-
tate ignition in this region, delivering supplementary
oxygen by face mask or nasal cannula requires special
vigilance. Fires can also occur within the airway
itself; this is discussed in detail in Chapter 11.
Table 25.2. A sampling of various kinds of lasers available for clinical use
Type Gas/solid Wavelength (nm) Color Fiberoptic transmissible?
Helium/neon Gas 633 Red Yes
Argon Gas 500 Blue-Green Yes
CO2 Gas 10 600 Invisible (far infrared) No
Ruby Solid 695 Red Yes
Nd:YAG Solid 1064 Invisible (near infrared) Yes
KTP Solid 532 Green Yes
Wavelengths are given in nanometers (nm). There are 10 9 nm to a meter.
The argon laser produces blue-green coherent light at a number of wavelengths but most of the energy is at wavelengths 488 nm
and 514 nm.
Nd:YAG is short for neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet.
KTP is short for potassium titanyl phosphate.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
238
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Yet another concern is for possible ophthalmic
injuries, since CO 2 lasers can cause serious corneal
injuries, while Nd:YAG lasers can cause retinal
damage. To mitigate such risks, the eyes of the patient
can be protected by taping the eyelids and then apply-
ing moist dressings on top, while caregivers should
wear protective goggles. Each kind of laser is associated
with its own kind of protective eyewear that filters out
photons having a wavelength associated with that kind
of laser. For example, goggles absorbing radiation at
532 nm wavelength (KTP lasers) typically have an
orange appearance, and would be relatively ineffective
in protecting against an Nd:YAG laser emitting energy
at 1060 nm. Protective eyewear for carbon dioxide
lasers consists of material opaque to far infrared wave-
lengths. Note also that the energy of the photons
making up a laser beam depend s on their wavelength
in that shorter-wavelength photons (toward the ultra-
violet region) have more energy than longer-
wavelength photons (toward the infrared region).
In addition to the dangers associated with stray
laser beams that may produce eye injuries or burns,
the clinician should be aware of the possibility of
lasers igniting fires, as well as the possibility of inad-
vertently perforating organs or vessels or of causing a
gas embolism.
Figure 25.1. Typical warning sign for
use with clinical lasers.
Figure 25.2. Example of three types of
laser safety eyewear. Reproduced from:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:
Laser_goggles.jpg (Author Han-Kwang)
under a Creative Commons Share Alike
license.
Chapter 25: Anesthesia for ENT laser surgery
239
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Finally, note that ANSI standard Z136.3 (Safe Use
of Lasers in Health Care Facilities) provides add-
itional information on this and related matters. EN
207 is the related European standard for laser safety
eyewear.
Laser-safe endotracheal tubes
Not long after the advent of laser surgery clinicians
came to realize the special dangers that could occur
should a regular ETT ignite from a laser beam. In the
past, metallic tapes applied in a spiral manner or the
use of similar “guard” methods to prevent endotra-
cheal tubes from igniting due to laser energy have
been tried [3,4]. Today, however, a number of
special-purpose [5] ETTs are available for this purpose
(Table 25.3, Figure 25.3). It is common to fill cuffs of
laser ETTs with saline to serve as an additional protec-
tion against fire. Some clinicians add small amounts of
methylene blue to this saline to help detect cuff perfor-
ation. Note that the addition of fluid to the cuff will
slightly prolong the cuff deflation time. Finally, care-
fully placed saline-soaked pledgets are occasionally
applied to laser ETT cuffs for additional protection;
these must be kept wet to avoid ignition and, of course,
special care must be taken to retrieve all the pledgets at
the end of the operation.
Anesthetic technique
The choice of anesthetic technique will depend on
clinical circumstances. Total intravenous anesthesia
(TIVA) techniques for laser ENT surgery are particu-
larly popular, and are essential in cases where the
patients are unintubated and jet ventilation is used.
When patients are intubated, a potent inhalational
agent like sevoflurane is often used, although not
infrequently an infusion of remifentanil is used as
an anesthetic adjunct in such cases (typical rate: 0.05
to 0.1 mg/kg/min). More commonly total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA) is used and potent inhalational
agents are avoided. Our traditional TIVA recipe con-
sists of propofol 500 mg (50 ml) to which is added
1 mg of remifentanil in a single 60 ml syringe. Remi-
fentanil, with its vagomimetic effect, is especially
useful to limit the heart rate in the face of intense
sympathetic stimulation from the effects of the sus-
pension laryngoscope. After induction with midazo-
lam, fentanyl, propofol and rocuronium, our usual
Table 25.3. Some types of laser ETTs in clinical use
Name Description Intended
use
Laser Flex Airtight stainless-steel corrugated spiral with a PVC Murphy eye tip and double cuffs.
More information is available at http://www.cardinal.com/us/en/distributedproducts/
ASP/43168– 45.asp
CO2 or KTP
lasers
Laser-Shield II Silicone rubber tube wrapped with aluminum and wrapped over with Teflon. More
information at http://www.medtronicent-techcomms.com/inserts-web/68E1503_B.pdf
CO2 or KTP
lasers
Lasertubus Soft white rubber, reinforced with corrugated copper foil and an absorbent sponge. Double
cuffed. More information at http://www.myrusch.com/images/rusch/docs/A20C.pdf
CO2 or KTP
lasers
Sheridan
Laser-Trach
Red rubber design with embossed copper foil and outer covering designed to reduce
damage to mucosal surfaces and vocal cords. More information at http://www.orsupply.
com/product/Hudson-RCI-Sheridan-Laser-Trach-Endotracheal-Tubes/6951
CO2 or KTP
lasers
Figure 25.3. Laser-Flex laser-resistant endotracheal tube from
Cardinal Health. Note the special double cuff arrangement. Some
clinicians like to fill the cuffs with dilute methylene blue; in this way
an ETT cuff rupture from a misdirected laser beam can be readily
detected. Photo courtesy the author.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
240
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012starting dose of the propofol portion of this mixture is
100 mg/kg/min, followed by titration to clinical effect.
Note that a dose of 100 mg/kg/min of propofol here
produces a corresponding remifentanil dose of 0.2 mg/
kg/min. While some clinicians prefer to use two
separate infusion systems in such cases, with the pos-
sibility of controlling each infusion separately, we
believe that our approach is simpler, has withstood
the test of time, involves less chance for operator
error, and requires less equipment and space.
Premedication is usually not used in these cases,
although an antisialagogue like glycopyrrolate can often
be helpful. Finally, to reduce the likelihood of airway
fires, while lasers are in use nitrous oxide should not be
used and the oxygen concentration should be limited to
the lowest concentration necessary to maintain accept-
able arterial oxygen saturation levels. For additional
details see Chapter 11 on airway fires.
Airway management is without doubt a frequent
challenge in many laser surgery cases. The importance
of the surgeon and anesthesiologist working together
to plan and implement a management strategy cannot
be overemphasized. First, the presence of any airway
pathology has the potential to make both ventilation
and intubation difficult. One important issue here is
whether general anesthesia should be preceded by
awake intubation. Another issue is whether or not
the procedure should be performed under general
anesthesia with the patient breathing spontaneously,
albeit with assistance, as is sometimes desirable in
cases where an anterior mediastinal mass is present.
The otolaryngology and anesthesia teams will find it
necessary to discuss the advantages and disadvantages
of the various clinical options in the light of the
patient's condition, the available equipment and the
preferences and training of the two clinical teams.
Muscle relaxation is often employed to help
ensure an immobile surgical field. In the USA, where
sugammadex is still not available (at the time of
writing), succinylcholine is often used as an initial
relaxant in patients with a potentially difficult airway
because its short duration of action adds a measure of
safety should the patient become impossible to intub-
ate or ventilate following its administration. Many
Europeans would instead be more comfortable using
rocuronium as a relaxant, followed by a “sugamma-
dex rescue ” should the airway become unmanageable
following relaxant administration. Many clinicians,
however, simply intubate the patient awake whenever
issues of this kind arise.
Extubation in these cases can sometimes be very
challenging. Some cases will benefit from the admin-
istration of intravenous dexamethasone (Decadron ®)
to reduce edema. Stridor is sometimes encountered
after extubation; while this may require reintubation,
we are often able to avoid this via the use of inhaled
racemic epinephrine or the use of heliox, a mixture of
helium (typically 70%) and oxygen. Extubation over a
tube exchanger can be helpful in cases where the need
for reintubation is a concern and would be expected
to be challenging. Clinicians will vary in their estima-
tion as to when conditions have improved sufficiently
to allow “safe” extubation.
In some cases the entire surgical procedure is done
without intubation. The advantages of this approach
are a decreased risk of fire (no ETT to ignite) and
improved access to airway structures. Disadvantages
include the risk of aspiration with an unprotected
airway and potential difficulties in ventilating the
patient. Typically in such cases an anterior commis-
sure laryngoscope or similar device is used in con-
junction with TIVA and jet ventilation. In other cases
the laryngoscope is used in conjunction with a small-
diameter ETT (e.g., MLT size 5.0) with the procedure
performed under brief periods of apnea in conjunc-
tion with intermittent removal of the ETT to allow
unimpaired access to the glottic structures.
Atmospheric contamination issues
Laser vaporization of tissue, especially from CO 2
lasers, often results in a plume of smoke that can be
annoying and sometimes even dangerous. The use of
a smoke evacuator at the surgical site along with
protective masks which filter out particulate material
is often advised, especially when virus particles are
present in the vaporized tissue (Figure 25.4).
Postoperative concerns
Even when patients are extubated conservatively
following laser surgery cases, airway problems can
arise later. In cases of immediate respiratory distress
following laser cases, consider the following possibil-
ities: (1) tissue edema (e.g., after Nd:YAG laser
use), (2) residual muscle relaxant or anesthetic effects,
(3) airway secretions, (4) pneumothorax, (5) bleeding,
and (6) pneumomediastinum. Of course, delayed
complications can also arise, such as infection and/
or pneumonia from atelectasis or airway secretions,
or from delayed onset edema (see Case study).
Chapter 25: Anesthesia for ENT laser surgery
241
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Summary
Anesthesia for otolaryngologic laser surgery is fraught
with special challenges, such as possible difficulties
with intubation and ventilation, the need to prevent
airway fires, the frequent need for total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA), and the need to protect clinicians
against airborne viruses released as a result of papil-
loma surgery. Special laser endotracheal tubes are
often employed. TIVA is usually carried out using a
combination of propofol and remifentanil. Concerns
about the possibility of tissue edema (especially after
Nd:YAG laser use), pneumothorax, bleeding, and
pneumomediastinum are also frequent postoperative
issues.
Case study
Abdelmalak et al. [6] described a patient who developed
respiratory arrest 4 hours after successful laser treat-
ment of tracheal stenosis using a Nd:YAG (neodymium:
yttrium-aluminum-garnet) laser. She had earlier been
extubated at the end of the procedure without difficulty.
Respiratory arrest was believed to be caused by delayed
airway narrowing due to tissue edema from thermal
injury by deep penetration of the laser beam. The
following commentary is from their report:
Two hours after surgery, the patient began coughing.
One hour later, she developed stridorous breath
sounds consistent with upper-respiratory obstruction,
and she was treated with oxygen and bronchodilator
Figure 25.4. Concern that infectious human papilloma virus (HPV) may be present in the plume of laser-treated recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis has led some clinicians to use battery-operated air-purifying hoods such as those as shown here. Such systems typically
include a blower, battery, headpiece and a breathing tube, creating a decidedly eerie effect. Photo courtesy of the author.
Section 3: Anesthesia for head and neck surgery
242
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:37 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012aerosol. Over the next hour, airway obstruction
progressively became worse. Air exchange became
inadequate, and the patient became obtunded over
several minutes, oxyhemoglobin saturation decreased to
80%, heart rate decreased to 40 bpm, and arterial blood
pressure decreased to 60/46 mmHg. Controlled
ventilation via a mask was attempted, with much
difficulty. To maintain adequate oxygenation, the
trachea was intubated. An endotracheal tube, size
6.0 mm internal diameter, was passed with difficulty
beyond the lasered area. With a fraction of inspired
oxygen of 1.0, oxyhemoglobin saturation promptly
increased to 100%. Heart rate and blood pressure
returned to baseline levels. The patient was then
admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for ventilatory
support. She was given methylprednisolone 60 mg IV at
6-h intervals. The next day her trachea was exubated, and
the following day she was discharged from the hospital.
Instructional videos
The following are some educational videos concern-
ing otolaryngologic laser surgery that may be of inter-
est to readers:
Laser resection of vocal cord nodules
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGSU4i1O-P0
Arytenoidectomy surgery
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZvRp8KhbIM
Laryngeal papilloma – MGH voice center
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kRI9AVheKdQ
Nasal surgery laser
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qio2cJIl1X0
Clinical pearls
/C15Surgical lasers emit high amounts of energy and
have the potential for unintended tissue damage
(for example, when accidently reflected from a
polished surgical instrument).
/C15Lasers can accidently start operating room fires
(e.g., a stray laser beam can ignite surgical drapes),
especially when high levels of oxygen around the
patient's face are used in unintubated patients.
/C15Yet another concern is for possible ophthalmic
injuries, since CO 2 lasers can cause serious corneal
injuries while Nd:YAG lasers can cause retinal
damage. To mitigate such risks, the patient 's eyes
can be protected by taping the eyelids and then
applying moist dressings on top, while caregivers
should wear protective goggles.
/C15A number of special laser-safe ETTs are available.
It is common to fill cuffs of laser ETTs with saline
to serve as an additional protection against fire.
Some clinicians add small amounts of methylene
blue to this saline to help detect cuff perforation.
Note that the addition of fluid to the cuff will
slightly prolong the cuff deflation time.
/C15Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) techniques
for laser ENT surgery are particularly popular;
muscle relaxation is often employed to ensure an
immobile surgical field.
/C15Some patients will benefit from the administration
of intravenous dexamethasone (Decadron ®)t o
reduce edema. Be especially concerned about
the possibility of delayed tissue edema after Nd:
YAG laser use.
/C15Stridor is sometimes encountered after
extubation; while this may require reintubation,
we are often able to avoid this via the use of
inhaled racemic epinephrine or the use of heliox, a
mixture of helium (typically 70%) and oxygen.
Extubation over a tube exchanger can be helpful
in cases where the need for reintubation is a
concern and would be expected to be challenging.
References
1. Rampil IJ. Anesthetic
considerations for laser surgery.
Anesth Analg 1992;74:424–35.
2. Sheinbein DS, Loeb RG. Laser
surgery and fire hazards in ear,
nose, and throat surgeries.
Anesthesiol Clin 2010;28(3):485–
96. PubMed PMID: 20850079.
3. Absten GT. Physics of light and
lasers. Obstet Gynecol Clin North
Am 1991;18(3):407–27. PubMed
PMID: 1956663.
4. Van Der Spek AFL, Spargo PM,
Norton ML. The physics of lasers
and implications for their use
during airway surgery. Br
J Anaesth 1998;60:709–29.
5. Lai HC, Juang SE, Liu TJ,
Ho WM. Fires of endotracheal
tubes of three different materials
during carbon dioxide laser
surgery. Acta Anaesthesiol Sin
2002;40(1):47–51. PubMed PMID:
11989049.
6. Abdelmalak B, Ryckman JV,
AlHaddad S, Sprung J. Respiratory
arrest after successful neodymium:
yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser
treatment of subglottic tracheal
stenosis. Anesth Analg 2002;95(2):
485–6. PubMed PMID:
12145077.
Chapter 25: Anesthesia for ENT laser surgery
243
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:38 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:39:38 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.028
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 4
Chapter
26
Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
Anesthesia for laryngoplasty
Michael S. Benninger and T atyana Kopyeva
Introduction
Laryngeal framework surgery (LFS) is a very dynamic,
rapidly expanding area of phonosurgery (PS), which
is intended primarily to improve or restore voice. The
concept of LFS was systematically developed by
Isshiki in the 1970s. The acceptance of the procedures
and further new developments in the field made it
confusing even for the specialists with regard to ter-
minology, types of surgery, and classification, which
in turn made it difficult to compare results between
different institutions and authors. Attempts have been
made to establish a practical classification system for
PS and a more precise list of definitions [1,2].
In 2001 the Phonosurgery Committee of the Euro-
pean Laryngological Society published a proposal for
classification and nomenclature in LFS [1]. A few
terms are often used describing LFS [1,2]: laryngeal
framework surgery, laryngoplasty and thyroplasty.
LFS is the general term for the phonosurgical proced-
ures modifying the supporting structures of the larynx
and aiming at functional improvement. Laryngoplasty
(LPL) is often used as a synonym to LFS and may be
more suitable to use in daily practice, though it is not as
inclusive as LFS. “Injection laryngoplasty ” refers to
some injection techniques for augmentation of the
vocal fold, but it is not true LFS and is described
elsewhere. Thyroplasty (TPL) is a specific subgroup
of LPL (or LFS) and includes the procedures which
alter or modify the thyroid cartilage in order to change
the position or the length of the vocal folds.
In general, LFS can be divided into four major
groups [1,2] according to intended purpose:
/C15approximation laryngoplasty (correction of
insufficient glottic closure): injection
laryngoplasty, medialization thyroplasty;
arytenoid adduction, arytenopexy
/C15expansion laryngoplasty (correction of vocal fold
hyperadduction or bilateral vocal fold paralysis):
lateralization thyroplasty; vocal fold abduction
/C15relaxation laryngoplasty (procedures for
pathologically tightened vocal folds or too
high-pitched voice): shortening thyroplasty
/C15tensioning laryngoplasty (procedures for
pathologically lax vocal folds or too low-pitched
voice): cricothyroid approximation; elongation
thyroplasty.
During the above procedures, position and/or tension
of the vocal folds is changed to improve vibratory
movements of the vocal folds, reduce turbulent phon-
atory airflow or alter vocal pitch [1,2]. The different
types of LPL are often combined to achieve optimal
functional results.
The most common procedures performed are
glottal narrowing procedures (approximation LPL)
for glottic insufficiency with dysphonia and/or aspir-
ation. Injections are the most common procedures to
medialize the vocal folds, although for the most
part injectables are temporary. Different techniques
and implants (Silastic, Gortex, hydroxylapatite, titan-
ium, cartilage) can be used to achieve the glottic
approximation [3 –5].
Unilateral vocal fold paralysis (UVFP) is the most
frequent reason for laryngoplasty (medialization thyr-
oplasty type I with/without arytenoid adduction or
arytenopexy). It results in incomplete glottic closure,
compromising the vocal function and increasing the
risk of aspiration. Most often the reason for UVFP is
neural injury to vagal or recurrent laryngeal nerve.
Incomplete glottic closure can also be caused by atro-
phy, scarring, or cricoarytenoid joint fixation. Symp-
toms may include hoarsness, dysphagia, aspiration,
poor cough production, and frequent pneumonia. In
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
245
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the etiology of unilateral vocal fold paralysis neoplas-
tic process has the major role, with nonlaryngeal
malignancy being the leading cause (pulmonary,
mediastinal malignancies, neoplasms of the base of
the skull and brain metastases, neck neoplasms). Sur-
gery (thoracic, cardiac, thyroidectomy and neck sur-
geries) is the second leading cause of the UVFP, but it
is the first leading cause for bilateral vocal fold par-
alysis. Idiopathic paralysis, which is a diagnosis of
exclusion, when no apparent reason for vocal fold
paralysis can be found, is also a cause of UVFP in a
good number of patients as well as traumatic injury
(including intubation injury), cerebrovascular acci-
dents, and infection [6,7].
Preoperative evaluation
Preoperative evaluation by the surgeon of a patient
with vocal fold paralysis includes assessment of many
factors and is done with subjective and objective
methods. Objective tests for evaluation of voice qual-
ity may include measurement of phonatory airflow,
acoustic parameters, perceptual voice analysis, and
assessment of maximum phonation time (MPT).
MPT is a very simple test to perform and gives very
good evaluation between pre- and postoperative
results in an individual patient and can be done
during the surgery under light sedation.
Laryngeal videostroboscopy is an essential part of
evaluation of vocal fold pathology and helps to evalu-
ate anatomy, position, vibration and function of the
vocal fold. With the advent of distal “chip-in-tip”
endoscopes an assessment can be made of motion in
running speech and vibration in the same
examination.
Laryngoplasty is a permanent procedure and usu-
ally is reserved for the patients in whom the potential
for functional recovery of the vocal fold is very small.
Laryngeal EMG is currently the best method to evalu-
ate the vocal fold innervation and determine the
prognosis for recovery and is also used in preopera-
tive evaluation of patients with vocal fold paralysis.
Laryngeal EMG can help to distinguish between
neural and other causes of paralysis. Even with an
EMG that suggests a good prognosis, if there is no
clinical evidence of recovery at 1 year following onset
or injury, motion is very unlikely to return.
Preoperative subjective evaluation with different
quality-of-life surveys plays an important role since
LPL is a functional surgery and many patients base
their decision to undergo the surgery on the level of
disability they experience as a result of a voice dis-
order. One of the very widely used questionnaires is
the Voice Handicap Index (VHI), which consists of 30
statements divided into three subgroups (functional,
emotional, and physical). It is useful for comparison
of results pre- and post-intervention in the same
patient as well as the results of different studies [8].
Surgical procedure (medializaton
laryngoplasty (thyroplasty) with/
without arytenoids adduction or
arytenopexy)
This surgery is performed with the patient in the
supine position with the neck slightly extended. Typ-
ically, the patient is given dexamethasone (10 mg) and
an antibiotic at the beginning of the procedure.
Oxygen can be delivered via a mask or a nasal cannula
placed in the mouth. Local anesthetic is used to anes-
thetize the skin at the incision and soft tissues down
to the thyroid cartilage. One of the most common
local anesthetics used is a mixture of 1% lidocaine
with 1:100 000 of epinephrine and 0.25% bupivacaine
(50:50 mixture). Nasal mucosa is topicalized with 4%
lidocaine after spraying it with oxymetazoline, a
nasal decongestant. A flexible videolaryngoscope
can be used during the procedure either continuously
or intermittently. The flexible videolaryngoscope is
passed through the nose on the opposite site from
the paralysis if possible and is suspended if being
used to visualize the larynx through the entire case
(Figure 26.1).
Incision is made horizontally at about the mid-
point of the thyroid cartilage and begins just lateral to
the midline on the non-involved side and extends
laterally on the involved side to about the lateral
aspect of the thyroid cartilage (7 –8 cm long) (Figure
26.2). After dissection is done and thyroid cartilage is
exposed, a window in the anterior cartilage is created
with the preservation of the inner perichondrium (it
is just elevated in all directions, the most being in the
posterior direction). Carving the Silastic prosthesis is
the most critical part of the procedure and requires
significant experience. The determination whether the
prosthesis is appropriate is made with a combination
of intraoperative assessments: the size and angle of
the thyroid cartilage, the quality of the patient 's voice,
the laryngoscopic appearance of the position of the
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
246
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012prosthesis and the amount of medialization of the
vocal fold, and the MPT. An excellent voice may not
occur immediately in the operating room even with a
good prosthesis since many patients have developed
compensatory, hyperfunctional voice behaviors that
they may need to correct. Patients who have a vocal
fold paralysis from lung surgery or have simply
reduced pulmonary reserve may not be able to sup-
port the voice in the surgical position. In such cases, a
midline position of the vocal fold and a dramatic
improvement in MPT would predict good long-term
results.
In cases of small defects Gortex can be used for the
medialization of the vocal fold. Gortex has less long-
term predictability as it is compressible and may shift
over time. High or overcorrected Gortex implants may
result in extrusion and require revision.
If an arytenoid adduction is to be performed at the
same time as the medialization thyroplasty, the pros-
thesis is removed and a posterior window is created in
the thyroid cartilage so that a stitch can be placed and
pulled forward to allow the vocal process of the aryte-
noid to rotate medially in a vertical plane which is at the
same level as on the other side. The prosthesis is then
replaced and the position of the vocal fold is verified.
The wound is closed, and a small drain (rubber
band) and a light pressure dressing are applied. Such
surgeries are done almost exclusively as outpatient
procedures unless there is a medical indication to
admit the patient. They are re-evaluated with flexible
laryngoscopy 3 hours after the procedure to ensure
there is no bleeding or hematoma and discharged to
be seen the next day for drain removal.
Monitored anesthesia care for
laryngoplasty
Laryngoplasty is a functional surgery and as such it is
important to have a patient who is able to cooperate
during the procedure and be able to verbalize at the
surgeon's request. Although the surgery can be done
under sole local anesthesia performed by the surgeon,
many patients find it uncomfortable and require
some form of sedation, particularly during the initial
injection. Most patients tolerate the entire procedure
well with minimal sedation with a brief period of
propofol-induced deep sedation at the time of the
local anesthetic injection. They are then weaned off
the sedation in order to maximize their cooperation
with the surgeon. This is the preferred technique.
Figure 26.1. The fiberoptic scope is inserted nasally with the help of topical anesthesia and is positioned hanging from an IV pole.
This arrangement allows for laryngeal visualization during the surgery. Images courtesy of Drs. B. Abdelmalak and R. Lorenz of Cleveland
Clinic Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 26: Anesthesia for laryngoplasty
247
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Those rare patients who require more sedation
may provide a number of challenges for the anesthe-
siologist: provision of adequate sedation, patient com-
fort and anxiolysis, adequate airway control with the
challenge of a shared airway, requirement for a
patient to remain cooperative and be able to phonate
or rapid reversibility of sedation when needed.
Traditionally the procedure has been done using
opioids, benzodiazepines, propofol (as boluses or an
infusion) [3,9,10]. These combinations may be diffi-
cult to titrate, often producing under-sedation or over-
sedation and making it difficult to achieve the degree
of cooperation needed to maximize the voice outcome
or even risking airway collapse or apnea in some cases.
Dexmedetomidine, an a2-adrenoreceptor agonist,
has been successfully used for sedation during LFS
[11–13]. It has unique properties of anxiolysis, sed-
ation, analgesia and some amnestic properties with
minimal respiratory depression and thus significantly
reduced risk of airway collapse. The sedation with
dexmedetomidine is similar to natural sleep and pro-
vides a comfortable, sleeping patient, who is easily
aroused when needed and able to verbalize [14 –17].
Jense et al. [11]. reported the use of dexmedeto-
midine as a sole agent in 14 patients during LFS.
Twelve out of 14 patients received a bolus of dexme-
detomidine (0.2 –1 mg/kg), followed by an infusion;
the remaining two had an infusion started without a
bolus. On average, each patient received an additional
three boluses of dexmedetomidine of 0.32 mg/kg
during the duration of the surgery.
Abdelmalak et al. [13] reported the use of dexme-
detomidine in one patient for LFS and it was used in
a more conventional way with an initial bolus of
1 mg/kg, followed by an infusion 0.6 mg/kg/h titrated
to the effect.
Another three patients in whom dexmedetomi-
dine was used for sedation for LFS were reported by
Busick et al. [12]. In all patients sedation was supple-
mented with opioids and midazolam and in two of
them additional propofol infusion was used.
Few minor negative side effects were reported
in all 18 patients: one patient had an episode of
tachycardia and three patients had bradycardia. All
episodes were self-limiting and asymptomatic. One
patient in the Busick et al. report, where dexmedeto-
midine was used in combination with opioids, mid-
azolam and low-dose propofol infusion, developed
mild hypotension and bradycardia towards the end
of the procedure, although it did not require any
intervention. In the study, three additional patients
developed brief episodes of airway obstruction
resolved with a chin lift or lightening of sedation.
Although the published experience in dexmedeto-
midine use in LFS is limited, it appears to be close to an
ideal agent for use in laryngoplasty due to its unique
sedation profile and lack of respiratory depression.
General anesthesia for laryngoplasty
General anesthesia is considered by many of the sur-
geons unacceptable for laryngoplasty due to the need
for the patient to verbalize during the procedure for
better results. In over 1000 cases performed by the
first author, not one patient has required a general
anesthetic in order to complete the procedure. None-
theless, there may be rare patients who cannot tolerate
the procedure under sedation and may require gen-
eral anesthesia. General anesthesia has some advan-
tages, providing a quiet operative field with no
laryngeal, cough or swallowing reflexes.
The most common procedure reported done
under general anesthesia is medialization thyroplasty
Figure 26.2. Location of the incision at the midpoint of the thyroid
cartilage, extending from just lateral to the midline on the
uninvolved side and then extending 5 – 7 cm in length. Reprinted
with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
248
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(thyroplasty type 1) [18 –22], with few reports describ-
ing arytenoid adduction with or without thyroplasty
[23–25].
Different general anesthesia techniques were used
in reported cases. Bielamowicz et al. [23] published
their experience with 26 patients with a vagal nerve
paralysis after skull base surgery who underwent early
arytenoids adduction for aspiration prophylaxis
under general endotracheal anesthesia.
In the majority of the other reported cases or case
series a laryngeal mask was used during general anes-
thesia for medialization thyroplasty alone. The Pro-
Seal LMA may be used in cases where esophageal
reflux is a concern. The choice of anesthetic was
sevoflurane or total intravenous anesthesia with pro-
pofol (with intermittent boluses of opioids or with a
remifentanil infusion). Patients were either spontan-
eously breathing or provided with positive-pressure
ventilation. Continuous flexible fiberoptic laryngo-
scopy was used in all cases creating a potential chal-
lenge of a shared airway. A bronchoscopic swivel
connector with a diaphragm can be used to accom-
modate a fiberoptic scope for continuous laryngo-
scopy while maintaining ventilation.
Griffin et al. [19] and Sproson et al. [20] used
“interrupted” general anesthesia: when the surgeon
was ready to site the implant, the anesthetic was
discontinued and the patient was allowed to wake
up, the laryngeal mask was removed and the patient
phonated at the surgeon 's request. Sedation with a
propofol infusion was then reinstated until the end of
surgery.
The use of a laryngeal mask for procedures involv-
ing arytenoid adduction may not be suitable
depending on the surgical technique: if dissection in
the piriform fossa or the removal of the posterior part
of thyroid cartilage is required during the surgery, the
inflated cuff of the laryngeal mask may make it diffi-
cult for the surgeon to get adequate exposure. Stow
et al. [25] suggested deflating the laryngeal mask cuff
temporarily during dissection in the piriform fossa.
The question remains largely unanswered whether
the results of laryngoplasty done under general
anesthesia are comparable with the results when sur-
gery is done under local anesthesia with or without
sedation. Buckmire et al. [26] compared two surgical
techniques: laryngoplasty under local anesthesia
(16 patients) and laryngoplasty performed under
general anesthesia with a laryngeal mask airway (four
patients).
Surprisingly, the LMA subgroup demonstrated a
greater degree of improvement for all measured sub-
jective parameters (grade, roughness, breathiness,
asthenia, strain of the voice; GRBAS) assessed by a
skilled listener, glottal function index (GFI), and voice-
related quality of life (VRQOL) than did the more
standard local anesthetic subgroup. These data go
against the conventional reliance on intraoperative
voice testing for better functional results, but are prob-
ably biased by the small numbers, and the apparent
reluctance of the surgical team in performing these cases
under local anesthesia, since 1 in 4 of their patients
required a general anesthetic. In addition, the use of
temporary injection laryngoplasty to provide a laryngo-
scopic reference for the proper degree of vocal fold
augmentation in the LMA group (laryngoscopic images
were acquired in a clinic at a period deemed by the
patient to be his/her“best postinjection voice” and used
intraoperatively to guide the proper vocal fold position)
may have influenced the results. Larger studies are
needed to evaluate the relative vocal outcomes of type
I laryngoplasty under general anesthesia.
In contrast, both the expansion laryngoplasty and
relaxation thyroplasty may be performed equally well
under local or general anesthesia with either jet venti-
lation or laryngeal mask [27] as reported by Remacle
et al., because the posterior displacement of the anter-
ior cartilage segment cannot be adjusted incremen-
tally under phonation control as is the case during
medialization thyroplasty. In such cases, visual con-
trol of the airway remains very important.
Complications of laryngoplasty
Early complications
In the earlier report by Tucker et al. [28] 10% of the
patients (six out of 60) who underwent medialization
thyroplasty had significant complications. All six of
these patients developed some degree of airway
obstruction due to hematoma, in one patient requir-
ing urgent tracheostomy. Only two instances of
obstruction occurred in the first 24 hours, while the
later four (4 –7 days after the surgery) were just
observed (unfortunately, the authors did not elabor-
ate on any other non-surgical interventions). In add-
ition, one patient had a prosthesis extrusion on the
fifth postoperative day.
Another group of researchers (Cotter et al. [29])
did not encounter any major airway obstruction after
Chapter 26: Anesthesia for laryngoplasty
249
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012medialization thyroplasty for unilateral vocal fold
paralysis. However, they reported an 8.6% rate of
major complications, mainly due to prosthesis extru-
sion. Minor vocal fold hematoma without airway
obstruction was observed in 24% of the patients.
The relatively high complication rates that are noted
in these early reports are encountered much less fre-
quently over time with refinement of technique and
increased experience. In our experience in over 1000
cases of medicalization larynogoplasty with Silastic,
there have been no episodes of acute hematoma
requiring surgical drainage and only three cases of
edema that required admission for observation. Most
patients will have bruising of the vocal folds, but
without noticeable edema or swelling.
It appears that the complication rate is higher
after medialization thyroplasty with arytenoid
adduction/fixation or bila teral medialization thyro-
plasty as compared with medialization thyroplasty
alone [30,31], most likely due to more extensive
dissection throughout the former. Because of this,
it is often recommended that patients be admitted
following these procedures. Despite the very rare
occurrences of an airway complication, the surgical
and anesthesia teams should be prepared to estab-
lish an airway if needed. Severe airway obstruction
requiring tracheostomy may occur within 24 hours
after the surgery secondary to hematoma and
edema. The relatively slow onset of airway obstruc-
tion makes it reasonable t o use conservative meas-
ures first before proceeding with tracheostomy:
racemic epinephrine, intr avenous dexamethasone
(8–16 mg). Heliox (a mixture of helium and
oxygen) may be useful as it has reduced gaseous
density and decreases work of breathing; the use of
Heliox is discussed in detail in Chapter 10.
In cases of stridor and respiratory distress after
medialization thyroplasty conservative measures (as
above) usually suffice [30,32]. Occasionally severe
vocal fold edema may develop during the surgery,
necessitating termination of the procedure [22].
A different mechanism of severe dyspnea was
observed by Yumoto et al. [33] in two cases requiring
emergency tracheostomy in patients 1 –2 days after
completion of arytenoid adduction combined with
type I thyroplasty (medialization). Both patients had
a history of prior esophagectomy with reconstruction
of the esophagus using a gastric tube. Laryngeal
closure reflex triggered by esophageal regurgitation
during or after taking a meal was considered to be
the most probable cause of severe dyspneic attacks
after a thorough evaluation.
Because of possible severe airway compromise in
patients after laryngoplasty the decision to have these
surgeries done as outpatient procedures needs careful
consideration. Some surgeons routinely observe all
patients overnight, some – in cases of unilateral med-
ialization thyroplasty without arytenoid adduction –
discharge patients the same day after re-examination
of the airway 2 –3 hours after the procedure. Our
experience is that less than 1% of patients undergoing
a medialization with Silastic or Gortex alone require
admission, and we have been performing these as
outpatient surgeries for over 20 years.
Late complications
The aims of medialization thyroplasty for unilateral
vocal fold paralysis with or without arytenoid adduc-
tion are augmentation and median fixation of the
immobile vocal fold and the postoperative glottic aper-
ture may become narrower. Therefore, some degree of
subclinical extrathoracic airway compromise may
ensue after the surgery. Since it is fixed extrathoracic
obstruction it affects inspiratory flow more and may
not correlate with pulmonary function testing [34–36].
Flow-volume loops may demonstrate the flattening
of inspiratory and expiratory portions of the loops
compatible with fixed extrathoracic obstruction. As
reported by Yumoto et al. [36], an increase in the index
of FEV 1/PEFR is also expected when upper airway
obstruction is present: in upper airway obstruction a
large reduction of expiratory flow occurs at high lung
volumes only, so that the PEFR (peak expiratory flow
rate) decreases while the FEV 1 (forced expiratory
volume in 1 second) remains almost unchanged. It
appears that arytenoid adduction may potentially
cause more significant airway obstruction compared
to medialization thyroplasty alone.
Overall, symptomatic airway obstruction is
uncommon after laryngoplasty, possibly because the
majority of the patients are not very active and their
ventilatory demand is relatively low.
Since the glottic aperture becomes smaller, patients
after medialization thyroplasty are more susceptible to
airway edema after airway management for proced-
ures unrelated to the airway [37]. Stridor may occur in
the operating or recovery rooms, requiring nebulized
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
250
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012racemic epinephrine, intravenous steroids, or in severe
cases urgent tracheostomy. Airway instrumentation
may also cause displacement of a thyroplasty implant
[38], which may also happen spontaneously, even
many months or years after the thyroplasty [28,29,39].
Any anesthesiologist must be aware of possible
airway complications in such patients (fortunately,
these occur rarely). To minimize the risk of airway
trauma, atraumatic intubation with a small endotra-
cheal tube should be considered if feasible, and extu-
bation should be performed smoothly, with fully
deflated cuff. Patients need close observation in the
postoperative period [40].
Summary
Laryngeal frame surgery is a very dynamic and rap-
idly developing field. Communication with the sur-
geon is of utmost importance to understand the
proposed procedure and better prepare for the anes-
thetic management.
Since it is functional surgery many surgeons
prefer to operate under local anesthesia with or with-
out sedation for the patient to be able to phonate for
better surgical results.
General anesthesia may be reserved for the rare
patients in whom sedation is not an option. Different
techniques exist, with the laryngeal mask being the
preferred airway device, if intubation is not required,
allowing continuous laryngoscopy.
Anesthesiologists should be aware of rare, but
possibly severe, airway complications which may
happen in the recovery room as well as on the ward.
In patients requiring endotracheal intubation after
laryngoplasty for unrelated procedures the anesthe-
siologist must be extremely cautious and gentle
during the airway management and in the postopera-
tive period.
Case study
The patient was a 66-year-old male, 185.4 cm in
height and weighing 79 kg, with a history of right
vocal fold paralysis for 1.5 years. During evalu-
ation for unilateral vocal fold paralysis he was
found to have right post erior fossa meningioma
with brain stem compression and so underwent
debulking of the meningioma 1 month after the
diagnosis. He later had two vocal fold injections
for paralysis, the last one over a year before his
current presentation. Although he had some
improvement with the injections he still felt that
he had significant voice fatigue. VHI score was 65.
Stroboscopy showed right vocal fold immobility.
The right vocal fold appeared to be in a near
midline position, flaccid with phonation, with
incomplete glottic closure. The CT of the head
showed bulky residual posterior fossa meningioma
with brainstem compression, post craniectomy,
unchanged since the previous CT.
He was scheduled for a right medialization thyr-
oplasty with Silastic prothesis.
Preoperative evaluation
Comorbidities: hyperlipidemia, GERD, PE post
craniectomy (stopped coumadin 5 days before
the scheduled surgery), mild to moderate OSA,
improved since he lost 12 kg of his weight after
the initial surgery.
Airway: MP II airway, thyromental distance of 3
finger breadths, no overbite, limited neck extension.
History of easy ventilation and intubation for his
brain surgery.
Anesthesia management
On the day of surgery the patient had been NPO for
more than 8 hours. He appeared to be anxious, and
stated that he had difficulty lying flat due to frequent
cough. The ENT surgeon prefers the patient to be
awake for voice control. MPT was checked by the
surgeon preoperatively and was 4 seconds.
The patient was positioned supine and the, opera-
tive bed in reverse Trendelenburg position for patient
comfort.
After applying standard ASA monitors, the patient
was premedicated with 2 mg of midazolam IV, dexa-
methasone 10 mg IV, and cefazolin 1 g IV. Oxygen was
delivered via MAC Safe ® nasal cannula at 4 l/min.
The surgeon prepped and draped the neck and
injected 20 ml of a mixture of lidocaine 1% with
epinephrine 1:100 000 and 0.25% bupivacaine
(50:50) after a propofol 40 mg IV bolus was given to
the patient. Then the left side of the nose was topica-
lized with 4% lidocaine and a fiberoptic scope was
passed to visualize the glottic opening (Figures 26.1
and 26.2). Before the incision the patient was fully
awake and cooperative.
Chapter 26: Anesthesia for laryngoplasty
251
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The surgery proceeded. After the dissection was
completed and the Silastic implant carved and
placed, the patient was asked to phonate and MPT
was checked and the position of the vocal folds
checked again. The prosthesis required some adjust-
ment. After the position of the prosthesis was
judged satisfactory, the wound was irrigated with
normal saline and closed. A drain was left in place.
During the procedure the patient was given only
small doses of fentanyl for comfort (total of
50 mg), which was possible because of the careful
use of local anesthesia and patient padding/pos-
itioning. His final MPT was 42 s and his voice
improved significantly.
The patient was admitted to PACU for phase II
recovery and shortly after was admitted to the hos-
pital for overnight observation.
Potential complications
Airway edema
Hematoma
Early implant extrusion
Clinical pearls
/C15Unilateral vocal fold paralysis (UVFP) is the most
frequent reason for laryngoplasty. It results in
incomplete glottic closure, compromising the vocal
function and increasing the risk of aspiration.
/C15Typically, the patient is given dexamethasone (10
mg) and an antibiotic at the beginning of the
procedure. Oxygen can be delivered via a mask or
a nasal cannula placed in the mouth.
/C15Local anesthetic is used to anesthetize the skin at
the incision and soft tissues down to the thyroid
cartilage.
/C15A flexible videolaryngoscope can be used during
the procedure either continuously or
intermittently. The flexible videolaryngoscope is
passed through the nose on the opposite side from
the paralysis if possible and is suspended if being
used to visualize the larynx through the entire
case.
/C15Laryngoplasty is a functional surgery and as such
it is important to have a patient who is able to
cooperate during the procedure and be able to
verbalize at the surgeon 's request. Most patients
tolerate the entire procedure well with minimal
sedation following a brief period of propofol-
induced sedation at the time of the local anesthetic
injection.
/C15General anesthesia with a supraglottic airway can
be utilized in rare instances.
/C15A rare but serious early complication is varying
degrees of airway obstruction secondary to
hematoma; this requires the immediate attention
and intervention of both the anesthesia and
surgical teams.
References
1. Friederich G, de Jong FICRS,
Mahien HF, Benninger MS, Isshiki
N. Laryngeal framework surgery: a
proposal for classification and
nomenclature by the Phonosurgery
Committee of the European
Laryngological Society Eur. Arch
Otorhinolaryngol 2001;258:
389–96.
2. Friederich G, Remacle M,
Birchall M, Marie JP, Arens C.
Defining phonosurgery: a proposal
for classification and nomenclature
by the Phonosurgery Committee of
the European Laryngological
Society (ELS). Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol 2007;264:
1191–200.
3. van Ardenne N, Vanderwegen J, Van
Nuffelen G, De Bodt M, Van de
Heyning P. Medialization thyroplasty:
vocal outcome of silicone and
titanium implant.Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol2011;268:101–7.
4. Hendricker RM, de Silva BW,
Forrest LA. Gore-Tex
medialization laryngoplasty for
treatment of dysphagia.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2010;142:536–9.
5. Mesallam TA, Khalil YA,
Malki KH, Farahat M.
Medialization thyroplasty using
autologous nasal septal cartilage
for treating unilateral vocal fold
paralysis. Clin Exp
Otorhinolaryngol 2011;43:142–8.
6. Rosenthal-Swibel L, Benninger
MS, Deeb RH. Vocal
Fold Immobility: A Longitudinal
Analysis of Etiology over
30 Years. Laryngoscope 2007;
117:1864–70.
7. Ramadan HH, Wax MK, Avery S.
Outcome and changing cause of
unilateral vocal cord paralysis.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1998;118:199–202.
8. Jacobson BH, Johnson A,
Grywalski C, et al. The Voice
Handicap Index (VHI):
development and validation. Am
J Speech Lang Pathol 1997;6(3):
66–70.
9. Santhanam S, Templeton L.
Superficial cervical plexus block
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
252
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:18 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012for vocal cord surgery in an awake
pediatric patient. Anesth Analg
2004;98:1656–57.
10. Donnelly M, Browne J,
Fitzpatrick G. Anaesthesia for
thyroplasty. Can J Anaesth
1995;42(9):813–5.
11. Jense RJ, Souter K, Davies J,
Romig C, Panneerselvan A,
Maronian N. Dexmedetomidine
sedation for laryngeal framework
surgery. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 2008;117(9);659–64.
12. T. Busick, Kussman M, Scheidt T,
Tobias JD. Preliminary
experience with
dexmedetomidine for monitored
anesthesia care during ENT
surgical procedures. Am
J Therapeutics 2008;15;520–7
13. Abdelmalak B, Guttenberg L,
Lorenz RR, et al .
Dexmedetomidine supplemented
with local anesthesia for awake
laryngoplasty. J Clin Anesth
2009;21(6):442–3.
14. Kamibayashi T, Maze M. Clinical
uses of alpha 2-adrenergic
agonists. Anesthesiology
2000;93:1345–9.
15. Hall JE, Uhrich TD, Barney JA,
Arain SR, Ebert TJ. Sedative,
amnestic, and analgesic
properties of small-dose
dexmedetomidine infusions.
Anesth Analg 2000;90:699–705.
16. Ramsay MA, Luterman DL.
Dexmedetomidine as a total
intravenous anesthetic agent.
Anesthesiology 2004;101:787–90.
17. Nelson LE, Lu J, Guo T, et al. The
alpha 2-adrenoreceptor agonist
dexmedetomidine converges on an
endogenous sleep-promoting
pathway to exert its sedative
effects. Anesthesiology
2003;98:428–36.
18. Grunler S, Stasey MR.
Thyroplasty under general
anesthesia using a laryngeal mask
airway and fiberoptic
bronchoscope. Can J Anesth
1999;46(5):460–3.
19. Griffin M, Russel J, Chambers F.
General anaesthesia for
thyroplasty. Anaesthesia
1998;53:1202–4.
20. Sproson E, Nightingale J,
Puxeddu R. Thyroplasty type
I under general anaesthesia with
the use of the laryngeal mask and
a waking period to assess voice.
Auris Nasus Larynx 2010;37:
357–60.
21. Karmarkar A, Wisely NA,
Wooldridge W, Jones P.
Thyroplasty under total
intravenous anaesthesia with
intermittent positive pressure
ventilation. Eur J Anaesthesiol
2007;24(12):1041–4.
22. Razzaq I, Woolridge W. A series
of thyroplasty cases under general
anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 2000;
85(4):547–9.
23. Bielamowicz S, Gupta A, Sekhar
LN. Early arytenoid adduction for
vagal paralysis after skull base
surgery. Laryngoscope 2000;
110(3 Pt 1):346 –51.
24. Tokashiki R, Hiramatu H,
Tsukahara K, et al . A new
procedure of arytenoids
adduction combined with type
I thyroplasty under general
anesthesia using a laryngeal
mask. Acta Oto-Laryngol
2007;127:328–31.
25. Stow NW, Lee JW, Cole I E.
Novel approach of medialization
thyroplasty with arytenoid
adduction performed under
general anesthesia with a
laryngeal mask. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 2012;146:266–71.
26. Buckmire RA, Bryson PC, Patel
MR. Type I Gore-Tex
laryngoplasty for glottic
incompetence in mobile vocal
folds. J Voice 2011;25(3):288–92.
27. Remacle M, Matar N, Verduyckt
I, Lawson G. Relaxation
thyroplasty for mutational
falsetto treatment. Ann Otol
Rhinol Laryngol 2010;119(2):
105–9.
28. Tucker HM, Wanamaker J,
Trott M, Hicks D. Complications
of laryngeal framework surgery
(phonosurgery). Laryngoscope
1993;103:525–8.
29. Cotter CS, Avidano MA,
Crary MA, Cassisi NJ, Gorham
MM. Laryngeal complications
after type I thyroplasty.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
1995;113:671–3.
30. Abraham MT, Gonen M, Kraus
DH. Complications of Type
I thyroplasty and arythenoid
adduction.Laryngoscope2001;111
(8):1322–9.
31. Weinman EC, Maragos NE.
Airway compromise in
thyroplasty surgery. Laryngoscope
2000;110(7):1082–5.
32. Zhao X, Roth K, Fung K. Type
I thyroplasty: risk stratification
approach to inpatient versus
outpatient postoperative
management. J Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 2010;39(6):757–61.
33. Yumoto E, Samejima Y, Kumai
Y, Haba K. Esophageal
regurgitation as a cause of
inspiratory distress after
thyroplasty. Am J Otolaryngol
2006;27(6):425–9.
34. Janas JD, Swenson ER, Waugh P,
Hillel A. Effect of thyroplasty
on laryngeal airflow. Ann Otol
Rhinol Laryngol 1999;108(3):
286–92.
35. Schneider B, Kneussl M, Denk
DM, Bigenzahn W. Aerodynamic
measurements in medialization
thyroplasty. Acta Otolaryngol
2003;123(7):883–8.
36. Yumoto E, Minoda R, Toya Y,
Miyamaru S, Sanuki T. Changes
in respiratory function after
thyroplastic surgery. Acta
Otolaryngol 2010;130(1):132–7.
Chapter 26: Anesthesia for laryngoplasty
253
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:18 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201237. Lin HW, Bhattacharyya N.
Incidence of perioperative airway
complications in patients with
previous medialization
thyroplasty. Laryngoscope
2009;119(4):675–8.
38. Ayala MA, Patterson MB,
Bach KK. Late displacement of
a montgomery thyroplasty
implant following endotracheal
intubation. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 2007;116(4):262–4.
39. Rosen CA, Murry T, DeMarino
DP. Late complications of type
I thyroplasty: a case report.
J Voice 1999;13(3):417–23.
40. Friedlander P, Aygene E,
Kraus DH. Prevention of airway
complications in thyroplasty
patients requiring endotracheal
intubation. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 1999;108(8):
735–7.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
254
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:18 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.029
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 4
Chapter
27
Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
Anesthesia for tracheotomy
Onur Demirci and Marc Popovich
Introduction
Over the past decade, the role of anesthesiologist
during tracheotomies has evolved. Though surgical
tracheotomies performed in the operating room are
the norm, there is a growing trend of performing
bedside percutaneous dilatational tracheotomies in
the intensive care unit. For anesthesiologists the pro-
vision of care for patients undergoing tracheotomies
in the operating room is a routine matter; however,
with published studies finding decreased morbidity
with bedside-performed percutaneous dilatational
tracheotomies, anesthesiologists are challenged out-
side their comfort zone in the traditional operating
rooms to support surgeons at the bedside in the ICU,
thus adding another so-called “remote anesthesia
service location ”. Furthermore, some intensive-
care-trained anesthesiologists are opting to perform
their own patients ' percutaneous tracheotomies,
which blurs the boundaries between a surgeon 's role
and that of the intensivist anesthesiologist.
The cricothyrotomy and the tracheotomy are both
procedures that create a subglottic surgical airway.
A cricothyrotomy is an emergency procedure that is
performed with a stab incision through the cricothyroid
membrane, whereas a tracheotomy usually requires a
more meticulous and lengthy dissection of the neck
tissues before entering the trachea between the second
and third tracheal rings. Therefore most tracheotomies
are performed in a more controlled environment and
are considered elective or urgent procedures.
Although tracheo tomy and tracheo stomy are used
interchangeably by most healthcare professionals,
based on their Greek roots, the former refers to the
surgical procedure of “cutting” the trachea whereas
the latter refers to the “mouth” or the opening that
has been created.
With references dating back to 2000 BC in the
sacred Hindu scripture of Rig Veda, tracheotomies
have a long history. Practitioners have been securing
airways with tracheotomies long before endotracheal
devices were utilized [1]. The procedure gained more
acceptance in the early nineteenth century as a life-
saving measure in patients with diphtheria [1]. The
currently-used technique of “low” tracheotomy was
advocated and standardized by Dr. Chevalier Jackson
in 1932 [1]. Although the percutaneous tracheotomy
was first described in 1957 by Shelden et al. [2],
it gained popularity after two papers published
by Dr. Ciaglia, a surgeon from New York, and
Dr. Griggs, an intensivist from Australia, in the late
1980s [3,4]. These methods, with some modifications,
led to the modern-day bedside techniques with com-
mercially available kits including the commonly used
“Blue Rhino ”™ [5].
Surgical procedure
While the indications for a tracheotomy are many,
they can be categorized into five groups:
1. Acute or chronic upper airway obstruction
(Ludwig's angina, retropharyngeal abscess,
obstructive sleep apnea).
2. Risk of or presence of chronic aspiration
(stroke patients).
3. Chronic respiratory failure (ICU patients with
endotracheal tubes).
4. Retention of bronchial secretions (weak cough,
cystic fibrosis, severe pneumonia).
5. Elective during surgical procedures
involving the head or neck (cancers of the
tongue, oral cavity or the upper airways,
laryngectomy).
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
255
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Although there are no absolute contraindications,
three instances that constitute a relative contraindi-
cation should be mentioned:
1. Uncorrected coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia
(INR > 1.5 or platelet count < 50 000).
2. Presence of a laryngeal cancer (to avoid
manipulation before a laryngectomy because of a
possibility of stomal recurrence).
3. Hemodynamic instability in the setting of elective
tracheotomy.
A surgical tracheotomy requires a vertical or trans-
verse incision to be made approximately 2 –3c m
above the sternal notch. This skin incision is carried
through the subcutaneous tissue and the platysma.
Once the strap muscles are retracted and the thyroid
isthmus is divided, if necessary, the trachea with its
rings is visualized. Depending on the surgeon 's
preference, the trachea is entered either through a
horizontal incision between the second and third or
third and fourth tracheal rings or by using an infer-
iorly based flap with the corresponding tracheal
ring. If desired, stay sutures are placed to facilitate
reintubation in case of accidental removal of
the tracheotomy tube. Once the tube has been
placed, it is secured using skin sutures and a cir-
cumferential tie.
Device manufacturers cite decreased procedure
times and reduced hospital costs as benefits of
percutaneous dilatational tracheotomies performed
at the bedside in the intensive care unit [5]. However,
given the relatively blind entry into the trachea,
patient selection for percutaneous dilatational trache-
otomy requires more stringent assessment criteria to
prevent complications that might be fatal outside the
controlled environment of the operating room.
Therefore patients with neck masses, prior neck sur-
gery, prior neck radiation or obese patients with large
neck circumference are best served with a surgical
tracheotomy.
When compared to the surgical tracheotomy, the
minimally invasive percutaneous dilatational trache-
otomy using a commercially available kit requires a
smaller skin incision and a less involved blunt dissec-
tion of the surrounding tissues. The trachea is trans-
illuminated between the second and third or third and
fourth tracheal rings with the bronchoscope intro-
duced through the endotracheal tube, and the trachea
is entered at this site with an introducer needle.
A guide wire is placed and the tract is dilated using
serial dilators using a Seldinger technique. The
tracheotomy tube is then placed under direct visual-
ization with the bronchoscope and secured in a
fashion similar to the surgical tracheotomy.
Finally, mention should be made of permanent
tube-free tracheostomy. This is a surgical technique
to create a skin-lined, non-collapsing, non-stenosing
and self-sustaining stoma that does not require a
cannula to keep the tract open [6].
Anesthetic management
Preoperative evaluation
It is the anesthesiologist 's obligation to ensure a safe
and smooth procedure. Given the multitude of indi-
cations for tracheotomy, the patients ' severity of
medical conditions can vary greatly. For example,
the patient undergoing elective surgical tracheotomy
before a glossectomy would most likely have fewer
comorbid conditions than the ICU patient under-
going a percutaneous dilatational tracheotomy.
Therefore a thorough history and physical examin-
ation, including the patient 's current medications,
infusions, and ventilator settings, if intubated, are of
utmost importance. Based on these finding an appro-
priate laboratory workup should be ordered.
Besides the usual pre-anesthetic evaluation, some
common comorbidities and problems associated with
them are outlined below.
Neurological system
A full neurological exam should be performed and
any deficits should be carefully recorded.
Respiratory system
History of previous neck surgery or radiation should
be communicated to the surgeon due to the possibil-
ity of complications during the tracheotomy.
Patients who do not have a secure airway before
the procedure should undergo a thorough airway
evaluation since most of them do have an underlying
anomaly of the oral cavity or upper airway. If a diffi-
cult airway is expected, the anesthesiologist must
decide whether an airway should be obtained using
an awake intubation technique (e.g., fiberoptic) or an
awake tracheotomy.
ICU patients already intubated and mechanically
ventilated should be assessed for the ventilator mode,
FiO2 and PEEP requirements. Certain ventilator
modes, such as inverse ratio or bilevel, cannot be
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
256
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012provided by most of the operating room anesthesia
machines and will require an ICU ventilator. Patients
on these ventilator modes as well as patients on high
PEEP (especially if over 15 cmH 2O) should be con-
sidered for a bedside tracheotomy to prevent compli-
cations associated with patient transport.
Cardiovascular system
All patients should be evaluated for cardiac risk
factors and further workup should be obtained as
indicated.
When ICU patients are hemodynamically stable
on pressor or inotropic support, anesthesia for trache-
otomy can be safely provided in most instances. How-
ever, if hemodynamic stability is a concern, further
invasive monitoring should be obtained or the case
should be postponed until the patient is more stable.
Gastrointestinal system
NPO status of the patient should be verified, espe-
cially if the patient is receiving tube feeding. To
achieve complete gastric emptying, tube feeds should
be stopped at least 6 hours before the procedure
unless the feeding tube is post-pyloric.
Coexisting ileus or small bowel obstruction might
pose an aspiration risk even in intubated patients,
since the cuff of the endotracheal tube will be deflated
during the placement of the tracheotomy tube.
Urinary system
ICU patients have a high incidence of acute kidney
injury requiring renal replacement therapy [7]. If a
patient has completed a recent intermittent hemodi-
alysis session, a period of 6 hours should elapse before
proceeding with elective tracheotomy to allow equili-
bration of the electrolytes. Cardiac arrhythmias due to
electrolyte shifts and hypotension in the immediate
post-dialysis period are common.
Hematological system
The incidence of coagulopathy and thrombocyto-
penia in ICU patients has been reported as high as
28% and 44%, respectively [8]. Similarly, patients with
malignancies who are undergoing chemotherapy have
a higher risk of bleeding diathesis. Therefore, a coagu-
lation panel and platelet count should be obtained the
day of the planned procedure. If any abnormalities
are detected, fresh frozen plasma and platelet concen-
trates might be needed to achieve an INR < 1.5 or
platelet count > 50 000.
Uremic ICU patients might have abnormal plate-
let function despite adequate platelet counts. To
investigate further, nursing staff can be asked about
increased bleeding during IV starts and nasogastric
tube insertion; however, a platelet function test is
rarely indicated.
Laboratory tests
As mentioned above, at a minimum, a coagulation
panel, complete blood count with platelets and a
metabolic panel should be drawn the day of surgery.
Other laboratory values might be needed as indicated
by the history and physical exam.
Premedication
For awake tracheotomies, an anxiolytic like midazo-
lam with the addition of a potent opiate like fentanyl
should be used.
In critically ill patients or if there is a concern for
difficult airway or impeding acute upper airway
obstruction, premedication should be used very judi-
ciously or avoided all together.
Patients receiving steroids may benefit from stress
dose steroids, e.g., hydrocortisone 100 mg IV every
8 hours for three doses, if the tracheotomy will be
performed under general anesthesia.
The surgeon should be consulted about the prefer-
ence for preoperative antibiotic. Usually a first-
generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin 1 g IV) to
cover the skin flora will be administered before incision.
Intraoperative management
Blood loss is usually minimal; therefore a functioning
18-gauge IV for access is sufficient. The majority of
the ICU patients will have a central line in place,
which can be used intraoperatively.
An isotonic crystalloid solution (0.9% saline or
lactated Ringer 's) at 2 ml/kg/h should be used as
maintenance fluid; however, since most ICU patients
have different maintenance fluid requirements due
to coexisting conditions (e.g 5% dextrose in
water for patients with hypovolemic hypernatremia
or no maintenance fluids for patients who are hyper-
volemic), a discussion with the intensive care team
preoperatively would help determine the selection and
rate of maintenance fluids for these patients.
In addition to the standard ASA monitors [9], all
other monitoring should be continued for ICU
Chapter 27: Anesthesia for tracheotomy
257
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012patients (e.g., intracranial pressure monitors, invasive
cardiac index monitors, etc.).
The patient will be positioned supine. A shoulder
roll to extend the neck for better surgical access will
most likely be utilized by the surgeon.
Awake tracheotomies will require local anesthetic
to be injected to the incision site and deeper tissues
by the surgeon. It is important to communicate with
the surgeon in order to avoid exceeding the toxic
dose for the local anesthetic used. The procedure
will be completed under monitored anesthesia care
with minimal sedation until the surgeon secures the
airway. If local anesthesia alone is not sufficient due
to patient factors (e.g., preexisting anxiety disorder),
intravenous sedation with dexmedetomidine infusion
can be attempted. Another described approach was
to convert scheduled awake tracheotomy to asleep
tracheotomy, utilizing a carefully planned topicaliz-
ation and sedation technique dependent mainly on a
respiratory sparing sedative like dexmedetomidine
[10]. Awake tracheostomy is somewhat stressful
to patients, surgeons and anesthesiologists; asleep
tracheotomy is a much preferred technique if
feasible.
If the tracheotomy will be done under general
anesthesia and the airway exam reveals possible
airway difficulty, an awake fiberoptic intubation
should be performed.
If no airway difficulty is expected, the patient can be
induced using propofol IV titrated to blood pressure or
etomidate IV, if the patient requires pressor or inotrope
support.
Maintenance of anesthesia can be provided with
inhaled anesthetics or total intravenous anesthesia,
especially if the procedure is being performed at the
bedside in the intensive care unit.
Pharmacological muscle relaxation is required to
facilitate endotracheal intubation. However, while
it is not required otherwise, it is preferred as it
provides a motionless patient, which might contribute
to ease of the procedure, and potentially less bleeding
and safe cannulation of the newly formed
tracheotomy.
When the surgeon is ready to incise the trachea,
the FiO 2 should be decreased to less than 30%, if
feasible. Next, the endotracheal tube should be
advanced further into the trachea, so the incision
can be made above its cuff. Once the tracheotomy is
completed FiO 2 should be increased to 100% for a
couple of minutes to provide an appropriate pre-
oxygenation to allow time for managing the airway
in case of failure to intubate the trachea through the
newly created tracheotomy. Once the trachea has
been entered, the cuff will be deflated (do not forget
to suction orally above the cuff before deflating
the cuff to avoid aspiration of pooled secretions)
and the endotracheal tube will be slowly withdrawn.
A sterile anesthesia circuit extension will be passed
onto the surgical field to be attached to the newly
placed tracheotomy tube. After the tracheotomy tube
placement has been verified with the presence of end-
tidal CO 2, the endotracheal tube can be removed.
Percutaneous dilatational tracheostomies will
require similar intraoperative management. A swivel
adapter will be attached to the endotracheal tube
to allow simultaneous mechanical ventilation and
visualization of trachea with the flexible broncho-
scope. Rather than advancing the endotracheal tube
before the trachea is entered, it must be withdrawn
proximally to an immediate subglottic position to
transilluminate the expected tracheotomy site. The
anesthesiologist might be requested to maneuver
the flexible bronchoscope in certain instances.
Postoperative management
Most patients will require mechanical ventilation and
ICU admission in the immediate post-tracheotomy
period. Therefore necessary monitoring and equip-
ment to transfer the patient to the ICU should be
readily available. Intravenous sedation should be con-
tinued during transport.
The anesthesia provider should be vigilant for
the complications that might occur in the early post-
operative period as described below. Tube dislodge-
ment during patient transport can be especially
disastrous. An endotracheal tube and a laryngoscope
or a portable videolaryngoscope should be brought
along for transport to secure the airway.
Although a chest X-ray has been performed
customarily after all tracheotomies, it has been sug-
gested that chest X-rays are not necessary in routine
surgical tracheotomies or percutaneous dilatational
tracheotomies [11,12]. Therefore chest X-rays should
be obtained only after emergency or difficult proced-
ures, or in patients suspected of having pneumo-
thorax (symptomatic ones are mostly diagnosed
clinically and managed expeditiously, as the clinical
condition might be deteriorating very fast, not
allowing time to obtain a chest X-ray).
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
258
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012The tracheotomy is a relatively painless procedure
and low-dose intermittent IV narcotics can be used
for postoperative analgesia.
Other considerations
Central lines placed in the internal jugular veins
might pose a higher infection risk in patients with
tracheotomies. It has been recommended to replace
these central lines with lines in the subclavian or even
femoral veins, since they have been shown to decrease
the risk of catheter-related bloodstream infections in
this patient group [13].
Complications
Tracheotomies are one of the most frequently per-
formed invasive procedures among critically ill
patients and carry a relatively low complication rate.
Most common complications are wound infections
and bleeding, with an incidence of 6.6% and 5.7%,
respectively [14].
Based on the time of occurrence tracheotomy
complications can be classified as intraoperative, early
postoperative and late [1,15].
Intraoperative complications
Most intraoperative complications are due to close
proximity of the surgical site to other major struc-
tures in the neck and thoracic cavity.
Bleeding
Although preoperative coagulopathy is a common
cause of bleeding during tracheotomies in ICU
patients, surgical bleeding through the anterior jugu-
lar veins and thyroid isthmus is also a common
culprit. Injuries to the internal jugular veins and
carotid arteries are possible but rare.
Airway fire
This feared complication during airway surgeries can
be prevented by limiting FiO 2 < 30% when cautery is
being used; however, this might present a challenge in
patients with moderate to severe ARDS who already
have a higher FiO 2 requirement. Although the Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists ' Practice Advisory
recommends removing the endotracheal tube during
an airway fire [16], the benefits of leaving the endo-
tracheal tube in place for a patient who was a difficult
intubation may outweigh the risks [17].
Pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum
This complication is especially concerning in children
due to high pleural domes. In addition, patients with
hyperinflation of the lungs due to emphysematous
changes are at high risk. Both may manifest as car-
diopulmonary arrest in an otherwise stable patient.
Air embolism
This may occur secondary to injury to the internal
jugular vein.
Injury to nearby structures
The posterior wall of the trachea, cricoid cartilage and
first tracheal ring are potential injury sites. These
injuries could result in tracheal stenosis as well as in
the formation of a tracheoesophageal fistula. Recur-
rent laryngeal nerve and vagus nerve can also be
injured if the dissection is carried lateral to the
trachea.
Early postoperative complications
Subcutaneous emphysema
This occurs if air is allowed to escape into the sub-
cutaneous tissue due to an incorrectly sized tracheot-
omy tube. The emphysema will be reabsorbed quickly
after replacing the tube with a properly fitting one,
unless the tube is displaced in a false tract (see below).
Tube displacement
Any attempt to replace a displaced tracheotomy tube
within the first postoperative week (before the tract
has been epithelialized (mature tracheostomy))
should be done under direct visualization using a
flexible bronchoscope due to the risk of creating a
false lumen. If any difficulty is encountered while
doing this, the patient should be reintubated orally
or nasally using direct laryngoscopy and the tube
replacement should be delayed until it can be done
in the controlled environment of the operating room.
In the case of unsuccessful endotracheal intubation
attempts, bag-mask ventilation or placement of an
LMA while holding pressure on the tracheal stoma
to avoid air escape can prevent hypoxemia and poten-
tial catastrophic anoxia.
Tube blockage
By using humidified oxygen, tube blockage can be
easily avoided. If a blockage is suspected, the inner
cannula of the tracheotomy tube should be removed
Chapter 27: Anesthesia for tracheotomy
259
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and inspected for any inspissated material. Further
attempts to loosen and remove the blockage can be
made by using saline or bicarbonate flushes along
with suctioning, with either a medium-bore suction
catheter or a flexible bronchoscope.
Bleeding
Minor bleeding from the skin edges should be differ-
entiated from a more catastrophic bleeding secondary
to erosion into a large vessel, such as the innominate
artery. Therefore, any bleeding during the first 2
weeks warrants a thorough inspection of the wound
by the surgeon.
Wound infection
Self-limiting skin infections due to skin and respira-
tory flora are common and usually do not require
treatment; however, necrotic skin due to excessive
pressure on the wound edges and prolonged use of
surgical packing for bleeding will provide an excellent
breeding medium for more virulent organisms and
should be avoided. Extension of a superficial infection
can cause tracheitis, perichondritis or even paratra-
cheal abscess [18].
Late postoperative complications
Tracheoesophageal fistula
This complication is caused either by direct trauma to
the posterior wall of the trachea during initial trache-
otomy or by pressure necrosis. The patient may pre-
sent with increasing oxygen requirements, signs of
infection and aspiration, as well as “bubbling” from
the mouth. Avoidance of high cuff pressures and
large-bore feeding tubes in the esophagus will help
prevent this complication. The use of fiberoptic bron-
choscopy during percutaneous tracheotomies minim-
izes injuries to the posterior tracheal wall and
therefore decreases the incidence of this complication.
Tracheal stenosis
This is mostly surgical technique related (damage to
the first tracheal ring or cricoid cartilage).
Granuloma formation
Usually due to the tracheotomy tube causing irrita-
tion in the trachea, granuloma formation may mani-
fest as bleeding during suctioning and difficulty in
passing a suction catheter. This condition rarely needs
treatment and can be prevented by avoidance of
constant rubbing of an inappropriately fitting trache-
otomy tube against the trachea.
Despite the somewhat widely spread belief that
percutaneous dilatational tracheotomies have higher
complication rates, a systematic review and meta-
analysis published in 2006 concluded that the percu-
taneous dilatational tracheotomy reduces the overall
incidence of wound infection, may further reduce
clinically relevant bleeding and mortality when com-
pared with surgical tracheotomy and should be con-
sidered the procedure of choice for performing
elective tracheotomies in critically ill adult patients
[14]. Although the decreased complication rate can
be attributed to less surgical trauma to the surround-
ing tissue, it should be kept in mind that careful
patient selection plays an important role as well.
Summary
With the increasing number of ICU admissions glob-
ally, anesthesiologists will most likely encounter more
patients with chronic respiratory failure and therefore
more patients requiring tracheotomies as part of their
hospital course. Anesthesiologists need to have the
knowledge and skills to provide care for the special
needs of these patients.
Although tracheotomies are considered relatively
safe procedures due to low complication rates, one
should always keep in mind that there is a potential
risk of losing the airway with catastrophic conse-
quences. Therefore being prepared for any difficult
or lost airway situation in terms of having well-
equipped difficult-airway carts (including LMAs,
intubating stylets, tube exchangers and flexible bron-
choscopes) and thorough knowledge of the American
Society of Anesthesiologists ' difficult airway algo-
rithm [19] can potentially improve airway manage-
ment outcomes.
Case study
“Tracheotomy saves the night ”
A 74-year-old female, 5 0300 (160 cm) in height
and weighing 72 kg, has a history of hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, peripheral vascular
disease, remote tobacco use and previous cerebrovas-
cular accident resulting in mild right-sided residual
weakness.
She was admitted to the hospital for an elective left-
sided carotid endarterectomy. Her pre-anesthetic evalu-
ation revealed a small mouth opening, a limited neck
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
260
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012range of motion and a slightly recessed chin, all of which
were relatively minor. As a precaution the anesthesiol-
ogist decided to use a GlideScope Video Laryngoscope
(by Verathon), which he is most experienced with.
Although her larynx was noted to be anterior, a 7.0
endotracheal tube was placed without difficulty. The
remainder of her intraoperative course was uneventful;
she was extubated in the operating room and admitted
to the intensive care unit in stable condition.
However, on postoperative day 3, she developed a
new-onset right-sided hemiparesis and aphasia. An
emergency CT angiogram of her brain showed a
subtotal occlusion of the left-middle cerebral artery,
for which she was taken to the neuroradiology suite.
She underwent CT-guided revascularization with
mechanical clot aspiration under monitored anesthe-
sia care. In despite of this intervention, her hemipar-
esis and her aphasia did not resolve.
On the night of postoperative day 4, she was noted
to be more lethargic. An arterial blood gas obtained at
that time showed severe respiratory acidosis with
marginal oxygenation while receiving 50% oxygen
via a facemask. Although the hypercarbia was
believed to be secondary to excessive narcotic admin-
istration, the intensive care physician voiced concerns
of possible pneumonia due to ongoing micro-aspir-
ation. He decided to electively intubate the patient
before she deteriorated further. He notified the
anesthesiologist on-call as backup after reviewing the
anesthetic record from her initial surgery. He chose
not to administer any sedatives or muscle relaxants,
since the patient was already lethargic and made an
initial attempt at direct laryngoscopy with a MAC 3
laryngoscope. This attempt was unsuccessful due to a
very anterior larynx and copious thick oropharyngeal
secretions. The on-call anesthesiologist made a second
unsuccessful attempt using a Miller 2 laryngoscope,
which was followed by a third unsuccessful attempt
using a GlideScope Video Laryngoscope. At this time
a flexible bronchoscope was brought to the bedside
for another attempt. Unfortunately, the laryngeal
structures could not be visualized due to excessive
swelling and presence of blood after previous intub-
ation attempts. The patient was easy to bag-mask
ventilate throughout this episode. The anesthesiolo-
gist chose to place an LMA #4 and to notify the ENT
surgeon for an urgent tracheotomy.
The patient was transferred to the operating room
while being bag-ventilated through the LMA. Upon
arrival at the operating room, she was placed on
the operating room table in supine position and gen-
eral anesthesia was administered with 0.6 MAC of
sevoflurane. Any further narcotics were avoided.
A shoulder roll was placed underneath the patient 's
shoulders and her neck was prepped and draped in
sterile fashion. The ENT surgeon administered 10 ml
of 0.5% bupivacaine with 1:200 000 epinephrine to
achieve local anesthesia as well. Her trachea was visu-
alized after a quick dissection; an 8.0 Shiley tracheot-
omy tube was placed through an incision between the
third and fourth tracheal rings. After successful ven-
tilation and verification of end-tidal carbon dioxide
with capnography, the tracheotomy tube was secured
with sutures. The patient was transferred back to the
intensive care unit in guarded condition and placed
on mechanical ventilation.
The next morning, the patient was noted to be
awake and following commands, with no new neuro-
logic sequelae from the previous night 's events. On
postoperative day 7 she was successfully weaned off
the ventilator, but the tracheotomy was left in place
for better pulmonary hygiene.
She was discharged to a skilled nursing facility
on postoperative day 8 for further care and
rehabilitation.
Clinical pearls
/C15 Although tracheotomy and tracheostomy are used
interchangeably by most healthcare professionals,
based on their Greek roots the former refers to
the surgical procedure of “cutting” the trachea
whereas the latter refers to the “mouth” or the
opening that has been created.
/C15 Although there are no absolute contraindications,
three circumstances constitute a relative
contraindication for elective tracheostomy:
(1) uncorrected coagulopathy or
thrombocytopenia
(2) presence of a laryngeal cancer (to avoid
manipulation before a laryngectomy because
of the possibility of stomal recurrence)
(3) hemodynamic instability.
/C15 Emergency tracheostomy can be performed under
local anesthesia with no to minimal sedation;
however, if time, equipment and expertise
allow, awake intubation should be attempted to
allow the procedure to proceed under general
anesthesia.
Chapter 27: Anesthesia for tracheotomy
261
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012/C15 When the surgeon is ready to incise the trachea,
the oxygen concentration should be decreased to
30% or less, where feasible. Next, the endotracheal
tube should be advanced further into the trachea,
so the incision can be made above its cuff. Once
the tracheotomy is completed the oxygen
concentration should be increased to 100% for a
couple of minutes in case subsequent difficulties
are encountered.
/C15 Chest X-rays are not necessary in routine surgical
tracheotomies or percutaneous dilatational
tracheotomies, but should be obtained after
emergency or difficult procedures, or in patients
suspected of having a pneumothorax.
/C15 Central lines placed in the internal jugular veins
might pose a higher infection risk in patients with
tracheotomies.
/C15 Airway fires and failure to cannulate the trachea
are among the most feared complications during
tracheostomy.
/C15 Though surgical tracheotomies performed in the
operating room are the norm, there is a growing trend
of performing bedside percutaneous dilatational
tracheotomies in the intensive care unit (ICU).
References
1. Bailey BJ, Johnson JT, Newlands
SD. Head & Neck Surgery –
Otolaryngology, 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins; 2006. pp. 786 –801.
2. Shelden CH, Pudenz RH, Tichy
FY. Percutaneous tracheotomy.
J Am Med Assoc 1957;
165(16):2068–70.
3. Griggs WM, Worthley LI, Gilligan
JE, Thomas PD, Myburg JA.
A simple percutaneous
tracheostomy technique. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 1990;170(6):543–5.
4. Ciaglia P, Firsching R, Syniec C.
Elective percutaneous dilatational
tracheostomy. A new simple
bedside procedure; preliminary
report. Chest 1985;87(6):715–9.
5. Cook Medical Ciaglia Blue
Rhino® G2 Product Feature. 2011;
available from: http://www.
cookmedical.com/cc/
datasheetFeature.do?id¼4888.
Accessed August 17, 2011.
6. Akst LM, Eliachar I. Long-term,
tube-free (permanent)
tracheostomy in morbidly obese
patients. Laryngoscope 2004;
114(8):1511–2; author reply
1512–3. PubMed PMID: 1528073.
7. Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Acute
renal failure in the intensive care
unit. Semin Respir Crit Care Med
2006;27(3):262–73.
8. Levi M, Opal SM. Coagulation
abnormalities in critically ill
patients. Crit Care 2006;
10(4):222.
9. American Society of
Anesthesiologists. Standards for
Basic Anesthetic Monitoring.
2011; available from: http://www.
asahq.org/For-Healthcare-
Professionals/~/media/For
Members/documents/Standards
Guidelines Stmts/Basic Anesthetic
Monitoring 2011.ashx. Accessed
August 20, 2011
10. Abdelmalak B, Makary L,
Hoban J, Doyle DJ.
Dexmedetomidine as sole
sedative for awake intubation in
management of the critical
airway. J Clin Anesth 2007;19:
370–3.
11. Smith DK, Grillone GA,
Fuleihan N. Use of postoperative
chest x-ray after elective adult
tracheotomy. Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 1999;120(6):
848–51.
12. Hoehne F, Ozaeta M, Chung R.
Routine chest X-ray after
percutaneous tracheostomy is
unnecessary.Am Surg
2005;71(1):51–3.
13. Lorente L, Jimenez A, Naranjo C,
et al. Higher incidence of catheter-
related bacteremia in jugular site
with tracheostomy than in
femoral site. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2010;
31(3):311–3.
14. Delaney A, Bagshaw SM, Nalos M.
Percutaneous dilatational
tracheostomy versus surgical
tracheostomy in critically ill
patients: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Crit Care 2006;
10(2):R55.
15. Russell C, Matta B. Tracheostomy:
A Multiprofessional Handbook .
Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2004.
pp. 51 –7.
16. Caplan RA, Barker SJ, Connis RT,
et al. Practice advisory for the
prevention and management of
operating room fires.
Anesthesiology 2008;108(5):
786–801.
17. Chee WK, Benumof JL. Airway
fire during tracheostomy:
extubation may be
contraindicated. Anesthesiology
1998;89(6):1576–8.
18. Cole AG, Kerr JH. Paratracheal
abscess after tracheostomy.
Intensive Care Med
1983;9(6):345–7.
19. Practice guidelines for
management of the difficult
airway: an updated report by the
American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on
Management of the Difficult
Airway. Anesthesiology 2003;
98(5):1269–77.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
262
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:40:48 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.030
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 4
Chapter
28
Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
Anesthesia for the management of
subglottic stenosis and tracheal resection
John George III and D. John Doyle
Introduction
Subglottic stenosis (Figure 28.1) can be divided into
two broad categories: congenital and acquired.
The congenital causes of subglottic stenosis account
for a small proportion of the disease. While inflam-
matory diseases such as Wegener 's granulomatosis
are a common cause of subglottic strenosis, a great
many cases of subglottic stenosis are the result of
prolonged endotracheal intubation. In the pediatric
population, incidence rates as high as 24% occurred
during the 1960s in association with prolonged endo-
tracheal intubation. As familiarity with the technique
and advances in the care of the disease progressed,
the incidence of subglottic stenosis cited most com-
monly is 1 –8%, with an incidence less than 1% if
infants weighing less than 1500 g are excluded [1].
Similarly, the incidence in the adult population ranges
from 1% to 8%.
Anatomy
Infant airway anatomy differs from the airway in the
adolescent and adult. When considering the larynx
specifically, four distinctions can be made: (1) the
infant larynx is approximately one-third the size of
the adult larynx; (2) the vocal cords are angled and
the vocal process of the arytenoids comprises a larger
portion of the length of the vocal cords in infants;
(3) the cricoid in infants is located about the fourth
cervical vertebra while in the adult it is roughly at
the sixth vertebral level; and (4) the narrowest por-
tion of the airway in adults is the glottic opening
while in infants it is at the cricoid ring of the sub-
glottis. Various tissues in the infant, in general, seem
to have more elasticity than in the adult. It is this
increased elasticity in association with less fibrous
tissue and the airway differences noted above that
predispose infants to a greater incidence of airway
narrowing from edema.
Etiology
Congenital causes of subglottic stenosis overwhelm-
ingly occur in utero and result from malformation of
the cricoid cartilage. The diagnosis is considered to be
congenital if the patient has not had a history of
endotracheal intubation and has an absence of other
potential causes of stenosis. Severe conditions typic-
ally present during childhood, while milder forms can
present in adolescence or even in adult life.
Acquired forms of subglottic stenosis most com-
monly occur from trauma to airway tissue, with 90 –
95% a result of endotracheal intubation. The factors
that are consistently cited as causative include the
duration of intubation, the size of the endotracheal
tube, frequent manipulation of the endotracheal tube,
and repeated intubations, with the duration of intub-
ation being the most important factor. While reports
of severe injury have been reported in periods less
than 24 hours, a 7 –10-day period of endotracheal
intubation in the ICU is considered acceptable, with
increasing potential for injury beyond that time
frame. A variety of other factors can also contribute
to the formation of subglottic stenosis as shown in
Table 28.1.
Pathophysiology
As mentioned previously, the main cause of acquired
subglottic stenosis is prolonged endotracheal intub-
ation. The use of a tube too large for the airway, a
tube with an overinflated cuff, or a tube surrounded
by an edematous airway can lead to mucosal
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
263
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012compression. Persistent compression leads to ische-
mia, and ultimately ulceration. This ulceration poten-
tially leads to perichondritis and chondritis, which
after healing by secondary intention results in scar
tissue and weakened cartilage [2].
Gastroesophageal reflux disease is well known not
only for its debilitating effects on the esophagus, but
also for its role in many respiratory disease processes.
Many patients with subglottic stenosis have a coexist-
ing history of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Not
only has it been implicated as the causal source of
subglottic stenosis in those patients presenting with-
out a history of endotracheal intubation, but it also
may be the cause of restenosis after laryngotracheal
reconstruction/repair (LTR) [2].
Figure 28.1. Examples of laryngotracheal stenosis. Treatment may involve expectant management, laser excision of the lesion, dilatation
using a rigid bronchoscope or high-pressure inflatable balloon, and tracheal reconstruction. Reused from http://upload.wikimedia.org/
wikipedia/commons/d/de/Laryngotracheal_stenosis_001.jpg, author rncantab under a Creative Commons license.
Table 28.1. Factors that contribute to the formation of
subglottic stenosis
Iatrogenic causes
Past surgery
Radiotherapy
Tracheostomy
Autoimmune diseases
Polychondritis
Sarcoidosis
Wegener's
granulomatosis
Bacterial conditions
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
Neoplasms
External injury
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
264
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Disease classification
While subglottic stenosis (or laryngotracheal stenosis,
to use the broader term) can affect all age groups,
most experts differentiate the disease and its process
based on a pediatric or adult presentation. The same
is true for classifying the disease. Myer et al. [3]
revised the original Cotton grading system for assess-
ing severity of pediatric laryngotracheal stenosis. The
system uses endotracheal size as a measure of airway
diameter. Comparing the largest-size endotracheal
tube that permits an audible leak pressure between
10 cm and 25 cm in an age-matched pediatric patient
with and without the disease is how the stenotic
percentage is calculated [3]. It consists of four grades:
grade 1 is no obstruction to 50% obstruction, grade
2 is 51% obstruction to 70% obstruction, grade 3 is
71% obstruction to 99% obstruction, and grade 4 is
no detectable lumen. While this system is a useful tool
to assess the grade of subglottic severity and to predict
the success rate of decannulation of pediatric trache-
ostomy patients, it does have limitations. The system
probably has less value as a prognostic indicator in
patients with multiple sites of airway disease, or
with airway inflammation, or in the case of trauma
from multiple intubation attempts [3]. Using cross-
sectional area as a guide to consistently determine
successful decannulation in the adult population is
challenging at best, and therefore the McCaffrey
system [4] for adults was created.
Defining treatment success as time to decannula-
tion, McCaffrey collected data on age, sex, etiology,
site of stenosis, length of stenosis, diameter of sten-
osis, and the surgical technique. Of these, only site
and diameter of the stenosis had independent effects
on the time to decannulation [4]. Based on this find-
ing, he developed the four-stage system used to clas-
sify adult laryngotracheal stenosis. Stage 1 lesions are
confined to the subglottis or trachea and are less than
1 cm, stage 2 lesions are subglottic stenoses longer
than 1 cm within the cricoid ring and not extending
to the glottis or trachea, stage 3 lesions are subglottic
stenoses that extend into the upper trachea but do not
involve the glottis, and stage 4 lesions involve the
glottis and cause fixation or paralysis of one or both
of the vocal cords.
Surgical management
No definitive medical therapies have been found to
treat the disease process found in subglottic stenosis.
Steroids and antibiotics have been shown to limit the
extent of granulation tissue in animal studies, but
exact doses and duration of treatment in humans is
unknown. Underlying medical causes (such as infec-
tious or inflammatory causes) should be treated.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease should also be aggres-
sively treated to aid positive surgical results as well as
to minimize potential restenosis that can occur
following surgical repair. Ultimately, surgical correc-
tion is the definitive therapy.
Initial surgical approaches typically consist of
endoscopic procedures, especially for mild disease.
Two of the more common endoscopic procedures
performed are dilatation and/or use of a carbon
dioxide laser. Either procedure can be performed
with or without the use of steroids or mitomycin
therapy. Mitomycin, an antineoplastic agent, limits
fibroblast growth and activity. It ideally aids endo-
scopic results by minimizing scar reformation.
Severer forms of subglottic stenosis require a more
invasive approach to treatment, namely open surgical
reconstruction.
While various forms of reconstruction exist, there
are four main procedures (each with multiple vari-
ations): (1) anterior cricoid split; (2) a single-stage
approach using auricular, costal, or thyroid cartilage;
(3) a multistage procedure involving various combin-
ations of anterior and posterior cartilaginous grafting
and stenting; and (4) cricotracheal resection. Of
these, laryngotracheal reconstruction and cricotra-
cheal resection are the procedures more routinely
performed. The goal and measure of success of open
surgical procedures is the decannulation rate. While a
logical conclusion of which surgical procedure to use
would be the one that offers the highest decannula-
tion rate, no studies to date have compared matched
patients to each of the surgical procedures. Laryngo-
tracheal reconstruction has the advantage of being
less invasive, but they have similar decannulation
rates in patients with severe forms of subglottic
stenosis (severe grade 3 and grade 4). Despite this
observation, cricotracheal resection is typically the
preferred surgical option for patients with severe
grade 3 or grade 4 stenosis while laryngotracheal
reconstruction is chosen for grade 2 and less severe
grade 3 patients. The rationale is that while the decan-
nulation rates are similar with severe stenosis and
LTR is a less invasive procedure, comparatively more
patients treated with LTR require a second surgery to
achieve decannulation [1].
Chapter 28: Anesthesia for the management of subglottic stenosis and tracheal resection
265
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Use of stents
While the first reports of the use of airway stents were
in 1915 and concerned stents made of rubber, the first
mainstream stents were made of silicone. Today, stent
selection includes not only silicone, but also self-
expanding metal stents. Newer stent design allows
stents to be retrievable, which is a very attractive
feature for benign airway disease in particular. Sili-
cone stents are easier to remove, and resist tumor
ingrowth and granulation tissue accumulation. The
disadvantages of using them are the potential for stent
migration and the elimination of mucociliary clear-
ance in the stented segment [5]. Metal stents are
nitinol- or alloy-based. They can be deployed with
smaller sheaths or over flexible bronchoscopes with
minimal impact on mucociliary clearance. These
stents too have the potential for migration, but a
greater disadvantage is an eventual build-up of granu-
lation tissue, particularly on the edges of these stents.
Additional complications of either stent used are
pneumothorax, pneumonitis, empyema, stent frac-
tures, or hemoptysis due to erosion of a stent into
blood vessels.
The airway stents currently used are designed for
use in benign airway disease, preoperatively to restore
airway patency prior to surgical treatment, and for
malignant airway disease prior to chemoradiation,
with malignancy being the most common indication
for their use. The benign airway diseases or problems
for which stents are commonly used are post-lung
transplant strictures, radiation-induced airway sten-
osis, relapsing polychondritis, granulomatous disease
such as Wegener 's, congenital disease, and strictures
from prolonged intubation to name a few. Airway
stents for benign diseases, as mentioned previously,
pose great challenges due to poor long-term patency
due to the build-up of granulation tissue, and as a
consequence patients with benign diseases require
multiple procedures to maintain stent patency. Stud-
ies report the rate of granulation tissue formation on
metal stents to be as high as 18%, while the need for
repeat interventions to maintain airway patency
ranges from 41% to 87% [5,6]. The average functional
life of metal stents is around 12 months [6]. It is
because of these problems that most advocate stent
placement for benign conditions in only a select
group of patients. Selection criteria recommendations
include patients who have failed endoscopic manage-
ment, are medically unsuitable for open procedures,
and are not candidates for T-tube use or for frequent
screening and therapeutic endoscopies.
Anesthetic management
Because managing the airway in these patients is often
associated with great difficulty, collaboration amongst
both the anesthesia and surgical teams should take
place prior to the surgery. Special equipment such as
multiple sizes of endotracheal tubes (ETT) or emer-
gency tracheotomy kits should be readily available.
An anesthetic plan should also be formulated which
takes into account avoidance of airway irritants that
may cause coughing or lead to total airway occlusion.
Preoperative medications to limit or prevent gastro-
esophageal reflux are often given. The decision
whether to premedicate with drugs such as benzodi-
azepines or opiates is controversial. A patient with
imminent total airway occlusion might best be
promptly brought to the operating room without
sedation where equipment and personnel to perform
an emergency surgical airway are available. Alterna-
tively, pharmacologic anxiolysis may improve
respiratory conditions in a patient without airway
obstruction who may have some respiratory com-
promise due to the stress of the perioperative period.
Ultimately, the decision should be made according to
the clinical picture at hand.
Intravenous access typically consists of two per-
ipheral IV lines (one in each upper extremity). If
central venous access is being considered, location of
its placement should be carefully considered, as the
location must avoid compromising the surgical field.
Standard ASA monitors are used. Blood pressure
monitoring is most effectively accomplished with
the use of an arterial line; not only does it provide
continuous blood pressure monitoring, but it also
provides a means for sampling blood in order to assess
oxygenation, ventilation, and any electrolyte abnor-
malities. A left radial arterial line is the preferred site
as confusion about a hypotensive state by inadvertent
surgical compression of the innominate artery can be
avoided. Along the same reasoning, the pulse oximeter
should be placed on the right hand to alert to the
presence of innominate artery compression.
The anesthetic intraoperative course for open sur-
gical correction of this disease can be divided into five
phases: (1) induction and intubation, (2) surgical
dissection, (3) open airway, (4) surgical closure, and
(5) emergence and extubation [7]. Of these, induction
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
266
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and intubation, open airway, and the emergence and
extubation phases present the most challenging por-
tion of the procedure for the anesthesiologist.
One of the main challenges during induction is
establishing an airway in the face of a potentially
severely stenotic airway with the possibility of a total
airway occlusion. Additionally, a confounding compli-
cating factor is the inability to utilize options typically
available in the difficult airway algorithm such as
transtracheal ventilation, tracheostomy, or other sur-
gical airways due to the pathology found in subglottic
stenosis. Based on these findings, an inhalational
induction is sometimes chosen. The advantages of an
inhalational induction are preservation of spontan-
eous ventilation and maintaining a patent airway with
minimal airway irritation (due to the use of sevoflur-
ane or halothane). The disadvantages include a pro-
longed passage through the excitement phase due to
airway narrowing, and hypotension from the deep
inhalational induction levels required for airway
manipulation and intubation [5].
The second technique for induction that is more
commonly used is total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA).
This technique offers a rapid onset of induction and
ease of titration during maintenance of anesthesia,
facilitating smooth emergence and extubation. While
TIVA has the advantage of avoidance of the problems
found with an inhalational induction the technique has
the potential to abolish spontaneous ventilation, poten-
tially leading to total airway obstruction.
Bronchoscopy usually follows induction. Dilatation
of the airway is performed first if the stenotic segment is
roughly 5 cm or less. Serial dilatations are performed
with dilators and pediatric bronchoscopes. Reports of
the use of an esophageal bougie have also been pub-
lished and potentially this may be less traumatic [8].
Following bronchoscopy, the intubation is performed.
Depending upon the location of the lesion, an ETT can
be placed above the lesion or through the lesion with a
small (6 mm outside diameter) ETT if a proximal lesion
is present. A cuffed 6 mm ETT is usually the smallest-
size tube required, but an uncuffed tube may sometimes
be required for severe stenotic lesions. Great care
should be exercised on intubation attempts as tissue
dislodgement, bleeding, and edema can quickly occur.
Once a secure airway is established, maintenance of
anesthesia usually consists of a TIVA approach. While
excessive use of narcotics should be avoided in order to
obtain prompt extubation at the conclusion of the sur-
gery, propofol combined with remifentanil works well
for producing amnesia and providing intraoperative
pain relief. An intermediate-acting muscle relaxant
can be used sparingly throughout the case to prevent
inadvertent patient movement, which is especially
important during the open airway portion of the pro-
cedure. The open airway portion of the procedure poses
the second major concern for the anesthesiologist. Gas
exchange during this portion can be performed in one
of four ways: (1) jet ventilation, (2) distal tracheal
intubation and intermittent positive pressure ventila-
tion, (3) spontaneous ventilation, and (4) cardiopul-
monary bypass.
Multiple case reports have been written on the use
of high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV) for tracheal
resection. The jet ventilation catheter is inserted
through the ETT and passed into the distal trachea.
Some of the advantages reported for HFJV are a
simple approach to airway management, a surgical
field unobstructed by the ETT, adequate control of
gas exchange, and continuous gas flow coming out of
the trachea [9]. One of the major risk factors of HFJV
is barotrauma, and great care must be taken to limit
excessive intrathoracic pressures. An additional draw-
back is the potential for hypercarbia due to
hypoventilation.
The distal tracheal intubation technique is prob-
ably the most common method of ventilating during
the open airway phase of the surgery. With this tech-
nique, the ETT is pulled back above the lesion (if not
already in that location), and the distal trachea is
intubated with a new ETT sterilely inserted by the
surgeon. The tip of this tube rests in the trachea in
high and mid-tracheal lesions, whereas for low trach-
eal or carinal lesions the tip can be placed in either
mainstem bronchus, allowing one lung ventilation.
Prior to anastomosis, the trachea must again be
intubated. Reintubation typically consists of the sur-
geon pulling either the proximal ETT or a new one
into the trachea past the anastomotic site.
Only a couple of reports have been published
which document spontaneously breathing patients
throughout the procedure. Two reports were of
patients who were endotracheally intubated above
the lesion and allowed to breathe spontaneously with
oxygen flowing through the endotracheal tube. The
other was a patient with a patent tracheal stoma
allowed to breathe spontaneously with oxygen
delivered through a catheter passed through the
stoma [6]. Currently, novel approaches are being
described and used in clinical practice making use of
Chapter 28: Anesthesia for the management of subglottic stenosis and tracheal resection
267
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012cervical epidural anesthesia. The epidural in these
patients not only allows a patient to breath spontan-
eously throughout the case, but the patients are also
awake for the airway surgery [10].
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and extracorpor-
eal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) have both been
described and used for tracheal surgery. They allow
gas exchange while completely bypassing the stenotic
lesion. While CPB can be a life-saving maneuver as a
last resort for near or total tracheal occlusion, the
potential risk of excessive bleeding due to anticoagu-
lation requirements is present. Tracheal resection can
therefore be done completely under CPB or only to
establish an airway on induction [11,12].
Extubation at the conclusion of the procedure is
most often the goal due to the potential for stress and
potential disruption of the anastomosis from mech-
anical ventilation. Additionally, prolonged intubation
is not only a common cause of subglottic stenosis, it
also can predispose to an increased restenosis rate,
which is another reason for early extubation. The
neck is usually placed in flexion during the closure
and a chin stitch placed. Maintaining this position
during emergence is important as well as reminding
the patient during emergence and after extubation to
keep the neck flexed. Although the absence of signifi-
cant airway swelling should be assessed prior to extu-
bation by noting an air leak with ETT cuff deflation, it
can still be present. Airway swelling can be temporar-
ily treated by elevating the head of the bed until a
more definitive treatment with racemic epinephrine
can be obtained. Immediately following extubation,
hearing the patient speak is important in order to
exclude potential unilateral or bilateral recurrent
nerve injury.
Postoperative management
Because the immediate postoperative period is such a
tenuous time in terms of airway compromise for these
patients, they are typically admitted to the intensive
care unit (ICU) for postoperative management. While
the goal for the majority of these patients is prompt
extubation, concerns over airway edema or the need
for continued ventilator support may warrant mech-
anical means of controlling the airway beyond that
done in the operating room. This can be in the form
of a small endotracheal tube, tracheostomy tube, or a
T-tube. Regardless of the presentation to the ICU, all
of these patients are started on humidified oxygen in
an attempt to minimize the risk of anastomotic
disruption.
Potential complications of tracheal surgery are
numerous, and can be found in Table 28.2. The need
for reintubation because of any of these complications
poses a serious problem. If required, an uncuffed
6 mm ETT is a reasonable first option, and care
should be taken to avoid disruption of the anasto-
mosis. While direct laryngoscopy may be possible,
fiberoptic intubation is likely to be a better choice.
Once reintubated, visualization of the tip of the ETT
below the anastomosis should be verified.
Summary
While tracheal resection for subglottic stenosis has a
relatively low occurrence rate, appropriate planning
must be undertaken for those few surgeries. A well-
thought-out anesthetic plan involves not only the
anesthesiologist but also close collaboration and com-
munication with the surgeon throughout the entire
perioperative period. While this is true of most sur-
geries it is even more of a reality during these surger-
ies due to abnormal anatomy, potential for loss of the
airway, and because the airway is shared by both
anesthesiologist and surgeon. The main goals for the
anesthesia provider during these cases should be
having a variety of options for gaining and maintain-
ing control of the airway, providing adequate anes-
thesia while maximizing surgical field exposure, and
being able to extubate the patient at the end of the
procedure.
Table 28.2. Complications of tracheal surgery
Mucus plug occlusion
Wound infection or abscess formation
Granulation tissue formation
Bleeding/hematoma
Subcutaneous emphysema
Pneumothorax and/or pneumomediastinum
Stent problems (e.g., migration, breakage)
Re-formation of stenosis
Injury to recurrent or superior laryngeal nerves
Airway obstruction
Death
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
268
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Case study
The patient was a 33-year-old woman, 60 kg and
170 cm tall, who had suffered from Wegener 's gran-
ulomatosis for almost a decade. Complications from
the condition included structural damage to the nose
(chondritis), past periods of renal insufficiency, as
well as tracheal stenosis. Treatment included prednis-
one and cyclophosphamide.
The nose had previously been repaired using a
bone graft while the trachea had been dilated a
number of times previously. Each time when her
breathing became difficult again she would be
brought to the operating room for dilatation. Here,
standard monitors were applied, followed by induc-
tion of anesthesia with propofol, fentanyl, midazolam
and rocuronium. A size 5.0 ID MLT endotracheal
tube was inserted effortlessly and positive-pressure
ventilation with air/oxygen was achieved without dif-
ficulty. For maintenance of anesthesia the patient
received TIVA, consisting of propofol 500 mg and
remifentanil 1 mg mixed in a 60 ml syringe, starting
at around 100 mg/kg/min of propofol. The surgeon
than placed a suspension laryngoscope and removed
the ETT while the patient was ventilated using the jet
ventilation adapter to the suspension laryngoscope.
The chest was seen to rise appropriately with each
breath (30 psi of driving pressure in an initial pattern
of 1 second on – 3 seconds off). Using the suspension
laryngoscope and a long knife, the surgeon then made
radial cuts through the stenosis, followed by balloon
dilatation and the application of mitomycin.
Following this the patient was reversed and allowed
to wake up from anesthesia using an anesthesia face
mask. Postoperatively she described her breathing as
“much better ”.
Two years later, the patient returned again with
severe tracheal stenosis, but this time she had become
refractory to the above previously successful proced-
ure due to excessive scarring. A decision was thus
made to perform a formal tracheal resection (excision
of the involved tracheal segments).
This time general anesthesia was induced as
above, and an MLT size 4 ETT was inserted orally
deep into the trachea, passing through the tracheal
resection site and ending up with the tip immediately
above the carina. A radial arterial line was inserted.
The surgeon began exposing the trachea. When the
tracheal incision was performed, the ETT cuff was
deflated and the ETT retracted back above the
incision site, then left in place. A transfield reinforced
ETT size 5 was then inserted into the distal trachea.
When the resection was completed and the end-to-
end anastomosis was near completion, the transfield
ETT was removed, and the original tube was pushed
down the trachea under direct vision to its original
position. The tracheal anastomosis was then com-
pleted. At all critical times the patient was ventilated
with 100% oxygen, while at other times the oxygen
levels were kept in the 30 –40% range to reduce the
chance of an airway fire. For the most part, scissors
and blades were used to accomplish the tracheal resec-
tion, although when bleeding was anticipated or
encountered electrocautery was used with the above-
noted fire precautions. At the end of the surgery the
patient was woken up very gently, and then extubated.
She was then admitted to PACU for a standard recov-
ery, and then to a step-down unit specialized in man-
aging airway patients.
Clinical pearls
/C15Many patients with subglottic stenosis without a
history of endotracheal intubation have a history
of gastroesophageal reflux disease causing the
subglottic stenosis; this also may be the cause of
restenosis after laryngotracheal reconstruction.
/C15Silicone stents are easier to remove, and resist
tumor ingrowth and granulation tissue
accumulation. The disadvantages of using them
are the potential for stent migration and the
elimination of mucociliary clearance in the stented
segment.
/C15Metal stents can be deployed via flexible
bronchoscopes and have minimal impact on
mucociliary clearance. These too have the
potential for migration, but a greater disadvantage
is an eventual build-up of granulation tissue.
/C15Patients with tracheal or subglottic stenosis are
usually not difficult to mask ventilate (in the
absence of other causes of the same) once general
anesthesia is induced and a muscle relaxant has
been administered.
/C15Multiple sizes of endotracheal tubes (ETT) and
emergency tracheotomy kits should be readily
available in managing tracheal stenosis patients.
/C15A left radial arterial line is the preferred site
because inadvertent surgical compression of the
innominate artery will produce false pressure
readings in the right arm. Similarly, the pulse
Chapter 28: Anesthesia for the management of subglottic stenosis and tracheal resection
269
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012oximeter should be placed on the right hand to
alert to the presence of innominate artery
compression.
/C15During the open airway portion of tracheal
resection, gas exchange can be performed in one
of four ways: (1) jet ventilation, (2) distal tracheal
intubation and intermittent positive pressure
ventilation, (3) spontaneous ventilation, and
(4) cardiopulmonary bypass.
/C15Extubation at the end of the procedure is most
often the goal to avoid the potential disruption of
the anastomosis from mechanical ventilation. The
neck is usually placed in flexion during the closure
and a chin stitch placed to maintain this position
during emergence and after extubation as well.
/C15Postoperatively these patients are typically
admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for
postoperative management.
References
1. Hartley BEJ, Cotton RT. Pediatric
airway stenosis: laryngotracheal
reconstruction or cricotracheal
resection? Clin Otolaryngol
2000;25:342–9.
2. Eid EA. Anesthesia for subglottic
stenosis in pediatrics. Saudi
J Anaesth 2009;3(2):77–82.
3. Myer CM 3rd, O 'Connor DM,
Cotton RT. Proposed grading
system for subglottic stenosis
based on endotracheal tube sizes.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
1994;103(4 Pt 1):319 –23.
4. McCaffrey TV. Classification of
laryngotracheal stenosis.
Laryngoscope 1992;102:1335–40.
5. Walser, EM. Stent placement for
tracheobronchial disease. Eur
J Rad 2005;55:321–30.
6. Eller RL, Livingston WJ 3rd,
Morgan CE, et al . Expandable
tracheal stenting for benign
disease: worth the complications?
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
2006;115(4):247–52.
7. Sandberg W. Anesthesia and
airway management for tracheal
resection and reconstruction.
Int Anesthesiol Clin 2000;38(1):
55–75.
8. Pinsonneault C, Fortier J,
Donati F. Tracheal resection and
reconstruction. Can J Anesth
1999;46(5):439–55.
9. Magnusson L, Lang FJW,
Monnier P, Ravussin P.
Anaesthesia for tracheal resection:
report of 17 cases. Can J Anaesth
1997;44(12):1282–5.
10. Macchiarini P, Rovira I, Ferrarello
S. Awake upper airway surgery.
Ann Thorac Surg 2010;89:387–91.
11. Chiu CL, Teh BT, Wang CY.
Temporary cardiopulmonary
bypass and isolated lung
ventilation for tracheal stenosis
and reconstruction. Br J Anaesth
2003;91(5):742–4.
12. DeWitt RC, Hallman CH. Use of
cardiopulmonary bypass for
tracheal resection: a case report.
Tex Heart Inst J 2004;31(2):188–90.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
270
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:41:08 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.031
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 4
Chapter
29
Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
Anesthesia for otologic and
neurotologic surgery
Vladimir Nekhendzy
Introduction
Ear surgery can be organized around two broad cat-
egories: otologic and neurotologic surgery; some of the
most commonly performed procedures are summar-
ized in Table 29.1. Over the last decade, the patient
outcomes after otologic and neurotologic surgery
have become favorably affected by a plethora of tech-
nological advances, such as the introduction of high-
magnification operating microscopes, the use of
powered instrumentation with integrated irrigation-
suction capability, the use of sophisticated endoscopic
and navigation image-guided surgery, and improved
intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring [1 –3].
Otologic and neurotologic surgery is performed
for a wide spectrum of disorders, including congenital
malformations, and infectious, traumatic, and neo-
plastic diseases. Patients of both sexes are equally
affected, and the surgical procedures span across
all age groups. However, the young adult patient
population (aged 18–65 years old) tends to predomin-
ate [2,4].
This chapter focuses on the fundamental prin-
ciples and details of anesthesia management of adult
patients presenting for selected, most common otolo-
gic and neurotologic surgical procedures, such as
middle ear surgery, skull base surgery, resection of
acoustic neuroma, and cochlear implantation. Signifi-
cant overlap in such principles exists for both otologic
and neurotologic surgery, and knowledge of such
principles by the anesthesiologist can help greatly in
caring for such patients and may positively impact
their outcomes.
Surgical considerations
Otologic surgical procedures [2,5–7]
Most otologic surgical procedures are performed via
either a transcanal approach (through the natural
meatus of the external ear), a retroauricular incision,
or a combination of the two.
Depending on the extent of the disease, surgery
involving the external auditory canal may require
additional resection of adjacent tissues and skin
grafting; graft may be harvested from the retroauri-
cular region, the inner aspect of the patient 's arm, or
from the hip or thigh. Middle ear procedures are
usually undertaken to control recurrent or chronic
ear infections. A simple myringotomy is most com-
monly performed in pediatric patients, while myrin-
goplasty involves the repair of a persistent tympanic
Table 29.1. Categories of ear surgery, and most commonly
performed surgical procedures
Otologic surgery Neurotologic surgery
External auditory canal
Exostoses resection
Ear canal reconstruction
(canalplasty)
Temporal bone
Limited and radical
resection
Middle ear
Myringotomy/
myringoplasty
Tympanoplasty
Mastoidectomy/
tympanomastoidectomy
Stapes surgery
Ossicular chain
reconstruction
Cranial nerves, skull base,
cranial fossae
Restoration of facial
nerve function
Glomus tumors
Acoustic neuromas
Dural defects surgery
Inner ear
Labyrinthectomy
Endolymphatic sac
surgery
Restoration of hearing
Bone-anchored hearing
aids (BAHA)
Cochlear implantation
Auditory brainstem
implantation
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
271
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012membrane (TM) perforation, usually using autolo-
gous graft. Combined with repair of chronic middle
ear changes, the latter procedure is termed a
tympanoplasty.
A simple mastoidectomy, performed for removing
loculated infection and diseased tissue from the
air-filled cavities of the mastoid bone, is often com-
bined with tympanoplasty (tympanomastoidectomy)
to address the changes from chronic infection. This
represents the standard surgical approach for resec-
tion of a cholesteatoma, a keratin-containing epithe-
lial cyst originating from the TM that has grown into
the middle ear and mastoid cavity. When the poster-
ior bony wall of the external auditory canal is left
in place to keep the mastoid cavity anatomically sep-
arated from the external auditory canal, the procedure
is called a canal-wall-up tympanomastoidectomy. In
contrast, a canal-wall-down tympanomastoidectomy,
performed for more aggressive disease, exteriorizes
the mastoid cavity into the external auditory canal.
The complete removal of mastoid and middle
ear contents is frequently referred to as a radical
mastoidectomy.
Ossicular chain reconstruction involves rebuilding
or replacing the bones of hearing (malleus, incus, and
stapes) with either the patient 's own tissues, or with
alloplastic prostheses, and may be performed either in
conjunction with other tympanomastoid surgery, or
as an independent procedure. A stapedectomy (stape-
dotomy) is typically performed in patients suffering
from otosclerosis that has resulted in the progressive
fixation of the stapes to the surrounding bone and
conducting hearing loss; the stapes is replaced by a
prosthesis to restore more normal continuity of
sound conduction.
Neurotology and skull base surgery [2,8–10]
The skull base can be divided into anterior, middle,
and posterior fossae, and is formed by the frontal,
ethmoid, sphenoid, temporal, and occipital bones.
The term skull base surgery can be viewed as a mis-
nomer, as the majority of lesions treated are located
adjacent to the brainstem and not intrinsic to the skull
base itself. Neurotologists primarily deal with lesions
in the posterior fossa, which is bordered by the clivus
(anterior), temporal bone (lateral), and occipital bone
(posterior) (Figure 29.1). Removal of the skull base
bone allows exposure to these lesions while minimiz-
ing cerebral and cerebellar retraction.
Vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas)
are removed via three surgical approaches: translabyr-
inthine, retrosigmoid, and middle fossa. The
translabyrinthine approach uses a post-auricular inci-
sion to access the temporal bone (Figure 29.2).
Retraction of the temporal lobe and cerebellum is
minimized as the entire mastoid and labyrinth is
removed to create access. This approach results in
complete sensorineural hearing loss and is most
commonly used in patients with large tumors and/or
non-salvageable hearing. In other cases, a hearing-
conservation approach (retrosigmoid or middle fossa)
to the tumors is usually chosen. The retrosigmoid
(suboccipital) approach uses a more posterior crani-
otomy between the sigmoid and transverse sinuses;
the cerebellum is retracted posteriorly away from the
petrous face of the temporal bone (Figure 29.3). Dis-
advantages include the need for rigid skull fixation
(e.g., Mayfield head frame), the increased incidence
of postoperative headache, and a somewhat higher
incidence of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. The
middle fossa approach places the craniotomy above
the ear and requires superior retraction of the tem-
poral lobe (Figure 29.4). This approach has the
highest rate of hearing conservation, but can only be
used in smaller tumors without increasing the risk of
postoperative facial palsy. The anatomy of the middle
cranial fossa is variable, dural elevation can be diffi-
cult, and full appreciation of the three-dimensional
anatomy of the temporal bone by the surgeon
is crucial.
Another commonly approached area in neurotol-
ogy is the jugular foramen (JF), which lies at the
junction of the petrous apex and occipital bone.
Glomus jugulare tumors originating in this region
are highly vascular, and patients undergo preopera-
tive embolization before surgery. A lateral
transjugular craniotomy, which is similar to the trans-
labyrinthine approach, exposes the entire jugular
fossa and involves resection of the involved sigmoid
sinus and jugular vein (Figure 29.5). In addition, a
limited neck dissection is performed in order to gain
proximal vascular control of the jugular vein and
carotid artery.
Cochlear implantation is an option to address
severe or profound inner ear hearing loss ( “sensori-
neural hearing loss ”). During implantation, a retro-
auricular incision and mastoidectomy are performed
to provide a pathway for device placement into the
inner ear. A receiver-stimulator is placed under the
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
272
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012skin behind the ear, and a flexible electrode array is
threaded into the turns of the cochlea to later be used
for stimulating the cochlear nerve directly, thereby
bypassing the dysfunctional inner ear. The devices
are usually activated several weeks following place-
ment, at which time hearing function is expected to
increase.
Intraoperative complications [2,7,11]
Although the internal carotid artery and jugular bulb
pass through the middle ear (Figure 29.6), significant
vascular injury happens infrequently, and most if not
all bleeding can be readily controlled acutely with
packing within the surgical field. An internal carotid
artery (ICA) injury may require additional neurora-
diologic or neurosurgical intervention; however, clin-
ically significant hemorrhage is rare, and can usually
be avoided with prompt packing.
Venous injury, such as laceration of the sigmoid
sinus during mastoidectomy, can usually be controlled
using bone wax or with other hemostatic materials held
with pressure against the site of bleeding. The walls of
the sigmoid sinus are non-collapsible, and extensive
surgical intervention aimed at obliteration of the sinus
both above and below the laceration may be required if
bleeding is severe. In the case of a large venous injury, a
venous air embolism can potentially result, and timely
communication between the surgical and anesthesia
teams can facilitate its identification and treatment.
The temporal bone abuts the dura of the middle
fossa above, and the posterior fossa behind, and dural
violation may happen either as the result of path-
ology, from dissection of adjacent tissues, or due to
direct dural trauma caused by indiscriminate cauter-
ization of the dural vessels, or the use of the otologic
drills. When this occurs, the surgeon can usually close
the defect and control the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
leak using autologous tissues, and administration of a
7,8
PA
IAC
CO
GG
ME
EAC
M
SSC
CPA
SS
4V
Cb
P
Cl
Figure 29.1. An axial view of the skull through the level of the
internal auditory canal and cerebellopontine angle [2]. 5, Trigeminal
nerve; 7, facial nerve; 8, audiovestibular nerve; PA, petrous apex; IAC,
internal auditory canal; CO, cochlea; GG, geniculate ganglion of the
facial nerve; ME, middle ear; EAC, external auditory canal; M, mastoid
air cell system; SCC, semicircular canals; CPA, cerebellopontine
angle; SS, sigmoid sinus; 4V, fourth ventricle; Cl, clivus; P, pons;
Cb, cerebellum. Reproduced with permission from: Jackler RK. Atlas of
Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery . St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book: 1996.
my self Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.
B
A
F
D
C
E
Figure 29.2. Typical left translabyrinthine posterior fossa
craniotomy exposure of a medium-sized tumor [2]. Inferiorly, the
lower cranial nerves (A) are visible and the jugular bulb (B) has been
identified. Troughs have been drilled above and below the IAC, and
the dura (C) has been reflected off the tumor surface. The sigmoid
sinus (D) and cerebellum are gently retracted posteriorly. The
trigeminal nerve (E) is located superiorly. The facial nerve (F) takes a
variable and often serpentine course across the medial side of the
tumor. Reproduced with permission from: Jackler RK. Atlas of
Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book: 1996.
my self Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
273
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Valsalva maneuver may be requested to check the
integrity of the repair.
General considerations and anesthesia
objectives
The density and complexity of the microanatomy of
the middle ear and the temporal bone (Figure 29.6)
dictate the extremely delicate nature (and prolonged
duration) of many otologic/neurotologic procedures,
and hence many of the anesthetic requirements [2,5].
The essential requirements for precision otologic
and neurotologic surgery include a clear, dry surgical
field, absence of patient movement, preservation of
facial/cranial nerve function, and non-stimulating
emergence from anesthesia [2,4,5,7,12,13].
Maintenance of clear surgical field is extremely
important in the majority of cases, as even a small
amount of bleeding can have a significant impact
on intraoperative exposure [2,12,13]. In addition to
maintenance of controlled hypotension by the anesthe-
siologist (see “Anesthesia induction and maintenance”
in “Anesthetic management of otologic surgical proced-
ures” section), mixtures of local anesthetic-epinephrine
containing solutions (e.g., 1% lidocaine with 1:100 000
epinephrine) are commonly used by the surgeon to
improve hemostasis and facilitate quiet surgical field
[2,7]. The anesthesiologist should be made aware of
such use, and closely observe (and treat, where appro-
priate) the ensuing patient hemodynamic responses.
Smooth emergence from anesthesia, devoid of
bucking and/or coughing on the in situ endotracheal
tube (ETT) is necessary, and is essential after recon-
structive surgery of the middle or inner ear, facial
nerve, or closure of cranial base/dural defects [2,4].
Avoidance of protracted straining or retching associ-
ated with postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV)
is equally critical in that regard, and adequate
pharmacological PONV prophylaxis should be rou-
tine [2,4,12,13].
Intraoperative patient positioning
Postauricular or temporal surgical incision is used, with
possible extension into the neck for GT, as discussed
above [2]. For the majority of the otologic and neuro-
tologic procedures, the patient is positioned supine,
with the head turned 45 /C14 away from the side of the
surgery. Extreme rotation of the patient 's head should
be avoided, especially in elderly patients and those
with cervical spine disease [4]. If necessary, a small roll
placed under the shoulder on the side of the surgery can
further facilitate surgical exposure. Once positioned,
the patient's head is not usually moved until the surgery
has been completed. Mayfield rigid fixation is used in
retrosigmoid craniotomies or for very large tumors
extending towards the brain stem [2].
The operating room (OR) table is typically turned
180/C14 away from the anesthesiologist, to allow for
the use of the operating microscope and to facilitate
unrestricted access of the surgical team to the surgical
field. As a result, immediate access to the patient 's
head becomes difficult or impossible for the anesthe-
siologist. The dedicated artificial airway must be dili-
gently taped, and all the anesthesia circuit connections
must be checked to prevent accidental disconnection
under the surgical drapes. Steep lateral OR table rota-
tion is frequently used intraoperatively, and the
patient's body must be securely strapped. The patient's
SS
PSCC
VA
ESJB
10 9
8 5
T
e
n
t
o
r
i
u
m
7
F1Ch
Cerebellum
BS
IIC
IIS
JV
CC
SSCC
Co
PA
S
VI
V
Figure 29.3. Anatomical relationships of the cerebellopontine
angle shown through a retrosigmoid posterior fossa craniotomy [2].
JV, jugular vein; JB, jugular bulb; SS, sigmoid sinus; 11S, spinal
component of the accessory nerve; 11C, cranial component of the
accessory nerve; 10, vagus nerve; 9, glossopharyngeal nerve; Ch,
choroid plexus emanating from the lateral recess of the fourth
ventricle; F1, flocculus; BS, brainstem surface (pons); 5, trigeminal
nerve; 7, facial nerve; 8, audiovestibular nerve; PA, porus acousticus;
IV, inferior vestibular nerve; SV, superior vestibular nerve; ES,
endolymphatic sac; VA, vestibular aqueduct; PSCC, posterior
semicircular canal; CC, common crus; SSCC, superior semicircular
canal; Co, cochlea. Reproduced with permission from: Jackler RK.
Atlas of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery . St. Louis:
Mosby-Year Book: 1996. my self Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
274
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Figure 29.4. Middle fossa exposure of a
small right-sided tumor [2]. The retractor
is engaged over the posterior lip of the
petrous bone and retracts the temporal
lobe. Bone has been removed around
the IAC, and the dura has been opened
to expose the tumor. The facial nerve
typically courses across the superior
aspect of the tumor surface. Reproduced
with permission from: Jackler RK. Atlas
of Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery .
St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book: 1996.
my self Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.
VA
V
XI
X
IX
Ch
Cb
VII, VIII
F
Figure 29.5. Transjugular craniotomy
illustrating the degree of intracranial
exposure obtained following resection of
the sigmoid-jugular system and wide
opening of the posterior fossa dura [2].
Note the multiple small rootlets of the
lower cranial nerves emanating from the
lateral surface of the medulla. In contrast
to extracranial procedures, the sigmoid
sinus is ligated proximally rather than
packed extralumenally. While this
illustration depicts anterior rerouting of
the facial nerve, this is not necessary in
most intracranial jugular foramen tumors.
The sigmoid sinus has been controlled
with a suture ligature just distal to the
transverse-sigmoid junction. VA, vertebral
artery; F, flocculus; Ch, choroid; Cb,
cerebellum; V, trigeminal nerve; VII, facial
nerve; VIII, audiovestibular nerve; IX,
glossopharyngeal nerve; X, vagus nerve;
XI, accessory nerve. Reproduced with
permission from: Jackler RK. Atlas of
Neurotology and Skull Base Surgery .
St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book: 1996.
my self Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
275
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Semicircular
Canals
Ossicles
Mastoid Air
Cells
Tympanic
Membrane
TC
Internal
Auditory
Canal
Medulla
Eighth
Nerve
Pons
Petrous
Apex
Cochlea
Temporal Lobe
Eustachian
Tube
Jugular
Bulb
Carotid
Artery
Jugular
Vein
(A)
Semicircular
Canals Incus Malleus
Geniculate
Ganglion
Condyle
Eustachian
Tube
Jugular
Bulb
Carotid
Artery
Jugular
Vein
Mastoid
Tip
Endolymphatic
Sac
Facial
Nerve
2’nd
Genu
Sigmoid
Sinus
Greater
Superficial
Petrosal
Nerve
(B)
Figure 29.6. Multiple vital
neurovascular structures interrelate in a
small confined space. These include
the organs of hearing and balance,
the facial nerve, the carotid artery, jugular
vein, sigmoid sinus, and the delicate
mechanisms of the middle ear [2]. (A)
Coronal representation of the anatomy
of the ear and temporal bone TC:
transverse crest. (B) Lateral view of the ear
and temporal bone anatomy following a
simple mastoidectomy. Reproduced with
permission from: Jackler RK, Driscoll
CLW, eds. Tumors of the Ear and
Temporal Bone. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2000. my self
Dr. R. K. Jackler © 2007.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
276
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012pressure points and both arms must be well padded
and secured to prevent any positioning-related com-
plications [2,14], especially in view of the lateral OR
table shifts. The patient 's eyes must be properly pro-
tected to avoid accidental corneal abrasion caused by
heavy instrumentation around the patient 's face.
Immobility of the surgical field
Any intraoperative adjustment of equipment or pos-
ition can have profound consequences during micro-
dissection [2]. Under the microscope, the surgeon 's
attention is fully and continuously directed to the per-
formance of gentle and careful microsurgical dissection,
making it critical to avoid any external motion interfer-
ence with the surgical field [2]. The noninvasive blood
pressure (NIBP) cuff should be positioned on the
patient's arm opposite to the surgeon, to eliminate the
possibility of triggering sudden surgical tremor during
cuff inflation (the pre-induction intravenous (IV) line is
usually secured on the side of the procedure).
Situational awareness is required on the part of
the anesthesiologist at all times to avoid any inadvert-
ent action that may result in accidental movement
of the OR table. The surgeon must be informed of
any plans that may result in patient motion – even
those that would otherwise seem insignificant [2].
Manipulation of OR table control by the anesthesiol-
ogist should be closely coordinated with the surgeon,
who must first steer clear of the surgical field.
Avoidance of any active patient movement consti-
tutes a challenging task. Deeper planes of anesthesia are
frequently required to avoid sudden patient motor
responses, because maintenance of intraoperative
neuromuscular blockade (NMB) is usually contraindi-
cated (see “Anesthesia induction and maintenance” in
“Anesthetic management of otologic surgical proced-
ures” section).
Preservation of facial/cranial nerve function
Intraoperative identification and preservation of the
facial nerve constitutes one of the most important
goals during otologic and neurotologic surgery
[2,5,7,10,11]. The incidence of iatrogenic facial par-
alysis may reach nearly 4%, and can be as high as 10%
during revision cases [11]. Administration of the
NMB agents is best avoided intraoperatively to allow
for adequate neural monitoring (see “Anesthesia
induction and maintenance ” in “Anesthetic manage-
ment of otologic surgical procedures ” section). When
full neurophysiological monitoring is used during
cranial base surgery (e.g., acoustic neuroma resec-
tion), the selected anesthetic technique should also
result in facilitation of such monitoring for best pre-
servation of cranial nerve function (see “Anesthesia
induction and maintenance ” in “Anesthetic manage-
ment of neurotological surgical procedures and skull
base surgery ” section).
The essential anesthetic considerations and
requirements are summarized in Table 29.2.
Anesthetic management of otologic
surgical procedures
Patient preoperative evaluation
and preparation
Adult patients presenting for ear surgery are generally
young and healthy (with the possible exception of
those presenting for cochlear implantation), and
most otologic procedures are performed on an outpa-
tient basis. Presence of significant cardiovascular,
cerebrovascular, and/or chronic renal disease may
preclude the use of controlled hypotension (see
“Anesthesia induction and maintenance ” in “Anes-
thetic management of otologic surgical procedures ”
Table 29.2. Essential anesthesia requirements for otologic
and neurotologic surgery
Maintenance of stable, adequate plane of anesthesia at
all times
Maintenance of moderate controlled hypotension
Secure patient positioning on the OR table (three straps)
Avoidance of iatrogenic external motion interference
with microsurgical dissection
Absence of patient movement
Avoidance of intraoperative neuromuscular blockade
Facilitation of intraoperative monitoring of the facial
nerve/cranial nerves
Smooth emergence from anesthesia, without bucking,
coughing, straining
Rapid awakening, to facilitate early assessment of the
facial/cranial nerve function
Avoidance of postoperative nausea and vomiting
Fast-tracking patients for discharge from the recovery
room, where appropriate
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
277
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012section), which is frequently required intraopera-
tively. Appropriate preoperative laboratory and diag-
nostic studies should be obtained in these patients.
During the preoperative visit, the anesthesiologist
should allow sufficient time to establish rapport with
the patient and the patient's family. Preoperative com-
munication with the patients may be difficult due to
their decreased hearing ability, and written communi-
cation may be required. Patients should be allowed
to wear hearing aids for as long as possible, which must
then be removed before induction of anesthesia
to prevent intraoperative pressure injury to the exter-
nal ear [2]. The hearing aid can be replaced before
emergence to help minimize anxiety and facilitate
communication [4]. The debilitating symptoms of
the primary otologic disease and frequent revision
surgeries may leave a long-standing negative psycho-
logical impact on the patient [5,7] and result in patient
depression, anxiety, and irritability. Although a signifi-
cant number of patients presenting for revision sur-
gery may be taking antidepressant medications
preoperatively [15], chronic ear pain requiring long-
standing analgesic treatment is rare.
Preoperative airway compromise is rarely observed,
with the possible exception of patients presenting with
persistent trismus caused either by involvement of the
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) in the primary disease
process (e.g., malignancies of the temporal bone), or by
post-radiation fibrotic changes involving the TMJ and/
or muscles of mastication.
Conventional and alternative
airway management options
Although some well-motivated patients can undergo
selected, uncomplicated procedures under local
anesthesia with sedation [4], general anesthesia is used
most frequently. Tracheal intubation is most com-
monly performed; however, absent contraindications,
the use of supraglottic airway (SGA) devices and, spe-
cifically, the laryngeal mask airway (LMA; LMA North
America, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) should be given
consideration, and represents the author's first choice.
Prospective randomized studies by Webster et al.
[16] and Atef et al. [17] have shown that LMA use in
endoscopic ENT surgery was associated with better
cardiovascular stability during airway management
on induction and emergence, superior maintenance
of a stable plane of anesthesia and controlled hypo-
tension, improved quality of surgical field, smooth
emergence from anesthesia, and faster awakening
time. Large retrospective studies by Ayala [18] and
Taheri [19] on LMA use in otologic surgery
corroborate these findings, indicating improved
intraoperative hemodynamic stability, reduced usage
of anesthetic drugs, shortened operative time, and
decreased incidence of adverse respiratory events.
Furthermore, the use of the LMA does not require
administration of NMB, facilitates the resumption of
spontaneous ventilation, and is associated with the
decreased likelihood of the airway reflex stimulation
(Table 29.3).
When used appropriately in selected patients, absence
of immediate access to the patient's airway should not be
considered a deviation from the standard of care of the
LMA use in the modern era [4,20]. Selection of the LMA
devices that possess greater ventilating capability and
provide gastric access (e.g., the LMA-Proseal ™,t h e
LMA-Supreme™) will increase the margin of safety (see
“Case study: anesthesia for middle ear surgery” section).
The new SGAs, such as i-gel ™ (Intersurgical Ltd,
Wokingham, Berkshire, UK) and air-Q ™ Cookgas
Table 29.3. Advantages of the laryngeal mask airway (LMA) over the endotracheal tube (ETT)
Adverse event ETT (%) LMA (%) ETT:LMA
Clinically significant problems 3.4 0.9 3.7
Laryngeal spasm 0.38 0.12 3.2
Aspiration 0.017 0.02 0.85
Sore throat 50 10 5
Laryngeal trauma 6.2 ? ( < 1) > 6
Coughing on emergence 60 2 30
Modified from Brimacombe JR, Brain, AJ. The Laryngeal Mask Airway. A Review and Practical Guide . London: Saunders; 1997.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
278
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Intubating Laryngeal Airway (ILA; Mercury Medical,
Clearwater, FL, USA) also show some promise [21–26];
however, their ventilatory performance in prolonged sur-
gical cases awaits formal evaluation.
With the LMA in place, either spontaneous or con-
trolled ventilation can be maintained intraoperatively
[4,16–20]. The author's experience corroborates that of
others [20] that early institution of pressure support
ventilation through the LMA is frequently required
in anesthetized, spontaneously breathing patients.
A combination of anesthesia-induced paradoxical dia-
phragmatic and rib cage movement [27] and increased
patient inspiratory effort frequently results in a rocky
respiratory pattern, which causes motion interference
with the microsurgical dissection. The associated reduc-
tion in tidal volume and changes in intrapulmonary gas
exchange can be further exacerbated by chest wall
restriction due to positioning (chest straps) and deeper
planes of anesthesia (see “Anesthesia induction and
maintenance” in “Anesthetic management of otologic
surgical procedures ” section), resulting in alveolar
hypoventilation, and therefore the use of controlled
ventilation may be preferred from the outset.
If the LMA is used, meticulous attention must be
directed to the confirmation tests of the proper place-
ment of the device, and ensuring the full separation
between the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts
(see section VII, below). Adequacy of the LMA pos-
itioning and effectiveness of controlled ventilation
should be continuously monitored intraoperatively
by observing the expired tidal volume ( Vt), pulse
oximetry and EtCO 2 values, EtCO 2 wave form, total
leak fraction, total compliance, and by visually assess-
ing the flow –volume and pressure –volume loops, if
available. Sudden changes, such as increased leak
fraction, decreased total compliance, and (depending
on the mode of ventilation used) either decreased Vt
or increased peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) will rep-
resent early signs of the lighter planes of anesthesia.
With the LMA use, these changes typically precede
the patient 's hemodynamic and motor responses,
thereby facilitating hypnotic monitoring and allowing
for prompt deepening of anesthesia.
These advantages notwithstanding, future pro-
spective randomized trials are needed to better define
the role of the LMA in otologic surgery. Until then,
the choice about the use of the LMA or the ETT as a
primary ventilatory device will be largely based upon
each individual practitioner 's experience, preference,
and clinical judgment.
Premedication and monitoring
Standard premedication with short-acting benzodi-
azepine (e.g., midazolam) is generally indicated, and
may also decrease the incidence of PONV [28]. Anti-
biotic prophylaxis (e.g., cefazolin) is typically admin-
istered in the majority of cases. Routine monitoring is
usually sufficient, even if controlled hypotension is
used intraoperatively. The use of invasive blood pres-
sure monitoring (A-line) should be dictated by the
patient's medical history. Before induction, tempor-
ary removal of a surgical mask may be needed to
allow patients to lip read the anesthesiologist 's
instructions in the OR [2].
Anesthesia induction and maintenance
Standard IV induction with propofol is used most
often, although there is little evidence to support pro-
pofol's beneficial antiemetic effect if total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA) is not used intraoperativly [29,30].
If general endotracheal anesthesia (GETA) is planned,
a single intubating dose of an intermediate-acting
non-depolarizing NMB (e.g., rocuronium) is usually
inconsequential with regard to the planned intraoper-
ative electromyography (EMG) monitoring of the
facial nerve [2]. In the absence of contraindications,
succinylcholine can also be safely administered for
tracheal intubation. A combination of remifentanil
2 mg/kg IV, propofol 2 mg/kg IV, lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg
IV, and only half of an intubating dose of rocuronium
(0.3 mg/kg) IV can also be used, and will achieve
intubating conditions similar to administration of IV
succinylcholine 1.5 mg/kg [31]. Co-administration of
IV remifentanil bolus 3 –4 mg/kg (or alfentanil
40–60 mg/kg) given over 90 s, and propofol IV bolus
2–2.5 mg/kg, will provide excellent intubating condi-
tions without the need for NMB in the majority of
patients [32–34].
Maintenance of NMB is usually contraindicated
intraoperatively (see “Facial nerve monitoring ”,
below), and sufficiently deep planes of anesthesia are
frequently required to prevent sudden patient move-
ment, which may lead to disastrous consequences
[4,13]. Monitoring of the hypnotic state of anesthesia
(e.g., processed electroencephalogram activity) may
be advisable to maintain adequate anesthetic depth
at all times, especially when TIVA is used. Overly
deep planes of anesthesia may provoke hemodynamic
instability, requiring appropriate volume loading, as
well as judicious use of vasopressors.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
279
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Inhalational anesthesia, balanced inhalational
anesthesia, TIVA, and even “sandwich” propofol-
inhalational anesthetic have all been successfully used
for maintenance [12,35–39]. Compared to other inha-
lational anesthetics, sevoflurane may be preferred for
the outpatient surgery: it improves the quality of
postoperative patient recovery, shortens the discharge
time, is associated with reduced incidence of
coughing and postoperative agitation compared to
desflurane [40,41], and produces less somnolence
and PONV compared to isoflurane [41,42]. However,
Jellish et al. [12] were unable to demonstrate signifi-
cant clinical difference between sevoflurane and des-
flurane during otologic surgery, whereas both drugs
produced better emergence profile compared to
isoflurane. Desflurane appears to cause a greater
systemic and intrapulmonary pro-inflammatory
response than sevoflurane during ear surgery [43],
but clinical significance of this finding awaits further
investigation.
TIVA with propofol and an opioid (most com-
monly, remifentanil or alfentanil) is frequently used
for induction and maintenance of anesthesia for oto-
logic surgery [12,35,37,44 –47]. A propofol-based
anesthetic results in profound depression of pharyn-
geal and laryngeal musculature and reflexes, sup-
presses hormonal stress response to ENT surgical
procedures, and effectively blocks the catecholamine
release and associated hyperdynamic cardiovascular
responses, thereby facilitating maintenance of
induced hypotension (see “Controlled hypotension ”,
below) [35,44,46 –54]. Most prospective studies
demonstrate that, compared to inhalational and bal-
anced inhalational techniques, TIVA offers many
practical advantages, such as superior intraoperative
hemodynamic stability, quicker recovery times,
faster return of cognitive function, decreased inci-
dence of PONV, and improved patient satisfaction
[12,36,37,39,41,44,45,48–51,55–57].
Pain scores associated with otologic surgery are
low [58], and the use of large doses of fentanyl or
highly potent opioids, such as sufentanil, is usually
not warranted with either anesthetic technique. In
the author 's experience, a total intraoperative dose
of fentanyl can be safely limited to 2 –3 mg/kg in the
majority of patients, especially when remifentanil is
used intraoperatively. During TIVA, the full syner-
gistic effect of propofol with rapidly acting opioids,
such as remifentanil or alfentanil, allows quick
titration of anesthetic to the desired clinical effect
[37,39,49,59–61]. Continuous IV infusions of opioids
offer advantages over intermittent boluses, resulting
in decreased total dose, greater hemodynamic stabil-
ity, more rapid recovery of consciousness, less pain in
the immediate postoperative period, and decreased
discharge times from the recovery room [61 –64].
Remifentanil has been shown superior to both fenta-
nyl [65] and alfentanil [37,39,42,46] in promoting
intraoperative hemodynamic stability, improving
respiratory and general patient recovery, and facili-
tating patient discharge after outpatient surgery
[42,66–69]. The recommended induction doses are
remifentanil IV bolus 0.5 –2 mg/kg and IV bolus
dose of propofol 1 –2 mg/kg, followed by continuous
maintenance infusions of propofol 80 –200 mg/kg/min
and remifentanil 0.1 –0.5 mg/kg/min [35,37,46,49,
55,61,65]. At times, remifentanil infusion rates as high
as 1.0 mg/kg/min have been used without untoward
sequela [39]. Commonly used doses of alfentanil
are IV induction bolus 20 –30 mg/kg, followed by con-
tinuous maintenance infusion 0.25 –1 mg/kg/min
[37,42,46,64].
Compared to conventional weight-based manual
infusions, target controlled infusions (TCI) allow
easier and more rapid titration of anesthetic drugs
to the individual patient 's responses, therefore
avoiding overshoot, improving the time course of
the drug effects, facilitating perioperative hemody-
namic control [70 –72], and possibly improving the
recovery profile after otologic surgery [73]. Targeting
propofol concentration 3 –3.5 mg/ml and remifentanil
concentration 2 –5 ng/ml should probably be suffi-
cient for the majority of otherwise young (age 18 –65
years) and healthy (ASA I –II) patients during the
maintenance stage of anesthesia, especially if the
LMA is used [64,70,73 –76].
The use of nitrous oxide (N 2O) should be discour-
aged, especially during revision otologic surgery, as it
may not only interfere with the graft placement, but
also provoke graft dislodgement and even disarticula-
tion of stapes upon N 2O discontinuation [4,13,77].
A recent ENIGMA trial found that in addition to severe
PONV, the use of N 2O is also associated with a higher
incidence of wound infection, pneumonia, atelectasis or
any other pulmonary complications [78].
Controlled hypotension
Maintenance of moderate controlled hypotension
(systolic blood pressure, SBP, below 100 mmHg; mean
arterial pressure, MAP, 60 –70 mmHg) is essential
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
280
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012for maintaining optimal operating conditions during
otologic surgery [12,75,79 –81]. A variety of pharma-
cological approaches, such as the use of IV sodium
nitroprusside, IV b-blockers (esmolol, labetalol, meto-
prolol), IV calcium channel blockers (nicardipine),
IV a2-adrenoreceptor agonists (dexmedetomidine),
IV magnesium sulfate, and the use of potent inhala-
tional agents and IV opioids have been successfully
employed for this purpose, all producing comparable
improvement in the operating conditions and quality
of the surgical field [4,75,79 –82].
The author 's experience, as that of others [79],
has shown that the use of remifentanil seems to be
particularly effective in that regard due to the drug 's
superior potency and titratability. Maintenance of
induced hypotension with remifentanil during otolo-
gic surgery rarely requires additional pharma-
cological supplementation, and is equally effective
with both inhalational and TIVA techniques
[39,79,81]. The incidence of rebound hypertension
and tachycardia with the use of remifentanil appears
to be low, and prophylactic administration of labe-
talol IV bolus 0.1 –0.3 mg/kg at the end of surgery is
usually effective in patients with preexisting cardio-
vascular disease.
Intraoperative use of esmolol 0.5 –1 mg/kg IV
bolus, followed by continuous IV infusion 100 –300
mg/kg/min, titrated to the desired hemodynamic end-
point [82,83] represents another attractive therapeutic
option. The potentiation of action of opioids and
anesthetic agents by esmolol [84 –86] further facili-
tates emergence from anesthesia, and results in
decreased postoperative opioid analgesic require-
ments and shorter discharge time after outpatient
surgical procedures [87 –89].
Controversy exists with regard to the effect of
induced hypotension on maintenance of cochlear
blood flow and overall tympanometric stability with
different anesthetic techniques. Albera et al . [90]
demonstrated a protective effect of sevoflurane, but
not propofol-based anesthetic, on inner ear microcir-
culation. However, propofol was administered by
intermittent boluses in this study, and the repeated
high peak concentrations may have negatively
affected cochlear blood flow and homeostasis.
Conversely, Preckel et al. [91] illustrated the preser-
vation of cochlear autoregulation and function with
TIVA rather than isoflurane-based anesthetic. The
clinical significance of these findings has yet to be
determined.
Facial nerve monitoring
Intraoperative facial nerve evoked EMG monitoring
represents the current standard of surgical care
during otologic and neurotologic surgery, and facili-
tates facial nerve preservation [2,55]. Maintenance of
NMB should be avoided, although some studies sug-
gest that a moderate ( /C20 50%) degree of NMB does
not interfere with facial EMG responses [92 –94].
Nevertheless, any consideration for instituting intrao-
perative NMB should be discussed and closely coord-
inated with the surgeon. Even if partial NMB is used
intraoperatively, full immobility cannot be guaran-
teed during highly stimulating parts of the procedure,
and close attention to maintenance of an adequate
plane of anesthesia is required at all times. The use
of remifentanil as part of the anesthetic technique
(see above) greatly facilitates maintenance of a stable
plane of anesthesia and patient immobility, without
affecting the quality of neural monitoring [55]. Useful
information can be drawn from the facial nerve
audible EMG responses by the anesthesiologist,
as increased activity of upper facial muscles usually
indicates enhanced patient responsiveness [55,95].
Jellish et al. [55] found that large increases in such
activity better predicted sudden movement in patients
undergoing neurotologic surgery than the BIS
monitor, thereby providing the anesthesiologist with
advanced opportunity to expeditiously deepen the
anesthesia [55].
Emergence from anesthesia
If GETA was used, deep stages of anesthesia are
required until the very end of the procedure, to blunt
the patient 's laryngotracheal responses and avoid
bucking and coughing associated with the patient 's
head movement during a dressing application [2,12].
The use of the LMA in lieu of the ETT will facilitate
smooth patient awakening and allow for safe reduc-
tion of the level of anesthesia towards the end of the
surgery (see “Conventional and alternative airway
management options ” section above and Table 29.3).
Maintaining a very low-dose remifentanil IV infusion
(e.g., 0.02 mg/kg/min) until the patient is fully
awakened and the LMA is removed may be beneficial,
particularly if the total intraoperative dose of IV fen-
tanyl has been significantly reduced (see “Premedica-
tion and monitoring ” section above). In the author 's
experience, this virtually eliminates the emergence-
related events, such as patient agitation, coughing,
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
281
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:16 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012uncontrolled head movements, and post-extubation
laryngospasm, if the LMA was used.
If endotracheal intubation is utilized, smooth
emergence from anesthesia may constitute a challenge
in many patients. Among the strategies that can be
used to facilitate smooth tracheal extubation, three
deserve further discussion. First, the patient 's trachea
can be extubated at a deep plane of anesthesia, and the
patient's airway supported by a mask, until the
patient resumes spontaneous ventilation and emerges
from anesthesia. For otologic surgery, this does not
constitute a viable option because of the increased risk
of post-extubation laryngospasm and overall
increased need for airway support required on the
part of the anesthesiologist. Application of PPV or
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is con-
traindicated on emergence, since the pressure trans-
mitted through the eustachian tubes may unseat the
tympanic membrane graft or disrupt other repairs
[2]. The second approach (Bailey maneuver) [96]
involves insertion of a SGA (usually the LMA) behind
the existing ETT and removal of the ETT with the
patient still anesthetized, followed by administration
of supraglottic ventilatory support until the patient
resumes spontaneous ventilation and awakens from
anesthesia. The third, pharmacological, approach
relies on a low-dose remifentanil infusion to blunt
the tracheal responses and promote smooth extuba-
tion. Remifentanil provides a predictable, rapid, and
almost simultaneous recovery of consciousness and
protective airway reflexes [97]. Current data indicate
that maintenance of remifentanil IV infusion 0.05 –
0.06 mg/kg/min (target concentration 1.5 ng/ml)
during emergence can be effective for this purpose,
since this dose effectively suppresses cough reflex in
the majority of awake intubated patients [98,99].
Antiemetic prophylaxis should be routine (see
“General considerations and anesthesia objectives ”
section), as the incidence of PONV may reach as high
as 50 –80% after otologic surgery [4,28]. The use of
TIVA and avoidance of N 2O are highly advisable (see
“Premedication and monitoring ” section).
The optimal antiemetic drug combination has
been a subject of intense investigations over the years
[28], and is most commonly achieved by IV adminis-
tration of a 5HT-3 antagonist (e.g., IV ondansetron
4–8 mg) [2,14]. A combination of a 5HT-3 receptor
blocker with IV dexamethasone (8 –10 mg) appears to
be safe and highly effective [28,100], and may lead to
improved patient outcome [28]. Multimodal PONV
prophylaxis (e.g., the addition of transdermal scopol-
amine patch) is warranted in high-risk patients [28].
Immediate post-anesthesia recovery period
Most common intraoperative complications include
facial nerve injury and/or dural defects (see “Intra-
operative complications” section above). Patients who
have undergone stapedectomy are frequently pos-
itioned with the operated side up through their post-
operative recovery, to allow a blood clot to form
around the open inner ear [2]. Middle and inner ear
surgery is frequently associated with postoperative
vertigo; a combination of standard antiemetics and
vestibular suppressants (e.g., benzopiazepines) is usu-
ally effective in controlling these symptoms [2].
Immediate postoperative pain associated with oto-
logic surgery is usually low (see “Anesthesia induction
and maintenance ” section above), with the possible
exception of radical mastoidectomy, where it can be
moderate to severe. Intermittent IV bolus doses of
fentanyl, in combination with standard oral anal-
gesics, are usually sufficient for pain control and
fast-tracking patients for discharge [2]. A multimodal
analgesic regimen, incorporating the perioperative
use of a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor (e.g.,
celecoxib) and either acetaminophen or ibuprofen,
can further decrease postoperative pain, and improve
the quality of recovery and patient satisfaction after
outpatient otolaryngologic surgery [101,102].
Remifentanil-induced hyperalgesia has not been
an issue in the author 's experience, possibly because
of the relatively low remifentanil IV infusion rates
typically required intraoperatively (0.1 –0.3 mg/kg/
min). Should acute opioid tolerance be suspected,
adequate doses of fentanyl and/or long-acting opioid
analgesics (e.g., morphine) can be effectively and
safely administered [103].
Anesthetic management of
neurotologic surgical procedures
and skull base surgery
General surgical and anesthesia considerations for
neurotologic procedures have been discussed (see
“Surgical considerations ” and “General consider-
ations and anesthesia objectives ” sections). Anesthetic
evaluation and management of uncomplicated neuro-
tologic procedures aimed at restored hearing, such as
BAHA or cochlear implantation (see Table 29.1),
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
282
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012generally follows the same path as anesthesia for
otologic surgery (see “Anesthetic management of
otologic surgical procedures ” section). Patients with
the tumors involving the anterior skull base, jugular
foramen and CPA present some of the unique anes-
thetic challenges.
Patient preoperative evaluation
and preparation
The anterior skull base is a common location of many
intradural and extradural cranial and/or facial path-
ologies [104]. Effective skull base surgery requires an
established multidisciplinary team that involves oto-
laryngologist head and neck surgeons, neurotologists,
neurosurgeons, plastic surgeons, specialized operating
room nurses, neuroradiologists, neurophysiologists,
a dedicated anesthesia team, medical oncologists,
radiation oncologists, prosthodontists, and other sup-
porting physicians and allied health professionals
[10,105]. The anesthesiologist can help improve post-
operative outcomes and reduce patient morbidity,
provided (s)he is well familiar with the principles of
neuroanesthesia, and possesses full preoperative
details about the pathological process involved and
the planned surgical approach [14].
Tumors that may require anterior skull base resec-
tion include selected malignant tumors of the para-
nasal sinuses that extend superiorly through the
cribriform plate, ethmoid roof, and planum sphenoi-
dale or posteriorly through the posterior wall of the
frontal sinus; benign and malignant meningiomas
that involve the same area; and selected benign pro-
cesses such as orbital apex schwannomas, occasional
encephaloceles and mucoceles, and selected large
benign tumors including juvenile angiofibromas and
inverted papillomas [105]. Preoperative surgical
evaluation includes high-quality MRI, and is almost
always supplemented by CT imaging to assess the
integrity of bony structures [105]. Depending on the
nature and the location of these lesions, a variety of
surgical approaches can be utilized, such as craniofa-
cial, endoscopic, bifrontal craniotomy, or a combin-
ation of the above [105]. Free muscle flap
reconstruction of the cranial base may be required
for large postoperative defects [104,106].
Highly vascular tumors are usually embolized
during preoperative neuroangiography, particularly
if the internal maxillary artery is the major contribu-
tor to the tumor 's blood supply [105]. If the tumor 's
blood supply is from the anterior and posterior
ethmoidal arteries, which are branches of the ophthal-
mic artery, then these vessels cannot be safely
embolized unless vision has already been lost [105].
A preoperative ICA balloon occlusion test is per-
formed during angiography, if the ICA is involved
or encased [106], providing the anesthesiologist with
valuable information for management. Dissection
near the ICA and optic chiasm is often aided by
intraoperative surgical navigation [105].
The cerebellopontine angle (CPA) is a fluid-filled
space containing the facial nerve (VII) and vestibulo-
cochlear nerve (VIII) coursing laterally towards the
internal auditory canal [2]. A depiction of the CPA
and associated cranial nerves is shown in Figure 29.3.
This is one of the most commonly approached areas
in skull base surgery; lesions include vestibular
schwannomas (91.3%), meningiomas (3.1%), epider-
moids (2.4%), non-vestibular schwannomas (1.4%),
and arachnoid cysts (0.5%) [2,9,10]. Although most
of the symptoms associated with vestibular schwan-
nomas (acoustic neuromas) are related to hearing and
vestibular dysfunction, large tumors can compress the
brainstem, cause preoperative cranial nerve deficits,
and occasionally produce symptoms of increased
intracranial pressure (ICP). Anesthetic management
in the setting of intracranial hypertension secondary
to tumor extension should follow the same general
principles as for other intracranial mass lesions [107].
The jugular foramen (JF) region is a complex area
of the cranial base that can be invaded by several types
of tumors, both benign and malignant [108]. The JF
connects the intracranial compartment to the neck and
contains the glossopharyngeal nerve (IX), vagus nerve
(X), accessory nerve (XI), jugular bulb, and inferior
petrosal sinus [2,8]. Immediately outside the foramen,
the ICA, the jugular vein, and the cranial nerves are
surrounded by a common connective tissue sheath
[108]. Glomus tumors (GT) are the most common
locally aggressive benign tumors (paragangliomas) of
the temporal bone that principally originate around the
jugular bulb; of less common occurrence are the
meningiomas, schwannomas, and chondrosarcomas
[2,8,9,106,108]. In advanced cases the GT grow in a
variety of directions, and may involve the jugular bulb,
ICA, and also spread transdurally/intracranially
[2,8,9,106]. In rare cases, paragangliomas may origin-
ate in the tympanic branch of the IX cranial nerve
(Jacobson's nerve) and the auricular branch of the
X cranial nerve (Arnold 's nerve) [9,108].
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
283
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Paragangliomas are divided into two groups: (1)
adrenal paragangliomas (pheochromocytomas), and
(2) extraadrenal paragangliomas located in the abdo-
men, chest, and head and neck regions [2]. Less
common pathologies in the JF area include menin-
giomas and lower cranial nerve schwannomas [2].
Large GT are capable of secreting catecholamines
and (less commonly) serotonin, presenting significant
anesthetic challenges associated with symptoms and
signs of pheochromocytoma (e.g., hypertension,
sweating, cardiovascular instability) or carcinoid syn-
drome [107]. Urine and plasma catecholamine levels
should probably be routinely checked preoperatively
for all extensive GT, even if the patient is asymptom-
atic [107]. Significant elevations of urine or serum
catecholamines or their metabolites will require the
same preoperative pharmacologic stabilization as
for the patients with a pheochromocytoma (i.e., a-
and b-blockers, calcium channel blockers, etc.) [107].
The reader is referred to comprehensive texts discuss-
ing the details of anesthetic management of these
patients.
Determining a preoperative plasma serotonin
level in the absence of clinical symptoms for serotonin
excess (e.g., diarrhea, flushing, headaches) is probably
unnecessary [107]. If serotonin-secreting GT are iden-
tified, dehydration and/or electrolyte abnormalities
should be corrected preoperatively [107]. Intraopera-
tively, the release of histamine and bradykinin can
cause bronchospasm, tachycardia, and both hypoten-
sion and hypertension [107].
Large GT can cause preoperative cranial nerve IX,
X, XI, and XII palsies, with the vagal nerve dysfunc-
tion being the most common [108]. Cranial nerve IX,
X, and XII deficits can predispose to airway com-
promise, either by obstruction or by aspiration (the
risk of aspiration caused by gastroparesis is increased
in these patients) [107,108]. Careful history and pre-
operative airway examination are required. In the
majority of cases, vocal cord function will be compre-
hensively evaluated by the surgeons preoperatively.
Appreciating the nature of the lesion(s) and the
pathological process involved will guide the anesthe-
siologist's preparation for possible significant blood
loss. This especially concerns tumors that it was not
possible to embolize preoperatively, and highly vascu-
lar neoplasms, such as GT and meningiomas [14,106].
Tumor involvement and extension into cranial
sinuses (e.g., sigmoid sinus, the inferior petrosal
sinus), ICA and its branches increases the likelihood
of substantial blood loss [14,106,107]. Preoperative
embolization of the vascularized tumors should be
done whenever possible, and will diminish intrao-
perative blood loss, decrease operation time,
and permit one-stage operation [14,106,107]. Intrao-
perative blood loss can be in excess of 1 liter in these
cases, and 2–4 units of cross-matched blood should be
readily available (1 unit of cross-matched or autolo-
gous blood is usually sufficient for other skull base
surgery) [2].
Conventional and alternative airway
management
Preoperative airway compromise is rare. In patients
with preexisting significant facial nerve paralysis
mouth opening can be asymmetric and limited,
but this does not interfere with direct laryngoscopy
after induction of anesthesia. Rapid sequence induc-
tion should be considered in patients at increased
risk of aspiration of gastric contents. Preoperative
tracheostomy is rarely performed, but may be
required postoperatively in selected patients (see
“Emergence from anesthesia ” section below).
Standard GETA is used in the majority of cases.
Patients with the GT or other lesions extending
into the JF or upper neck or skull-base brainstem-
compressing lesions may require intraoperative iden-
tification and functional monitoring of the vagus
nerve [109]. In these patients, placement of the spe-
cialized ETT (e.g., Xomed ETT, Medtronic Xomed
Inc., Jacksonville, FL USA) to record and monitor
the electromyography (EMG) activity of the vocal
cords can be requested by the surgeon.
Premedication and monitoring
Standard premedication with short-acting benzodi-
azepine (e.g., IV midazolam) is warranted in the
majority of cases, but should be done with caution
or avoided if symptoms of increased ICP are present.
IV antibiotics with good CSF penetration (e.g., IV
ceftriaxone 2 g) are almost uniformly used [2,10].
Corticosteroids (e.g., IV dexamethasone 10 –12 mg)
are not routinely given, except in patients with large
(> 3 cm) tumors or those with peritumoral brain
edema [10].
Operations on the skull base can easily last up to
12 hours or longer [2], and meticulous attention
should be directed to proper patient positioning before
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
284
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the surgery commences. Jellish et al. [14] recorded a
9% incidence of brachial plexus injury after skull base
surgery, with over 60% of injuries occurring on the
side of surgery. With rigid head fixation in place,
excessive neck torsion should be avoided to prevent
cervical injury, as well as to reduce the risk of cerebellar
swelling secondary to compromised blood flow
through the vertebral venous system [7,9,10].
The most critical aspect during operations on the
skull base is identification and preservation of the
cranial nerves [7,9,10]. Intraoperative neurophysio-
logical monitoring (INM) immediately alerts the sur-
geon about the risk of nerve injury, helps trace the
course of the nerve(s) when anatomy is distorted, and
therefore facilitates tumor resection while achieving
cranial nerve preservation [110]. INM is utilized most
often when the tumors are located at the cervicome-
dullary junction, CPA, JF, and the upper clivus, when
the tumors are large, and during revision surgeries
[110]. Cranial nerves VII, IX, X, XI, and XII are most
commonly monitored. Standard INM may involve, in
part or in combination, EMG recordings, somatosen-
sory and motor evoked potentials (SSEP and MEP),
and brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAER) to
monitor cochlear nerve (VIII) function [110,111].
Standard monitors are usually used for induction.
Large-bore IV access and A-line monitoring are
secured prior to the beginning of surgery. The use
of CVP is rarely indicated and should be guided by
the patient 's medical history; however, it should be
considered if significant blood loss is anticipated. The
Foley catheter is used in all cases.
Anesthesia induction and maintenance
Intravenous induction with propofol may be pre-
ferred due to its rapid redistribution and facilitation
of the baseline INM assessment. Intravenous barbit-
urates cause reduction in amplitude and increased
latency of the evoked potentials [111]. Intravenous
ketamine and etomidate have the unusual effect of
increasing the SSEP amplitude, and etomidate also
may increase the latency of the cortical SSEP [111].
The use of intermediate-acting non-depolarizing
NMB will facilitate tracheal intubation, and also allow
for non-hurried, careful patient positioning. In
patients with increased ICP, standard induction pre-
cautions should be observed. With large tumors, a
lumbar drain will be placed after the patient is anes-
thetized, to decompress CSF and to reduce the risk of
operative complications through minimizing surgical
brain retraction [105]. It may also be used to reduce
the risk of CSF fistulization, when extensive peri-
internal auditory canal pneumatization is present
[10]. Administration of IV mannitol (0.5 –1 g/kg),
started after the scalp incision, and the use of mild
hyperventilation will further facilitate brain relaxation
for the dural entry. Patients should be kept euvolemic,
and the electrolyte status should be monitored during
the surgery.
Controlled hypotension (see “Anesthesia induc-
tion and maintenance ” in “Anesthetic management
of otologic surgical procedures ” section) is used
often to maximize surgical visibility and reduce con-
gestion of the vascular lesion(s) [2]. The use of
deliberate hypotension and hypothermia may be
limited by the SSEP recording, as both these inter-
ventions may affect the cortical SSEP latencies [111].
Pharmacological manipulation of MAP may be
necessary if the ICA will be occluded or resected.
As a rule, normothermia should be maintained
intraoperatively.
The selected anesthetic technique must be able to
facilitate the INM. Intraoperative use of NMB is
avoided (see “Anesthesia induction and mainten-
ance” in “Anesthetic management of otologic surgi-
cal procedures ” section). Opioid-based techniques,
allowing a safe reduction of the concentration of
inhalational agent to /C20 0.5 minimal alveolar concen-
tration (MAC), are widely used, since opioids have
only a modest effect on SSEP parameters [14,111].
Higher concentrations of inhalational agents will
tend to decrease the cortical SSEP amplitude and
increase the latency; the effects of different inhala-
tional anesthetics are similar in that regard [111].
The combination of N 2O and a volatile anesthetic
tends to have a greater depressant effect on SSEP
than an equipotent administration of a single agent
[111]. Compared with EEG and SSEP, BAER are
much more resistant to anesthetic effects [111]. Since
the threshold of anesthesia effects on SSEP and EMG
responses may vary, any amount of inhalational
agent may not be acceptable for proper INM in some
patients, necessitating either a “sandwich” anesthetic
technique or TIVA (see “Anesthesia induction and
maintenance” in “Anesthetic management of otolo-
gic surgical procedures ” section) [112]. TIVA can
also be selected as a primary anesthetic technique
from the outset, if appropriate. Intravenous remifen-
tanil infusion is commonly used for the reasons
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
285
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012outlined above (see “Anesthesia induction and main-
tenance” in “Anesthetic management of otologic sur-
gical procedures ” section).
Stimulation of the trigeminal or vagus nerves
during skull base surgery can cause bradycardia, both
hypotension and hypertension, arrhythmias and even
transient asystole; therefore, the surgeon should be
promptly informed of their occurrence [2,113,114].
Surgical dissection should be immediately suspended,
and cardiovascular instability treated, as appropriate
[113,114]. The mechanisms underlying bradycardia,
hypotension, and asystole induced by the vagus nerve
stimulation also involve adrenergic transmission
from the medulla, and therefore may not be fully
prevented or treated with IV atropine; however, these
effects are usually short-lived [113,114].
Emergence from anesthesia
Considerations for smooth extubation and non-stimu-
lating emergence should be carefully observed (see
“Emergence from anesthesia ” in “Anesthetic manage-
ment of otologic surgical procedures ” section).
Coughing and bucking on the ETT may provoke post-
operative bleeding, increase cerebral edema, and cause
tension pneumocephalus (TP) [107,115]. TP may
occur in up to 12% of the cases after classical craniofa-
cial resection, and represents a potentially fatal compli-
cation leading to rapid neurological deterioration
postoperatively [115]. It may be provoked by a sudden
increase in the airway pressure (coughing, sneezing,
Valsalva maneuvers), when the air enters the cranial
vault through a potential communication between the
sinonasal tract and the epidural space, and becomes
trapped [115]. PONV prophylaxis must be routine,
and multimodal PONV prophylaxis should be strongly
considered, especially after acoustic neuroma surgery
(see “Emergence from anesthesia” in “Anesthetic man-
agement of otologic surgical procedures” section).
Tracheal extubation is carried out in the majority
of cases, with the exception of those where the free flap
reconstruction of the cranial base was required, and
the possible exception of those where cranial nerve
deficits existed preoperatively. With regard to the
latter, the extubation strategy will be decided on an
individual patient basis, depending on the degree of
preoperative airway compromise, aspiration risk, and
the extent of the procedure performed. The dynamic
nature of edema around the cranial nerves in the early
postoperative period must be appreciated by both the
anesthesiologist and the surgeon, and nursing staff
[107]. New paralysis of the lower cranial nerves with
dysphasia remains the most serious complication
related to surgery, and delayed extubation and trache-
otomy may be required in selected cases [106].
Immediate post-anesthesia recovery period
If extubated, patients should be awake, and able to
follow commands and cooperate with the early neuro-
logical assessment. The majority of the extubated
patients are monitored in the intensive care unit
overnight; minimal sedation is administered to allow
for adequate neurological monitoring [2]. Airway and
aspiration precautions should be observed in patients
with possible lower cranial nerve palsies [2].
Postoperative pain is usually mild-to-moderate
(VAS 4 –6) [2]. With the remifentanil-based anesthe-
sia technique it is not uncommon, in the author 's
experience, for patients to have moderate-to-severe
postoperative pain (VAS 7 –8) over the first several
hours. This pain should be promptly controlled to
prevent postoperative hypertensive responses. Con-
tinuous IV administration of vasoactive drugs may
be required for adequate blood pressure control to
maintain postoperative MAP within the range desired
by the neurotologist and/or neurosurgeon.
Even with the extended anterior skull base surger-
ies, operative mortality is well under 1%, and intracra-
nial bleeding or hematomas are exceedingly rare [105].
Serious central nervous system deficits (including
cerebrovascular accidents, unanticipated blindness,
postinfection deficits, and autonomic dysfunction)
are also rarely observed (2 –3% of patients) [105].
Summary
Otologic and neurotologic procedures are highly
sophisticated, require precision surgery, and
present significant challenges to the anesthesiologist.
The anesthesiologist should be very familiar with the
nature of the pathological process, understand the
critical parts of the surgical procedure, and communi-
cate closely with the surgeon during the perioperative
period.
Thorough appreciation of the fundamental prin-
ciples of the anesthetic management for otologic and
neurotologic surgery, discussed in this chapter, and
meticulous execution of the properly selected anes-
thetic techniques and strategies will greatly facilitate
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
286
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012the success of surgery and help improve postoperative
patient outcomes.
Case study: anesthesia for middle ear
surgery
Case description and preoperative
evaluation
A 52-year-old female, a professional singing teacher,
was scheduled to undergo elective right tympano-
plasty for chronic middle ear infection. The recurrent
middle ear infections have produced a slight hearing
loss in the patient, resulting in voice strain.
Preoperatively, the patient expressed significant
concern and anxiety about the adverse effects of
tracheal intubation, and specifically possible damage
to the vocal cords and larynx. Ten years previously,
she was tracheally intubated for elective laparoscopic
cholecystectomy, with resultant significant postopera-
tive dysphonia and prolonged vocal recovery.
The patient 's past medical history was otherwise
unremarkable, review of systems was negative, and
the airway and physical exams were normal. The
patient was not taking any medications, and preo-
perative laboratory tests were non-contributory. The
patient's baseline vocal cord function and voice qual-
ity were comprehensively evaluated by the otolaryn-
gologist preoperatively.
Preoperative vital signs were: NIBP 128/75
mmHg, heart rate 72/min, respiratory rate 16/min,
SpO2 98% on room air; the patient 's height was
168 cm, weight 76 kg.
Anesthetic management
The patient was reassured preoperatively, and
the options of intraoperative airway management to
prevent voice damage were discussed. The patient
expressed strong interest in avoiding tracheal intub-
ation, and in the use of the LMA by the
anesthesiologist.
On the day of surgery, the patient had been NPO
for over 6 hours. After standard premedication (mid-
azolam 2 mg IV), the patient was brought to the OR
and standard monitors were applied. After adequate
preoxygentaion (FiO 2 ¼ 1.0), anesthesia was induced
uneventfully with fentanyl IV 100 mg and propofol IV
200 mg given over 30 s. Once adequate depth of
anesthesia was confirmed by absence of patient move-
ment to jaw thrust [116], a size 4 LMA Proseal ™ was
easily inserted using a standard, digital insertion tech-
nique. The cuff of the LMA Proseal ™ was inflated
with 20 ml of air. Correct positioning of the LMA
Proseal™ was confirmed [117] by the positive supras-
ternal notch test, the lack of air leak from the gastric
tube, by positioning of more than 50% of the integral
bite block beyond the upper incisors, by the absence
of gastric insufflation during positive-pressure venti-
lation (PPV), the presence of a square-wave EtCO 2
capnography trace, and by the easy passage of a lubri-
cated 14Fr orogastric tube (OGT) through the drain-
age tube of the device into the patient 's stomach, with
subsequent aspiration of the small amount ( < 15 ml)
of clear gastric contents (Figures 29.7 and 29.8).
The oropharyngeal leak pressure (OLP) was
recorded at 30 cmH 2O, with fresh gas flow 3 l/min
Figure 29.7. Airway management with
the LMA Proseal ™ as a primary ventilator
device in a patient anesthetized for
middle ear surgery. Note a small film of a
lubricant placed inside the drainage tube,
to elicit positive suprasternal notch test
and confirm absence of air leak during
PPV. Deep LMA Proseal ™ positioning,
with more than 50% of the integral bite
block located beyond the upper incisors
serves as an additional confirmation test
of the correct LMA Proseal ™ positioning.
Proper midline fixation of the LMA
Proseal™, which also preserves the
natural forward curvature of the device, is
essential for facilitating maintenance of
the LMA seal and separation of the
respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. See
text for details.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
287
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and closed pressure-adjusted expiratory valve on the
anesthesia machine [121]. The LMA Proseal ™ was
taped midline, to maintain stable cuff position and
optimal airway seal (Figure 29.7).
The patient's lungs were ventilated with a mixture
of O 2 and air (FiO 2 ¼ 0.4, total fresh gas flow 0.6 l/
min), in a pressure-controlled mode (PCV) of
15 cmH 2O, RR of 8 breaths/min, and inspiratory/
expiratory (I:E) ratio of 1:2. Adequacy of ventilation
was confirmed by achieving an appropriate expired Vt
of 600 ml, absent oropharyngeal leak, SpO 2 of 99%,
and EtCO 2 < 40 mmHg. Adequacy of ventilation
was further assessed continuously during the case,
by monitoring Vt, EtCO 2 value, total leak fraction,
total compliance, and by observing the flow –volume
and pressure –volume loops and EtCO 2 waveform on
the display of the anesthesia machine (see “Conven-
tional and alternative airway management options ” in
“Anesthetic management of otologic surgical proced-
ures” section).
Additional preventive measures aimed at reducing
the risk of possible gastric insufflation during PPV,
gastric regurgitation, and aspiration included main-
taining PIP below OLP, and passively emptying
gastric contents into an empty IV bag through the
OGT left in the drainage tube of the device (Figure
29.8) [20,118,119]. The in situ OGT also served as a
functional guide, enabling advancement of the LMA
Proseal™ back into the optimal position, had acciden-
tal displacement of the device and loss of seal
occurred intraoperatively (Figure 29.8) [122].
Anesthesia was maintained with continuous IV
infusions of propofol and remifentanil, titrated to
the Patient State Index (PSI ™) (SEDLine ® Brain-
Function Monitoring System, Masimo Corp., Irvine,
CA, USA) value between 25 and 50, which indicated
adequate hypnotic state. Maintenance of moderate
controlled hypotension (MAP 60 –70 mmHg) was
facilitated with intermittent IV boluses of labetalol
(total 15 mg). Surgical duration was 1 h 50 min, and
the anesthetic course was uneventful. Antiemetic
prophylaxis was achieved with dexamethasone IV
8 mg and ondansetron (Zofran ®) IV 4 mg. Additional
labetalol IV 20 mg was given at the end of surgery, to
prevent a rebound hypertension.
TIVA was discontinued during the dressing appli-
cation, and the patient was allowed to emerge
from anesthesia while breathing spontaneously with
Figure 29.8. The above patient being prepped for surgery. Note the positioning of the side table affixed to the OR bed, on the patient 's
left. Such arrangement allows for the anesthesiologist to reach the patient 's airway under the surgical drapes, and troubleshoot the
positioning of the LMA Proseal ™, should the need arise. The orogastric tube is passed through the drainage tube into the patient 's
stomach to facilitate safe administration of positive-pressure ventilation. See text for the details.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
288
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012FiO2 ¼ 1.0. The patient 's stomach and oropharynx
were suctioned, the LMA Proseal ™ cuff was deflated,
and the LMA was removed smoothly and unevent-
fully, with the patient fully awake. The patient
was transported to the recovery room while breathing
O2 delivered at 3 l/min through the nasal cannula.
Immediate postoperative recovery room course was
uneventful, without PONV. Pain was effectively con-
trolled with fentanyl intermittent IV bolus doses
(total 150 mg), and the patient 's vital signs remained
stable. The patient was discharged home from
the recovery room 1.5 hours after the completion
of surgery.
No voice changes were observed postoperatively,
and the patient gradually resumed singing activity
during her postoperative recovery. She was very satis-
fied with the anesthetic management.
Discussion
Anesthetic management of this patient emphasizes
the principles of a safe use of the LMA with PPV.
The use of the LMA for otologic surgical procedures
offers significant advantages over the ETT, and may
be preferred (see “Anesthetic management of otologic
surgical procedures ” section and Table 29.3). The use
of the LMA Proseal ™, or its disposable equivalent
LMA Supreme ™, should be strongly considered, due
to the superior ventilation capabilities of these
devices, and the ability to confirm a proper LMA
placement. Compared to the LMA Proseal ™, the use
of the LMA Supreme ™ results in the same or a
slightly higher insertion success rate on the first
attempt, but lower OLP [120,123,124].
Patients who are vocal performers or professional
voice users present unique challenges, requiring the
anesthesiologist to avert even the slightest trauma to
the patient's vocal cords and/or cricoarytenoid joints,
and to protect laryngeal and vocal function at all
times [125]. Preoperatively, these patients are fre-
quently very sensitive and anxious, as inadvertent
laryngeal trauma may jeopardize their professional
career and psychological health [125]. In this regard,
the use of the LMA in this patient was particularly
beneficial. Even routine, short-term tracheal intubation
is frequently associated with transient post-intubation
dysphonia, characterized by decreased voice intensity,
increased voice roughness and decreased affect [126].
Rieger et al. [127] prospectively studied over 200 ASA
I–III patients presenting for non-airway surgery, and
demonstrated that tracheally intubated patients were
almost twice as likely (47% vs. 25%) to develop mild
postoperative dysphonia as the patients in the LMA
group. In a systematic review of studies comparing
airway complications associated with the use of the
ETT vs. the LMA, Yu and Beirne [128] showed that
the incidence of postoperative hoarseness was more
than three times higher when the ETT was used (25%
vs. 7.5%). Although the patients ' laryngeal complaints
usually resolve within 72 h [126,129], both the duration
[127,129] and severity [130] of postoperative symptoms
are more pronounced when tracheal intubation is
employed. Direct trauma to the vocal cords and larynx
with LMA use is uncommon, and is typically caused by
either malpositioning (direct contact of the tip of the
LMA with the vocal cords) or removal of the LMA with
an inflated cuff, particularly with forced/twisting trac-
tion, which may produce rotation of the larynx and
dislocation of the arytenoids [130]. In this patient dili-
gent confirmation of the correct LMA Proseal ™ pos-
itioning was performed, and full deflation of the LMA
Proseal™ cuff before removal of the device was carefully
observed. Additional intraoperative measures aimed at
minimizing extralaryngeal causes of dysphonia included
inflating the LMA Proseal™ cuff with only two-thirds of
the maximum recommended volume [118] and the use
of low gas flows (0.6 l/min). Inhalation of cold and dry
anesthetic gases may produce thinning and dehydration
of vocal cord mucosa, increasing the adhesiveness of the
vocal folds during phonation [127,131].
Had tracheal intubation been used instead, avoid-
ance of vocal cord and laryngeal injury could have
been facilitated by smooth, atraumatic intubation, the
use of a small ETT (ID 5.0 –6.0 mm), inflation of the
ETT cuff to seal pressure only [131], and strict adher-
ence to smooth extubation protocol (see “Emergence
from anesthesia ” in “Anesthetic management of
otologic surgical procedures ” section), which would
have helped to avoid cough-induced vocal cord injury
[132].
Conclusions
The use of the SGAs during otologic surgery offers
significant advantages, including avoidance of the
administration of the NMB, improved cardiovascular
stability and maintenance of a stable plane of anesthe-
sia, facilitatation of the monitoring of adequate
hypnotic state, and promotion of smooth emergence
from anesthesia without associated coughing,
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
289
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012bucking, or straining (see “Conventional and alterna-
tive airway management options” in “Anesthetic man-
agement of otologic surgical procedures” section). Safe
and effective use of the LMA devices, such as the LMA
Proseal™ or the LMA Supreme ™, which possess great
ventilating capabilities and provide gastric access, is
strongly preferred for this purpose. Such safeguards as
the anesthesiologist 's thorough familiarity with these
devices' design and technical aspects, knowledge of the
confirmation tests of their proper placement and func-
tion, and meticulous monitoring of the optimal per-
formance of these devices intraoperatively, are
essential for the patient safety.
Clinical pearls
/C15 Essential requirements for precision otologic and
neurotologic surgery include a clear, dry surgical
field, absence of patient movement, preservation
of facial/cranial nerve function, and smooth
emergence from anesthesia.
/C15 The operating room (OR) table is typically turned
180/C14 away from the anesthesiologist, making
immediate access to the patient 's head difficult for
the anesthesiologist. The dedicated artificial airway
must be diligently taped, and all the anesthesia
circuit connections must be checked to prevent
accidental disconnection under the surgical drapes.
/C15 Situational awareness is required on the part of
the anesthesiologist at all times to avoid any
inadvertent action that may result in accidental
movement of the OR table.
/C15 Perioperative communication with the patients
may be difficult due to their decreased hearing
ability, and written communication may
sometimes be required. Patients should be allowed
to wear hearing aids for as long as possible, which
must then be removed before the induction of
anesthesia to prevent intraoperative pressure
injury to the external ear. The hearing aid can be
replaced before emergence to help minimize
anxiety and facilitate communication
/C15 Either an ETT or an LMA can be used
intraoperatively. With the LMA, pressure support
or controlled ventilation is usually required in
anesthetized, spontaneously breathing patients to
avoid hypoventilation.
/C15 Deeper planes of anesthesia are required to avoid
sudden patient motor responses, because
maintenance of intraoperative neuromuscular
blockade (NMB) is usually contraindicated.
/C15 The use of nitrous oxide (N 2O) should be
discouraged, especially during revision otologic
surgery, as it may not only interfere
with the graft placement, but also provoke
graft dislodgement and even disarticulation of
stapes.
/C15 Antiemetic prophylaxis should be routine.
/C15 Maintenance of remifentanil IV infusion
0.05–0.06 mg/kg/min during emergence
can be effective for achieving smooth
emergence.
References
1. Benecke JE, Stahl BA. Otologic
instrumentation. In Brackmann
DE, Shelton C, Arriaga MA, eds.
Otologic Surgery . Philadelphia: W.
B. Saunders; 1994. pp. 1 –26.
2. Blevins NH, Jackler RK, V.
Nekhendzy, Guta C. Section
3.0: Otolaryngology – head and
neck surgery. Otology and
neurotology. In Jaffe RA, Samuels
SI, Schmiesing CA, Golianu B,
eds. Anesthesiologist 'sM a n u a l
of Surgical Procedures ,4 t he d n .
Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer
Health/Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2009. pp. 239 –49.
3. Glasscock ME. The history of
neuro-otology. A personal
perspective. Otolaryngol Clin North
Am 2002;35:227–38.
4. Liang S, Irwin MG. Review of
anesthesia for middle ear
surgery. Anesthesiol Clin
2010;28:519–28.
5. Sheehy JL. Tympanoplasty: outer
surface grafting technique. In
Brackmann DE, Shelton C, Arriaga
MA, eds. Otologic Surgery .
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
pp. 121 –32.
6. Gantz BJ, Redleaf MI.
Management of Bell 's palsy and
Ramsay Hunt syndrome. In
Brackmann DE, Shelton C, Arriaga
MA, eds. Otologic Surgery .
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
pp. 385 –95.
7. Smith MF, Roberson JB.
Avoidance and management of
complications. In Brackmann DE,
Shelton C, Arriaga MA, eds.
Otologic Surgery . Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders; 1994. pp. 359 –71.
8. Brackmann DE, Arraiga MA.
Surgery for glomus tumors. In
Brackmann DE, Shelton C,
Arriaga MA, eds. Otologic
Surgery. Philadelphia: W.
B. Saunders; 1994.
pp. 579 –93.
9. House WF, C. Shelton. The
middle fossa approach. IIn
Brackmann DE, Shelton C, Arriaga
MA, eds. Otologic Surgery .
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1994.
pp. 595 –604.
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
290
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 201210. Jackler RK, Sim DW.
Retrosigmoid approach to tumors
of the cerebellopontine angle. In
Brackmann DE, Shelton C,
Arriaga MA, eds. Otologic
Surgery. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders; 1994. pp. 619 –36.
11. Wiett RJ, Harvey SA, Bauer GP.
Management of complications of
chronic otitis media. In
Brackmann DE, Shelton C,
Arriaga MA, eds. Otologic
Surgery. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders; 1994. pp. 259 –76.
12. Jellish WS, Owen K, Edelstein S,
et al. Standard anesthetic
technique for middle ear surgical
procedures: a comparison of
desflurane and sevoflurane.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2005;133:269–74.
13. Firat Y, Kizilay A, Akarcay M,
et al. The effect of
dexmedetomidine on middle ear
pressure. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2007;137:218–23.
14. Jellish WS, Murdoch J, Leonetti
JP. Perioperative management of
complex skull base surgery: the
anesthesiologist's point of view.
Neurosurg Focus 2002;12(5):e5.
15. Chandra RK, Epstein VA,
Fishman AJ. Prevalence of
depression and antidepressant use
in an otolaryngology patient
population. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 2009;141:136–8.
16. Webster AC, Morley-Forster PK,
Janzen V,et al. Anesthesia for
intranasal surgery: a comparison
between tracheal intubation and the
flexible reinforced laryngeal mask
airway.Anesth Analg1999;88:421–5.
17. Atef A, Fawaz A. Comparison of
laryngeal mask with endotracheal
tube for anesthesia in endoscopic
sinus surgery. Am J Rhinol
2008;22:653–7.
18. Ayala MA, Sanderson A, Marks
R, et al. Laryngeal mask airway
use in otologic surgery. Otol
Neurotol 2009;30:599–601.
19. Taheri A, Hajimohamadi F,
Soltanghoraee H, et al.
Complications of using laryngeal
mask airway during anaesthesia
in patients undergoing major ear
surgery. Acta Otorhinolaryngol
Ital 2009;29:151–5.
20. Mandel JE. Laryngeal mask
airways in ear, nose, and throat
procedures. Anesthesiol Clin
2010;28:469–83.
21. Uppal V, Fletcher G, Kinsella J.
Comparison of the i-gel with the
cuffed tracheal tube during
pressure-controlled ventilation.
Br J Anaesth 2009;102:264–8.
22. Sharma B, Sehgal R, Sahai C, et al.
PLMA vs. I-gel: a comparative
evaluation of respiratory
mechanics in laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. J Anaesthesiol
Clin Pharmacol 2010;26:451–7.
23. Theiler LG, Kleine-Brueggeney
M, Kaiser D, et al. Crossover
comparison of the laryngeal mask
supreme and the i-gel in
simulated difficult airway
scenario in anesthetized patients.
Anesthesiology 2009;111:55–62.
24. Jagannathan N, Kozlowski RJ,
Sohn LE, et al. A clinical
evaluation of the intubating
laryngeal airway as a conduit for
tracheal intubation in children.
Anesth Analg 2011;112:176–82.
25. Galgon RE, Schroeder KM, Han
S, et al. The air-Q( ®) intubating
laryngeal airway vs the LMA-
ProSeal(TM): a prospective,
randomised trial of airway seal
pressure. Anaesthesia
2011;66:1093–100.
26. Joffe AM, Liew EC, Galgon RE,
et al. The second-generation air-
Q intubating laryngeal mask for
airway maintenance during
anaesthesia in adults: a report of
the first 70 uses. Anaesth Intensive
Care 2011;39:40–5.
27. Gelb AW, Southorn P, Rehder K.
Effect of general anaesthesia on
respiratory function. Lung
1981;159:187–98.
28. Fujii Y. Clinical strategies for
preventing postoperative nausea
and vomitting after middle ear
surgery in adult patients. Curr
Drug Saf 2008;3:230–9.
29. Soppitt AJ, Glass PS, Howell S,
et al. The use of propofol for its
antiemetic effect: a survey of
clinical practice in the United
States. J Clin Anesth 2000;12:
265–9.
30. Tramèr M, Moore A, McQuay H.
Propofol anaesthesia and
postoperative nausea and
vomiting: quantitative systematic
review of randomized controlled
studies. Br J Anaesth 1997;78:
247–55.
31. Siddik-Sayyid SM, Taha SK,
Kanazi GE, et al. Excellent
intubating conditions with
remifentanil-propofol and either
low-dose rocuronium or
succinylcholine. Can J Anaesth
2009;56:483–8.
32. Scheller MS, Zornow MH,
Saidman LJ. Tracheal intubation
without the use of muscle
relaxants: a technique using
propofol and varying doses of
alfentanil. Anesth Analg
1992;75:788–93.
33. Erhan E, Ugur G, Alper I, et al.
Tracheal intubation without
muscle relaxants: remifentanil or
alfentanil in combination with
propofol. Eur J Anaesthesiol
2003;20:37–43.
34. Erhan E, Ugur G, Gunusen I,
et al. Propofol – not thiopental
or etomidate – with
remifentanil provides adequate
intubating conditions in the
absence of neuromuscular
blockade. Can J Anaesth
2003;50:108–15.
35. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP,
Avramov A, et al. Remifentanil-
based anesthesia versus a
propofol technique for
otologic surgical procedures.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2000;122:222–7.
36. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Fahey K,
et al. Comparison of 3 different
anesthetic techniques on 24-hour
recovery after otologic surgical
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
291
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012procedures. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 1999;120:406–11.
37. Eberhart LH, Eberspaecher M,
Wulf H, et al. Fast-track
eligibility, costs and quality of
recovery after intravenous
anaesthesia with propofol-
remifentanil versus balanced
anaesthesia with isoflurane-
alfentanil. Eur J Anaesthesiol
2004;21:107–14.
38. Van den Berg AA, Savva D,
Honjol NM, et al. Comparison of
total intravenous, balanced
inhalational and combined
intravenous-inhalational
anaesthesia for tympanoplasty,
septorhinoplasty and
adenotonsillectomy. Anaesth
Intensive Care 1995;23:574–82.
39. Loop T, Priebe HJ. Recovery after
anesthesia with remifentanil
combined with propofol,
desflurane, or sevoflurane for
otorhinolaryngeal surgery. Anesth
Analg 2000;91:123–9.
40. White PF, Tang J, Wender RH,
et al. Desflurane versus
sevoflurane for maintenance of
outpatient anesthesia: the effect
on early versus late recovery and
perioperative coughing. Anesth
Analg 2009;109:387–93.
41. Gupta A, Stierer T, Zuckerman R,
et al. Comparison of recovery
profile after ambulatory
anesthesia with propofol,
isoflurane, sevoflurane and
desflurane: a systematic review.
Anesth Analg 2004;98:632–41.
42. Philip BK, Kallar SK, Bogetz MS,
et al. A multicenter comparison
of maintenance and recovery with
sevoflurane or isoflurane for adult
ambulatory anesthesia. The
Sevoflurane Multicenter
Ambulatory Group. Anesth Analg
1996;83:314–19.
43. Koksal GM, Sayilgan C, Gungor
G, et al. Effects of sevoflurane and
desflurane on cytokine response
during tympanoplasty surgery.
Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
2005;49:835–9.
44. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Murdoch
JR, et al. Propofol-based
anesthesia as compared with
standard anesthetic techniques
for middle ear surgery. J Clin
Anesth 1995;7:292–6.
45. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Murdoch
J, et al. Propofol based anesthesia
as compared with standard
anesthetic techniques for middle
ear surgery. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 1995;112:262–7.
46. Wuesten R, Van Aken H, Glass
PS, et al. Assessment of depth of
anesthesia and postoperative
respiratory recovery after
remifentanil- versus alfentanil-
based total intravenous anesthesia
in patients undergoing ear-nose-
throat surgery. Anesthesiology
2001;94:211–17.
47. Ledowski T, Bein B, Hanss R,
et al. Neuroendocrine stress
response and heart rate
variability: a comparison of total
intravenous versus balanced
anesthesia. Anesth Analg
2005;101:1700–5.
48. Sonne NM, Clausen TG, Valentin
N, et al. Total intravenous
anaesthesia for direct
laryngoscopy: propofol infusion
compared to thiopentone
combined with midazolam and
methohexitone infusion. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 1992;36:250–
4.
49. Montes FR, Trillos JE, Rincón IE,
et al. Comparison of total
intravenous anesthesia and
sevoflurane-fentanyl anesthesia
for outpatient otorhinolaryngeal
surgery. J Clin Anesth
2002;14:324–8.
50. Larsen B, Seitz A, Larsen R.
Recovery of cognitive function
after remifentanil-propofol
anesthesia: a comparison with
desflurane and sevoflurane
anesthesia. Anesth Analg
2000;90:168–74.
51. Visser K, Hassink EA, Bonsel GJ,
et al. Randomized controlled trial
of total intravenous anesthesia
with propofol versus inhalation
anesthesia with isoflurane-nitrous
oxide: postoperative nausea with
vomiting and economic analysis.
Anesthesiology 2001;95:616–26.
52. McKeating K, Bali IM, Dundee
JW. The effects of thiopentone
and propofol on upper airway
integrity. Anaesthesia
1988;43:638–40.
53. Mustola ST, Baer GA, Metsä-
Ketelä T, et al. Haemodynamic
and plasma catecholamine
responses during total
intravenous anaesthesia for
laryngomicroscopy. Thiopentone
compared with propofol.
Anaesthesia 1995;50:108–13.
54. Ewalenko P, Deloof T, Gerin M,
et al. Propofol infusion with or
without fentanyl supplementation
for microlaryngoscopy. Acta
Anaesthesiol Belg 1990;41:297–
306.
55. Jellish WS, Leonetti JP, Buoy CM,
et al. Facial nerve
electromyographic monitoring to
predict movement in patients
titrated to a standard anesthetic
depth. Anesth Analg
2009;109:551–8.
56. Siler JN, Horrow JC, Rosenberg
H. Propofol reduces prolonged
outpatient PACU stay. An
analysis according to surgical
procedure. Anesthesiol Rev
1994;21:129–32.
57. Tang J, Chen L, White PF, et al.
Recovery profile, costs, and
patient satisfaction with propofol
and sevoflurane for fast-track
office-based anesthesia.
Anesthesiology 1999;91:253–61.
58. Sommer M, Geurts JW, Stessel B,
et al. Prevalence and predictors of
postoperative pain after ear, nose,
and throat surgery. Arch
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2009;135:124–30.
59. Mustola ST, Baer GA, Neuvonen
PJ, et al. Requirements of
propofol at different end-points
without adjuvant and during two
different steady infusions of
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
292
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012remifentanil. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 2005;49:215–21.
60. Pavlin JD, Colley PS, Weymuller
EA Jr, et al. Propofol versus
isoflurane for endoscopic sinus
surgery. Am J Otolaryngol
1999;20:96–101.
61. Vuyk J. Clinical interpretation of
pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic propofol-
opioid interactions. Acta Anaesth
Belg 2001;52:445–51.
62. Ausems ME, Vuyk J, Hug CC Jr,
et al. Comparison of a computer-
assisted infusion versus
intermittent bolus administration
of alfentanil as a supplement to
nitrous oxide for lower
abdominal surgery.
Anesthesiology 1988;68:851–61.
63. Kern SE, Stanski DR.
Pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of
intravenously administered
anesthetic drugs: concepts and
lessons for drug development.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2008;84:
153–7.
64. Stanski DR, Shafer SL.
Quantifying anesthetic drug
interaction. Implications for drug
dosing. Anesthesiology 1995;
83:1–5.
65. Twersky RS, Jamerson B, Warner
DS, et al. Hemodynamics and
emergence profile of remifentanil
versus fentanyl prospectively
compared in a large population of
surgical patients. J Clin Anesth
2001;13:407–16.
66. Wiel E, Davette M, Carpentier L,
et al. Comparison of remifentanil
and alfentanil during anaesthesia
for patients undergoing direct
laryngoscopy without intubation.
Br J Anaesth 2003;91:421–3.
67. Ozkose Z, Yalcin Cok O, Tuncer
B, et al. Comparison of
hemodynamics, recovery profile,
and early postoperative pain
control and costs of remifentanil
versus alfentanil-based total
intravenous anesthesia (TIVA).
J Clin Anesth 2002;14:161–8.
68. Alper I, Erhan E, Ugur G, et al.
Remifentanil versus alfentanil in
total intravenous anaesthesia for
day case surgery. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2003;20:61–4.
69. Pandazi AK, Louizos AA, Davilis
DJ, et al. Inhalational anesthetic
technique in microlaryngeal
surgery: a comparison between
sevoflurane-remifentanil and
sevoflurane-alfentanil anesthesia.
Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
2003;112:373–8.
70. Albertin A, Casati A, Federica L,
et al. The effect-site concentration
of remifentanil blunting
cardiovascular responses to
tracheal intubation and skin
incision during bispectral index-
guided propofol anesthesia.
Anesth Analg 2005;101:125–30.
71. Björkman S, Wada DR, Stanski
DR. Application of physiologic
models to predict the influence of
changes in body composition and
blood flows on the
pharmacokinetics of fentanyl and
alfentanil in patients.
Anesthesiology 1998;88:
657–67.
72. Passot S, Servin F, Allary R, et al.
Target-controlled versus
manually-controlled infusion of
propofol for direct laryngoscopy
and bronchoscopy. Anesth Analg
2002;94:1212–16.
73. Yeganeh N, Roshani B, Yari M,
et al. Target-controlled infusion
anesthesia with propofol and
remifentanil compared with
manually controlled infusion
anesthesia in mastoidectomy
surgeries. Middle East J
Anesthesiol 2010;20:785–93.
74. Troy AM, Hutchinson RC, Easy
WR, et al. Tracheal intubating
conditions using propofol and
remifentanil target-controlled
infusions. Anaesthesia
2002;57:1204–7.
75. Ryu JH, Sohn IS, Do SH.
Controlled hypotension for
middle ear surgery: a comparison
between remifentanil and
magnesium sulphate. Br J Anaesth
2009;103:490–5.
76. Leone M, Rousseau S, Avidan M,
et al. Target concentrations of
remifentanil with propofol to
blunt coughing during
intubation, cuff inflation, and
tracheal suctioning. Br J Anaesth
2004;93:660–3
77. Takahashi H, Sugimaru T, Honjo
I, et al. Assessment of the gas
exchange function of the middle
ear using nitrous oxide.
A preliminary study. Acta
Otolaryngol 1994;114:643–6.
78. Graham AM, Myles PS, Leslie K,
et al. A cost-benefit analysis of the
ENIGMA trial. Anesthesiology
2011;115:265–72.
79. Degoute CS, Ray MJ, Manchon
M, et al. Remifentanil and
controlled hypotension;
comparison with nitroprusside or
esmolol during tympanoplasty.
Can J Anaesth 2001;48:20–7.
80. Richa F, Yazigi A, Sleilaty G, et al.
Comparison between
dexmedetomidine and
remifentanil for controlled
hypotension during
tympanoplasty. Eur J Anaesthesiol
2008;25:369–74.
81. Dal D, Celiker V, Ozer E, et al.
Induced hypotension for
tympanoplasty: a comparison of
desflurane, isoflurane and
sevoflurane. Eur J Anaesthesiol
2004;21:902–6.
82. Degoute CS. Controlled
hypotension: a guide to drug
choice. Drugs 2007;67:1053–76.
83. Yu SK, Tait G, Karkouti K, et al.
The safety of perioperative
esmolol: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Anesth Analg
2011;112:267–81.
84. Miller DR, Martineau RJ,
Wynands JE, et al. Bolus
administration of esmolol for
controlling the haemodynamic
response to tracheal intubation:
the Canadian Multicentre Trial.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
293
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Can J Anaesth 1991;38:
849–58.
85. Menigaux C, Guignard B, Adam
F, et al. Esmolol prevents
movement and attenuates the BIS
response to orotracheal
intubation. Br J Anaesth
2002;89:857–62.
86. Oda Y, Nishikawa K, Hase I, et al.
The short-acting beta1-
adrenoceptor antagonists esmolol
and landiolol suppress the
bispectral index response to
tracheal intubation during
sevoflurane anesthesia. Anesth
Analg 2005;100:733–7.
87. White PF, Wang B, Tang J, et al.
The effect of intraoperative use of
esmolol and nicardipine on
recovery after ambulatory
surgery. Anesth Analg
2003;97:1633–8.
88. Coloma M, Chiu JW, White PF,
et al. The use of esmolol as an
alternative to remifentanil during
desflurane anesthesia for fast-
track outpatient gynecologic
laparoscopic surgery. Anesth
Analg 2001;92:352–7.
89. Smith I, Van Hemelrijck J, White
PF. Efficacy of esmolol versus
alfentanil as a supplement to
propofol-nitrous oxide
anesthesia. Anesth Analg
1991;73:540–6.
90. Albera R, Ferrero V, Canale A,
et al. Cochlear blood flow
modifications induced by
anaesthetic drugs in middle ear
surgery: comparison between
sevoflurane and propofol. Acta
Otolaryngol 2003;123:812–6.
91. Preckel MP, Ferber-Viart C,
Leftheriotis G, et al.
Autoregulation of human inner
ear blood flow during middle ear
surgery with propofol or
isoflurane anesthesia during
controlled hypotension. Anesth
Analg 1998;87:1002–8.
92. Cai YR, Xu J, Chen LH, et al.
Electromyographic monitoring of
facial nerve under different levels
of neuromuscular blockade
during middle ear microsurgery.
Chin Med J (Engl) 2009;122:311–4.
93. Lennon RL, Hosking MP, Daube
JR, et al. Effect of partial
neuromuscular blockade on
intraoperative electromyography
in patients undergoing resection
of acoustic neuromas. Anesth
Analg 1992;75:729–33.
94. Kizilay A, Aladag I, Cokkeser Y,
et al. Effects of partial
neuromuscular blockade on facial
nerve monitorization in otologic
surgery. Acta Otolaryngol
2003;123:321–4.
95. Chang T, Dworsky WA,
White PF. Continuous
electromyography for monitoring
depth of anesthesia. Anesth
Analg 1988;67:521–5.
96. Verghese C. Laryngeal mask
airway devices: three maneuvers
for any clinical situation.
Available at: http://www.
anesthesiologynews.com/
download/3Maneuvers_
ANGAM10_WM.pdf. Accessed
November 4, 2011.
97. Rees L, Mason RA. Advanced
upper airway obstruction in ENT
surgery. Br J Anaesth CEPD
Reviews 2002;2:134–8.
98. Machata AM, Illievich UM,
Gustorff B, et al. Remifentanil for
tracheal tube tolerance: a case
control study. Anaesthesia
2007;62:796–801.
99. Nho JS, Lee SY, Kang JM, et al.
Effects of maintaining a
remifentanil infusion on the
recovery profiles during
emergence from anaesthesia and
tracheal extubation. Br J Anaesth
2009;103:817–21.
100. Liu YH, Li MJ, Wang PC, et al.
Use of dexamethasone on the
prophylaxis of nausea and
vomiting after tympanomastoid
surgery. Laryngoscope
2001;111:1271–4.
101. Issioui T, Klein KW, White PF,
et al. The efficacy of
premedication with celecoxib
and acetaminophen in preventing
pain after otolaryngologic
surgery. Anesth Analg
2002;94:1188–93.
102. White PF, Tang J, Wender RH,
et al. The effects of oral
ibuprofen and celecoxib in
preventing pain, improving
recovery outcomes and patient
satisfaction after ambulatory
surgery. Anesth Analg
2011;112:323–9.
103. Lerman J, Jöhr M. Inhalational
anesthesia vs total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA) for pediatric
anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth
2009;19:521–34.
104. Abuzayed B, Canbaz B, Sanus
GZ, et al. Combined craniofacial
resection of anterior skull base
tumors: long-term results and
experience of single institution.
Neurosurg Rev 2011;34:101–13.
105. Kaplan MJ, Fischbein NJ, Harsh
GR. Anterior skull base surgery.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am
2005;38:107–31.
106. Ramina R, Maniglia JJ,
Fernandes YB, et al. Tumors of
the jugular foramen: diagnosis
and management. Neurosurgery
2005;57(1 Suppl):59 –68.
107. Jensen NF. Glomus tumors of
the head and neck: anesthetic
considerations. Anesth Analg
1994;78:112–9.
108. Sen C, Hague K, Kacchara R,
et al. Jugular foramen:
microscopic anatomic features
and implications for neural
preservation with reference to
glomus tumors involving the
temporal bone. Neurosurgery
2001;48:838–47.
109. Jackson LE, Roberson JB Jr.
Vagal nerve monitoring in
surgery of the skull base: a
comparison of efficacy of three
techniques. Am J Otol
1999;20:649–56.
110. Topsakal C, Al-Mefty O, Bulsara
KR, et al. Intraoperative
monitoring of lower cranial
Section 4: Anesthesia for laryngotracheal surgery
294
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012nerves in skull base surgery:
technical report and review of
123 monitored cases. Neurosurg
Rev 2008;31:45–53.
111. Lopez JR. The use of evoked
potentials in intraoperative
neurophysiologic monitoring.
Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am
2004;15:63–8.
112. Sloan T. Anesthesia and
intraoperative
neurophysiological monitoring
in children. Childs Nerv Syst
2010;26:227–35.
113. Bauer DF, Youkilis A, Schenck
C, et al. The falcine
trigeminocardiac reflex: case
report and review of the
literature. Surg Neurol
2005;63:143–8.
114. Schaller B, Cornelius JF,
Prabhakar H, et al. Trigemino-
Cardiac Reflex Examination
Group (TCREG). The
trigemino-cardiac reflex: an
update of the current
knowledge. J Neurosurg
Anesthesiol 2009;21:187–95.
115. Gil Z, Cohen JT, Spektor S, et al.
Anterior skull base surgery
without prophylactic airway
diversion procedures.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2003;128:
681–5.
116. Drage MP, Nunez J, Vaughan
RS, et al. Jaw thrusting as a
clinical test to assess the
adequate depth of anaesthesia
for insertion of the laryngeal
mask. Anaesthesia
1996;51:1167–70.
117. O 'Connor CJ, Borromeo CJ,
Stix MS. Assessing ProSeal
laryngeal mask positioning: the
suprasternal notch test. Anesth
Analg 2002;94:1374–5.
118. Brimacombe J, Keller C. The
ProSeal laryngeal mask airway.
Anesthesiology Clin N Am
2002;20:871–91.
119. Cook TM, Nolan JP. The
ProSeal™ laryngeal mask
airway: a review of the literature.
Can J Anesth 2005;52:739–60.
120. Timmermann A, Cremer S, Eich
C, et al. Prospective clinical and
fiberoptic evaluation of the
Supreme Laryngeal Mask
Airway™. Anesthesiology
2009;110:262–5.
121. Keller C, Brimacombe JR, Keller
K, et al. Comparison of four
methods for assessing airway
sealing pressure with the
laryngeal mask airway in adult
patients. Br J Anaesth
1999;82:286–7.
122. Drolet P, Girard M. An aid to
correct positioning of the
ProSeal laryngeal mask. Can
J Anaesth 2001;48:718–9.
123. Eschertzhuber S, Brimacombe J,
Hohlrieder M, et al. The
Laryngeal Mask Airway
Supreme™ – a single use
laryngeal mask airway with
an oesophageal vent.
A randomised, cross-over
study with the Laryngeal Mask
Airway ProSeal™ in paralysed,
anaesthetised patients.
Anaesthesia 2009;64:79–83.
124. Seet E, Rajeev S, Firoz T, et al.
Safety and efficacy of laryngeal
mask airway Supreme versus
laryngeal mask airway ProSeal: a
randomized controlled trial.
Eur J Anaesthesiol 2010;27:
602–7
125. Sataloff RT, Hawkshaw MJ,
Divi V, et al. Voice surgery.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am
2007;40:1151–83.
126. Beckford NS, Mayo R,
Wilkinson A 3rd, et al. Effects of
short-term endotracheal
intubation on vocal function.
Laryngoscope 1990;100:331–6.
127. Rieger A, Brunne B, Hass I, et al.
Laryngo-pharyngeal complaints
following laryngeal mask airway
and endotracheal intubation.
J Clin Anesth 1997;9:42–7.
128. Yu SH, Beirne OR. Laryngeal
mask airways have a lower risk
of airway complications
compared with endotracheal
intubation: a systematic review.
J Oral Maxillofac Surg
2010;68:2359–76.
129. Zimmert M, Zwirner P, Kruse E,
et al. Effects on vocal function
and incidence of laryngeal
disorder when using a laryngeal
mask airway in comparison with
an endotracheal tube. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 1999;16:511–5.
130. Hönemann CW, Hahnenkamp
K, Möllhoff T, et al. Minimal-
flow anaesthesia with controlled
ventilation: comparison between
laryngeal mask airway and
endotracheal tube. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2001;18:458–66.
131. Hamdan AL, Kanazi G, Rameh
C, et al. Immediate post-
operative vocal changes in
patients using laryngeal mask
airway versus endotracheal tube.
J Laryngol Otol 2008;122:829–35.
132. Hamdan AL, Sibai A, Rameh C,
et al. Short-term effects of
endotracheal intubation on
voice. J Voice 2007;21:762–8.
Chapter 29: Anesthesia for otologic and neurotologic surgery
295
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:42:17 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.032
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 5
Chapter
30
Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
Anesthesia for diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures
Basem Abdelmalak and Mona Sarkiss
Diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures are performed
every day by both pulmonologists and thoracic sur-
geons. Diagnostic bronchoscopy is indicated for
airway exam, bronchioalveolar lavage, biopsy of
airway lesions, autofluorescence bronchoscopy, and
narrow band imaging. Most of the diagnostic proced-
ures are performed in an outpatient setting under
moderate (conscious) sedation in conjunction with
local anesthesia to numb the airway. Moderate
sedation is commonly provided by a trained sedation
nurse under the supervision of the bronchoscopist
and has become a well-accepted method of providing
anesthesia for diagnostic bronchoscopy. The short
duration of diagnostic bronchoscopy procedures
makes moderate sedation a suitable method of
anesthesia [1]. In recent years more prolonged sophis-
ticated diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures have
emerged. These include endobronchial ultrasound
with fine-needle aspiration (EBUS-FNA) [2], staging
of lung cancer, and electromagnetic navigation
(EMN) with biopsy of peripheral lung lesions. These
procedures require a longer duration and a quiet field
for precise targeting of the mediastinal lymph nodes
or lung lesions without injury to surrounding large
vessels or breach of the pleura. As a result there is
increasing demand for general anesthesia under the
care of anesthesiologists for advanced diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures.
The demand for the advanced diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures is increasing as these pro-
cedures provide a minimally invasive approach.
Although it seems intuitive to perform general anes-
thesia for airway procedures in the operating room,
the current practice is that most of these procedures
are performed in interventional bronchoscopy suites
that have been modified to mimic an operating room
(Figure 30.1) These suites are commonly found in
large academic centers with high volumes of patients
needing advanced diagnostic bronchoscopic proced-
ures on a daily basis. Several factors have caused the
shift of performing such airway procedures to outside
the operating room. These include the high safety
profile of EBUS-FNA, the increased cost of perform-
ing procedures in the operating room, inability to
obtain operating room block time on short notice
for the pulmonologists, and the cumbersome process
of moving the equipment required to perform the
procedures to the operating room. The interventional
bronchoscopy suites are designed with both safety
and excellence in mind [3]. The American Society of
Anesthesiology guidelines on establishing out of the
operating room anesthesia support have to be imple-
mented during the design of such interventional
bronchoscopic suites [4].
In addition to the concern over performing airway
procedures outside the operating room, there is a
greater concern over patients requiring such proced-
ures. The majority of patients needing diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures are diagnosed with or
suspected to have lung cancer with underlying severe
morbidities that commonly place them as ASA status
3–5. This represents a challenge for the anesthesiolo-
gists, who must simultaneously consider the severity
of their lung pathology and their other comorbidities.
It must also be emphasized that a continuous discus-
sion between the anesthesiologist and the bronchos-
copist needs to be maintained during the procedure
as they both share the airway. Consequently, the
anesthesiologist has to familiarize him/herself with
the procedure, possible complications and their man-
agement as well as alternative anesthetic and airway
management plans.
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
297
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:14 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Advanced diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures
Endobronchial ultrasound fine-needle
aspiration
Definition
EBUS is a minimally invasive procedure that was designed
to evaluate mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy using
a linear array ultrasound probe modified flexible bron-
choscope. Once enlarged lymph nodes are detected,
real-time transbronchial fine-needle aspiration can be
performed under direct vision facilitated by ultrasound
guidance. Tissue confirmation by on-site pathology com-
monly follows. Noteworthy is that the ultrasonic broncho-
scope has Doppler capabilities that allow for monocolor
flow mapping of mediastinal blood vessels.
Indications
1. Histological diagnosis of mediastinal and/or hilar
lymphadenopathy or masses.
2. Staging of known lung cancer.
Procedure description
Due to the large external diameter of 6.9 mm of the
EBUS bronchoscope, it is usually introduced through
the mouth instead of the nose. Once the EBUS bron-
choscope is positioned in the desired location a bal-
loon at the tip of the scope is inflated with normal
saline. Saline acts as a coupling medium for the ultra-
sound and allows the distal end of the bronchoscope
to abut the wall of the airway. A two-screen display
provides the fiberoptic image of the airway as well as
the ultrasound image (Figure 30.2). Vascular land-
marks are then identified and the associated lymph
nodes described in the Mountain classification are
measured. A fine needle ranging in gauge from 22
to 25 is then introduced through the working channel
of the EBUS bronchoscope and is advanced through
the wall of the airway into the lymph node. Sampling
may be repeated until adequate samples are con-
firmed by rapid on-site pathology evaluation (ROSE).
Figure 30.1. An example of the configuration of a modern bronchoscopy surgery room (image courtesy of the bronchoscopy suite at Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH). Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
298
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:14 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Electromagnetic navigational
bronchoscopy (ENB)
Definition
ENB is a bronchoscopic procedure that utilizes the
principle of GPS to allow the bronchoscopist to reach
peripheral lung lesions adjacent to very small distal
bronchi.
Indications
1. Biopsy of peripheral lung nodules.
2. Lymph node biopsy.
3. Guide the insertion of radiotherapy or
brachytherapy markers.
Procedure description (Figure 30.3)
Planning phase
A recent chest CT scan of the patient is loaded into
software that reconstructs the patient 's airways in 3D
images. The bronchoscopist marks the targeted area
on the 3D image and plans the pathway to the target.
Navigation phase
The bronchoscopist then introduces an extended
working channel with a sensor probe through a bron-
choscope in the airway. The extended working chan-
nel and the sensor probe are then navigated under
real-time guidance to the target location. Once the
desired location is reached the bronchoscopist locks
the extended working channel in place and removes
the sensor probe. Consequently, any bronchoscopic
tool desired (e.g., needle, radiotherapy markers)
can be introduced through the extended working
channel to the lesion of interest. It should be noted
that in such procedures, specially designed and meas-
ured procedure beds are used, with the precaution of
excluding all ferromagnetic items from the bed; for
example, we have devised a plastic replica of the
commonly used circuit holder to be used for these
procedures (Figure 30.4).
Figure 30.2. Bronchoscopy suite set-up for EBUS-FNA mediastinal staging. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 30: Anesthesia for diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures
299
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:14 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Figure 30.3. OR set up for electromagnetic navigational biopsy (ENB). Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Figure 30.4. Nonferromagnetic circuit
holder to be used with electromagnetic
navigational biopsies (innovation of
Ken Barclay, of Cleveland Clinic
Bronchoscopy Suite). Reprinted with
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012.
All rights reserved.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
300
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:14 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Anesthetic care
Preoperative evaluation
Diagnostic bronchoscopy can be considered an
urgent procedure where a definitive diagnosis and/
or staging of a known cancer is needed to plan treat-
ment. Preoperative assessment can be conducted in
a customary fashion with special attention to airway
and respiration.
Symptoms: hoarseness, stridor, dysphagia,
hemoptysis, dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea.
Signs: use of accessory muscles, wheezing, rhonchi,
crackles.
Imaging: location of enlarged lymph node station
in relation to the airway and number of stations to be
biopsied, extent of lung and mediastinal involvement,
airway and major vessels compression or obstruction,
evidence of pneumonia or other lung pathology.
Associated comorbidities: history of tobacco, alco-
hol use, coronary artery disease, COPD, supplemental
oxygen use, chemotherapy or radiation treatment,
evidence of metastatic disease
Premedication
Anxiolytics: in patients with compromised airway
anxiolytics should be used with care if indicated in
very anxious patients. Supplemental oxygen should be
provided or be readily available.
Antisialagogue: if the patient can tolerate tachy-
cardia, glycopyrrolate 0.2 –0.4 mg can be given to
reduce secretions that might dilute topical anesthetics
used during bronchoscopy.
Oxygen: preoxygenation with 100% FiO 2 can be
vital especially in patients exhibiting various degrees
of hypoxemia on room air, or those who are already
requiring home O 2 therapy.
Anesthesia technique
Advanced diagnostic bronchoscopy can be performed
under moderate sedation, monitored anesthesia care
or general anesthesia.
Moderate (conscious) sedation
Interventional bronchoscopists with no access to
anesthesia support commonly perform advanced
bronchoscopic procedures under moderate sedation.
Anxiolytics, e.g., midazolam, and narcotics, e.g., fen-
tanyl, are titrated for sedation. The airway is topica-
lized with local anesthetics in a spray-as-you-go
fashion. Difficulties with this approach are commonly
encountered due to the extended length of the pro-
cedure and lower tolerance of the large-diameter
EBUS bronchoscope by the patient. As a result higher
than commonly used doses of sedating medications
are given to allow the patient to tolerate the longer
duration and the large bronchoscope. This may result
in respiratory depression, unplanned intubation or
hospital admission and prolonged recovery time.
Monitored anesthesia care
In a selected group of patients monitored anesthesia
care can be the anesthetic technique of choice: for
example, procedures of short duration such as
when only one lymph node station will be biopsied,
especially if it were of a large size, or in patients
with no underlying lung pathology or oxygen
dependence.
The drugs of choice should be the ultra-short-
acting anesthetics that are easily titrated to match
the patient tolerance to the procedure as well as the
status of respiration, e.g., remifentanil, alfentanil, pro-
pofol, dexmedetomidine and fospropofol [5,6]. On
the other hand midazolam, fentanyl, and morphine
can also be acceptable choices.
General anesthesia
The total intravenous anesthetic technique (TIVA) is
the technique of choice [7 –9] and is preferred over
inhalational anesthetic for the following reasons.
Frequent suctioning of the airway secretions during
the procedure can result in fluctuating levels of anes-
thetic gas in the airway that can change the depth
of anesthesia. Additionally, frequent opening of the
anesthetic circuit to air to introduce and remove the
bronchoscope causes pollution of the procedure room
air. It is noteworthy that inhalation anesthetics can be
used to treat bronchospasm that is refractory to con-
ventional medical treatment such as b-agonists, which
may occur during bronchoscopy.
Propofol infusion rates between 100 and 250 mg/
kg/min are used and can be titrated to effect based on
the bispectral index monitor (BIS). On one hand the
use of the BIS monitors can help the anesthesiologist
avoid excessive anesthesia and hemodynamic com-
promise and on the other hand it can alert the
anesthesiologist to light anesthesia and possible recall,
which could occur as a result of pump failure, line
disconnect or occlusion.
Chapter 30: Anesthesia for diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures
301
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:14 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Opiates
Despite the fact that advanced bronchoscopic proced-
ures are not associated with somatic pain, the use of
low-dose opiates (e.g., fentanyl 50 –100 mg) or ultra-
short-acting opiates (e.g., remifentanil) can help
reduce the sympathetic stimulation associated with
airway manipulation during bronchoscopy as well as
ameliorate the commonly experienced post-procedure
cough. It should be noted, however, that remifentanil
use may result in bradycardia and hypotension,which
may lead to the administration of an unnecessarily
large amount of fluid, as the goal is to keep these
patients on the dry side.
Muscle relaxant
Introduction of the bronchoscope through the vocal
cords into the airway results in laryngospasm and
excessive coughing. This can be easily managed by
installation of local anesthetics such as lidocaine 1%.
However, care should be taken to avoid exceeding the
maximum dose of lidocaine (5 mg/kg plain, 7 mg/kg
with added epinephrine). The addition of muscle
relaxant during the induction of anesthesia helps pre-
vent laryngospasm and coughing. Muscle relaxants
provide the bronchoscopist with a quiet field where
small lymph nodes in difficult positions, such as
between the aorta and the pulmonary artery, can be
safely reached. Additionally EMN requires the patient
to be motionless in order to overlap the CT scan
image onto the patient 's actual tracheobronchial tree.
A succinylcholine infusion, rocuronium or cisatracur-
ium, can be used safely. However, care should be
taken in patients with lung cancer and associated
Eaton–Lambert syndrome, where prolonged paralysis
may occur.
Fraction inspired oxygen (FiO 2)
Administration of 100% oxygen is commonly needed
during advanced bronchoscopic procedures. Patients
with underlying lung pathology and low baseline
oxygen saturation desaturate frequently during the
procedure. Consequently, FiO 2 should be titrated to
maintain patient saturation above 94%.
Airway devices
Procedures performed under conscious sedation or
monitored anesthesia care require no airway devices.
However, oxygen should be delivered via nasal
cannula and carbon dioxide levels should be moni-
tored by capnography.
Supraglottic airways
Supraglottic airways (SGA) are ideal airway devices
for advanced bronchoscopic procedures. The large
diameter of the shaft of the SGA makes it easy to
insert the large EBUS bronchoscope (diameter 6.9
mm) and to ventilate around the bronchoscope. The
SGA also allows the bronchoscopist to inspect the
entire length of the airway from the vocal cord to
distal large bronchi (Figure 30.5) [10]. Additionally,
the LMA allows free mobility of the bronchoscope in
the airway in order to bring the ultrasound tip into
close proximity to the wall of the tracheobronchial
tree. A bite block needs to be inserted around the SGA
or the built-in bite block in some brands, as in the i-
gel version of the SGA, suffices (Figure 30.6).
Disadvantages of the SGA are lack of protection
against aspiration and the inability to seat the SGA
well in patients with oral, pharyngeal or laryngeal
deformity, pathology or radiation.
An ideal SGA for these procedures would have:
(1) a large-diameter short shaft
(2) high seal pressure
(3) built-in bite block
(4) no obstacles for the passage of the bronchoscope
such as aperture bars
(5) esophageal access to avoid gastric distension and
emptying of gastric contents
(6) the option to intubate through it if needed.
Endotracheal tubes (ETT)
Due to the large diameter of the EBUS bronchoscope
(6.9 mm) a large endotracheal tube (ETT) with
internal diameter of 8.5 or 9.0 mm has to be used to
facilitate ventilation (Figure 30.7) [10]. Once inserted
the ETT needs to be positioned above the level of the
lymph nodes to be biopsied. For example station 2
paratracheal lymph node may require a very high
insertion of the ETT in the airway where the ETT
cuff is in close proximity to the vocal cord. Addition-
ally the ETT needs to be cut close (Figure 30.8B) to
the patient to allow the insertion of the maximum
length of the bronchoscope to reach the most distal
lymph nodes, minimize resistance and facilitate bron-
choscope navigation. However, in special circum-
stances when bleeding is anticipated, it is preferable
not to cut the tube short to keep it available in case it
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
302
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012is needed to tamponade a bronchial bleeding or to
advance into one of the mainstem bronchi for
the purpose of lung isolation (Figure 30.8A).
Another situation when the use of an ETT is helpful
is when the EBUS bronchoscope is used as an eso-
phagoscope when it is desirable to biopsy nodes that
are closer to the esophagus than to the trachea. An
airway secured with an ETT will greatly facilitate the
esophageal insertion of the EBUS bronchoscope
(Figure 30.9).
Independent of the airway device used, a swivel
connector adaptor is needed to connect the airway
device to the anesthesia circuit to allow simultaneous
ventilation and bronchoscopy insertion (Figures 30.6
and 30.8).
Continuous clear communication between the
anesthesiologist and the bronchoscopist is essential
throughout the procedure as the condition of the
airway is constantly changing. For example inflation
of the balloon on the EBUS bronchoscope in the
trachea can cause an increase in airway pressure
and limit ventilation, or excessive bleeding in the
airway and suctioning can result in atelectasis and
desaturation.
Postoperative care
Patients should be transported to a standard post-
anesthesia care unit (PACU) with well-trained nurs-
ing staff. Supplemental oxygen should be continued
via face mask or nasal cannula and weaned off grad-
ually. Patients should be monitored with standard
monitors (EKG, pulse oximetery, noninvasive blood
pressure). Due to the use of ultra-short-acting general
anesthetic drugs, patients are commonly alert and
oriented within a short period of arrival in the PACU.
Figure 30.5. The use of supraglottic
airway in the context of EBUS TBFNA.
Reprinted with permission, Cleveland
Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights
reserved.
Chapter 30: Anesthesia for diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures
303
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Patients are observed until they meet PACU discharge
criteria (30 –45 minutes) before discharge. Detection
and management of possible post-procedure compli-
cations is described next.
Complications
EBUS and EMN are considered relatively safe pro-
cedures. Rare complications and morbidities can
occur.
Complications during diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures
Low to no yield: when the pulmonologist is unsuc-
cessful in obtaining tissue at all or obtaining very little
tissue for the biopsy. One aspect the anesthesiologist
can help with here is to provide a motionless patient
through the use of either deep anesthesia alone, or
balanced anesthesia with muscle relaxation. Any little
movement, such as those associated with coughing
secondary to tracheal and carinal irritation by the
tube and/or the bronchoscope, especially occurring
at the time of obtaining the biopsy, may cause the
pulmonologist to miss the target.
Hypercarbia may be noted during the procedure
due to ventilator perception of increased airway
resistance after insertion of the bronchoscope in the
airway. This is especially common with the use of
SGA with imposed pressure limit of 20 mmHg to
avoid inflation of the stomach. Hypercarbia can be
treated by increasing the minute ventilation.
Transient hypoxemia is encountered rarely and
can be due to several factors:
(1) lung atelectasis due to excessive bleeding in the
airway that migrates to the distal alveoli, or
excessive suctioning of the airway creating
negative pressure that collapses the alveoli;
(2) inadequate ventilation;
(3) pneumothorax:
Pneumothorax occurs most often with sampling
of station 2 lymph node. Pneumothorax can be
detected on the ultrasound image or using fluoro-
scopy during or after the procedure. Pneumothorax
can also manifest post procedure as chest pain.
Bleeding: multiple needle puncture sites cause
minor bleeding in the airway that can be easily suc-
tioned. Major bleeding from large mediastinal vessels
has not been reported. The use of a small-gauge
needle for biopsy makes major bleeding an unlikely
complication.
Laryngospasm can be encountered mainly around
extubation time after the muscle relaxant is reversed.
The etiology is unclear but it may be due to the
irritation of the vocal cord by the movement of
the large bronchoscope during the lengthy procedure.
Laryngospasm is easily treated with installation
of local anesthetics on the vocal cord under direct
vision through the working channel of the flexible
bronchoscope.
Bronchospasm: although the etiology is unclear
bronchospasm may occur during bronchoscopy.
Bronchospasm can be detected by audible wheeze,
increase in airway pressure and decreased tidal
volume delivered by mechanical ventilation. Inhal-
ation of a b-agonist such as albuterol and conversion
Figure 30.6. An i-gel supraglottic airway inserted and connected
to the breathing circuit through a blue Portex swivel adapter and a
corrugated Bennet connector. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland
Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights
reserved.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
304
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Figure 30.7. The use of endotracheal
tube for EBUS TBFNA. Reprinted with
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012.
All rights reserved.
(a) (b)
Figure 30.8. (A) A large diameter (8.5) ETT left uncut at the original length, which increases the resistance to the in-and-out motion of the
bronchoscope, but can help in cases where endobronchial bleeding is a risk. In such circumstances it can beadvanced and used for lung isolation to
maintain ventilation. (B) ETT, cut short, allowing for better manuvering and less resistance for the EBUS bronchoscope. In both images the ETT is
connected to the circuit with a blue Portex swivel adapter and a corrugated Bennet connector while the fiberoptic bronchoscope is seen entering the
ETT via the Portex adapter. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography© 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 30: Anesthesia for diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures
305
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012to inhalation anesthetic such as sevoflurane can gen-
erally relieve the refractory bronchospasm.
Respiratory failure may occur in the PACU and
results in unplanned hospital admission, intubation
and possible ICU stay. Although all common causes
of respiratory failure should be entertained, residual
muscle weakness and increased sensitivity to muscle
relaxant in patients with lung cancer and Eaton –
Lambert syndrome should be considered.
Cough: coughing after bronchoscopy is a
common encounter. Cough may be due to throat
irritation from the bronchoscope or airway device
used or due to distal airway irritation from needle
puncture sites and bleeding.
Delayed infections: there have been case reports of
mediastinal abscess, lung abscess, and infected peri-
cardial effusion 1 –3 weeks after the procedure.
Summary
Diagnostic bronchoscopy is a rapidly expanding field.
Diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures can be complex,
the patient population generally has multiple comor-
bidities, and the procedures are performed mostly out
of the operating rooms. Anesthesiologists need to stay
up to date with the advances in this field, and the
anesthetic challenges that might come with them.
Open communication between the anesthesiologist
Figure 30.9. The EBUS bronchoscope is
used as an esophagoscope when it is
desirable to biopsy nodes that are closer
to the esophagus than to the trachea.
Please note that the EBUS bronchoscope
is inserted into the mouth next to the
ETT that is securing the airway. Reprinted
with permission, Cleveland Clinic
Center for Medical Art & Photography
© 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
306
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012and pulmonologist, understanding the nature of the
procedure, and, above all, extreme vigilance and pre-
paredness are mandatory to achieve a favorable
outcome.
Case study
The patient was a 48-year-old male, 5 0900 (175 cm) in
height and weighing 95 kg, with a history of hyper-
tension, diabetes and an incidental finding of a per-
ipheral right lower lung nodule, lower paratracheal
lymphadenopathy, with two nodes measuring 2 /C2 2
cm each as estimated by chest CT.
He was scheduled for an endobronchial ultra-
sound (EBUS) biopsy of his paratracheal lymph
nodes, and an endobronchial navigational biopsy
(ENB) of his right lung nodule.
Preoperative evaluation
/C15Comorbidities: well-controlled hypertension and
diabetes.
/C15Airway: Mallampati 2 airway, thyromental
distance of 3 finger breadths, no overbite, neck
circumference of 15.5 inches.
Induction of anesthesia
On the morning of the procedure, the patient had
been NPO for more than 8 hours. The anesthesiolo-
gist and the pulmonolgist discussed the procedure
and airway management plans.
After applying standard monitors, the patient was
premedicated with 2 mg of midazolam IV. The
patient was then pre-oxygenated with 100% oxygen
via a face mask while a BIS monitor (Aspect Medical,
Newton, MA) was applied to the forehead to monitor
depth of anesthesia for the planned total intravenous
anesthesia (TIVA) technique, thus decreasing the risk
of unintended intraoperative awareness.
General anesthesia was then induced with 150mgo f
fentanyl, 40 mg of lidocaine (to lessen the burning
sensation associated with propofol injection), and
160 mg of propofol IV. A continuous IV propofol
infusion was started at 140 mg/kg/min, followed by
rocuronium 70 mg for muscle relaxation. Bag-mask
ventilation was initiated with the aid of an oral airway.
In about 2 minutes, when muscle relaxation was
confirmed, the patient was intubated with a large
9 mm ID endotracheal tube, using a MAC 4 laryngo-
scope. Endotracheal (ET) intubation was confirmed by
observing the ET tube (ETT) passing through the vocal
cords, chest rise, the presence of bilateral breath
sounds, and via capnography. A large ETT was chosen
to allow enough space around the US bronchoscope
for easy ventilation and to decrease resistance for the
movement of the bronchoscope within the ETT.
The ETT was secured at 20 cm as measured at the
lip in the midline, and was then cut short (above the
take-off of the pilot balloon) to facilitate movement of
the bronchoscope. A Portex swivel adapter (Smiths
Medical, Dublin, OH) was applied to connect the ETT
to the circuit through a Bennet connector instead of
the L-shaped circuit connector ordinarily used to
connct to the ETT (Figure 30.8). This Portex swivel
adapter helps facilitate spontaneous/positive-pressure
ventilation during the procedure while the broncho-
scope is in the airway.
Note: had the paratracheal lymph nodes been
higher in anatomical position, the use of the ETT
would have precluded successful completion of the
procedure, and a supraglottic airway (SGA) such as
the i-gel would have been the airway of choice in this
situation. Another scenario where an ETT would not
have been particularly appropriate is with upper
right lung lesions, as the presence of the ETT in
the trachea will make the bending of the broncho-
scope to navigate through the endobronchial tree to
reach an upper right lung lesion more difficult. On
such an occasion, the use of a SGA would be more
helpful (Figure 30.5).
Maintenance of anesthesia
General anesthesia was maintained with a titrated IV
propofol infusion as per clinical needs and to a BIS
~ 50. Muscle relaxation was maintained at 1–2 twitches.
Dexamethasone 8 mg IV was given for PONV prophy-
laxis and to decrease postoperative airway edema.
Emergence and recovery from anesthesia
At the completion of the case, muscle relaxation was
reversed, and the propfol infusion was discontinued.
The patient was extubated when he regained muscle
power, became fully awake and followed commands.
The patient was then admitted to PACU, where a
chest X-ray was found to be negative for any acute
changes; he spent an uneventful 60 minutes in PACU
and was then discharged home once he met the
PACU discharge criteria.
Chapter 30: Anesthesia for diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures
307
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Clinical pearls
/C15In recent years some very sophisticated diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures have emerged:
endobronchial ultrasound with fine-needle
aspiration (EBUS-FNA), staging of lung cancer,
and electromagnetic navigation (EMN) with
biopsy of peripheral lung lesions. These
procedures require extended periods where a quiet
field is needed to allow precise targeting of the
mediastinal lymph nodes or lung lesions without
injury to surrounding large vessels or breach of
the pleura. Thus there is increasing demand for
general anesthesia under the supervision of
anesthesiologists.
/C15Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) is the
technique of choice in such cases, and is
preferred over inhalational anesthesia since
frequent opening of the anesthetic circuit to
introduce and remove the bronchoscope
causes pollution of the procedure room air. In
addition, frequent suctioning during the
procedure can result in fluctuating levels of
anesthetic gas in the airway that can change the
depth of anesthesia.
/C15Supraglottic airways (SGAs), e.g., i-gel or a
large-diameter ETT (8.5 or 9.0 mm ID),
are commonly used as an airway for these
procedures.
/C15Muscle relaxants provide the bronchoscopist with
a quiet field where small lymph nodes located in
difficult positions can be safely reached with
precision. This can improve safety and diagnostic
yield.
/C15Administration of 100% oxygen is commonly
needed during advanced bronchoscopic
procedures.
/C15Continuous clear communication between the
anesthesiologist and the bronchoscopist is
essential throughout the procedure as the
condition of the airway is constantly changing.
/C15Potential complications include, cough,
pneumothorax, laryngospasm or bronchospasm.
References
1. Sarkiss M. Anesthesia for
bronchoscopy and interventional
pulmonology: from moderate
sedation to jet ventilation. Curr
Opin Pulm Med 2011;17(4):274–8.
Epub 2011/04/27.
2. Yasufuku K, Chiyo M, Koh E,
et al. Endobronchial ultrasound
guided transbronchial needle
aspiration for staging of lung
cancer. Lung Cancer 2005;
50(3):347–54. Epub 2005/09/21.
3. Beatriz A. What is an
interventional pulmonolgy unit in
Europe? Clin Pulmon Med
2010;17(1):42–6.
4. Practice guidelines for sedation
and analgesia by non-
anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology
2002;96(4):1004–17.
5. Abdelmalak B, Makary L,
Hoban J, Doyle DJ.
Dexmedetomidine as sole sedative
for awake intubation in
management of the critical airway.
J Clin Anesth 2007;19(5):370–3.
Epub 2007/09/18.
6. Silvestri GA, Vincent BD, Wahidi
MM, et al. A phase 3, randomized,
double-blind study to assess the
efficacy and safety of fospropofol
disodium injection for
moderate sedation in patients
undergoing flexible
bronchoscopy. Chest 2009;
135(1):41–7. Epub 2008/07/22.
7. Sarkiss M, Kennedy M, Riedel B,
et al. Anesthesia technique for
endobronchial ultrasound-guided
fine needle aspiration of
mediastinal lymph node.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2007;21(6):892–6. Epub 2007/
12/11.
8. Abdelmalak B. Anesthesia for
interventional pulmonology. In
Urman RGW, Philip B, eds.
Anesthesia Outside of the
Operating Room . New York:
Oxford University Press; 2011.
pp. 167 –74.
9. Doyle DJ, Abdelmalak B,
Machuzak M, Gildea TR.
Anesthesia and airway
management for removing
pulmonary self-expanding
metallic stents. J Clin Anesth
2009;21(7):529–32. Epub 2009/
12/17.
10. Abdelmalak B, Gildea T, Doyle
DJ. Anesthesia for bronchoscopy.
Curr Pharm Des 2012:
in press.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
308
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:46:15 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.033
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 5
Chapter
31
Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
Anesthesia for therapeutic
bronchoscopic procedures
Basem Abdelmalak and Mona Sarkiss
The field of therapeutic bronchoscopy started in 1865
when Dr. Killian, a head and neck surgeon, invented
the rigid bronchoscope. The rigid bronchoscope was
initially used to remove aspirated foreign bodies from
the airway [1]. Topical cocaine and subsequently gen-
eral anesthesia were utilized to enable the patient to
tolerate the procedure. By 1968 the flexible broncho-
scope was invented by Ikeda. The small diameter and
plasticity of the flexible bronchoscope rendered bron-
choscopy a well-tolerated procedure, eliminating the
need for general anesthesia, and rigid bronchoscopy
became obsolete [1]. Flexible bronchoscopy was ini-
tially used for diagnostic bronchoscopic procedures
such as airway exam, bronchioalveolar lavage, airway
biopsy and foreign-body removal. Subsequently, the
emergence of multiple small instruments that could
fit through the flexible bronchoscope working chan-
nel expanded the scope of utilization of the flexible
bronchoscope; examples of such instruments are
laser, electrocautery, biopsy forceps and balloon dila-
tors. These small probes allowed the bronchoscopist
to perform therapeutic procedures in the airway
where airway tumors could be ablated and/or
debulked. Furthermore several airway stents designed
to maintain the patency of airways compromised by
benign or malignant disease were invented. Some of
the airway stents can be deployed over a guidewire
introduced through the flexible bronchoscope
working channel with or without fluoroscopic
guidance. On the other hand, silicone stents have a
large deployment device that mandates stent insertion
through the rigid bronchoscope. Similarly, large
devices to debulk airway tumors, e.g., the microdeb-
rider, could only be introduced into the airway
through the barrel of the rigid bronchoscope. As a
result, interest in rigid bronchoscopy and general
anesthesia was revived. General anesthesia and rigid
bronchoscopy has also become a more suitable option
for lengthy therapeutic procedures performed on the
compromised airway and requiring more accuracy
and precession.
Patients presenting for therapeutic bronchos-
copy procedures commonly have multiple comor-
bidities and advanced lung pathology in addition to
their compromised airway. Terminally ill patients
are also encountered frequently. The presence of
an anesthesiologist to manage the patient comorbid-
ity as well as the compromised airway is invaluable
especially when therapeutic airway procedures are
performed in terminally ill patients [2]. An added
challenge to the anesthesiologist is the need to share
the airway with the bronchoscopist. Coordination
between the bronchoscopist and the anesthesiologist
is needed as the airway dynamics, the ventilatory
parameters, and required fractional inspired oxygen
FiO2 are continuously changing throughout the
procedure.
As a result, an open discussion and planning
among the anesthesiologist and the bronchoscopist
has to take place prior to and throughout the
procedure. The discussion should include tumor
location, e.g., trachea vs. bronchi, degree of airway
obstruction, e.g., complete vs. partial obstruction,
type of anesthesia needed, e.g., general or sedation,
airway device options, e.g., none, endotracheal tube,
laryngeal mask airway, rigid bronchoscope, and the
most suitable mode of ventilation, e.g., spontaneous
ventilation, assisted ventilation, mechanical ventila-
tion or jet ventilation. Additionally the anesthesiolo-
gist has to be familiar with the step-by-step plan the
bronchoscopist has to follow to manage the airway
pathology.
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
309
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures
Therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures can be divided
into two categories:
(1) tumor-debulking procedures carried out with the
intention to decrease tumor burden and size in the
airway, thus minimizing the airway compromise;
(2) procedures aimed at maintaining airway patency
such as balloon dilatation and deployment of
airway stents.
Tumor debulking
Depending on the tumor location, size, and vascular-
ity and the bronchoscopist ’s experience, one of the
following tools can be used for debulking of airway
tumor.
Mechanical tumor debulking can be achieved using one
of the following methods
1. The rigid bronchoscope can be used as a coring
device where a corkscrew back and forth twisting
motion is employed to shave off the tumor inside
the airway into the barrel of the bronchoscope.
The rigid bronchoscope is then used to
tamponade the bleeding.
2. The rigid or flexible forceps can be used to debride
tumors in a piecemeal fashion.
3. The microdebrider is an enclosed powered rotary
blade that has simultaneous tissue resection and
suction for removal of debris. The microdebrider
has to be inserted through a rigid bronchoscope.
Thermal tumor ablation
1. A laser can be applied through both flexible and
rigid bronchoscopes. The Nd:YAG laser is the
most commonly used laser in the airway due to its
combined ability to vaporize tumor tissue and
coagulate bleeding points.
2. Electrocautery uses electric current to destroy
tissue by heating.
3. Argon plasma coagulation (APC) uses argon gas
to carry electrons to tissue, causing heating and
destruction without directly contacting the tissue.
4. Cryotherapy causes tissue destruction by
repetitive cycles of freeze-thaw.
Others
1. Photodynamic therapy causes excitation of a
photosensitizer in the tissue by a light of matching
wavelength that results in production of oxygen
free radicals and cell necrosis.
2. Brachytherapy catheters can be inserted through
the nose and positioned in place inside or adjacent
to airway or lung tumors. This can be achieved
under direct vision provided by a flexible
bronchoscopy inserted next to the brachytherapy
catheter.
3. Fiducial markers can be implanted close to or
inside the lung lesion in order to target the lesion
for radiation therapy. The fiducial markers can
be placed under bronchoscopic direct vision or
using electromagnetic navigation for peripheral
lung lesions [3].
Maintaining airway patency
Stents
Indications for airway stent insertion are either to
maintain airway patency after debulking of intrinsic
airway lesions or to splint open the airway com-
pressed by an external mass. Stents can be placed in
both benign and malignant airway diseases [4]. The
initial stents invented were silicon stents. Due to the
large size of the deployment device for silicone stents
a rigid bronchoscope is needed for their insertion and
consequently general anesthesia. Silicone stents were
found to have a tendency to migrate when inserted in
an area with a stricture. As a result vascular metal
stents were modified to be inserted in the airway.
Metal stents can be deployed easily over a guide wire
inserted through the flexible bronchoscope with or
without fluoroscopic guidance. Complications of
metal stents are frequent granulation tissue at
the edges of the stent, tumor growth through or
over the stent and epithelialization of the stent inter-
ior, making removal of the stent difficult and
traumatic [5 – 7].
Balloon dilatation is indicated in the treatment of
airway stricture. Airway balloons can be inserted
through the working channel of the flexible broncho-
scope (Figure 31.1A). The balloon is then inflated
with normal saline or radioopaque material if fluoro-
scopic guidance is utilized. Airway balloons can be
inflated to a diameter of 4 – 20 mm and a length of 40 –
80 mm, generating 6 – 12 atmospheres of pressure.
The balloon can be held inflated for 1 minute at a
time and reinflation is repeated until the desired
airway diameter is reached. Airway tear and recurrent
stenosis are reported complications [8]. Figure 31.1B
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
310
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012shows a repaired tracheal rupture as a complication
of balloon dilatation, which was treated with a
graft through open thoracotomy, and required the
insertion of a double microlaryngeal tube deep into
the main bronchi below the level of the repair to allow
for healing.
Anesthetic management
Preoperative evaluation
Therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures are con-
sidered urgent and in some instances where the
airway is compromised the procedure is considered
an emergency. Preoperative evaluation is the same as
for the diagnostic bronchoscopy as detailed in the
previous chapter in addition to special attention to
the following.
Hemoptysis
The amount of blood expectorated over the few days
prior to the procedure needs to be assessed.
The definition of massive hemoptysis varies
from coughing of 100 ml/24 h to 1000 ml/24 h.
However, hemoptysis requiring transfusion, hospital-
ization, intubation or causing aspiration and airway
obstruction or hypoxemia could also be defined as
massive hemoptysis [9]. Type and screen and blood
availability are important parts of the preparation
for the procedure.
Anterior mediastinal mass
Symptoms and signs of positional dyspnea, stridor or
desaturation and/or orthopnea should be sought.
The position where the patient is most comfortable
with minimal respiratory effort should be identified
prior to the procedure. Compression of the heart and
major vessels detected on CT scan should alert the
anesthesiologist to seek symptoms and signs of car-
diovascular compromise [10].
Superior vena cava syndrome
Compression of the superior vena cava (SVC) results
in congestion of the head and neck, prominent tortu-
ous cutaneous veins on the anterior chest wall and
jugular venous distention [11]. If possible an SVC
stent should be placed prior to airway procedures.
Pericardial effusion and tamponade
This can result in symptoms and signs similar to SVC
syndrome in addition to pulsus paradoxus. The pres-
ence of these symptoms with evidence of cardiac
compression or pericardial effusion on chest CT scan
necessitates a preoperative echocardiogram to assess
the effect of the compression on cardiac function and
output [12]. A transthoracic echocardiogram can
(A) (B)
Figure 31.1. (A) Showing the performance of balloon dilatation of a tracheal stenosis through a rigid bronchoscope. (B) A tracheal rent as a
complication of balloon tracheal dilatation was repaired with a posterior tracheal wall graft aided by median sternotomy, and for postoperative
ventilation each main bronchus was intubated with a small MLT tube; both were connected to the same ventilator after using a double lumen tube
(DLT) connector. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Chapter 31: Anesthesia for therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures
311
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012also be used intraoperatively to evaluate and
manage intraoperative hemodynamic instability [13].
Depending on the size and the hemodynamic effects
of an existing pericardial effusion, preoperative peri-
cardiocentesis might be necessary. The need for car-
diopulmonary bypass on a stand-by basis should be
discussed.
Flow–volume loops/spirometery
In some reports widening of the mid-expiratory plat-
eau was shown to predict risk of airway compromise
under anesthesia [14]. It is noteworthy that blunting
of the expiratory limb of the flow-volume loop denot-
ing variable intrathoracic obstruction has not been
shown to predict complications. However, the pres-
ence of a mixed obstructive and restrictive pattern
was shown to be a good predictor of postoperative
complications [11]. To date the significance of pre-
operative spirometery in predicting risk and improve-
ment of anesthetic management has not been
confirmed.
Tracheal compression
The degree of tracheal compression detected on CT
scan has been linked to risk of airway compromise
under general anesthesia [15]. Patients with tracheal
cross-sectional area < 50% are usually symptomatic
and likely to suffer perioperative complications [11].
The combination of left mainstem obstruction and
right pulmonary artery compression has been
reported to cause catastrophic ventilation – perfusion
mismatch [16].
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Symptoms and signs of aspiration should be sought.
Radiographic evidence of aspiration should be docu-
mented preoperatively. The location and size of the
fistulas as well as the number of fistulas present
should be confirmed on preoperative chest CT scan.
Plans for airway management, method of ventilation
and airway rescue should be discussed with the
bronchoscopist prior to the procedure.
Intraluminal obstruction of trachea and main bronchi
Obstruction of the major airway by external compres-
sion was discussed in the anterior mediastinal mass
section. On the other hand intraluminal obstruction
of the trachea and bronchi by a malignant tumor
offers a different challenge. The patient symptoms
may range from being asymptomatic to suffering
from stridor and dyspnea or the patient may present
as an emergency acute central airway obstruction with
imminent suffocation. Intraluminal bleeding from the
tumor mass may acutely increase the degree of airway
obstruction by clot formation. Blood clots in the
central airway can also result in acute lobar collapse
or complete lung collapse. Emergency procedures
are required in theses cases in order to reduce the
bleeding, debulk the tumor and maintain airway
patency [17]. Unfortunately a large majority of these
patients are terminally ill with advanced lung cancer
and severe comorbidities and the goal of the broncho-
scopic therapy is at best palliative.
General anesthesia
Therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures performed
through the flexible bronchoscope can be easily per-
formed in the bronchoscopy suite outside the operat-
ing room under moderate sedation, monitored
anesthesia care (MAC) or general anesthesia. How-
ever, procedures with higher risks performed through
the rigid bronchoscope mandate the use of general
anesthesia and are preferably performed in the oper-
ating room [18], unless the bronchoscopy suite is
designed to function as a hybrid operating room
(Figure 31.2).
As described under advanced diagnostic bron-
choscopy (Chapter 30) total intravenous anesthesia
(TIVA) is the anesthetic technique of choice [19].
Inhalational anesthetic has multiple disadvantages
that include variable levels of anesthetic gas delivered
due to frequent suctioning during the procedure and
contamination of the operating room air by inhal-
ation agents. However, it is important to emphasize
that inhalation agents can be helpful in cases of
bronchospasm or in patients with anterior medias-
tinal mass where maintenance of spontaneous venti-
lation is mandatory.
Narcotics
Similar to advanced diagnostic bronchoscopic pro-
cedures (Chapter 30), therapeutic bronchoscopy is
not associated with somatic pain. However, the inser-
tion of the rigid bronchoscope can cause sympathetic
stimulation similar to direct laryngoscopy. Such a
response is observed mainly during insertion and less
so during the remainder of the procedure, in contrast
to direct laryngoscopy. This sympathetic stimulation
can be attenuated by instillation of lidocaine in the
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
312
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012airway, intravenous lidocaine, or the use of low-dose
narcotics (e.g., fentanyl 50 – 100 mg) or ultra-short-
acting narcotics (e.g., remifentanil).
General anesthesia for patients with
anterior mediastinal mass
Due to the issues regarding the potential for airway
obstruction as discussed above, maintaining a spon-
taneously ventilating patient is mandatory. One suc-
cessfully utilized technique calls for propofol infusion
rates between 100 and 250 mg/kg/min for anesthesia
induction while maintaining spontaneous ventilation.
The bispectral index monitor (BIS) can be utilized to
achieve and sustain an appropriate depth of anesthe-
sia. Once the patient attains adequate depth of anes-
thesia the ability to bag-mask ventilate has to be
assessed. This is a very important step in anesthesia
induction in patients with central airway tumors. The
inability to bag-mask ventilate should immediately
alert the anesthesiologist to avoid the use of muscle
relaxation. In this instance direct laryngoscopy
and instillation of lidocaine on the vocal cord is a
better alternative to the use of muscle relaxation
prior to insertion of the rigid bronchoscope or endo-
tracheal tube.
Another technique is described by Abdelmalak
et al . [20] where the procedure commenced with
awake intubation with dexmedetomidine infusion-
induced sedation, followed by deepening the anes-
thetic through (off label) higher dexmedetomidine
infusion rates, supplemented by very low-dose inhala-
tional anesthetic to complement the weak amnestic
properties of dexmedetomidine, and to decrease
room inhalational anesthetic contamination con-
cerns. Thus, deep anesthetic planes were achieved that
enabled insertion of the rigid bronchoscope in
exchange for the ETT, while maintaining spontaneous
ventilation.
General anesthesia for tracheoesophageal
fistula
As in the case of anterior mediastinal mass patients,
spontaneous ventilation induction is recommended
for patients with tracheoesophageal fistulas, to avoid
positive-pressure ventilation and the potential for
inflating the stomach, at least till intubation is accom-
plished and the ETT cuff is positioned distal to the
fistula site if feasible.
The use of muscle relaxation
The use of muscle relaxation for therapeutic broncho-
scopic procedures has many advantages. These
include:
(1) facilitating the insertion of airway devices, e.g.,
LMA, endotracheal tube;
(2) safer and easier insertion of the rigid
bronchoscope; attempting to insert the rigid
bronchoscope while the vocal cords are moving
can result in vocal cord injury;
Figure 31.2. An interventional
bronchoscopy suite designed to function
essentially as a hybrid operating room
(image courtesy of Cleveland Clinic
Bronchoscopy Suite). Reprinted with
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012.
All rights reserved.
Chapter 31: Anesthesia for therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures
313
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(3) better lung compliance during positive-pressure
ventilation or jet ventilation;
(4) providing the bronchoscopist with a still field
where precise laser targeting of lesions adjacent to
major vessels and the heart is needed;
(5) maintaining the glottis aperture open during
multiple insertion and removal of the
bronchoscope and other instruments, thus
minimizing trauma to the vocal cord.
Disadvantages of the use of muscle relaxation should
also be considered:
(1) loss of the airway patency especially with large
anterior mediastinal mass;
(2) positive-pressure ventilation-induced
pneumomediastinum or pneumothorax in
patients with tracheoesophageal or
bronchiopleural fistulas or in the event of airway
tears during the procedure;
(3) prolonged unwanted muscle relaxation in patients
with lung cancer and paraneoplastic Eaton –
Lambert syndrome.
In the experience of the authors we recommend the
use of a small dose of muscle relaxant, where the
patient becomes weak enough to safely insert the rigid
bronchoscope or other airway device but the muscle
relaxation could still be reversed promptly when
needed. The use of succinylcholine infusion can also
produce rapid muscle relaxation that can be termin-
ated if the need arises. Additionally the use of muscle
relaxants that are metabolized in the blood independ-
ently of organ metabolism should be considered in
patients with multiple systemic comorbidities, e.g.,
atracurium or cisatracurium. If muscle relaxation is
determined to be detrimental to the patient, then the
use of lidocaine is an appropriate alternative to min-
imize airway reflexes to instrumentation. Lidocaine
can be given through the intravenous cannula
or sprayed in the airway in a spray-as-you-go fashion.
The maximum tolerated dose of lidocaine should
be calculated and not exceeded in each patient
(8.2 mg/kg) [21].
Fluid management in bronchoscopic surgery
Fluids should be administered wisely in therapeutic
bronchoscopic procedures and based only on
patients' requirement. While fluid restriction is
advised in patients with heart failure or cor
pulmonale, aggressive hydration might be needed in
severely dehydrated patients or patients with pericar-
dial effusion. It is important to note that there is no
third-space fluid loss in therapeutic bronchoscopic
procedures and blood loss is commonly minimal.
Management of the FiO2
It is common to maintain the fraction of inspired
oxygen (FiO 2) at 100% during therapeutic broncho-
scopic procedures for multiple reasons.
1. Patients with advanced lung pathology commonly
have poor baseline oxygen saturation < 90% and/
or use supplemental oxygen. We recommend
preoxygenation in these patients with 100% FiO 2
prior to induction.
2. Complete airway occlusion and inability to
mechanically ventilate the lung occur during the
critical phases of deploying or extracting stents;
similarly during balloon dilatation of airway
strictures where the lung distal to the balloon is
not ventilated.
3. Periods of apnea where positive-pressure
ventilation is not feasible can occur during
therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures. For
example, during extraction of tumor mass
positive-pressure ventilation can force the excised
tumor down the mainstem bronchi, causing acute
obstruction. Another example of a period of apnea
is when a different-size rigid bronchoscope has to
be exchanged and reinserted in the airway.
In these instances, it is always advisable to return to
ventilation with 100% oxygen before anticipated
periods of apnea or iatrogenic airway occlusion.
However, low FiO 2 < 40% is required during
cautery, laser, argon plasma coagulation and cautery
snare in order to avoid airway fire.
Airway and ventilation
Endotracheal tube
Although endotracheal tubes are the definitive and
most reliable airway devices in patients undergoing
general anesthesia, they have their challenges when
inserted in patients with central airway obstruction
presenting for therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures.
Insertion of the endotracheal tube does not allow the
bronchoscopist to examine the vocal cord and upper
part of the trachea for pathology. The large external
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
314
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012diameter of the therapeutic flexible bronchoscope
requires the insertion of an ETT with internal diameter
of 8.5 or 9 mm in order to ventilate effectively around
the bronchoscope. The length of ETT projecting from
the patient 's mouth limits the length of the flexible
bronchoscope available for insertion in the airway and
the ETT proximal end is commonly cut short. Inser-
tion of an ETT in patients with preexisting tracheal or
bronchial stents by direct laryngoscopy carries a risk of
dislodging or deforming the stents, which can poten-
tially result in airway compromise.
Rigid bronchoscope
The rigid bronchoscope (Figure 31.3) is a stainless-
steel tube that ranges in diameter from 8 to 14 mm
and in length from 27 to 40 cm. The barrel of the
longer rigid bronchoscope is fenestrated in order to
allow for ventilation of the contralateral lung, while
the shorter rigid tracheoscope barrel lacks fenestra-
tions. The distal end of the rigid bronchoscope is
beveled to allow for lifting of the epiglottis and safer
insertion through the vocal cord and can also be
used for the coring out of tumors. The proximal
end of the rigid bronchoscope can remain open to
air to allow for simultaneous insertion of multiple
instruments. However, in this case jet ventilation or
spontaneous ventilation is the only possible mode of
ventilation. On the other hand placing a cap that
seals the proximal end of the rigid bronchoscope
and packing of the patient 's oropharynx with
saline-soaked gauze and occlusion of the nostrils
can allow for positive-pressure ventilation using an
anesthesia breathing circuit (Figure 31.3). A shorter
stainless-steel cylinder with multiple side ports is
commonly attached to the proximal end of the
rigid bronchoscope. The side ports are designed to
accommodate a jet ventilator, breathing circuit and
insertion ports for bronchoscopic instruments, e.g.,
suction catheters [22].
The rigid bronchoscope has many advantages over
the flexible bronchoscope. They include the ability to
provide positive-pressure ventilation during lengthy
airway procedures and the ability to insert instru-
ments of large diameter into the airway, such as a
microdebrider, a large suction catheter or a deploy-
ment device for silicone stents (Figure 31.4). The rigid
bronchoscope can also be used as a coring device to
debulk airway tumors, dilate stenotic areas, stent the
airway open in the case of external airway compres-
sion by an anterior mediastinal mass and tamponade
airway bleeding [23].
Supraglottic airway
The LMA was first introduced over 20 years ago and
remains in use today with a consistently low incidence
of complications. The SGA has several advantages
over the endotracheal tube when it comes to thera-
peutic bronchoscopic procedures. The supraglottic
position allows for complete inspection of the central
airway as well as vocal cord mobility similar to
Figure 31.3. Positive-pressure
ventilation through connecting the
anesthesia circuit to the side port of a
rigid bronchoscope. Not obvious in the
picture is the wet gauze packing around
the rigid bronchoscope barrel to
minimize leaks around the scope and
facilitate positive-pressure ventilation.
Reprinted with permission, Cleveland
Clinic Center for Medical Art &
Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights
reserved.
Chapter 31: Anesthesia for therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures
315
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012bronchoscopic examination performed under con-
scious sedation, as well as for treatment of subglottic
lesions (Figure 31.5) [24]. The large internal diameter
of the shaft of the SGA permits the insertion of a large
therapeutic bronchoscope or a metal stent
deployment device without interference with ventila-
tion. Although the SGAs were originally designed for
spontaneously ventilating patients, mechanical venti-
lation can be performed, with a limitation on max-
imum airway pressure of 20 cmH 2O [25,26].
(A) (B)
Figure 31.4. Silicone stents; (A) an endobronchial stent, and (B) a Y stent for the carina before being trimmed and cut to match the patient 's
dimensions Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
(A)
 (B)
Figure 31.5. (A) An operative bronchoscope is introduced into the i-gel and the airway via a Portex swivel adapter that allows for
simultaneous ventilation while examining and performing interventions on the airway such as treatment of subglottic stenosis. (B) The use
of supraglottic airway to facilitate access and treatment of subglottic lesions. Reprinted with permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for Medical
Art & Photography © 2011– 2012. All rights reserved.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
316
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Jet ventilation
Jet ventilation can be performed using a hand-held
device, where 100% oxygen is injected into the rigid
bronchoscope (the final delivered FiO 2 is dependent
on the amount of entrained room air). The pressure
of the injected oxygen can be adjusted by a dial and
the frequency of ventilation is left to the operator, and
frequently ranges from 8 to 20 breaths per minute. Jet
ventilation should only be performed when the prox-
imal end of the rigid bronchoscope is open to air in
order to avoid barotrauma [27]. Air is entrained at the
open proximal end of the rigid bronchoscope, causing
variation in the delivered oxygen FiO 2. More recently,
the mechanical Monsoon high-frequency jet ventila-
tor (Acutronic Medical Systems, Hirzel, Switzerland)
became available [28]. The mechanical jet ventilator
has many advantages over the simple hand-held jet
ventilators. The user can control the fractional
inspired oxygen, frequency of ventilation (up to 150
breaths per minute) and the driving pressure of ven-
tilation (up to 40 mmHg). The inspired oxygen can be
humidified up to 100%, allowing for prolonged
periods of jet ventilation without the risk of airway
mucosa dryness and necrosis or damage to ciliary
function [28]. Additionally the mechanical jet ventila-
tor has two alarms to protect from barotrauma and
will discontinue ventilation if the set maximum
airway pressure limit is reached.
Changing airway and ventilation
In the management of complex airway cases, it is not
uncommon to use different airways and different
ventilation modes to suit the needs and accomplish
the goals of the procedures. Examples of such proced-
ures are the long-term management of tracheobron-
chial deformity and recurring stenosis post airway
fires, as well as the case shown in Figure 31.6, where
establishing tracheal continuity between the tracheos-
tomy and the vocal cords required apnea at times,
intermittent ventilation through an ETT introduced
intermittently through the tracheostomy, and finally
through the rigid bronchoscope as the tracheal lumen
was re-established.
Postoperative care
Most of the procedures described above are per-
formed as outpatient procedures; patients are dis-
charged on the same day. The use of ultra-short-
acting anesthesia medication is vital to achieve
prompt discharge.
Complications
Residual muscle relaxation or post-procedure respira-
tory failures for a variety of reasons are possible
complications that mandate unplanned hospital stays
and probably ICU admission.
Figure 31.6. Patient with history of
prolonged intubation following a severe
acute lung injury and ARDS, which
required tracheostomy, and was
complicated by granulation tissue
obstructing the upper trachea and
preventing her from talking for about
6 months. An intermittent ventilation
technique utilizing an ETT through the
existing tracheostomy allowed dual
access to the granulation tissue above
the tracheostomy, from above with the
rigid bronchoscope and from below
(tracheostomy) through the flexible
bronchoscope, and the application of
laser and electrocautery that resulted in
establishing the continuity of the tracheal
lumen to allow her to talk. Reprinted with
permission, Cleveland Clinic Center for
Medical Art & Photography © 2011– 2012.
All rights reserved.
Chapter 31: Anesthesia for therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures
317
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Case study
A 28-year-old 85 kg male who had a history of
Wegner's granulomatosis, without any kidney
involvement, presented with stridor secondary to
recurrent subglottic stenosis. He was scheduled for
bronchoscopy, laser and dilatation of his subglottic
stenosis.
In the morning of the procedure, the patient had
been NPO for 8 hours; he was premedicated with
2 mg of midazolam IV in the OR and, after appli-
cation of standard ASA monitors and adequate pre-
oxygenation, the patient was induced with 150 mg
of propofol preceded by 40 mg of IV lidocaine,
100 mg of fentanyl and 40 mg of rocuronium.
Immediately following loss of consciousness, bag
mask ventilation was established without difficulty.
Anesthesia was maintained with continuous infu-
sion of plain propofol at 140 mg/kg/min and depth
of anesthesia was monitored via a BIS monitor.
Intravenous dexamethasone 10 mg was given to
help decrease swelling resulting from treating this
endotracheal lesion as well as to serve as a PONV
prophylaxis. An i-gel size 4 was then inserted with-
out difficulty, and positive-pressure ventilation was
commenced using pressure-controlled ventilation
with inspiratory driving pressure of 17 cmH 2O;
the operating flexible bronchoscope was inserted
into the airway through a Portex swivel adapter
allowing simultaneous ve ntilation. Gas flow was
always kept at 15 l/min to compensate for the cir-
cuit leaks and suction through the bronchoscope.
The lesion was treated with electrocautery, argon
laser, and balloon dilatation. During cauterization
and laser the FiO 2 was reduced to around 30% (also
high gas flow was maintained at the maximum air-
flow of the machine, 12 l/min, and 1 – 2 l/min O 2 to
maintain the desired FiO 2; high flow would also elim-
inate the need to use the O 2 flush button to inflate
collapsing ventilator pillows, or a bag which can ignite
a fire during laser or electrocautery). When the satur-
ation fell below 88%, the procedure was temporarily
halted to permit effective positive-pressure ventilation
and oxygenation with 100% oxygen. Once stabilized,
the oxygen concentration was returned to 30% and
lasering was resumed. Then the trachea was dilated
using a balloon dilator. At the end of the procedure,
mitomycin was applied to the lesion; it is believed that
this will result in delaying recurrence at the site of
application.
Muscle relaxation was reversed, the propofol infu-
sion stopped, and the patient was extubated when he
was fully awake and following commands.
The postoperative course was complicated by
cough that lasted for about 30 minutes, which was
relieved with intermittent doses of 25 mg of fentanyl.
The patient was discharged home a couple of hours
later in a satisfactory state, with much improved
breathing with no stridor.
Clinical pearls
/C15Therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures can be
either tumor-debulking procedures or procedures
aimed at maintaining airway patency, such as
balloon dilatation and deployment of airway
stents.
/C15These procedures can be done through a flexible
or a rigid bronchoscope and are generally done
under general anesthesia.
/C15Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) is the
technique of choice, and is preferred over
inhalational anesthetic since frequent opening of
the anesthetic circuit to introduce and remove the
bronchoscope pollutes the procedure room and
together with frequent suctioning during the
procedure can result in a fluctuating depth of
anesthesia.
/C15Airway options include: patient 's natural
airway, supraglottic airway, large-diameter
ETT tube (ID 8.5 or 9.0 mm), and rigid
bronchoscope.
/C15Muscle relaxation is often needed to facilitate safe
completion of these procedures. However,
spontaneous ventilation needs to be maintained at
least for the initial phase of the anesthetic in
managing patients with anterior mediastinal
masses or tracheoesophageal fistula.
/C15Continuous communication between the
anesthesiologist and the bronchoscopist is
essential throughout the procedure as the
clinical conditions are constantly changing. In
particular, FiO 2 changes and changes in airway
management are often needed to meet the
requirements of the different stages of these
procedures,
/C15Potential complications include cough,
pneumothorax, laryngospasm, bronchospasm and
complete loss of the airway.
Section 5: Anesthesia for bronchoscopic surgery
318
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012References
1. Becker HD. Bronchoscopy: the
past, the present, and the future.
Clin Chest Med 2010;31(1):1– 18.
2. Sarkiss M. Anesthesia for
bronchoscopy and interventional
pulmonology: from moderate
sedation to jet ventilation. Curr
Opin Pulm Med 2011;17(4):274– 8.
3. Anantham D, Feller-Kopman D,
Shanmugham LN, et al .
Electromagnetic navigation
bronchoscopy-guided fiducial
placement for robotic stereotactic
radiosurgery of lung tumors: a
feasibility study. Chest 2007;132
(3):930– 5.
4. Rafanan AL, Mehta AC. Stenting
of the tracheobronchial tree.
Radiol Clin North Am 2000;
38(2):395– 408.
5. Saito Y, Imamura H. Airway
stenting. Surg Today 2005;35
(4):265– 70.
6. Wood D. Airway stenting. Chest
Surg Clin N Am 2003;13(2):
211– 29.
7. Doyle DJ, Abdelmalak B,
Machuzak M, Gildea TR.
Anesthesia and airway
management for removing
pulmonary self-expanding
metallic stents. J Clin Anesth
2009;21(7):529– 32.
8. Folch E, Mehta AC. Airway
interventions in the
tracheobronchial tree. Semin
Respir Crit Care Med 2008;29
(4):441– 52.
9. Sakr L, Dutau H. Massive
hemoptysis: an update on the role
of bronchoscopy in diagnosis and
management. Respiration 2010;
80(1):38– 58.
10. Blank RS, de Souza DG.
Anesthetic management of
patients with an anterior
mediastinal mass:
continuing professional
development. Can J Anaesth
2011;58(9):853– 67.
11. Bechard P, Letourneau L,
Lacasse Y, Cote D, Bussieres JS.
Perioperative cardiorespiratory
complications in adults with
mediastinal mass: incidence and
risk factors. Anesthesiology
2004;100(4):826– 34; discussion
825A.
12. Redford DT, Kim AS, Barber BJ,
Copeland JG. Transesophageal
echocardiography for the
intraoperative evaluation of a
large anterior mediastinal mass.
Anesth Analg 2006;103(3):578– 9.
13. Brooker RF, Zvara DA, Roitstein
A. Mediastinal mass diagnosed
with intraoperative
transesophageal
echocardiography. J Cardiothorac
Vasc Anesth 2007;21(2):257– 8.
14. Erdos G, Tzanova I. Perioperative
anaesthetic management of
mediastinal mass in adults. Eur
J Anaesthesiol 2009;26(8):627– 32.
15. Stricker PA, Gurnaney HG,
Litman RS. Anesthetic
management of children with an
anterior mediastinal mass. J Clin
Anesth 2010;22(3):159– 63.
16. Huang YL, Yang MC, Huang CH,
et al . Rescue of cardiopulmonary
collapse in anterior mediastinal
tumor: case presentation and
review of literature. Pediatr Emerg
Care 2010;26(4):296– 8.
17. Conacher ID, Curran E. Local
anaesthesia and sedation for rigid
bronchoscopy for emergency
relief of central airway
obstruction. Anaesthesia 2004;
59(3):290– 2.
18. Eckardt J, Petersen HO, Hakami-
Kermani A, et al . Endobronchial
ultrasound-guided transbronchial
needle aspiration of undiagnosed
intrathoracic lesions. Interact
Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2009;
9(2):232– 5.
19. Sarkiss M, Kennedy M, Riedel B,
et al . Anesthesia technique for
endobronchial ultrasound-guided
fine needle aspiration of
mediastinal lymph node.
J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth
2007;21(6):892– 6.
20. Abdelmalak B, Marcanthony N,
Abdelmalak J, et al .
Dexmedetomidine for anesthetic
management of anterior
mediastinal mass. J Anesth
2010;24(4):607– 10.
21. British Thoracic Society
guidelines on diagnostic flexible
bronchoscopy. Thorax 2001;
56(Suppl 1):i1– 21.
22. Ayers ML, Beamis JF Jr. Rigid
bronchoscopy in the twenty-first
century. Clin Chest Med 2001;
22(2):355– 64.
23. Wahidi MM, Herth FJ, Ernst A.
State of the art: interventional
pulmonology. Chest 2007;
131(1):261– 74.
24. Abdelmalak B, Gildea T, Doyle
DJ. Anesthesia for bronchoscopy.
Curr Pharm Des 2012: in press.
25. Abdelmalak B, Ryckman JV,
Al Haddad S, Sprung J.
Respiratory arrest after successful
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-
garnet laser treatment of
subglottic tracheal stenosis.
Anesth Analg 2002;95(2):485– 6.
26. Hung WT, Liao SM, Su JM.
Laryngeal mask airway in patients
with tracheal stents who are
undergoing non-airway related
interventions: report of three
cases. J Clin Anesth 2004;
16(3):214– 6.
27. Fernandez-Bustamante A,
Ibanez V, Alfaro JJ, et al . High-
frequency jet ventilation in
interventional bronchoscopy:
factors with predictive value
on high-frequency jet
ventilation complications.
J Clin Anesth 2006;18(5):349– 56.
28. Kraincuk P, Kepka A, Ihra G,
Schabernig C, Aloy A. A new
prototype of an electronic jet-
ventilator and its humidification
system. Crit Care1999;3(4):101– 10.
Chapter 31: Anesthesia for therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures
319
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:48:41 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.034
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 6
Chapter
32
Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
Anesthesia for pediatric
otolaryngologic surgery
Rahul G. Baijal and Emad B. Mossad
Introduction
Anesthesia for pediatric otorhinolaryngologic proced-
ures represents the largest proportion of elective sur-
gery for not only pediatric anesthesiologists but also
general anesthesiologists taking care of children.
Anesthesia for otologic procedures
Myringotomy
Chronic otitis media with effusion (COME) is
common in young children secondary to impaired
eustachian tube drainage, potentially leading to con-
ductive hearing loss and cholesteatoma formation.
Surgical drainage with myringotomy tubes is indi-
cated when conservative medical management fails.
Many children with congenital anomalies, such as
those with cleft palate, Down 's syndrome, and cra-
niofacial abnormalities, require myringotomy tubes
secondary to abnormal eustachian tube anatomy.
General anesthesia is required for this brief ambu-
latory procedure and is often accomplished with an
inhalational anesthetic, usually sevoflurane, oxygen
and/or nitrous oxide by a facemask. An oropharyn-
geal airway may help maintain airway patency while
sharing the airway with the otolaryngologist and min-
imize head movements as perceived by the otolaryn-
gologist through the microscope. Additionally, this
procedure may also be surgically challenging and
longer in children with narrow ear canals, such as
children with Down 's syndrome and craniofacial
abnormalities, and a supraglottic airway (SGA) or
an endotracheal tube (ETT) should be considered
for maintenance of anesthesia. Intravenous access is
usually not needed unless significant airway obstruc-
tion or hemodynamic instability is expected; for
example, children with Down 's syndrome may
develop significant bradyarrythmias with sevoflurane
inhalational induction, and children with hypotonia
may develop airway obstruction following inhala-
tional induction.
Analgesia may be administered by various routes.
Acetaminophen is administered orally preoperatively
(10 to 20 mg/kg) or rectally intraoperatively (30 to
40 mg/kg). Oral acetaminophen is absorbed rapidly
preoperatively whereas rectal acetaminophen has an
onset time of 60 to 90 minutes and a peak effect of 2 to
3 hours. Children receiving a preauricular block with
0.2 ml of 0.25% bupivicaine versus 2 mg/kg intranasal
fentanyl had similar pain scores, need for rescue medi-
cations postoperatively, and time to discharge [1].
Intramuscular morphine 0.1 mg/kg and ketorolac
0.5 mg/kg may also be administered with no irritation
like intranasal fentanyl, but the 30 minutes onset of
duration may preclude immediate postoperative bene-
fit as many children are discharged within 30 minutes
from the PACU with simply acetaminophen (Tylenol)
or acetaminophen (Tylenol) with codeine.
Preschool children receiving unsupplemented sevo-
flurane anesthesia may exhibit emergence delirium of
unknown etiology postoperatively. Since intravenous
access is not usually needed for this brief procedure,
intranasal fentanyl 1 to 2 mg/kg was shown to reduce
emergence delirium postoperatively from sevoflurane
anesthesia for myringotomy tubes [2]. A recent study
comparing intranasal dexmedetomidine 1 to 2 mg/kg
to intranasal fentanyl 1 to 2mg/kg showed no difference
in emergence delirium and postoperative pain scores
but revealed increased time to discharge with
dexmedetomidine [3].
Children with COME may also have recurrent
upper respiratory tract (URI) infections that do not
resolve until myringotomy tubes are inserted to
improve middle ear drainage. Children with an active
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
321
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012or recent URI may be at risk for up to 6 weeks, for
perioperative respiratory complications including
airway obstruction, laryngospasm, bronchospasm,
and breath-holding [4]. The anesthesiologist is faced
with the decision of proceeding with the procedure
given these risks, knowing that the child may be re-
exposed to an inciting pathogen, or the symptoms
may not improve without surgical intervention.
Airway reactivity may persist for up to 8 weeks
even for children with a recent, uncomplicated URI.
However, there was no difference in perioperative
respiratory complications in those children present-
ing with an acute uncomplicated upper respiratory
tract infection for minor surgery not requiring airway
instrumentation [4].
Tympanoplasty and mastoidectomy
Tympanoplasty reconstructs the tympanic membrane
with or without a graft in children with a chronic
tympanic membrane perforation or cholesteatoma,
an epithelial perforation in the middle ear. Mastoi-
dectomies are performed in children with mastoiditis
and/or a cholesteatoma.
Children undergoing tympanoplasty and mastoi-
dectomy are positioned supine with the head laterally
rotated from the affected side 90 /C14or 180 /C14from the
anesthesiologist. The airway must be carefully secured
secondary to limited access and the neck must be
carefully rotated to reduce the risk of atlantoaxial
subluxation. Besides standard monitoring, electro-
myography is used to monitor and prevent facial
nerve injury given the close proximity of the facial
nerve to the surgical site; subsequently, neuromuscu-
lar blockade is avoided during the procedure. Nitrous
oxide is contraindicated during and following graft
placement to avoid graft dislodgement. The middle
ear is an air-filled, not distensible cavity, and an
increase in volume within this cavity also increases
the pressure within the cavity. Nitrous oxide may
accumulate in this closed space as it diffuses along a
concentration gradient more rapidly than nitrogen
moves out since nitrous oxide is 34 times more sol-
uble than nitrogen in the blood. The most common
complication following tympanoplasty and mastoi-
dectomy is postoperative nausea and vomiting from
vestibular labyrinth stimulation. Prophylactic anti-
emetics, such as dexamethasone and a serotonin
antagonist, and total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)
with propofol reduce the risk of postoperative nausea
and vomiting compared to inhalational anesthetics
and opiods alone. A preemptive great auricular nerve
block does not decrease postoperative analgesic
requirements compared to children who received this
block 1 hour prior to procedure completion but did
decrease the incidence of postoperative opioid
requirements, nausea, and vomiting [5]. A smooth
emergence is desired to prevent graft disruption and
may be achieved with an extubation performed while
the child is still in a deep plane of anesthesia, (the so
called “deep” extubation) and opiods titrated to pro-
duce a slow, regular respiratory pattern.
Cochlear implants
Early insertion of cochlear implants is occurring in
children with profound hearing loss to allow for
better development of speech and language skills.
Children as young as 6 months may receive a cochlear
implant. The cochlear implant stimulates the auditory
nerve, and intraoperative limits of implant stimula-
tion are set by evoked stapedius reflex thresholds
(ESRT). Volatile anesthetics abolish the stapedius
reflex in more than 50% of children and can result
in a dose-dependent increase in the ESRT, possibly
overestimating a child 's comfort level. Since propofol
does not affect the ESRT, TIVA may be preferred
during cochlear implantation [6].
Anesthesia for rhinologic procedures
Reduction of nasal fractures
Nasal fractures are seen more frequently in older
children, resulting from direct trauma. Since the nasal
mucosa is very vascular, acute nasal fractures may
produce significant bleeding, and a large volume of
blood may be swallowed into the stomach. Acutely, an
ETT following rapid sequence induction is required
to prevent aspiration. However, closed reduction is
often delayed for a few days to allow inflammation to
subside and for the bleeding risk to decrease An LMA
may then be substituted for ETT.
Choanal atresia
Choanal atresia is a congenital malformation with an
absent connection between the nasal cavity and the
aerodigestive tract. The atresia is bony and/or mixed
membranous. Choanal atresia is usually not associ-
ated with other craniofacial abnormalities but may
be part of a constellation of congenital anomalies
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
322
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012known as CHARGE (coloboma, heart malforma-
tions, atresia choanae, retardation of growth and
development, genitourinary defects, and ear
anomalies). If the obstruction is bilateral, children
may present with acute respiratory failure, particu-
larly neonates who are obligate nose breathers. Bilat-
eral choanal atresia usually manifests with airway
obstruction at rest, which resolves with crying or
an oral airway. A large hole may also be cut into
the pacifier to maintain airway patency. Unilateral
choanal atresia is not a medical or surgical emer-
gency and may present as only persistent unilateral
nasal discharge several years later. Surgical correc-
tion for bilateral choanal atresia depends on the
neonate's ability to compensate with oral breathing
and receive adequate nutrition. Some surgeons advo-
cate a “rule of tens ” for timing of the repair: the child
must be 10 weeks of age, weigh 10 pounds, and have
a hemoglobin of 10 gm/dl.
Both inhalational and intravenous induction
and maintenance with an inhaled anesthetic, muscle
relaxant, and opioid are appropriate. Neonates under-
going bilateral repair may have airway obstruction
postoperatively and should be observed in a moni-
tored setting. Following the surgical correction of the
atresia, restenosis may occur but can be reduced with
topical application of mitomycin C, an aminoglyco-
side and alkylating agent that prevents fibroblast
growth and migration.
Endoscopic sinus surgery
When medical management with broad-spectrum
antibiotics fails for the treatment of chronic sinusitis,
endoscopic sinus surgery is the primary surgical
management. The operation involves direct tele-
scopic visualization of the nasal mucosal membranes
for microdebridement. Many children with chronic
sinusitis have coexisting morbidities, particularly
asthma and cystic fibrosis, that must be optimized
prior to surgery. Both inhalational and intravenous
induction and maintenance with an inhaled anes-
thetic, muscle relaxant, and opiods are appropriate.
A cuffed preformed ETT (RAE tube) is required to
allow unobstructed access to the maxilla and sinuses
and prevent an air leak that may fog the endoscopic
instruments. Bleeding is common with this proced-
ure and the nasal cavity is packed with pledgets
soaked with a vasoconstrictor. The most commonly
used vasoconstrictors are oxymetazoline 0.025% to
0.05%, phenylephrine 0.25% to 1%, lidocaine 0.5% to
1% with epinephrine (1:100 000 solution), and
cocaine 4% to 10%. Topical vasoconstrictors may
cause severe hypertension, reflex bradycardia, and
possibly cardiac arrest. Severe hypertension is usually
transient and may not require treatment. Cortico-
steroids such as dexamethasone (0.5 to 1 mg/kg)
are administered intraoperatively to reduce inflam-
mation. Additionally, the surgeon may leave an
absorbable stenting material at the end of the pro-
cedure, which makes the child an obligate nose
breather and increases the possibility of emergence
delirium.
Adenotonsillectomy
Adenotonsillectomy (T&A) is one of the most com-
monly performed pediatric surgical procedures,
with recurrent tonsillitis or pharyngitis and adeno-
tonsillar hypertrophy as the major indications. Surgi-
cal management is indicated for recurrent tonsillitis
or pharyngitis when medical therapy fails and for
adenotonsillar hypertrophy when it leads to sleep-
disordered breathing. Although adenoidectomies are
routinely performed with tonsillectomies, an adenoi-
dectomy may be done independently for recurrent
adenitis, chronic sinusitis, and recurrent otitis media
with effusion.
Surgical techniques
Surgical techniques for T&A include cold and hot
knife dissection, suction, coblation (a non-heat-driven
process using radiofrequency energy), and unipolar
and bipolar electrocautery techniques. Electrocautery
techniques are associated with less perioperative hem-
orrhage but increased perioperative pain and reduced
postoperative oral intake.
Obstructive sleep apnea
Sleep-disordered breathing is a spectrum of illness
ranging from primary snoring to severe obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA). Although it is important to
distinguish children with obstructive sleep apnea, it
may be difficult simply based on clinical symptoms
without a documented sleep study as both disease
processes may present with similar symptoms. Docu-
mented severe obstructive sleep apnea places children
at higher risk of perioperative respiratory complica-
tions, along with some other characteristics and
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
323
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012comorbidities such as age less than 3 years, craniofa-
cial syndromes, cranial base disorders, neuromuscu-
lar disorders, trisomy 21, infiltrative disorders and
storage diseases, and obesity [7].
Obstruction may result not only in chronic hyp-
oxia and hybercarbia but also in cardiovascular
abnormalities, such as right ventricular hypertrophy,
biventricular dysfunction and pulmonary hyperten-
sion, failure to thrive, recurrent upper and lower
respiratory infections, and neurocognitive deficits,
such as poor learning, behavior problems, and lower
grades. Many of these sequlae are fortunately revers-
ible following a T&A.
Polysomnography
The severity of obstruction can only be assessed by a
sleep study. The severity of the obstruction varies
during sleep but is worse during REM sleep in the
early morning hours. The sleep study assesses end-
tidal CO2, an electroencephalogram, chest wall move-
ment, leg movement, and oxygen saturation. Several
indices are reported, including the apnea/hypopnea
index (AHI), which is the number of apneas (com-
plete cessation of airflow) and hypopneas (50% reduc-
tion in airflow) per hour, peak end-tidal CO 2, and
oxygen saturation nadir (see Table 32.1) [8]. Apneas
and hypopneas may be central, obstructive and
mixed, where there is no respiratory effort with cen-
tral apnea and inspiratory effort against limited upper
airway patency with obstructive apnea. Although
there is no consensus on the criteria for diagnosing
OSA in children, each index helps categorize the
severity of the obstruction, which is important in
determining the perioperative plan. Increasing AHI
is associated with increased risk of perioperative
respiratory complications. Additionally, true docu-
mentation of obstructive sleep apnea should be based
only on obstructive episodes, as central apnea may be
normal in children without associated respiratory
compromise. Furthermore, various scores have been
modeled to help predict the risk of perioperative
respiratory complications, but no one score has been
shown to be convincingly reliable and reproducible.
Even though the severity of the obstruction can only
be assessed by a sleep study, many children are not
tested given the dearth of sleep-study laboratories and
the inconvenience and difficulty of completing the
sleep study in a young child. Other diagnostic
tests, such as videotaping and nocturnal pulse oxime-
try, may help predict perioperative respiratory com-
plications, but they do not completely stratify the
severity of obstruction and the necessary follow-
up. A preoperative oxygen saturation nadir of less
than 80% is associated with an increased risk of peri-
operative respiratory complications [9]. The American
Academy of Otolaryngology recently issued recom-
mendations for polysomnography for sleep-disordered
breathing prior to tonsillectomy in children. The acad-
emy made the following recommendations: (1) before
determining the need for tonsillectomy, the clinician
should refer children with sleep-disordered breathing
for polysomnography if they exhibit certain complex
medical conditions such as obesity, Down's syndrome,
craniofacial abnormalities, neuromuscular disorders,
sickle cell disease, or mucopolysaccharidosis. (2) The
clinician should advocate polysomnography prior to
tonsillectomy for sleep-disordered breathing in
Table 32.1. Classification and severity of pediatric sleep disorder breathing
AHI SpO 2 nadir (%) PETCO 2 > 50 mmHg (% testing)
Normal /C201 >94 <10
Primary snoring /C201 >94 <10
Upper airway resistance syndrome /C202 >92 10 – 15
Obstructive alveolar hypoventilation /C202 >92 >20
Obstructive sleep apnea
Mild 2– 48 8– 92 10 – 15
Moderate 5 – 10 80 – 88 15 – 20
Severe >10 <80 >20
AHI, apnea/hypopnea index.
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
324
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012children without any of the comorbidities listed in
statement 1 for whom the need for surgery is uncertain
or when there is discordance between tonsillar size
on physical examination and the reported severity
of sleep-disordered breathing. (3) Clinicians should
communicate polysomnography results to the anesthe-
siologist prior to the induction of anesthesia for tonsil-
lectomy in a child with sleep-disordered breathing. (4)
Clinicians should admit children with obstructive sleep
apnea documented on polysomnography for inpatient,
overnight monitoring after tonsillectomy if they are
younger than age 3 or have severe obstructive sleep
apnea (AHI of 10 or more obstructive events/hour,
oxygen saturation nadir less than 80%, or both). (5) In
children for whom polysomnography is indicated to
assess sleep-disordered breathing prior to tonsillec-
tomy, clinicians should obtain laboratory-based poly-
somnography, when available [10].
Perioperative anesthetic concerns
A thorough history and physical examination is
essential, focusing on obstructive symptoms includ-
ing snoring, gasping or pausing, restless sleep, day-
time somnolence, and enuresis. The loudness of the
snoring, however, does not correlate with the severity
of the obstruction. A sleep study should be reviewed,
if available, to assess the severity of obstruction.
Although the oropharynx may be examined to quali-
tatively classify tonsillar size, there is no evidence that
the incidence of perioperative respiratory complica-
tions is directly associated with tonsillar size [11].
There is no evidence that routine preoperative
CBC or coagulation studies are necessary unless indi-
cated by a thorough history for bleeding diathesis.
A routine chemistry panel to evaluate for a compen-
satory metabolic alkalosis for hypercarbia is not rou-
tinely indicated as well. Cardiology evaluation with a
baseline EKG assessing for right ventricular hyper-
trophy and a subsequent echocardiogram if the EKG
indicates right ventricular hypertrophy should only be
performed if clinical history and physical examin-
ation indicate right ventricular strain or failure, such
as a loud second heart sound, exercise intolerance, or
hepatomegaly.
A number of unique situations may be encoun-
tered in children presenting for T&A. Children with
trisomy 21 have craniofacial abnormalities with mid-
face hypoplasia. Hypopharyngeal hypotonia with the
midface hypoplasia increases the risk of airway
obstruction during induction of anesthesia, poten-
tially making mask ventilation difficult. Children with
mucopolysaccharidosis I (Hurler 's syndrome) and II
(Hunter's syndrome) have diffuse infiltration of the
upper airway with mucopolysaccharidosis, also pre-
disposing them to airway obstruction and difficult
mask ventilation and intubation.
Anxious children may receive oral sedation
preoperatively with midazolam (0.5 mg/kg). A preme-
dication has not been shown to increases the incidence
of perioperative respiratory complications even in
those patients with severe obstruction [12].
During induction of anesthesia, early pharyngeal
obstruction may require a jaw thrust maneuver, inser-
tion of an oral or nasopharyngeal airway, and
moderate CPAP (10 to 20 cmH 2O) may be necessary
to prevent airway obstruction from loss of pharyngeal
tone. The closing pressure of the pharynx increases
with OSA severity, so greater levels of CPAP are
required with severe OSA than mild OSA. This serves
as a subjective assessment on the degree of airway
obstruction for children who do not obtain a preo-
perative sleep study. A T&A at most centers is a short
procedure from 15 to 45 minutes, and neuromuscular
blockade is not usually necessary. The patient is
intubated with a preformed-cuffed oral RAE (Ring –
Adair–Elwyn) to reduce the risk of aspirating blood
and secretions. A tube size 0.5 to 1 smaller than the
age-appropriate size is used to avoid airway trauma.
The ETT is placed during deep inhalational anesthe-
sia, which may be supplemented with a laryngeal
spray of topical lidocaine or an intravenous bolus of
propofol of 2 –3 mg/kg. The ETT is held in place by
the grooved tongue depressor that is part of the
Brown–Davis mouth gag. The FiO 2 should be
reduced to the lowest level possible to allow adequate
oxygenation while minimizing the risk of airway fire.
Maintenance may be achieved with inhaled anesthet-
ics or TIVA and supplemented with opiods, usually
initially titrated with 1 –2 mg/kg of fentanyl, 100 –
200 mg/kg of morphine, or 10 –20 mg/kg of hydromor-
phone. Children with severe OSA have lower peri-
operative morphine equivalent requirements and are
50% more likely to have apnea with fentanyl than
healthy children [13]. Furthermore, young children
and those with lower preoperative oxygen saturation
nadir also have lower postoperative morphine equiva-
lent requirements [14]. The use of spontaneous res-
piration during maintenance enables an assessment of
the response to small incremental doses of opiods.
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
325
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Although opiods are the mainstay for analgesia, the
use of opioid-sparing adjuncts such as anti-inflamma-
tory agents, acetaminophen, dexmedetomidine, and
ketamine have been advocated. Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs for T&A are controversial,
with a recent meta-analysis showing an increased risk
of post-tonsillectomy bleeding but a Cochrane data-
base review showing no significant correlation with
post-tonsillectomy bleeding [15]. Acetaminophen
may be administered orally preoperatively (10 –15
mg/kg), rectally (30 –40 mg/kg), and now intraven-
ously (10 –15 mg/kg). A randomized controlled trial
assessing duration of analgesia following intravenous
or rectal acetaminophen after T&A showed an
increased time to opioid rescue for both rectal and
intravenous acetaminophen, with a longer duration
of analgesia for the rectal administration [16].
A recent meta-analysis found that administration
of ketamine is associated with decreased postopera-
tive PACU pain scores and non-opioid analgesic
requirement but failed to exhibit a postoperative
opioid-sparing effect [17]. Dexmedetomidine, an
a2-agonist, with mild analgesic properties, at
doses of 0.75 –1 mg/kg increased the time to post-
operative opioid rescue but did not decrease the
total postoperative morphine equivalents when
compared to patients who only received morphine
intraoperatively [18].
High-dose dexamethasone (0.5–1m g / k g )d e c r e a s e s
the incidence of postoperative inflammation and
nausea and vomiting. There has been recent discus-
sion about the reported increased risk of bleeding
with larger doses of dexam ethasone, but this report
was criticized for the high incidence of primary
hemorrhage and the need to return to the OR on
the day of surgery [19].
At the end of the procedure, the surgeon suctions
the oropharynx and the stomach to remove residual
secretions and blood. The surgeon may electively
infiltrate the tonsillar fossa with local anesthetic for
postoperative pain control. There is no evidence
which local anesthetic, if any, and which concentra-
tion of local anesthetic improves postoperative pain
control. Extubation for low-risk children may be
accomplished under a deep or awake plane of anes-
thesia. Deep extubation is defined as extubation in the
absence of laryngeal reflexes. Blunting of laryngeal
reflexes may be achieved with a higher concentration
of inhaled anesthetics (MAC extubation, ~1.2 MAC)
or local anesthetics. Lidocaine may be administered
intravenously 1–2 mg/kg 5 minutes before the end of
the procedure, sprayed topically on the larynx during
laryngoscopy (1 –3m lo f2 –4%), injected through the
ETT at the end of the procedure (1 –2m lo f1 –2%), or
placed in the ETT cuff (1 –2m lo f1 –2%) following
laryngoscopy. Deep extubation decreases the inci-
dence of coughing and bucking at extubation, redu-
cing the possibility of post-tonsillectomy bleeding,
but may increase the possibility of laryngospasm
in the absence of airway reflexes and the presence
of secretions and blood in the oropharynx. Deep
extubation for high-risk children may increase the
incidence of airway obstr uction and postoperative
respiratory complications. Another common prac-
tice is to position the child in the lateral position
with head slightly down at the time of extubation to
a l l o wd r a i n a g eo fb l o o da n ds e c r e t i o n so u to ft h e
oropharynx. Unfortunately, there are no conclusive
studies correlating extubation techniques and peri-
operative respiratory complications in children
undergoing T&A. The anesthetic setting is also
important in determining extubation decisions
since most perioperative respiratory complications
will occur in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU).
Many outpatient surgery centers do not have a
backup anesthesiologist available and recovery
nurses often have limited pediatric experience, so
admitting a pediatric patient to PACU without
laryngeal reflexes followi ng deep extubation should
be done very cautiously.
LMA and T&A
The use of the LMA for adenotonsillectomies was
described in the early 1990s but did not become
widespread until a flexible-spiral metallic reinforced
tube was developed. Insertion of the LMA with ade-
notonsillar hypertrophy may be challenging and vari-
ous maneuvers may have to be used for appropriate
placement; however, the LMA is rarely dislodged
when the neck is placed in extreme extension for
the procedure, assuming appropriate position with
adequate ventilation and oxygenation were present
before the neck extension. Advantages of the LMA
over an ETT include a possible decrease in postopera-
tive stridor and immediate recovery in a child with a
spontaneous regular ventilatory pattern [20]. How-
ever, it remains controversial whether an LMA
changes the incidence of perioperative respiratory
complications.
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
326
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Postoperative management
Perioperative respiratory complications are defined as
major and minor respiratory complications. Major
respiratory complications include those that require
invasive and noninvasive airway interventions, such
as BIPAP, CPAP, and reintubation, and pharmacolo-
gic intervention, such as succinylcholine for laryngos-
pasm. Minor respiratory complications include mild
to moderate hypoxia with and without O 2 depend-
ence. Airway obstruction does not resolve immedi-
ately in the postoperative period and may be
exacerbated by the administration of sedative agents.
Blood and secretions in the oropharynx may further
precipitate laryngospasm.
Postoperative nausea and vomiting is common
due to pharyngeal mucosal irritation and swallowed
bloody secretions and should be prophylactically
treated with antiemetics such as a serotonin antagon-
ist or a promotility agent like metoclopramide.
A single intraoperative dose of dexamethasone also
reduces the incidence of emesis in the first 24 hours
postoperatively. The smallest effective dose is, how-
ever, unclear.
The child who must be monitored as an inpatient
postoperatively is difficult to identify. Children with
even mild OSA continue to have documented airway
obstruction the night following adenotonsillectomy
[21]. Obstruction with associated hypoxia postopera-
tively is four times more likely in children with severe
OSA than in children with mild OSA. There is, how-
ever, no evidence to help determine whether children
should be monitored in an intensive care unit, inter-
mediate care unit, or telemetry floor bed, and for how
long children should be monitored postoperatively.
At the authors ' institution, the practice is to observe
low-risk children for 2 hours postoperatively prior to
discharge, assuming they are tolerating oral intake
and maintaining SpO 2 >93%.
Post-tonsillectomy hemorrhage
Post-tonsillectomy bleeding can be primary or sec-
ondary. Primary bleeding occurs within 24 hours
postoperatively and is more brisk than secondary
bleeding. Secondary bleeding usually occurs beyond
24 hours postoperatively (usually between 7 and
10 days postoperatively) when the surgical eschar falls
off the tonsillar bed. Post-tonsillectomy bleeding is
more common in children older than 10 years of age.
Anesthetic management in both circumstances
can be challenging. Intravenous access should be
established preoperatively for volume resuscitation
and possible blood transfusion to compensate for
significant hemorrhage preoperatively. The child
should be adequately volume-resuscitated before
induction of anesthesia. The surgeon should be at
the bedside during induction as the bleeding may
obstruct the airway and a surgical airway may be
necessary. An awake fiberoptic intubation may be
challenging in an anxious child and an airway
obscured by blood. The child should be treated as full
stomach and aspiration risk. Rapid sequence induc-
tion with propofol (2 mg/kg), etomidate (0.3 mg/kg),
or ketamine (1 –2 mg/kg), with selection and dosage
guided by the patient 's hemodynamic status, and
succinylcholine (1 –2 mg/kg) or rocuronium (1.2
mg/kg) are appropriate. Two large suctions should
be available to help visualize the airway. A cuffed
ETT should be used to prevent aspiration of blood.
The ETT should be directed to the site where
bubbles are seen escaping from the glottic opening
when an assistant presses on the chest wall to pro-
duce a forced exhalation if the vocal cords are not
visible during laryngoscopy. Management and
maintenance of anesthesia focuses on maintaining
the patient 's hemodynamic and volume status,
guided by fluid therapy or blood transfusion. Suc-
tioning of the stomach at the end of the procedure
may not remove all the swallowed blood as much of
the blood may be clots that are too large to be
suctioned. The child should be extubated awake at
the end of the procedure.
Anesthesia for pharyngeal and
laryngeal surgery
Laser surgery
A laser ( light amplification by stimulated emission of
radiation) generates electron activity in the form of
light. The laser beam can be focused on a small area,
allowing for controlled coagulation, incision, and
vaporization of the target tissue without affecting
neighboring tissues. The CO 2 laser, which is the most
commonly used laser, is absorbed by all biologic
tissues and rapidly vaporizes intracellular water pre-
sent in the tissue, increasing temperature and
denaturing proteins in the target tissue. The CO 2 laser
produces focused vaporization of the target tissue
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
327
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012with minimal damage to surrounding tissues and
subsequent postoperative edema. The CO 2 laser has
been used to treat oropharyngeal and larynotracheal
papillomas, subglottic stenosis, subglottic hemangio-
mas, glottic webs, post-intubation granulomas, and
vocal cord nodules. The argon and the neodymium:
ytrrium–aluminum–garnet (Nd:YAG) lasers are used
in ophthalmologic surgery and in treating gastro-
intestinal bleeding. The CO 2 laser cannot penetrate
the cornea and may cause corneal injury whereas the
argon and Nd:YAG lasers can penetrate the cornea,
causing retinal injury. Therefore, all operating room
personnel should wear safety goggles that provide
protection from reflected beams, and the patient 's
eyes should be covered with saline-soaked eye pads
or metal eye shields. Flammable objects, such as sur-
gical drapes, PVC or non-metallic rubber tubes, and
unprotected skin should be removed from the path of
the laser to reduce the risk of fire.
Anesthetic management of laser surgery consists
of intubation and nonintubation techniques.
Standard PVC tubes are flammable and can be ignited
by the laser whereas red-rubber tubes cannot be
ignited but deflect the laser when wrapped with metal.
Metal-wrapped tubes may irritate the tracheal mucosa
causing postoperative edema, obstruct the airway if
the metal separates from the tube, and allow the laser
to penetrate and ignite unprotected portions of the
tube. Special nonflammable, non-reflective flexible
ETTs have been manufactured for laser surgery; how-
ever, the outer diameter of these ETTs is greater than
an equivalent PVC or red-rubber ETT, making them
inappropriate for small airways. A syringe or bucket
should always be available to douse ignited ETTs or
surrounding tissue. A non-intubation technique
following a routine inhalational induction may also
be used for laser surgery to allow for an unobstructed
view during the procedure and eliminate a potentially
flammable ETT. Furthermore, the depth of anesthesia
can be controlled by the patient 's minute ventilation.
A review of spontaneous ventilation has shown this to
be a safe and efficacious technique [22]. After the
patient is positioned with a suspension laryngoscope
the larynx is anesthetized with topical lidocaine,
and anesthesia is maintained with a TIVA technique
of propofol (200 –400 mg/kg/min) and remifentanil
(0.1–0.25 mg/kg/min) or passively delivered inhaled
anesthetic via the side-port of the bronchoscope.
Some anesthesiologists advocate the use of anticholi-
nergics to prevent reflex bradycardia and decrease
secretions. This technique allows ventilation and pas-
sive oxygenation during the procedure. The mixture of
gases delivered into the ETT or through the broncho-
scope affects the risk of combustion. Helium impedes
combustion from the CO2 laser, whereas nitrous oxide
and oxygen are additive in sustaining combustion.
Oxygen concentration should be less then 30% to
reduce the risk of airway fire, and the patient's ventila-
tion and oxygenation are monitored visibly or with a
precordial stethoscope and pulse oximeter. Intermit-
tent mask ventilation or alternatively intermittent
intubation by the surgeon may be required to
treat episodes of hypoxia. Mask ventilation is prefer-
able as repeat trauma from intermittent intubation
may increase the risk of postoperative edema.
A modification of this technique uses a jet ventilator
during periods of apnea. Supraglottic jet ventilation
via a catheter through the bronchoscope allows air to
be entrained and large airways to be intermittently
ventilated by the jet. This technique provides a rela-
tively immobile surgical field by eliminating large dia-
phragmatic excursions during the procedure but may
not provide effective ventilation for children with
small airway disease. Dexamethasone (0.5 –1 mg/kg)
is administered during the procedure to reduce post-
operative laryngeal edema, and racemic epinephrine
may be needed for postoperative stridor.
The most catastrophic complication from laser
surgery is airway fire. If the ETT ignites, oxygen flow
should be discontinued, and the ETT should be dis-
connected from the gas source and removed from the
airway. The fire should be doused with saline and the
airway reexamined with a bronchoscope to determine
the extent of tracheal and lung injury.
Tracheotomy
A tracheotomy may be performed as an emergency,
urgently, or electively. Since the airway is shared
between the anesthesiologist and the surgeon, a plan
should be established preoperatively. The tracheos-
tomy tube should conform to the trachea and neck
without causing skin or tracheal mucosal injury. Plas-
tic tracheostomy tubes are often used to prevent tissue
injury. Plastic tracheostomy tubes are manufactured
in metric sizes that correspond to ETT sizes whereas
metal tracheostomy tubes are still measured in French
sizes.
Elective tracheotomies are usually performed in
children with an in situ ETT, who have failed
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
328
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012extubation secondary to persistent hypoxemia, hyper-
carbia, or airway obstruction. Emergency or urgent
tracheotomies are usually performed in children who
initially maintain oxygenation and ventilation but are
at risk of acute respiratory failure from upper airway
or laryngeal trauma, corrosive ingestion, infections,
and tumors.
For urgent tracheotomies the anesthesiologist
must determine whether the child can maintain an
airway under general anesthesia and can be intubated
by standard laryngoscopy or fiberoptic bronchoscopy.
Spontaneous ventilation should be maintained with
an inhaled anesthetic induction. Ketamine, or TIVA
technique with propofol (200 –400 mg/kg/min), remi-
fentanil (0.1 –0.25 mg/kg/min), or dexmedetomidine
(1–2 mg/kg/h) may also be used for children with
impending respiratory failure. Muscle relaxants
should be avoided to prevent airway obstruction if
an unobstructed airway cannot be maintained.
After the child is induced, topical lidocaine (1 –3m l
of 2 –4%) may be sprayed on the larynx to blunt
laryngeal reflexes. If intubation is not possible, the
airway may be maintained with an LMA or facemask.
An ETT may be preferred to help the surgeon identify
the trachea.
Elective tracheotomies are performed in children
with an in situ ETT and anesthesia may be maintained
with an inhaled anesthetic, opioid, and muscle relax-
ant. The child is positioned with a shoulder roll, so
the neck is hyperextended, and the head is taped to
the end of the bed. Before the tracheostomy tube is
inserted, the ETT is pulled out to accommodate the
tracheostomy tube, but the ETT should not be
removed completely until ventilation is confirmed
with the tracheostomy tube. Stay sutures are placed
at the end of the procedure, so the surgeon may
identify the tracheal incision and lumen if the trache-
ostomy tube is removed accidentally. At the authors '
institution, children are sedated and paralyzed in the
ICU for 5 days postoperatively to allow stoma healing
and prevent accidental loss of the airway if the trache-
ostomy tube becomes dislodged.
The reader is directed to Chapter 33 on recon-
structive airway surgery in pediatrics for details.
Anesthesia for laryngoscopy,
bronchoscopy, and endoscopy
Rigid and flexible bronchoscopy allows both ana-
tomic and dynamic evaluation of the upper and lower
airways. Lesions commonly evaluated include laryn-
gotracheomalacia, external anomalies causing tra-
cheobronchial compression, congenital or acquired
subglottic stenosis, laryngeal papillomas, hemangio-
mas, granulomas, and airway foreign bodies.
Anesthesia for rigid and flexible bronchoscopy
and endoscopy requires constant cooperation and
communication between the surgeon and the anesthe-
siologist since they must both share the airway. Pre-
operative evaluation should focus on the degree of
airway obstruction at rest and with activity and pos-
itions or maneuvers that aggravate or improve the
symptoms. The anesthesiologist should evaluate all
imaging studies, pulmonary function tests, and arter-
ial blood gases as part of the evaluation. Preoperative
sedatives and opiods should be administered with
caution, so as not to cause respiratory depression
and worsen airway obstruction.
The rigid bronchoscope consists of the broncho-
scope, a glass rod telescope, a side arm for ventilating
with the anesthesia circuit, a light source for the
telescope, and in instrument channel for grasping
and incising (see Figure 32.1). The entire system is
closed, permitting ventilation while the telescope is in
place. Pediatric rigid bronchoscopes are available
in three lengths and various diameters. The smallest
optical telescope should be used to prevent increases
in airflow resistance for ventilation as the optical
telescope may occupy the entire lumen of the smaller
bronchoscopes [23]. A persistent increase in
intrathoracic pressure may occur when the telescope
impedes airflow, increasing the risk of barotrauma
and cardiovascular compromise. For example, when
a 2.8 mm telescope is used with a 3.5 mm broncho-
scope, adequate exhalation occurs. However, when a
smaller bronchoscope is used, adequate exhalation
may not occur and the telescope should be intermit-
tently removed, particularly for longer procedures, to
allow ventilation and passive exhalation.
An alternative method of ventilation during bron-
choscopy is the Sanders jet ventilation technique
(see Figure 32.2) [24]. The principle involves bursts
of oxygen up to 50 psi from a hand-held pressure-
reducing valve via a 16-gauge catheter attached to the
rigid bronchoscope. Current jet ventilators have
adjustable pressure valves that may decrease the risk
of barotrauma. Oxygen is released through the cath-
eter, creating a Venturi effect that entrains room air in
the rigid bronchoscope, inflating the lungs. A FiO 2 of
considerably less than 100% is administered since the
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
329
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012entrained air dilutes the oxygen delivered. Exhalation
is passive following elastic recoil of the lungs and
chest. The high inflation pressures may cause baro-
trauma, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and
gastric insufflation. Hypoxia from room air entrap-
ment and hypercapnea from incomplete exhalation
may also occur. Children with significant underlying
pulmonary or chest wall disease are not candidates for
jet ventilation. Anesthesia is usually maintained with a
TIVA technique as mentioned below.
The anesthesiologist must maintain oxygenation
and ventilation, prevent aspiration, and minimize
laryngeal motion during bronchoscopy while the sur-
geon controls the airway. Both inhalational and intra-
venous induction are appropriate, but spontaneous
ventilation should be maintained to allow the surgeon
to evaluate upper airway or tracheobronchial dynam-
ics. An anticholinergic may be administered to
decrease secretions and prevent a vagally mediated
bradycardia. Topicalizaion of the vocal cords with
lidocaine 1 –3m lo f2 –4% blunts laryngeal reflexes to
prevent coughing and bucking during instrumenta-
tion and allows a lighter plane of anesthesia to help
evaluate airway dynamics. Maintenance of anesthesia
(A) (B)
Figure 32.1. (A) The rigid bronchoscope consists of (from left to right) the laryngoscope, glass rod telescope, bronchoscope, and a side arm
for ventilating with the anesthesia circuit. (B) Different bronchoscope sizes (3.5 to 6.0) and lengths from left to right are shown.
Figure 32.2. Sanders jet ventilator.
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
330
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012with either an inhaled anesthetic or a TIVA with
propofol and/or opioid must be balanced to ensure
a “quiet” surgical field but prevent apnea to allow
evaluation of airway dynamics. A propofol-based
TIVA technique (200 –400 mg/kg/min) can be given
continuously during the bronchoscopy, producing a
more stable depth of anesthesia than an inhalational
anesthetic delivered through the side port of the bron-
choscope. Remifentanil (0.1 –0.25 mg/kg/min) has the
advantage of increasing the depth of anesthesia and
blunting additional sympathetic stimulation, and its
short-acting property minimizes the risk of respira-
tory depression when the surgical stimulus is
removed. Because ventilation may be intermittent or
occluded by the bronchoscope, 100% O 2 should be
delivered during the bronchoscopy. High fresh gas
flow rates and high concentration of inhaled anes-
thetic are necessary to compensate for leaks around
the rigid bronchoscope. Only the telescope without a
ventilating side channel may be used in a neonate,
necessitating the use of an ETT placed in the mouth
or nose for insufflation of oxygen. At the end of the
procedure, the surgeon may size the larynx with an
uncuffed ETT to determine an air leak with positive
pressure between 15 and 25 cmH 2O. Dexamethasone
0.5–1 mg/kg is administered to reduce airway edema
postoperatively. The child should be spontaneously
ventilating with a natural airway at the end of the
procedure when the bronchoscope is removed.
Continuous EtCO 2 monitoring is not always pos-
sible with bronchoscopy, and clinical observation of
chest wall movement or a precordial stethoscope is
useful. Hypercapnea is inevitable but usually well
tolerated in most children. Hypoxia, however, is usu-
ally not well tolerated and the bronchoscopy may
have to be stopped while the child is reoxygenated
with either a facemask or intermittent intubation.
Persistent hypoxia or rapid cardiovascular deterior-
ation should make one suspicious for the diagnosis of
tension pneumothorax.
Stridor
Stridor is a term generally used to describe noisy
breathing and to refer specifically to a high-pitched
crowing sound associated with various respiratory
etiologies. The etiology of stridor may be extrathor-
acic or intrathoracic, acquired or congenital, and
fixed or dynamic. Inspiratory stridor occurs from
anomalies above the thoracic inlet whereas expiratory
stridor typically occurs from anomalies below the
thoracic inlet. A preoperative history should focus
on the onset and duration of symptoms, position with
symptoms (e.g., supine or upright), activity with
symptoms (e.g., at rest or exertion), and previous
tracheal intubations. A nasal flexible bronchoscope
in an awake neonate may help evaluate the neonate 's
laryngeal dynamics without stressing the child. An
anticholinergic agent may be administered to prevent
a vagally mediated bradycardia, and the nasal mucosa
can be topicalizaed with lidocaine to prevent discom-
fort during the transnasal approach. Alternatively,
a rigid bronchoscope with general anesthesia not only
allows visualization of the lower tracheobronchial tree
but also maintains control over oxygenation and ven-
tilation as described previously.
Acute epiglottitis
Acute epiglottitis is a potentially life-threatening
supraglottic bacterial infection. Epiglottitis was
more common before the Haemophilus influenzae
type b vaccine became available. Children are toxic-
appearing with high fever, sore throat, dysphagia,
dysphonia, and inspiratory stridor. Classically, the
child is sitting up with the chin forward, mouth open
and drooling, and hands in a tripod posture. The
child may deteriorate rapidly unless a definitive
airway is established. Lateral neck radiographs may
show a swollen epiglottis but should not be performed
if causing a delay in definitive airway establishment.
The child should not be disturbed from this position,
to prevent complete airway obstruction, and immedi-
ately transferred without disturbance, usually in a
parent's arms, to the operating room by an anesthe-
siologist, otolaryngologist, or intensivist with the goal
of securing the airway in a controlled manner. ETT is
the preferred method of supportive airway care.
An inhaled induction maintaining spontaneous
ventilation and airway tone should be performed
gently with the child, usually in the parent 's arms,
to avoid causing acute airway obstruction. Intraven-
ous access should only be performed when the child is
obtunded. Moderate CPAP may be added to prevent
airway collapse, but spontaneous ventilation should
be maintained for airway tone. Intubation is usually
performed with ETT one or two sizes smaller than
the age-appropriate size. A classic cherry-red epiglot-
tis may be visible under direct laryngoscopy, but
significant inflammation of the epiglottis and other
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
331
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012supraglottic structures may distort oropharyngeal
anatomy, making direct laryngoscopy difficult. Emer-
gency airway equipment such as videolaryngoscopes
and bronchoscopes should be readily available, and
the surgeon may also perform an emergency trache-
ostomy under mask ventilation.
The child is mechanically ventilated postopera-
tively in the ICU until an air leak is audible, usually
24 to 48 hours following the initiation of antibiotics.
Croup
Croup has a more insidious onset than epiglottitis,
usually following an upper respiratory infection. Chil-
dren may have a bark-like cough with inspiratory
stridor at rest or activity but are not toxic-appearing,
unlike children with epiglottitis. Anteroposterior
radiographs of the neck reveal the classic “steeple
church” sign with symmetric narrowing of the sub-
glottis. Most cases of croup resolve spontaneously, but
children may occasionally present with respiratory
failure. Humidification of inspired gases prevents
drying of secretions. Supplemental oxygen may be
needed for hypoxia. Racemic epinephrine is the most
effective therapy, while corticosteroids, such as dex-
amethasone and budesonide, are also effective [25].
Antibiotics are usually not indicated as clinical
improvement usually occurs in 12 to 24 hours.
Peritonsillar abscess
Peritonsillar abscess is the most common deep neck
infection treated by an otolaryngologist. Children
may present preoperatively with fever, pharyngeal
swelling, sore throat, dysphagia, dysphonia, and tris-
mus. Preoperative evaluation should focus on the
degree of airway obstruction. Computed tomography
preoperatively helps identify airway deviation and
obstruction. Although intravenous induction may be
appropriate since airway obstruction from the abscess
is less likely as the abscess is in a fixed location in the
lateral pharynx, inhalational induction maintaining
spontaneous ventilation may be preferable to prevent
loss of airway tone during induction. An oropharyn-
geal airway should be avoided and care must be taken
during laryngoscopy to prevent rupture of the abscess
and aspiration of purulent material.
Vocal cord visualization should not be impaired
since the pathology is supraglottic and above the
laryngeal inlet although a right-sided abscess may
interfere with the normal sweeping of the tongue to
the left during laryngoscop y. Occasionally, laryngo-
scopy may be difficult if pharyngeal swelling dis-
torts normal oropharyngeal anatomy. A cuffed ETT
should be used to prevent aspiration of purulent
material.
Airway foreign body
Airway foreign bodies are most common in children
between 1 and 3 years of age. Aspirated objects are
usually peanuts, food, and plastic or metal objects.
Symptoms depend on the location, size, and acuity
of the aspirated object. Children may present with
hoarseness, stridor, dyspnea, unilateral decreased air
entry, or an acute history of choking. Children may
also have chronic cough, wheezing, or lower respira-
tory infections that are not responsive to medical
therapy. Normal physical examination cannot elimin-
ate the possibility of an aspirated foreign object, as up
to 45% of children with an abnormal bronchoscopic
exam will have a normal preoperative physical exam-
ination [26]. Foreign-body aspiration is diagnosed
within 24 hours in only half of children whereas the
remaining patients are diagnosed following failure of
medical management for chronic cough, wheezing,
stridor, or recurrent lower respiratory tract infections.
Some aspirated objects, such as plastic toys, are radio-
opaque and may be detected on chest radiograph;
unfortunately, the majority of aspirated objects,
including food items, are radiolucent and are unlikely
to be detected by chest radiograph.
The effect of the aspirated foreign body depends
on the pattern of obstruction [27]: (1) bypass valve,
where both respiratory phases are involved, but the
radiograph is normal since there is enough aeration
beyond the obstruction; (2) check valve, where inhal-
ation is normal but exhalation is impeded, creating
hyperinflation on expiratory radiographs; a medias-
tinal shift towards the normal side may be seen if
there is a significant volume difference; (3) ball valve,
where inhalation is impeded, leading to atelectasis on
the affected side; and (4) stop valve, where air flow is
completely impeded during inhalation and exhal-
ation. Consolidation of the involved area occurs,
followed by collapse.
The urgency to proceed with anesthesia and
bronchoscopic removal of the foreign body is dictated
by the severity of respiratory distress and the location
and type of aspirated material. For example,
unroasted peanuts should be removed immediately
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
332
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012as the unsaturated oils may cause a severe inflamma-
tory response. Additionally, peanuts may fragment
over time, making en bloc removal challenging. Chil-
dren who aspirate foreign bodies while eating present
with the additional risk of a full stomach and aspir-
ation. Waiting for the appropriate NPO time may not
be possible, particularly with signs of airway obstruc-
tion. Given the risk of airway obstruction, the airway
takes precedence over the risk of gastric content aspir-
ation. The major unresolved controversy with airway
foreign bodies is whether to maintain controlled
ventilation or spontaneous ventilation. Although an
intravenous induction may be possible in children
who do not present with airway obstruction, an inha-
lational induction while maintaining spontaneous
ventilation is preferable to reduce the risk of further
obstruction and minimize movement of the foreign
body with positive-pressure ventilation. Anesthesia is
maintained similar to bronchoscopy with an inhala-
tional anesthetic or TIVA technique with propofol
with/without remifentanil. Spontaneous ventilation
should be preserved until the location and degree
of obstruction are identified, noting that the position
of the foreign body may change intraoperatively.
Nitrous oxide is relatively contraindicated as it
reduces the inspired concentration of oxygen, but
more importantly may significantly increase lung
volumes if air trapping occurs. The foreign body is
usually removed easily through the bronchoscope, but
occasionally it may have to be pushed peripherally to
relieve significant airway obstruction or broken into
smaller pieces to facilitate removal. The size of the
foreign body may also exceed the internal diameter of
the bronchoscope. The foreign body, forceps, and the
bronchoscope must be removed together through the
vocal cords. If the foreign body is lost during
attempted removal the bronchoscope may have to
be re-introduced several times to facilitate removal,
increasing the risk of mucosal edema. Dexamethasone
0.5–1 mg/kg should be administered intraoperatively
to reduce the risk of airway edema postoperatively.
Postoperative croup may be treated with nebulized
racemic epinephrine.
Endoscopy for esophageal foreign body
ingestion
The most commonly ingested esophageal foreign
body is a coin, followed by food and bones. Fre-
quently, esophageal foreign bodies pass through the
gastric outlet and the gastrointestinal tract, rarely
requiring surgical intervention. Children with a mid-
esophageal foreign body may present with dysphagia,
drooling, retching, and vomiting, but children with an
upper esophageal foreign body may present with
respiratory distress from anatomic compression of
the airway. Major complications are rare, but a coin
lodged for more than 24 hours may cause esophageal
erosion. A chest radiograph, which should be obtained
in all cases of suspected esophageal foreign body inges-
tion, usually shows lodgement at the proximal esopha-
gus, the thoracic inlet, or the mid-esophagus. A coin
will appear transverse on a radiograph since the
esophagus is widest in the transverse position.
If the child is not in respiratory distress, the foreign
body may be removed following an appropriate fasting
period. Either an intravenous or inhalational induction
is appropriate, and an ETT for airway protection should
precede removal. The ETT should be taped to the left
side to allow space in the oropharynx for the surgeon to
insert the esophagoscope. The ETT may be dislodged
when the esophagoscope is withdrawn. Finally, the for-
eign body may be dislodged in the hyopharynx and slip
into the larynx during removal, completely occluding
the airway and requiring urgent retrieval.
Anesthetic complications in pediatric
otolaryngologic procedures
As presented in this chapter, otolaryngologic proced-
ures require proper preoperative evaluation, intrao-
perative planning and anticipation of postoperative
complications to ensure a favorable outcome.
Although many of the children presenting for these
procedures are healthy, and the procedures are done
as outpatient/ambulatory interventions, some are
done on children with complex medical history, syn-
dromes and with extensive surgical trauma.
Complications following otolaryngologic proced-
ures are either patient or procedure related. Pediatric
patients are more prone to separation anxiety and
difficulty with induction, postoperative emergence
delirium and lower pain tolerance with recovery.
Teenage girls have a higher incidence of post-
operative nausea and vomiting, and most airway
instrumentation procedures require prophylaxis or
therapy for such complication. Children with
enlarged adenoids and tonsils have increased risk of
intra- and postoperative airway obstruction, laryngos-
pasm, and desaturation. Pediatric patients with
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
333
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012syndromes or chromosomal abnormalities have a
higher risk of obstructive airway disease and post-
operative compromise, requiring prolonged recovery,
especially in those less than 3 years of age.
Laser procedures have the risk of airway fires as well
as occupational hazards to healthcare providers in the
operating room. Unique complications to such proced-
ures as adenotonsillectomy, with early or late postopera-
tive tonsillar bleeding, and ear and mastoid surgery,
with potential for nerve injury, require anticipation
and appropriate preparation for therapy. Laryngeal sur-
gery can result in postoperative airway compromise,
secondary to swelling or laryngo-tracheomalacia.
Summary
In conclusion, anesthesia for otolaryngologic proced-
ures in children is one of the most challenging and
rewarding fields in anesthesia. It requires a careful
understanding of the underlying pathophysiology, the
planned surgical procedure, and the anesthetic risks. It
also requires a concerted effort and clear communica-
tion with our surgical colleagues with whom we share
the airway in many of these interventions. A safe and
smooth postoperative recovery can be achieved by
anticipation of potential complications and careful
planning for prophylaxis, and effective therapy.
Case study of anesthesia for pediatric
otolaryngologic surgery
Preoperative evaluation
A 3-month old female presents for an elective T&A.
The parents report a history of extremely loud snor-
ing, self-resolving pauses ( ~2–3 seconds), restless
sleep, daytime somnolence, and hyperactivity at pre-
school according to her providers. She has baseline
chronic congestion presumed secondary to allergic
rhinitis and had a recent exacerbation of her chronic
congestion with upper respiratory tract infection. She
had 1 day of vomiting at that time, which required a
visit to an urgent care center. She was given oral
hydration therapy at the urgent care center; a chemis-
try panel drawn at that time was unremarkable except
for an HCO 3 of 30, and she was discharged home. She
has had no previous surgeries or general anesthetics.
Parents report no history of anesthetic complications
in the family. She has no known food or drug allergies
and is currently taking fexofenadine (Allegra), mon-
telukast (Singulair), and albuterol as needed, last used
approximately 4 weeks prior to her upper respiratory
tract infection. Physical examination reveals an
extremely anxious and clingy child with clear nasal
secretions that are baseline according to her parents.
Vital signs are temperature 98.2 /C14F, respiratory rate
(RR) 20, heart rate (HR) 132, and a weight of 19 kg.
Blood pressure (BP) and SpO 2 cannot be obtained
since the child is crying. Cardiorespiratory exam is
difficult to elicit through her crying.
Intraoperative course
She is given midazolam 6 mg (0.5 mg/kg) PO 20 min-
utes prior to the procedure, and is transported to the
OR sedated but able to communicate with the operat-
ing room team when prompted verbally. Standard
ASA monitors are placed prior to induction with
initial vital signs as HR 120, BP 102/65, SpO 2 93%
on room air. Inhalational induction with 70%/30%
N2O/O2 and 8% sevoflurane produces moderate
obstruction requiring CPAP 10 cmH 2O, reposition-
ing of the head, and an oral way. Propofol 30 mg,
morphine 1.2 mg, dexamethasone 6 mg, and ondan-
setron 2 mg are given following placement of a per-
ipheral IV. A 4.5 oral RAE ETT is placed following
direct laryngoscopy with a grade I view. The 15-
minute surgical procedure is uneventful as hemor-
rhage is controlled from the tonsillar bed, and an
orogastric tube is passed with minimal gastric con-
tents recovered. The child is extubated awake, but
develops airway obstruction immediately following
extubation, requiring CPAP 10 cmH 2O. SpO 2 at this
time was 90% with no change in HR and BP. She
resumes spontaneous ventilation with a regular
respiratory pattern and SpO 2 increases to 99%
Postoperative course
The child is transported to the PACU in the head-up
position and has a non-obstructive respiratory pattern
on arrival at the PACU. Initial vital signs in the PACU
are SpO2 98% on blow-by O 2, HR 112, RR 10, BP 102/
54. Approximately 10 minutes following arrival at the
PACU, she develops significant airway obstruction
with SpO 2 80% on blow-by O 2, HR 104, RR no air
entry noted with a paradoxical respiration, and BP
124/84. BIPAP and a jaw thrust are required by the
PACU nurse and the anesthesiologist to improve
airway obstruction. Vital signs are now SpO 2 94%
on 6l via Jackson-Rees circuit, RR 10 with moderate
airway obstruction, HR 120, and BP 126/76. She is
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
334
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012still asleep with minimal response to the jaw thrust.
Naloxone 15 mg for four doses is given at 3-minute
intervals. The child is now more awake and following
commands with SpO2 95% on blow-by O2, RR 10 with
mild airway obstruction, HR 120, and BP 126/82. She
redevelops significant airway obstruction approxi-
mately 30 minutes following her last naloxone
dose, again requiring BIPAP and a jaw thrust by the
PACU nurse and the anesthesiologist to improve the
airway obstruction; she is again asleep with minimal
response to the jaw thrust. An arterial blood gas is
obtained with a pH 7.20, pCO 2 120, pO 2 80, HCO 3
34. The child is reintubated and admitted to the
PICU.
She is extubated on postoperative day 2 and dis-
charged home on postoperative day 4. She has a sleep
study 2 months postoperatively that shows an RDI
4.5, SpO 2 nadir 88%, and peak EtCO 2 50, with
the mother reporting occasional snoring at night
with pauses, but improvement in hyperactivity at
preschool.
Sleep-disordered breathing is a disease con-
tinuum. Although there are no definitive guidelines
for the anesthetic management for T&A, it is
important to attempt to identify high-risk patients
preoperatively or intraoperatively as the analgesic
requirements and postoperative monitoring may need
to be modified.
Clinical pearls
/C15Preschool children receiving unsupplemented
sevoflurane anesthesia for myringotomy tube
placement may exhibit emergence delirium of
unknown etiology. Since intravenous access is not
usually needed for this brief procedure, intranasal
fentanyl 1 –2 mg/kg can be used to reduce
postoperative emergence delirium from
sevoflurane anesthesia.
/C15Children with an active or recent upper
respiratory tract infection may be at risk of
perioperative respiratory complications, including
airway obstruction, laryngospasm, bronchospasm,
and breath-holding, for up to 6 weeks. Increased
airway reactivity may persist for up to 8 weeks
even for children with a recent, uncomplicated
URI. However, no increases in perioperative
respiratory complications were found in those
children presenting with an acute uncomplicated
upper respiratory tract infection for minor
surgery not requiring airway instrumentation.
/C15Unilateral choanal atresia is not a medical or
surgical emergency and may present as only
persistent unilateral nasal discharge years later.
If the obstruction is bilateral, children may present
with acute respiratory failure; surgical correction
depends on the neonate 's ability to compensate
with oral breathing and receive adequate
nutrition. Some surgeons advocate a “rule of tens ”
for timing of the repair: the child must over
10 weeks of age, weigh over 10 pounds, and have
hemoglobin over 10 gm/dl.
/C15Documented severe obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
places children at higher risk of perioperative
respiratory complications, along with other
factors: age less than 3 years old, craniofacial
syndromes, cranial base disorders, neuromuscular
disorders, trisomy 21, infiltrative disorders and
storage diseases, and obesity.
/C15Children with mucopolysaccharidosis I (Hurler 's
syndrome) and II (Hunter 's syndrome) have
diffuse infiltration of the upper airway with
mucopolysaccharidosis, predisposing them to
airway obstruction, difficult mask ventilation and
difficulty with intubation.
/C15Deep extubation for high-risk children may
increase the incidence of airway obstruction and
postoperative respiratory complications.
/C15In managing acute epiglottitis, an inhaled
induction maintaining spontaneous ventilation
and airway tone should be performed gently with
the child, usually in the parent 's arms.
Intravenous access is ordinarily only performed
when the child is obtunded. Moderate CPAP may
be added to help prevent airway collapse.
Intubation is usually performed using an ETT one
or two sizes smaller than the usual age-
appropriate size.
References
1. Vornov P, Tobim MJ, Billings K,
et al. Postoperative pain relief in
infants undergoing myringotomy
and tube placement: comparison
of a novel regional anesthetic
block to intranasal fentanyl – a
pilot analysis. Pediatr Anesth
2008;18:1196–201.
2. Galinkin JL, Fazi LM, Cuy RM,
et al. Use of intranasal fentanyl in
children undergoing
myringotomy and tube placement
during halothane and sevoflurane
Chapter 32: Anesthesia for pediatric otolaryngologic surgery
335
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:49 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012anesthesia. Anesthesiology
2000;93:1378–83.
3. Pestieau SR, Quezado ZM,
Johnson YJ, et al. The effect of
dexmedetomidine during
myringotomy and pressure-
equalizing tube placement in
children. Pediatr Anesth
2011;21:1128–35.
4. Tait AR, Malviya S. Anesthesia for
the child with an upper
respiratory tract infection: still a
dilemma? Anesth Analg
2005;100:59–65.
5. Suresh S, Barcelone SL, Young
NM, et al. Postoperative pain
relief in children undergoing
tympanomastoid surgery: is a
regional block better than opiods.
Anesth Analg 2002;94:859–62.
6. Crawford MW, White MC, Propst
EJ, et al. Dose-dependent
suppression of the electrical
elicited stapedius reflex by general
anesthetics in children
undergoing cochlear implant
surgery. Anesth Analg
2009;18:1480–7.
7. Rosen GM, Muckle RP,
Mahowald MW, et al.
Postoperative respiratory
compromise in children with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Can it be anticipated? Pediatrics
1994;93:784–8.
8. Karlson KH Jr. What 's new in
pediatric obstructive sleep apnea?
Clin Pulm Med 2008;15:226.
9. Brown KA. Outcome, risk, and
error and the child with
obstructive sleep apnea. Pediatr
Anesth 2011;21:771–80.
10. Roland PS, Rosenfeld RM, Brooks
LJ, et al. Clinical practice
guideline: polysomnography for
sleep-disordered breathing prior
to tonsillectomy in children.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2011;145(1 Suppl):S1–15.
11. Nolan J, Brietzke SE. Systematic
review of pediatric tonsil size and
polysomnogram-measured
obstructive sleep apnea severity.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2011;144:844–50.
12. Francis A, Eltaki K, Bash T, et al.
The safety of preoperative
sedation in children with sleep-
disordered breathing. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol 2006;70:517–21
13. Brown KA, Laferrière A,
Lakheeram I, et al. Recurrent
hypoxemia in children is
associated with increased
analgesic sensitivity to opiates.
Anesthesiology 2006;105:665–9.
14. Brown KA, Laferrière A, Moss IR.
Recurrent hypoxemia in young
children with obstructive sleep
apnea is associated with reduced
opioid requirement for analgesia.
Anesthesiology 2004;100:806–10.
15. Cardwell M, Siviter G, Smith A.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs and perioperative bleeding
in paediatric tonsillectomy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2005;2:CD003591.
16. Capici F, Ingelmo PM,
Davidson A, et al. Randomized
controlled trial of duration of
analgesia following intravenous or
rectal acetaminophen after
adenotonsillectomy in children.
Br J Anaesth 2008;100:251–5.
17. Dahmani S, Michelet D,
Abback PS, et al. Ketamine for
perioperative pain management in
children: a meta-analysis of
published studies. Pediatr Anesth
2011;21:636–52.
18. Olutotye OA, Glover CD,
Diefenderge JW, et al. The effect
of intraoperative
dexmedetomidine on
postoperative analgesia and
sedation in pediatrics patients
undergoing tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy. Anesth Analg
2010;111:490–5.
19. Czarnetizki C, Elia N,
Lysakowski C, et al.
Dexamethasone and risk of
vomiting and postoperative
bleeding after tonsillectomy in
children: a randomized trial.JAMA
2008;300:2621–30.
20. Peng A, Dodson KM, Thacker LR.
Use of laryngeal mask airway in
pediatric adenotonsillectomy.
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2011;137:42–6
21. Helfaer MA, McColley SA, Pyzik
PL, et al. Polysomnography after
adenotonsillectomy in mild
pediatric obstructive sleep apnea.
Crit Care Med 1996;24:
1323–7.
22. Quintal M, Cunningham M,
Ferrari L. Tubeless spontaneous
respiration technique for pediatric
microlaryngeal surgery. Arch
Otolaryngol 1997;123:209–14.
23. Woods AM, Gal TJ. Decreaseing
airflow resistance during infant
and pediatric bronschoscopy.
Anesth Analg 1987;66:
457–9.
24. Miyasaka K, Sloan IA, Froese AB.
An evaluation of the jet injector
(Sanders) technique for
bronchoscopy in paediatric
patients. Can Anaesth Soc
1980;27:117–24.
25. Russell KF, Liang Y, O 'Gorman
K, et al. Glucocorticoids for
croup. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2011;1:CD001955.
26. Even L, Heno N, Talmon Y, et al.
Diagnostic evaluation of foreign
body aspiration in children: a
prospective study. J Pediatr Surg
2005;40:1122–7.
27. Zur KB, Litman RS. Pediatric
airway foreign body: surgical and
anesthetic perspectives. Pediatr
Anesth 2009;19:109–17.
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
336
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:50 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.035
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Section 6
Chapter
33
Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
Anesthesia for reconstructive airway
surgery in pediatrics
Megan Nolan and David S. Beebe
Introduction/background
Reconstructive surgery for the airway first began
being performed in children in the early part of the
twentieth century. At that time the chief cause
of laryngeal or tracheal pathology was diphtheria.
In the 1920s and 1930s a variety of surgical techniques
were developed by Jackson and Arbuckle to correct
laryngotracheal stenosis resulting from diphtheria.
Using resection of diseased tissue as well as skin
grafts, this allowed many of these children to no
longer require a tracheostomy. With the diphtheria
vaccine, the incidence of infectious laryngeal stenosis
declined. However, in the 1930s to the 1960s airway
injuries from automobile accidents increased. Tech-
niques to correct posttraumatic stenosis using rib car-
tilage grafts were developed during this time. In the
1960s premature babies began being managed by pro-
longed intubation for ventilatory support. Subglottic
stenosis from prolonged intubation soon became a
serious problem as these babies survived to childhood.
Often these children required a permanent tracheos-
tomy. However, airway operations such as the anterior
cricoid split were developed by otolaryngologists that
allowed an infant with subglottic stenosis to have an
adequate airway and often forgo a tracheostomy.
Cricoid resection is now also utilized in infants and
children with severe subglottic stenosis as well, as are
resections of short segments of the trachea for acquired
or congenital stenosis. In recent years tracheoplasty
techniques that allow the reconstruction of the airway
in infants or small children who have long segments of
stenosis have been developed, often using a cardiopul-
monary bypass. In the past these lesions were often
fatal [1,2].
Infants and children undergoing reconstructive
airway surgery present many challenges to the
anesthesiologist. If they are not yet tracheally intubated
at the time of surgery they may have stridor or some
degree of airway obstruction from their stenotic lesion,
making induction of general anesthesia hazardous.
Anesthesiologists and surgeons must be prepared to
handle a difficult airway when anesthetizing these
patients. Both flexible and rigid bronchoscopy are often
performed prior to beginning reconstructive airway
surgery. These procedures require close cooperation
between the anesthesiologist and surgeon when man-
aging a shared airway. Often these infants require
tracheal intubation for a week or two following oper-
ations on their airway. This is a challenge for the pedi-
atric intensivist. Adequate but not excessive sedation
must be provided so that tracheal intubation is tolerated
without long-term complications. Extubation and post-
extubation care can be a challenge as well because post-
operative edema can lead to airway obstruction. Finally,
many infants and children undergoing airway recon-
structive procedures require frequent laryngoscopies
and bronchoscopies under anesthesia to assess their
progress and determine whether further procedures
are necessary. These patients often have challenging
airways and become well known to the treating
anesthesiologists.
Surgical procedures
Subglottic stenosis is the primary indication for
reconstructive airway surgery in infants and small
children. Subglottic stenosis is a reduction in the
lumen of the airway below the level of the glottic
opening. Cotton in 1984 introduced a simple classifi-
cation system for subglottic stenosis based on the
degree of obstruction. Grade 1 is any degree of sten-
osis less that 70%. Grade 2 is a reduction of the lumen
of 70% to 90%. Grade 3 is a 90% stenosis with an
Anesthesia for Otolaryngologic Surgery , ed. Basem Abdelmalak and D. John Doyle. Published by Cambridge University Press.
© Cambridge University Press 2013.
337
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012identifiable lumen. Grade 4 is complete obstruction.
Children with greater than 70% stenosis will require
surgery to allow ventilation without a tracheostomy.
The most common cause of subglottic stenosis is
prolonged intubation, and neonates are the most
common patient population affected. Congenital sub-
glottic stenosis not resulting from prolonged intub-
ation only occurs about 5% of the time. Today, the
incidence of subglottic stenosis in neonates ranges
from 0.63% to 2.0% [3].
Acquired subglottic stenosis is thought to result
from airway injury causing an excess of granulation
tissue. This granulation tissue consists of fibroblasts,
macrophages, loose connective tissue, and new capil-
laries. The fibroblasts act to pull the edges of the
injured site together and decrease the size of the
airway. Even without trauma at the time of intub-
ation, any long-term intubation (greater than 14 days
duration) is irritating to the delicate tissue of the
airway and can result in edema, ulcerations, tissue
erosion, and scarring, with the development of sub-
glottic stenosis. Chronic aspiration and infection can
also cause or aggravate subglottic stenosis. In add-
ition, acquired subglottic stenosis can result from
external trauma such as a motor vehicle accident. In
the past subglottic stenosis was managed by long-
term tracheostomy below the site of the stenotic
lesion. Currently there are several operations available
that allow decannulation of a tracheostomy in chil-
dren with subglottic stenosis, or elimination of the
need for a tracheostomy in the management of sub-
glottic stenosis altogether [3].
One common operation developed for neonates
with subglottic stenosis is the anterior cricoid split.
The surgical criteria to perform an anterior cricoid
split are: (1) failed extubation on two or more
occasions; (2) a weight greater than 1500 g; (3) extu-
bation failure secondary to laryngeal pathology; (4)
no assisted ventilation for ten days prior to the pro-
cedure; (5) supplemental oxygen less than 35%; (6) no
congestive heart failure for at least 1 month prior to
the procedure; (7) no upper respiratory tract infec-
tion; and (8) no antihypertensive medications for 10
days prior to the procedure [3,4].
Following rigid bronchoscopy to identify the site
of the stenosis, the infants are tracheally intubated
with the tip of the tracheal tube placed just below the
site of the lesion. The head and neck are extended
and a horizontal incision is made in the skin over the
cricoid cartilage. An incision is made through the
cricoid ring and underlying mucosa, the lower
third of the thyroid cartilage and the first two trach-
eal rings (Figure 33.1). The endotracheal tube used
is removed and replaced, often nasally under surgical
guidance, with a tracheal tube one size larger
(0.5 mm) than predicted for the child 's age and
weight. The skin and subcutaneous tissue are loosely
closed. The infant is left intubated for approximately
1 week so the tracheal tube can stent the subglottic
aperture [4].
The classic anterior cricoid split has now largely
been succeeded by laryngotracheoplasty and, in
selected cases, cricotracheal resection. Laryngotra-
cheoplasty is similar to the anterior cricoid split.
However, both an anterior and posterior cricoid split
may be performed. Cartilage usually harvested from
the thyroid cartilage is sutured into place in the anter-
ior and occasionally the posterior splits to provide a
wider subglottic opening. The patients are managed
with tracheal intubation for approximately 1 week to
allow healing to occur [4].
Figure 33.1. Anterior cricoid split. An incision is made through the
cricoid cartilage, lower third of the thyroid cartilage, first two tracheal
rings and the underlying mucosa. The skin and subcutaneous tissue
are then loosely closed. The patient is left intubated for
approximately 1 week so the endotracheal tube can act as a stent
through the stenotic area. Artwork created by Martie Beebe.
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
338
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Cricotracheal resection is another surgical
option to treat subglottic stenosis in children. It
is technically more challenging than larnygotra-
cheoplasty and has the potential complications of
anastomotic dehiscence and recurrent laryngeal
nerve damage. However, it has allowed successful
decannulation of children who had such severe
subglottic stenosis that laryngotracheoplasty was
not likely to be successful . It has also proved useful
as a salvage technique following failed laryngotra-
cheoplasty [5].
The technique involves resection of the anterior
cricoid arch and thinning of the posterior cricoid
plate with preservation of a posterior mucosal flap
(Figure 33.2). The transected normal trachea is tele-
scoped and sutured to the submucosal flap and thy-
roid cartilage. Usually a tracheostomy is in place for
the procedure and can be left intact postoperatively.
Stenting of the anastomosis may be accomplished
either with tracheal intubation for 7 to 14 days as
with laryngotracheoplasty or with a T tube. Some
surgeons also place sutures between the chin and
chest to keep the anastomosis without tension from
head extension [5].
One type of challenging airway lesion that was
often fatal in the past but now can be treated surgi-
cally is severe congenital tracheal stenosis. These for-
tunately are very rare lesions and represent only
between 0.3% and 1% of all laryngotracheal stenosis.
Complete tracheal rings that have no posterior mem-
branous portion of the trachea cause the most severe
stenosis. These patients typically present in infancy
with “washing machine breathing ”. This describes the
characteristic bi-phasic noise made by secretions
being moved by respiration through an area of distal
tracheal stenosis. Anesthesiologists also commonly
discover these children when they come to the oper-
ating room for an unrelated procedure and a narrow
airway that is “unintubatable” due to its small size is
found. Often these children suffer other congenital
defects such as cardiac defects, pulmonary artery
slings, VATER syndrome and Down 's syndrome.
Short segments ( < 30% of the tracheal length) can
be managed with primary tracheal resection with end-
to-end anastomosis. Longer segments or segments
extending to the bronchus are more problematic.
One type of surgical repair used commonly in the
past involved splitting the stenotic trachea longitudin-
ally and sewing a graft of cartilage or more commonly
pericardium in place to give the trachea a bigger
lumen. These grafts were often plagued by the devel-
opment of granulation tissue in the new lumen with
recurrent stenosis. Graft disruption and mediastinitis
also frequently developed [2,6].
In 1989 Tang et al. first described the technique of
the slide-tracheoplasty [7]. In this repair the trachea is
bisected and the midpoint of the stenotic segment is
then split longitudinally superiorly and inferiorly. The
slide tracheoplasty overlaps stenotic segments of the
trachea, shortening the trachea but doubling the cir-
cumference and diameter of the stenotic area. The
segments are then telescoped and sewn together
(A) (B)
STENOTIC
AREA
Figure 33.2. Cricotracheal resection.
The anterior cricoid arch is resected and
the posterior cricoid plate thinned with
preservation of a posterior mucosal flap.
The transected normal trachea is
telescoped and sutured to the
submucosal flap and the thyroid cartilage.
Artwork created by Martie Beebe.
Chapter 33: Anesthesia for reconstructive airway surgery in pediatrics
339
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012(Figure 33.3). The advantage of this technique is that
the tracheal mucosa is preserved on the suture line
so that primary healing can occur without the devel-
opment of granulation tissue. The operation is
quite complex and usually cardiopulmonary bypass
is required to provide gas exchange during this oper-
ation. This challenging operation can allow survival of
infants with types of severe tracheal stenosis that were
once uniformly fatal [2,6,7].
Anesthetic management
Preoperative evaluation
Pediatric patients undergoing reconstructive surgery
on the airway require a thorough preoperative evalu-
ation by the anesthesiologist. The type of lesion being
repaired and type of repair must be determined. Pedi-
atric patients requiring airway reconstruction often
have other congenital defects such as congenital heart
disease, particularly if the airway lesion is congenital
in origin. These conditions should be evaluated
thoroughly by the pediatrician prior to beginning
airway reconstructive surgery. If there is a stenotic
lesion, the degree of stenosis should be determined
from previous studies such as CT or MRI scans or by
reviewing the results of flexible endoscopy. If the
patient is a neonate or child who is still tracheally
intubated, the ventilator settings and oxygen require-
ments should be determined. In extubated or ambu-
latory patients the oxygen requirements should be
determined from the parents or nurses as well as the
necessity for other aids to ventilation such as nebu-
lized bronchodilators. The parents and/or nurses
should be asked about the presence of stridor or
respiratory distress. The presence or absence of an
upper respiratory tract infection should also be ascer-
tained. The presence of a significant upper respiratory
infection will often warrant delay of surgery if it is not
urgent.
Physical examination of the pediatric patient
undergoing airway surgery should start with the
examination of the airway. A large tongue or
(A) (B) (C)
Figure 33.3. Slide tracheoplasty. The trachea is bisected at the midpoint of the stenotic segment then split longitudinally superiorly
and inferiorly. The segments are then telescoped and sutured together, shortening the trachea but doubling the area of the stenotic segment.
Artwork created by Martie Beebe.
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
340
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012limited mouth opening may make tracheal intub-
ation difficult. The presence of stridor suggests a
stenotic lesion that may make induction of anesthe-
sia hazardous. The patients may also have a trache-
ostomy tube or airway stent in place from previous
surgery that will affect the anesthetic management.
The lungs should be examined for the presence of
wheezing that may indicate the need for bronchodi-
lators, and the heart should be listened to for
murmurs suggesting an undiagnosed congenital
cardiac defect.
Finally it is important to discuss the plan for the
operation with the surgeon prior to entering the
operating room. The type of tracheal tube necessary,
whether spontaneous ventilation is required, and if
nerve monitoring forbidding the use of muscle relax-
ants is planned are all common questions that should
be discussed with the surgeon.
Intraoperative management
Prior to induction of general anesthesia it is often
helpful to administer oral midazolam 0.5 mg/kg to
infants and children greater than 1 year of age who
are not stridorous to calm the child during the induc-
tion process. If the patient is stridorous or in respira-
tory distress, the premedicant should be withheld.
Standard monitors, in particular the pulse oximeter,
should be placed prior to induction of general anes-
thesia. In most infants and children requiring airway
reconstructive surgery who are not already tracheally
intubated, anesthesia is induced with sevoflurane and
100% oxygen and spontaneous ventilation. Often, it is
necessary to administer 5 –8 cmH 2O of positive end
expiratory pressure to overcome upper airway
obstruction if there is a stenotic lesion as the child
becomes anesthetized. In all cases of airway stenosis
the surgeon should be standing by to provide a
surgical airway or perform rigid bronchoscopy to
establish ventilation should complete airway obstruc-
tion occur. An intravenous catheter is then estab-
lished and the patient is administered glycopyrrolate
(10 mg/kg) as a drying agent prior to beginning the
surgical procedures
Often before starting the actual reconstruction the
surgeon performs flexible and rigid bronchoscopy to
examine the airway and determine the location of any
obstructing lesion. Usually spontaneous ventilation is
required so that the proper movement of the vocal
chords can be visualized. There are numerous
techniques that can provide these conditions. One
technique utilized at the authors ' institution is to
begin an infusion of intravenous propofol at a rela-
tively high dose (200 –250 mg/kg/min) as well as small,
intermittent bolus doses of fentanyl (0.5 –1 mg/kg)
during periods of intense stimulation. Oxygen is
applied through a nasal cannula at 4 –6 l/min. The
end-tidal CO 2 concentration is measured using the
built-in side port of the nasal cannula or with a
separate catheter placed in one of the nares if the side
port is not available. The surgeon also applies topical
lidocaine to the airway prior to inserting the rigid
bronchoscope. Using this technique the airway can
be examined while maintaining spontaneous ventila-
tion in most patients. Occasionally succinylcholine
(0.5 mg/kg) may need to be administered if laryngos-
pasm occurs with insertion of the bronchoscope.
Following examination of the airway the trachea is
intubated with the appropriately sized tracheal tube by
either the surgeon or the anesthesiologist. The size of
tube is guided by the airway exam. Often cuffed tracheal
tubes are utilized for airway surgery in larger infants or
children. Cuffed tracheal tubes are more stable during
surgery, require fewer intubations and prevent operat-
ing room contamination from anesthetic gases. How-
ever, in neonates and small infants undergoing airway
surgery the external diameter of the cuffed tubes may be
too large for their small airways. Also the long-term
effects of even the modern, low-pressure cuffs in neo-
nates have not yet been determined.
In most cases skeletal muscle relaxants can be
utilized following completion of the bronchoscopy,
both to facilitate tracheal intubation and provide
muscle relaxation for the case. At this point a bal-
anced technique using an inhaled agent such as sevo-
flurane, a non-depolarizing skeletal muscle relaxant
(rocuronium or cis-atracurium), and fentanyl (1 –2
mg/kg/h) is utilized. Controlled ventilation using an
air–oxygen mixture of less than 50% is usually utilized
and adjusted appropriately based on the oxygen sat-
uration. Nitrous oxide is currently rarely if ever used
because it can support combustion and increase the
risk of airway fires from electrocautery. For the same
reason the FiO 2 is kept as low as possible. Both
pressure mode and volume modes of ventilation
may be utilized with the rate, tidal volumes and
inspiratory airway pressures adjusted based on the
oxygen saturation and end-tidal CO 2.
During reconstructive airway surgery it is
common that the patient may need to be reintubated
Chapter 33: Anesthesia for reconstructive airway surgery in pediatrics
341
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012at some time, either by the anesthesiologist or under
direct vision by the surgeon, or that a tracheotomy
may need to be performed. If a tracheotomy is per-
formed an armored sterile cuffed tube is placed
through the tracheostomy site and either taped or
sutured into place then reconnected with a sterile
breathing circuit to the anesthesia machine. Both
flexible and rigid bronchoscopy may also be per-
formed at any time during the operation. Anesthe-
siologists should discuss the types of tracheal tubes
that may be necessary with the surgeon so such tubes
can be readily available.
The slide tracheoplasty has some unique consider-
ations for the anesthesiologist. Typically an inhalation
induction is performed with the endotracheal tube
placed just cephalad to the complete rings. Arterial
and central venous catheters are placed prior to start
of surgery. Full heparinization is required if, as is
usually the case, cardiopulmonary bypass is utilized
for the repair. The endotracheal tube must be free of
blood and mucous and ventilation must be adequate
prior to discontinuing cardiopulmonary bypass and
reversal of heparinization. The surgeon also checks
the anastomosis bronchoscopically prior to the com-
pletion of surgery.
Infants and small children usually need some
period of tracheal intubation or airway stenting for
1 week or more postoperatively; it is rare in our
institution that children undergoing reconstructive
airway surgery are extubated at the end of surgery.
Instead the patients are transported to the pediatric
intensive care unit and initially placed on mechanical
ventilation. The postoperative management is then
turned over to the pediatric intensivist.
Postoperative care/recovery
Pediatric patients undergoing reconstructive airway
surgery often require 1 –2 weeks of tracheal intubation
to provide a stent and an airway while healing occurs.
Providing adequate but not excessive sedation to
allow these children to tolerate tracheal intubation
for this period is often difficult. Success has been
reported using minimal sedation in patients greater
than 2 years of age if they were nasotracheally intub-
ated. Minimizing sedation can prevent symptoms of
withdrawal when the sedative agents are discon-
tinued, and avoiding muscle relaxants may help pre-
vent the muscle weakness and atrophy often seen with
long-term skeletal muscle relaxant use [8].
A variety of sedative agents can be used to allow
adequate immobility following tracheal reconstruction
in children. Commonly, narcotics such as fentanyl or
morphine are utilized as well as benzodiazepines such
as midazolam. Propofol by infusion is also commonly
used. However, propofol may not be the first choice as
an agent to provide sedation following tracheal recon-
struction because of the possible development of pro-
pofol infusion syndrome. This is typically seen with
infusions lasting greater than 48 hours with propofol
infusion rates in excess of 67 mg/kg/min [9]. The
symptoms include metabolic acidosis, bradycardia,
arrhythmias, rhabdomyolysis, and cardiac failure.
Recently dexmedetomidine has been used as a sedative
agent following tracheal reconstruction because it
can provide effective sedation without clinically signifi-
cant respiratory depression, although it can result in
hypotension and bradycardia. Dexmedetomidine has
proved particularly valuable at our institution as an aid
to the weaning process as narcotic sedatives are
withdrawn. Intermediate-acting non-depolarizing skel-
etal muscle relaxants such as vecuronium or cis-atra-
curium are also often required. If skeletal muscle
relaxants are utilized, the train-of-four should be
monitored and the least amount of drug necessary
utilized to reduce the incidence of muscle weakness
following prolonged administration of neuromuscular
blocking agents that has been reported [9].
Extubation following tracheal reconstruction is
often performed in the operating room so that reintu-
bation can be easily performed if failure occurs, either
from airway edema or problems with the mechanical
repair. A course of steroids (dexamethasone) is
often administered for several days prior to extubation
to minimize airway edema. Bronchoscopy is also often
performed at that time to evaluate the repair. Following
many reconstructive operations, bronchoscopies are
often performed at weekly intervals initially to evaluate
the repair, and periodically as the child grows to deter-
mine whether further procedures are necessary.
Complications
Complications can occur at numerous points during
pediatric airway surgery and the often long recovery
process. Infants and children requiring airway recon-
structive procedures often present with the symptoms
of airway obstruction. In some cases induction of
general anesthesia may result in complete airway
obstruction requiring emergency tracheal intubation
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
342
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:23 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012or tracheostomy. Accidental extubation may occur
during the surgery, and obstruction of the tracheal
tube with blood and/or secretions is common. Right
mainstem intubation or tube kinking can occur sec-
ondary to changes in the patient 's position or repos-
itioning of the tracheal tube by the surgeon. With
positive-pressure ventilation, extravasation of air can
occur into the mediastinum or pleura, causing a
pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum. Hemorrhage
from thymic, innominate or thyroid vessels can occur.
During the recovery period accidental extubation may
occur prior to the planned extubation. This may result
in the need for emergency reintubation and possible
disruption of the repair. Following planned extubation
airway obstruction may also occur from airway edema,
vocal chord dysfunction or problems with the surgical
repair. Even if the surgery and recovery are uneventful
children undergoing these operations may suffer from
the adverse effects of narcotic and sedative agents and
their withdrawal or muscular atrophy from the use of
skeletal muscle relaxants [9].
Surgical complications include scar tissue forma-
tion from granulation tissue, recurrent laryngeal
nerve injury and airway obstruction from disruption
of graft material. Abnormal healing may occur at the
resection or anastomotic sites and result in stenosis or
areas of deformity in the airway. Finally the airway
reconstructive surgery may affect the function and
position of the arytenoids. This may require further
surgery and impact voice development [2 –7].
Summary
Surgical procedures have been developed that now
allow most infants and children suffering from
acquired or congenital defects in the airway to be
corrected and no longer need to be managed with
tracheostomy for their entire life. Some defects that
were uniformly fatal can now be successfully managed
surgically. Although the surgical and perioperative
care can be very demanding, with proper manage-
ment most pediatric patients can undergo airway
reconstructive surgery with a good outcome.
Case study
A 22-month-old 13.3 kg male was admitted for slide
tracheoplasty to repair congenital tracheobronchial
anomalies including two complete tracheal rings and
aberrant takeoff of the right mainstem bronchus.
(Figure 33.4) He had a history of being a “noisy
breather” and ultimately was diagnosed with com-
plete tracheal rings at the age of 14 months by bron-
choscopy. He was also noted to have a hypoplastic
right lung and aberrant takeoff of the right mainstem
Figure 33.4. Case study. CT angiogram
of patient with congenital
tracheobronchial anomalies including
tracheal stenosis with two complete
tracheal rings as well as an aberrant
takeoff of the right mainstem bronchus
and a hypoplastic right lung. This patient
underwent a slide tracheoplasty.
Chapter 33: Anesthesia for reconstructive airway surgery in pediatrics
343
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012bronchus. He had a normal upper airway and normal
heart sounds, but had stridor on examination.
Anesthesia was induced via inhalation induction
with sevoflurane in 100% oxygen. A 20-gauge periph-
eral IV was then inserted and 0.1 mg glycopyrrolate,
1 mg of vecuronium, and 25mg of fentanyl were admin-
istered. The patient was then intubated easily with a
Miller number 2 blade. A Cormack –Lehan (CL) grade
I view was seen and a 4.5 Microcuff® endotracheal tube
(Kimberly Clark, Roswell GA, USA) was placed and
taped at 13 cm at the teeth. Anesthesia was maintained
with isoflurane 0.5–1.0%, vecuronium and fentanyl. An
arterial line and central venous catheter were inserted.
The patient was then cannulated for cardiac bypass,
5200 units of heparin were administered, and vecuro-
nium and fentanyl infusions were started. The total
bypass time was 4 hours and 25 minutes. After surgical
correction, fiberoptic visualization of the anastomosis
was performed. When the anastomosis was deemed
stable, the oral endotracheal tube was removed and a
4.0 cuffed endotracheal tube was placed nasally with
fiberoptic confirmation of placement. After confirm-
ation of the nasotracheal tube proper position, discon-
tinuation of cardiopulmonary bypass was attempted.
Ventilation was difficult because of the presence of a
tissue ball valve obstruction at the right mainstem bron-
chus. Following discontinuation of bypass rigid bron-
choscopy was performed to further clear the
obstruction. The patient was reintubated with a 4.0
nasotracheal tube. This was very difficult due to airway
edema. The patient was then transferred to the pediatric
intensive care unit.
Throughout the first night the patient had marked
respiratory acidosis in spite of excellent oxygenation,
due to obstruction from airway edema. The patient
was then placed on an oscillating ventilator. Bron-
choscopy was performed several times and the trach-
eal tube was increased to a size 4.5 Microcuff ®
nasotracheal tube. Heliox was also utilized.
The patient gradually improved and extubation was
attempted 3 weeks following surgery. The attempt at
extubation failed 2 days later. The patient required rein-
tubation and eventually a tracheostomy. Subsequently
the patient developed tracheal stenosis at the distal one-
t h i r do ft h et r a c h e at h a tr e q u i r e dr e p e a t e dt r i p st ot h e
operating room for rigid bronchoscopies and dilata-
tions. He eventually recovered respiratory function well
enough to be weaned from mechanical ventilation. He
did, however, suffer from narcotic withdrawal during
this process. He was discharged to home approximately
3 months later although still with a tracheostomy in
place and requiring intermittent oxygen administration
at night. He is expected to require further endoscopic
examinations and possible dilatations in the future.
Clinical pearls
/C15Pediatric patients requiring airway reconstruction
often have other congenital anomalies such as
heart defects, particularly if the airway lesion is
congenital in origin. These conditions should be
evaluated thoroughly prior to surgery.
/C15Subglottic stenosis is the primary indication for
reconstructive airway surgery in infants and small
children.
/C15Severe congenital tracheal stenosis typically
presents in infancy with “washing machine
breathing”, a characteristic bi-phasic noise
made from secretions being repeatedly
moved through an area of distal tracheal
stenosis via respiration. Anesthesiologists may
discover these children when they come to
the operating room for an unrelated
procedure and find a narrow airway that is
“unintubatable”.
/C15During reconstructive airway surgery it is
common that the patient may need to be
reintubated at some time, either by the
anesthesiologist or under direct vision by the
surgeon, or that a tracheotomy may need to be
performed. If a tracheotomy is performed an
armored sterile cuffed tube is placed through
the tracheostomy site and either taped or
sutured into place.
/C15Extubation following tracheal reconstruction is
often performed in the operating room, sometimes
using a tube exchanger, so that reintubation can be
easily performed if failure occurs.
References
1. Santos D, Mitchell R. The history
of pediatric airway reconstruction.
Laryngoscope 2010;120:
815–20.
2. Hein EA, Rutter MJ. New
perspectives in pediatric
airway reconstruction.
Int Anesthesiol Clin 2006;44:
51–56.
3. Cotton RT. Management of
subglottic stenosis. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am 2000;33:111–30.
4. O 'Connor TE, Bilish DD, Choy
D, et al. Laryngotracheoplasty to
Section 6: Anesthesia for pediatric ENT surgery
344
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012avoid tracheostomy in neonatal
and infant subglottic stenosis.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2011;144:435–9.
5. Rutter MJ, Hartley BEJ, Cotton
RT. Cricotracheal resection in
children. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 2001;127:
289–92.
6. Rutter MJ, Cotton RT, Azizkhan
RG, et al. Slide tracheoplasty for
the management of complete
tracheal rings. J Pediatr Surg
2003;38:928–34.
7. Tsang V, Murday A, Gilbe C,
Goldstraw P. Slide
tracheoplasty for congenital
funnel shaped tracheal
stenosis. Ann Thorac
Surg 1989;48:632–5.
8. Jacobs BR, Salman BA,
Cotton RT, et al.
Postoperative management
of children after single-stage
laryngotracheal
reconstruction. Crit Care
Med 2001;29:164–8.
9. Hammer GB. Sedation and
analgesia in the pediatric
intensive care unit following
laryngotracheal reconstruction.
Pediatr Anesth 2009;
19(Suppl S1):166 –79.
Chapter 33: Anesthesia for reconstructive airway surgery in pediatrics
345
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:44:24 WET 2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139088312.036
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012Index
acetaminophen 321, 326
acoustic neuromas see vestibular
schwannomas
acromegaly 134, 136
adenotonsillectomy (T&A) 323 –7
anesthetic management 325 –6
case study 334 –5
postoperative management 327
surgical techniques 323
advance directives 32
airway
bleeding 91
difficult see difficult airway
edema 46, 181, 250 –1, 268
fires 105 –11
foreign bodies 332 –3
infections 91, 94 –5
pathologic conditions 94 –8
pediatric anatomy 30 –1, 263
preoperative evaluation 27 –8, 41,
50–6
sensory innervation 67 –8
tumors 94, 95, 96
airway obstruction 36, 90, 91
awake intubation 58, 61
bronchoscopic surgery 312
instrumentation 18, 20
pediatric airway reconstruction
342–3
alfentanil 62, 280
American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart
Association (ACCF/AHA)
perioperative guidelines 31,
144
American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA)
difficult airway algorithm 36, 37,
39–40, 50, 51, 58
operating room fire algorithm 105,
106
physical status classification 28 –9
preanesthesia evaluation advisory 28
preoperative fasting guidelines 29
anatomy, clinical 1 –7
angioedema 91
ankyloglossus 6
anterior cricoid split 337, 338
anterior ethmoidal nerve 67
block 68 –9
anterior mediastinal mass 96 –7, 311,
313
anticholinergic agents 60
anticoagulation, after free flap surgery
160
antiemetic prophylaxis 129, 233, 282,
327
antisialagogues 60, 301
apneic ventilation 230, 232
arytenoid adduction 247, 248 –9
arytenoid cartilage 10
arytenopexy 246 –7
ASA see American Society of
Anesthesiologists
aspiration prophylaxis 29, 61, 180
atomizers, disposable plastic 66
atropine 60
awake intubation 40, 41 –6, 58–78
case study 77
nerve blocks 66 –74
orotracheal vs. nasotracheal route
75
panendoscopy 229
post-tonsillectomy hemorrhage 327
premedication 60 –1
preoperative endoscopic airway
examination 52, 54
preoperative preparation 58 –60
sedation 42 –3, 61 –4
staff, monitors and equipment
59–60
techniques 75 –7
topicalization of airway 64 –6
trauma 84
Zenker's diverticulectomy 197 –8,
200–1
awake tracheotomy 144, 230, 258
Bailey maneuver 165, 171, 282
Ben-jet tube 232
Bennett connectors 123, 304, 305, 307
benzocaine, airway topicalization 65
Berman airway 75
Bispectral Index (BIS) monitoring
22–3, 124 –5, 233
bleeding
airway-related 91
bronchoscopic procedures 304
ear surgery 273
endoscopic sinus surgery 122 –3
mandibular surgery 214, 218
maxillary surgery 211
nasal surgery 115, 119 –20
obstructive sleep apnea surgery
182
post-tonsillectomy 327
tracheotomy surgery 259, 260
transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
137
b-blockers 117, 233, 281
blood transfusions 158, 189,
224
bone flaps, vascularized 152
Bonfils Retromolar Intubating
Fiberscope™ 76–7
bronchial obstruction, intraluminal
312
bronchoscope
fiberoptic (FOB) 66, 90, 309
rigid 18, 20, 309
examination under anesthesia
228, 229
jet ventilation via 317
pediatric 329, 330
therapeutic bronchoscopy 310,
315
bronchoscopy
awake intubation 75 –6
diagnostic 228, 229, 297 –308
advanced procedures 298 –9, 300
anesthetic care 301 –3,
304, 305
case study 307
complications 304 –6
postoperative care 303 –4
pediatric 329 –33
suite 297, 298, 312, 313
therapeutic 309 –18
anesthetic management 311 –17
case study 318
postoperative care 317
types of procedures 310 –11
bronchospasm 304 –6
calcium channel blockers 117
cancellation of surgery, indications
for 29
346
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:23 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012capacity, decision-making 31 –2
carbon dioxide (CO 2), airway fire
prevention 107
carbon dioxide (CO 2) laser 237, 238,
327–8
cardiac risk, major head and neck
surgery 31, 144
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) 96,
268, 342, 344
cardiovascular assessment,
preoperative 31, 144
carotid artery occlusion, intraoperative
188, 189, 190 –1
carotid body 186
carotid body tumors (CBTs) 186 –7
functioning 186, 188, 189
resection 187 –93
case study 192
complications 191
intraoperative management
188–91
preoperative management 187 –8
cerebellar hemorrhage, remote (RCH)
126–7, 128
cerebellopontine angle (CPA) 273,
274, 283
cerebral protection, carotid body
tumor surgery 190 –1
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
drains 133
leaks 125–6, 137, 273 –4
cervical fascia 8
cervical spine
“clearance” methods 86
injuries 83, 86
protection, trauma 83 –4, 86
cetacaine, airway topicalization 65
CHARGE association 323
choanal atresia 322 –3
cholesteatoma 272
chronic facial pain, after maxillary
surgery 211
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
145
chronic otitis media with effusion
(COME) 321
cocaine 61, 65, 116 –17
cochlear implants 272 –3, 322
congenital cardiac anomalies 27
congenital tracheal stenosis 263, 338,
339–40
associated defects 339, 340
case study 343 –4
consent, informed 30
continuous positive airways pressure
(CPAP) 175, 176, 183, 325
Cotton grading, pediatric subglottic
stenosis 265, 337 –8
cricoarytenoid joint 10
cricoid cartilage 10
cricoid resection 337
cricopharyngeal myotomy, endoscopic
199
cricopharyngeus muscle 13
cricothyroid joint 10
cricothyroid membrane 10
cricothyroidotomy (cricothyrotomy)
85, 255
cricotracheal resection 265
pediatric patients 337, 339
see also tracheal resection
croup 332
cuff test 129
Cushing's disease 134, 136
deep cervical plexus block 190, 199
delirium, emergence 321
dexamethasone
panendoscopy 233
postoperative antiemesis 129, 326
stridor 102, 104
dexmedetomidine
awake intubation 42 –3, 63
bronchoscopic surgery 313
laryngoplasty 248
pediatric patients 321, 326, 342
diabetes insipidus 137
difficult airway 36 –47
ASA algorithm 36, 37, 39–40, 50, 51,
58
awake intubation see awake
intubation
case report 47
causes 38
failed intubation 46
form 41, 44
laryngoscopes 40 –1
management techniques 41
mask ventilation 36 –9
panendoscopy 229 –30
predicting difficult intubation 40, 41
difficult extubation 46
difficult mask ventilation (DMV) 38 –9
diphtheria 337
do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders 32
Dohlman procedure 196
Down syndrome (trisomy 21) 28, 321,
325
droperidol, awake intubation 64
ear, anatomy 3
EEG monitoring, intraoperative 190
electrocautery, fire risk 105, 107, 110
electromagnetic navigational
bronchoscopy (ENB) 297, 299,
300, 304–6, 307
electromyography (EMG)
facial nerve 204, 206, 281
laryngeal 246, 284
embolization, preoperative tumor 283,
284
emergencies, ENT 90 –2
case study 92
equipment 90
emphysema, subcutaneous 97, 259
endobronchial ultrasound with fine
needle aspiration (EBUS-FNA)
297, 298, 299
anesthetic care 302 –3, 305, 306
case study 307
complications 304 –6
endoscopes 18 –20, 22, 55
endoscopic cricopharyngeal myotomy
199
endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS)
121–31
anesthetic emergence 123, 127 –9
clinical goals 121 –2
complex procedures 124 –5
complications 129
equipment set-up 20 –3
functional see functional endoscopic
sinus surgery
pediatric patients 323
repeat, and emergencies 125 –7
endoscopic staple diverticulectomy 196
endoscopy
esophageal foreign bodies 333
pediatric 329 –33
preoperative see preoperative
endoscopic airway
examination
see also bronchoscopy;
esophagoscopy; laryngoscopy;
panendoscopy
endotracheal tubes (ETT) 39
diagnostic bronchoscopy 302 –3,
305, 307
difficult extubation 46
exchange catheters 46
intralaryngeal EMG recording 168,
169
laryngotracheal surgery 18, 19
laser-safe 240, 328
management during fires 105
nasal intubation 215
nasal surgery 114, 115, 116
pediatric surgery 341
pharyngeal and esophageal surgery
18, 22
therapeutic bronchoscopy 314 –15
topical anesthesia application via
128–9
tracheal resection 267, 269
tracheotomy procedure 258
vs. laryngeal mask airway
278
Index
347
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:23 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012epidural anesthesia, cervical 190, 268
epiglottis 10
epiglottitis, acute 94 –5, 331 –2
epiglottoplasty 178
epinephrine 91, 102, 104, 114
epistaxis 91, 115, 119 –20
Eschman stylet 40
esmolol, otologic surgery 281
esophageal obturator airways,
trauma 85
esophagoscope, rigid 18 –20, 22
esophagoscopy 228, 303, 306
esophagus 13
dilatation systems 20, 23
foreign bodies 333
surgical instruments 18 –20, 22
examination under anesthesia (EAU)
228–35
see also panendoscopy
external auditory canal surgery 271
external ear 3, 5
extubation, difficult 46
eye protection, laser surgery 239,
328
face
anatomy 1 –2
fractures 1 –2, 85–6
face transplantation 220 –6
anesthetic team 225
donor management 220
intraoperative management 222 –5
preoperative assessment 220 –2
subsequent surgery 225
facial expression, muscles of 2, 4
facial nerve 2
ear surgery 3, 277
monitoring, intraoperative 204, 206,
281
salivary gland surgery 203, 204, 206,
213
fasciocutaneous flaps 152
fasting, preoperative 29, 197
fentanyl 62, 158, 321
Feyh–Kastenbauer (FK) laryngo-
pharyngoscope 18 –20, 22
fires
airway 105–11
case studies 110
chicken model 107
flooding surgical site with CO 2
107
management 105, 107, 110
safety precautions 105, 107, 114,
241
tracheotomy surgery 105 –7, 108,
109, 259
ASA algorithm for operating room
105, 106
laser-related risks 110, 238, 328
flap reconstructive surgery 151 –62
anesthetic management 157 –9
case study 161 –2
complications 160 –1
operating room setup 154 –5, 156,
157
postoperative care 159 –60
preoperative preparation 153
surgical aspects 151 –3
flumazenil 62
Fontaine's sign 186
foreign bodies 332 –3
free flaps 151, 152, 223 –4
see also flap reconstructive surgery
Frey's syndrome 206
functional endoscopic sinus surgery
(FESS) 121 –2, 130
case study 130, 131
intraoperative management 122 –4
preoperative aspects 122
see also endoscopic sinus surgery
gastroesophageal reflux disease 264,
265
genioglossus advancement (GA)
177–8
geriatric patients, preoperative
evaluation 31 –2
GlideScope® videolaryngoscope 40 –1,
42, 43 –6, 76
glomus jugulare tumors (GT) 272,
283–4
glossopharyngeal nerve 67
blocks 69–70, 71
glottic tumors 11, 12, 14
glottis 10–11
glycopyrrolate 60, 301
great auricular nerve (GAN) 203
gum elastic bougie 40
hearing aids 278
hearing loss 272 –3
Heliox, 101 –2, 103
hematoma, postoperative 166, 192,
206, 249 –50
hemoptysis 311
hemorrhage see bleeding
high-frequency jet ventilation (HFJV)
232, 267
history, patient 26
Hunsaker monjet tube 232
hyoid suspension 178
hypercalcemia 169
hypercarbia 304
hyperparathyroidism 169 –70
hyperthyroidism 163 –4
hypocalcemia, postoperative 168 –9
hypopharyngeal tumor 13, 14
hypopharynx 11 –13
hypotension
complicating free flap surgery 160
controlled
carotid body tumor resection
188–9
ear surgery 274, 280 –1, 285
mandibular surgery 214
nasal surgery 117
hypothermia, free flap surgery 156,
160–1
hypothyroidism 164
hypoxemia, transient 304
i-gel supraglottic airway 278 –9, 302,
304, 316
implants see prostheses
infections
airway 91, 94 –5
postoperative 260, 306
upper respiratory (URI) 29, 122,
321–2
inhalational anesthesia
face transplantation 223 –4
nasal surgery 117
otologic/neurotologic surgery 280,
285
panendoscopy 232 –3
tracheal resection 267
inhalational injuries 86 –7
inner ear 3
instruments, otolaryngology 18 –24
intracranial pressure (ICP), raised 188,
283, 284, 285
intraoperative neurophysiological
monitoring (INM) 285
introducers, tracheal tube 40, 42
intubating oral airways 75
Intubation Difficulty Scale (IDS) 40
Jehovah's Witnesses 210
jet ventilation
bronchoscopic surgery 317
laryngeal surgery 18, 19
panendoscopy 229 –30, 231 –2, 235
pediatric patients 328, 329 –30
tracheal resection surgery 267
jugular foramen surgery 272, 275, 283
ketamine 63 –4, 326
Kiesselbach's plexus 4
laboratory tests, preoperative 28
laryngeal cancer 143 –4
laryngeal framework surgery (LFS)
245
laryngeal mask airway (LMA)
adenotonsillectomy 326
endoscopic sinus surgery 123, 124
Index
348
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:23 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012laryngoplasty 249
otologic surgery 278 –9, 281 –2,
287–90
trauma 85
vs. endotracheal tube 278
see also supraglottic airways
laryngeal papillomatosis 96, 97
laryngeal surgery
instruments 18
pediatric 327 –8
laryngectomy 143 –9
case study 147 –9
complications 146
intraoperative management 145 –6
neck anatomy after 16
partial 143
preoperative evaluation 144 –5
total 143, 144
laryngoplasty (LPL) 245 –52
case study 251 –2
complications 249 –51
general anesthesia 248 –9
monitored anesthesia care 247 –8
preoperative evaluation 246
surgical procedure 246 –7, 248
laryngoscopes 18
panendoscopy 228, 229
suspension devices/systems 18, 21
tracheal intubation 38, 40 –1
laryngoscopy
awake look technique 56
examination under anesthesia 228
pediatric 329 –33
video 43 –6, 76, 246, 247
virtual 56
laryngospasm 304
laryngotracheal reconstruction (LTR)
265
laryngotracheal stenosis 11, 263 –70
classification 265
pediatric 337
see also subglottic stenosis
laryngotracheoplasty 338
larynx
anatomy 9 –11
intubation-mediated damage 287,
289
pediatric 30 –1, 263
preoperative endoscopic
examination 55, 56
sensory innervation 67 –8
topical anesthesia 65 –6
trauma 85
laser surgery 237 –43
anesthetic technique 240 –1
atmospheric contamination 241,
242
case study 242 –3
clinical applications 237
endotracheal tubes 240, 328
fire risks 110, 238, 328
pediatric patients 327 –8
postoperative concerns 241
safety issues 238 –40
subglottic stenosis 265
tumor debulking 310
lasers 237, 238
Le Fort classification, maxillary
fractures 2, 85 –6
lidocaine 61, 64, 65 –6, 128 –9, 314
LMA see laryngeal mask airway
local anesthesia 113 –14, 246, 258
local anesthetics 55, 64 –5
Ludwig's angina 6, 92, 95
MADgic® Mucosal Atomization
Device 66
Mallampati scale 27
mandible 213
mandibular fractures 1 –2, 85
mandibular surgery 213 –15
case study 216 –18
complications 214, 217 –18
mask ventilation 36 –9
after rhinoplasty 118
difficult (DMV) 38 –9
mastoidectomy 272, 322
maxillary fractures 2, 85 –6
maxillary surgery 210 –12
maxillectomy 210 –12
maxillomandibular advancement
(MMA) 178
maxillomandibular expansion 178
McCaffrey grading, subglottic stenosis
265
McGrath® videolaryngoscope 76
methylprednisolone (Solumedrol) 102,
104
microlaryngeal instruments 18, 21
microlaryngeal tube (MLT) 229, 230,
231
midazolam, awake intubation 62
middle ear
anatomy 3, 276
surgery 271 –2, 287 –90
middle fossa approach, acoustic
neuroma 272, 275
mivacurium, parotid surgery 205
morphine, pediatric patients 325
mouth, anatomy 5 –14
mucopolysaccharidoses 325
Muller maneuver 180
multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
syndromes 165
muscle flaps 152
muscle relaxants see neuromuscular
blockade
myocutaneous flaps 152
myringoplasty 271 –2
myringotomy 271, 321 –2
naloxone 63
nasal septum 3 –4
nasal surgery
instruments 20 –4
obstructive sleep apnea 113, 176 –7
pediatric patients 322 –3
see also septoplasty/rhinoplasty
nasopharyngeal airways, trauma 84
nasopharynx, sensory innervation 67
nasotracheal intubation 4 –5
awake 75, 76
mandibular surgery 214, 216, 217
temporomandibular joint surgery 215
trauma 84
nebulizers 66, 67
neck
anatomical levels 14 –16, 145
anatomy 14–16
hematoma, postoperative 166, 192,
206
radiation changes 144
neck dissection 16, 143 –9
case study 147 –9
complications 146
intraoperative management 145 –6
preoperative evaluation 144 –5
procedures 143 –4, 145
neodymium:
yttrium–aluminum–garnet
(Nd:YAG) laser 237, 238, 328
nerve blocks, awake intubation 66 –74
neuroleptanalgesia, awake
intubation 64
neurological assessment,
preoperative 27
neuromuscular blockade (NMB)
bronchoscopic procedures 302,
313–14
ear surgery 279, 281, 285
face transplantation 225
laser surgery 241
panendoscopy 233
parotid surgery 205, 206
pediatric surgery 341
neuronavigation 135
neurotologic surgery 271 –90
anesthesia objectives 274 –7
anesthetic management 282 –6
intraoperative complications 273 –4
surgical procedures 271, 272 –3, 274,
275
nitroglycerin 117
nitroprusside, sodium 117
nitrous oxide (N 2O)
fire risk 105, 110
otologic surgery 280, 322
Index
349
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:24 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012nose 3–5
fractures 322
patency assessment 215
sensory innervation 67
topical anesthesia 65
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) 175 –84
comorbidities 175, 178 –9
diagnosis 175 –6, 324 –5
medical treatment 176
pediatric patients 323 –7
preoperative airway evaluation
27–8, 179, 180
surgery 176–84
case study 182 –3
complications 181, 183
intraoperative management
180–1
postoperative management 181 –2
preoperative management
178–80
procedures 113, 176 –8
occlusion 1
opioids
adverse effects 62 –3, 282
awake intubation 62 –3
bronchoscopic procedures 302,
312–13
carotid body tumor resection 189
face transplantation 224
obstructive sleep apnea surgery 180,
181
otologic/neurotologic surgery 280,
281–2, 285
pediatric patients 321, 325
optical stylets, awake intubation 76 –7
oral airways, intubating 75
oral appliances (OA), obstructive sleep
apnea 176
oral cavity
anatomy 5 –6
large tumors 14
orbital fractures 2
oropharyngeal airways, trauma 84
oropharynx
anatomy 6 –9
topical anesthesia 65
orotracheal intubation
awake 75–6
trauma 84
ossicular chain reconstruction 272
osteocutaneous flaps 152
otalgia, referred 5, 6
otologic surgery 271 –90
anesthesia objectives 274 –7
anesthetic management 277 –82
case study 287 –90
complications 273 –4, 282
pediatric 321 –2
procedures 271 –2
outpatient procedures, patient
selection 29
Ovassapian airway 75
oxygen administration
awake intubation 60
bronchoscopic procedures 302, 314
fire risks 105, 107, 110, 114
nasal surgery 20, 114
oxymetazoline 115 –16
palate
hard 5
primary tumor 5, 6
soft 7, 8, 9
palatine nerves 67
panendoscopy 228 –35
case study 234 –5
complications 234
emergence phase 234
equipment 228
intraoperative management 229 –33,
234
preoperative assessment 228 –9
paragangliomas 283 –4
see also carotid body tumors;
glomus jugulare tumors
paranasal sinuses 5
surgical instruments 20 –4
tumors 283
parathyroid glands 16
parathyroid surgery 169 –70
parotid gland 203 –4
pathology 203 –4, 206 –7
parotid gland tumors 203 –4, 212
case study 207 –8
difficult airway 40
parotid surgery 203 –8
parotidectomy 204 –6
anesthesia management 204 –6
case study 207 –8
complications 206
facial nerve monitoring 204,
206
superficial, procedure 204
peanuts, aspirated 332 –3
pediatric patients
acute epiglottitis 94 –5, 331 –2
adenotonsillectomy 323 –7
airway anatomy 30 –1, 263
anesthetic complications 333 –4
case study 334 –5
endoscopic sinus surgery 323
informed consent 30
laryngoscopy, bronchoscopy and
endoscopy 329 –33
otolaryngologic surgery
321–35
otologic surgery 321 –2
pharyngeal and laryngeal surgery
327–8
preoperative evaluation 26 –8, 29,
30–1
reconstructive airway surgery
337–44
rhinologic procedures 322 –3
stridor 102, 103, 331
subglottic stenosis 263, 265, 337 –40
tracheotomy 328 –9, 342
pedicled flaps 151, 152
Pentax-AWS® videolaryngoscope 76
pericardial effusion/tamponade
311–12
peritonsillar abscess 332
pharyngeal surgery
instruments 18 –20, 22
pediatric 327 –8
pharyngeal web 51
pharynx 9 –13
muscles 7, 9
sensory innervation 67
phenylephrine 61, 115
phonosurgery (PS) 245
photodynamic therapy 310
physical examination, preoperative
26–8
piriform sinus tumor 14
pituitary tumors 133, 134 –5
platysma muscle 14
pleomorphic adenoma 203 –4
pneumocephalus, tension (TP) 286
pneumomediastinum 259, 314
pneumothorax 259, 304, 314
polyps, airway 95
polysomnography (PSG) 175–6, 324–5
positioning, patient
after obstructive sleep apnea surgery
182
flap reconstructive surgery 154 –5
nasal surgery 117 –18
otologic/neurotologic surgery
274–7, 284 –5
panendoscopy 228
transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
136, 138, 139
positive airways pressure (PAP) 176
post-thyroidectomy tracheomalacia
(PTTM) 167
post-tonsillectomy hemorrhage 327
posterior fossa 272, 273
postponement of surgery, indications
for 29
premature infants 29
preoperative endoscopic airway
examination (PEAE) 50 –6
information sought 52, 53 –4
procedure 54 –6
preoperative evaluation 26 –34
Index
350
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:24 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012airway 27 –8, 41
case study 32 –4
prolactinomas 135
propofol
after pediatric airway reconstruction
342
awake intubation 63
diagnostic bronchoscopy 301
face transplantation 223 –4
panendoscopy 233
prostheses
laryngoplasty 245, 246 –7, 252
complications 250, 251
voice 16, 143, 144
see also cochlear implants
psychological evaluation and
preparation, preoperative 27
pulmonary assessment, preoperative
27
radiation therapy 144, 153, 310
reconstructive airway surgery,
pediatric 337 –44
case study 343 –4
complications 342 –3
intraoperative management 341 –2
postoperative care 342
preoperative evaluation 340 –1
surgical procedures 337 –40
see also tracheal resection
recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) 11, 68
intraoperative monitoring 167 –8,
169
palsy 167 –8
refusal of care 30
regional anesthesia 189 –90, 199
remifentanil
awake intubation 62
flap reconstructive surgery 157 –8
nasal surgery 114 –15
otologic surgery 280, 281 –2
panendoscopy 233
respiratory complications,
adenotonsillectomy 327
respiratory distress, postoperative 166,
192, 241, 250
respiratory disturbance index (RDI)
175, 176
respiratory failure 306
respiratory papillomatosis 96, 97, 242
retromolar trigone 5
retropharyngeal abscess 95
retropharyngeal space 7 –9
retrosigmoid posterior fossa
craniotomy 272, 274
retrosternal goiter (RSG)
164–72
rhinoplasty see septoplasty/rhinoplasty
ROTIGS device 75 –6
salivary glands 212 –13
surgical resection 212 –13
tumors 212
see also parotid gland
Sanders jet ventilation technique
329–30
scopolamine 60
sedation
after face transplantation 225
after pediatric airway reconstruction
342
awake intubation 42 –3, 61–4
awake tracheotomy 258
diagnostic bronchoscopy 297, 301
laryngoplasty 247 –8
nasal surgery 113 –14
Sensascope™ 77
septoplasty/rhinoplasty 113 –20
anesthetic management 113 –18
case report 119 –20
postoperative care 118 –19
sevoflurane anesthesia, preschool
children 321
sialolithiasis 204, 206 –7
skull base surgery 23 –4, 273
anesthesia objectives 274 –7
anesthetic management 282 –6
surgical procedures 271, 272 –3, 274,
275
skull base tumors 283 –4
sleep apnea
central 175
obstructive see obstructive sleep
apnea
sleep-disordered breathing, pediatric
323–7, 334 –5
slide tracheoplasty 339 –40, 342,
343–4
somatosensory evoked potentials
(SSEPs) 190 –1, 285
sphenopalatine ganglion block 68, 69
stapedectomy (stapedotomy) 272, 282
stents, airway 266, 309, 310, 316
sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) 14
stridor 91 –2, 101 –4
case presentation 103
causes 102, 103
diagnosis 103
Heliox treatment 101 –2, 103
management options 102
pediatric patients 102, 103, 331
thyroid surgery patients 164
subglottic jet ventilation 232
subglottic stenosis 11, 263 –70
anesthetic management 14, 266 –8
case studies 269, 318
classification 265, 337 –8
congenital see congenital tracheal
stenosis
etiology 259, 260, 263, 264, 338
pathophysiology 263 –4
pediatric 263, 265, 337 –40
postoperative management 268
stenting 266
surgical management 265
tracheal dilatation see tracheal
dilatation
subglottic tumor 11, 13
subglottis 11
submandibular gland surgery 212 –13
succinylcholine 205, 279
sugammadex 206, 241
superficial cervical plexus block 190,
199
superior laryngeal nerve (SLN) 67 –8
block 70 –3
superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome
97, 164 –5, 311
supraglottic airways (SGA)
diagnostic bronchoscopy 302, 303,
304, 307
difficult airway 38, 46
endoscopic sinus surgery 123, 124
nasal surgery 114, 115
otologic surgery 278 –9, 281 –2,
287–90
panendoscopy 229
preoperative endoscopic airway
examination 53
therapeutic bronchoscopy 315 –16
trauma 85
see also laryngeal mask airway
supraglottic jet ventilation 231 –2
supraglottic tumors 10, 11, 147 –9
supraglottis 10
surgical airways, trauma 85
syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)
137
teamwork 32
teeth 1, 27, 28
temporal bone 273 –4, 276
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) 213
arthroscopy 215, 216
dysfunction 214, 215
surgery 215 –16
tension pneumocephalus (TP) 286
thermoregulation, flap reconstructive
surgery 156
throat see pharynx
thyroid cancer 32 –4, 163
thyroid cartilage 9 –10
thyroid gland 16
enlarged 170, 164 –71
thyroid storm (thyrotoxic crisis) 163,
166–7
thyroid surgery 163 –73
Index
351
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:24 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012thyroid surgery (cont.)
anesthesia technique 165 –6
case study 170 –1, 172
complications 166 –9
preoperative assessment 163 –5
thyromental distance 179
thyroplasty (TPL) 245, 246 –7,
248–9
see also laryngoplasty
thyrotoxicosis 163 –4
tongue 5–6, 8
advancement/stabilization surgery
177–8
base 9
tumors 9, 14
reduction surgeries 177, 178
sensory innervation 67
tonsillectomy see adenotonsillectomy
tonsils 9
lingual 9
topical anesthesia, airway
application techniques 65 –6
awake intubation 64 –6, 198
bronchoscopic surgery 314
local anesthetics 64 –5
panendoscopy 233
postoperative extubation 128 –9
preoperative endoscopic airway
examination 55
total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA)
bronchoscopic procedures 301 –2,
312–13
endoscopic sinus surgery 123, 124 –5
face transplantation 223 –4
laser surgery 240 –1
nasal surgery 114 –15
otologic/neurotologic surgery 280,
285–6, 288
panendoscopy 232 –3
tracheal resection 267
trachea
compression 164 –72, 312
iatrogenic perforation 97
iatrogenic rupture 310 –11
intraluminal obstruction 312
topical anesthesia at end of surgery
128–9
see also transtracheal anesthesia
tracheal dilatation 13, 265, 310 –11
case studies 269, 318
prior to tracheal resection 267
tracheal intubation 39
after pediatric airway reconstruction
337, 342
awake see awake intubation
distal technique, tracheal surgery
267
endoscopic sinus surgery 124, 125
failed, management options 46
fiberoptic (FOI) 41 –6, 75–6, 84
flap reconstructive surgery 154
laryngectomy and neck dissection
144
laryngoscopes 38, 40 –1
postoperative neck hematoma 166
prediction of difficulty 40, 41
retrograde 84 –5
subglottic stenosis complicating
263–4, 338
subglottic stenosis repair surgery
267
total laryngectomy patient 16
transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
135–6
trauma 84–5
vocal cord damage 287, 289
see also difficult airway;
endotracheal tubes
tracheal resection 263 –70
anesthetic management 266 –8
case study 269
complications 268
pediatric patients 337
postoperative management 268
see also cricotracheal resection;
subglottic stenosis
tracheal stenosis see subglottic stenosis
tracheal surgery, instruments 18
tracheoesophageal fistula
bronchoscopic surgery 312, 313
complicating tracheotomy 259, 260
tracheoesophageal puncture (TEP) 143
tracheoplasty 337
slide technique 339 –40, 342, 343 –4
tracheotomy/tracheostomy 255 –62
airway fires 105 –7, 108, 109, 110,
259
anesthetic management 256 –9
awake 144, 230, 258
case study 260 –1
complications 259 –60
face transplantation 222
flap reconstructive surgery 154,
159–60
obstructive sleep apnea 178
pediatric patients 328 –9, 342
percutaneous dilatational 255, 256,
258, 260
permanent tube-free 256
surgical procedure 255
terminology 255
trauma 85
tracheotomy tubes
blockage 259 –60
displacement 258, 259
pediatric 328
transcranial Doppler, carotid body
tumor resection 191
transglottic tumor 11, 12, 14
transjugular craniotomy 272,
275
translabyrinthine posterior fossa
craniotomy 272, 273
transsphenoidal pituitary surgery
133–41
anesthetic management 133 –5
case study 137 –40
complications 137
intraoperative management 135 –6,
138, 139
operating room setup 135, 140
postoperative/recovery 137
surgical procedure 133
transtracheal anesthesia 73 –4
transtracheal jet ventilation 229 –30,
232
trauma, head and neck 83 –7
airway management 83 –5
case study 87
facial fractures 1 –2, 85–6
flap reconstructive surgery 153
primary survey (ABCDE) 83
types of injury 85 –7
trigeminal nerve, surgical stimulation
286
triple endoscopy see panendoscopy
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) 28, 321,
325
tumors
airway 94, 95, 96
bronchoscopic debulking 310
flap reconstructive surgery 152 –3,
153
tympanomastoidectomy 272, 322
tympanoplasty 271 –2, 287 –90, 322
upper respiratory infections (URI) 29,
122, 321–2
uvulopalatal flap (UPF) 177
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP)
177
uvuloplasty, laser-assisted 177
vagus nerve
monitoring, intraoperative 284
surgical stimulation 286
see also recurrent laryngeal nerve
vascular access
carotid body tumor resection 188
face transplantation 222 –3
flap reconstructive surgery 154 –5
tracheal resection 266
tracheotomy 257, 259
vascular catheter dislodgment, free
flap surgery 160
vasoconstrictors, nasal mucosal 4 –5,
55, 61, 114, 115 –17, 323
Index
352
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:24 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012vasopressors 158, 224 –5
venous air embolism (VAE) 137, 189,
259, 273
vertigo, postoperative 282
vestibular schwannomas 272, 275,
283
videolaryngoscopy 43 –6, 76, 246, 247
videostroboscopy, laryngeal 246
vocal cords (folds) 10 –11
intubation-mediated damage 287,
289
unilateral paralysis (UVFP) 245 –6,
251
vocal ligament 10
voice
postoperative changes 287, 289
prosthesis 16, 143, 144
users, professional 287, 289
Voice Handicap Index (VHI) 246
Warthin tumor 203, 204
“washing machine ” breathing 339
Weerda diverticuloscope 18 –20, 22
Wegener's granulomatosis 263, 269,
318
Williams airway 75
World Health Organization (WHO),
Safe Surgery Checklist 32
Xomed NIM ™ EMG Endotracheal
Tube 168, 169
Zenker's diverticulectomy 195 –201
anesthetic management 197 –9
case study 200 –1
postoperative issues 199 –200
preoperative management 197
surgical approaches 195 –6
Zenker's diverticulum 195, 196, 197
cricoid pressure 198, 201
inadvertent perforation 199
other surgery in patients with
200
Index
353
Downloaded from Cambridge Books Online by IP 128.122.149.154 on Mon Dec 31 12:49:24 WET 2012.
http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ebook.jsf?bid=CBO9781139088312
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2012