PART 1: BASIC PRINCIPLES
1 Metabolic response to injury 2
The late Kenneth Fearon
2 Shock and blood transfusion 12
Karim Brohi
3 Wounds, healing and tissue repair 24
Michael John Earley 
4 Tissue engineering and regeneration 33
Andrew W . McCaskie & John Andrew Bradley
5 Surgical infection 42
Peter Lamont
6 Tropical infections and infestations 57
Pradip K. Datta, Pawanindra Lal &  
Sanjay De Bakshi
7 Basic surgical skills and anastomoses 84
Mark G. Coleman
8 Principles of laparoscopic and robotic surgery 105
Hutan Ashrafian, Sanjay Purkayastha &  
Ara Darzi
9 Principles of paediatric surgery 119
Anthony Lander 
10 Principles of oncology 139
Robert J.C. Steele & Alastair Munro
11 Surgical audit and research 161
Jonothan J. Earnshaw & Birgit Whitman
12 Surgical ethics and law 170
Robert Wheeler
13 Human factors, patient safety and quality 
improvement 176
Frank B.V . Keane & Ken Mealy
PART 2: INVESTIGATION AND 
DIAGNOSIS 
14 Diagnostic imaging 190
Matthew Matson, Muaaze Ahmad & Niall Power
15 Gastrointestinal endoscopy 216
James O. Lindsay & Philip Woodland
16 Tissue and molecular diagnosis 234
Roger M. Feakins
PART 3: PERIOPERATIVE CARE
17 Preoperative care including the high-risk 
surgical patient 254
Medha Vanarase-Pandit, Pierre Foex &  
Anand Sardesai
18 Anaesthesia and pain relief 269
Vivek Mehta & Serene Hsi-Lin Chang
19 Nutrition and fluid therapy 278
John MacFie
20 Postoperative care 290
Anand Sardesai & Fay Gilder 
21 Day case surgery 301
Douglas McWhinnie & Ian Jackson
PART 4: TRAUMA  
22 Introduction to trauma 310
Peter Giannoudis & Bob Handley
23 Early assessment and management of severe 
trauma 322
Chris Moran & Dan Deakin
24 Traumatic brain injury 328
Harry J.C.J. Bulstrode & Antonio Belli 
Contents
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   5 25/10/2017   07:21Contentsvi
25 Neck and spine 338
John Crawford & Douglas Hay
26 Maxillofacial trauma 355
David A. Koppel
27 Torso trauma 364
Ken Boffard & Elias Degiannis 
28 Extremity trauma 381
Lee Van Rensburg
29 Disaster surgery 409
Mamoon Rashid
30 Conflict surgery 424
Jon Clasper & Phill Pearce
PART 5: ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
31 History taking and clinical examination in 
musculoskeletal disease 436
Stephen M. McDonnell & Hemant G. Pandit
32 Sports medicine and sports injuries 463
Gina Allen
33 The spine 471
Brian J.C. Freeman & Chris Lavy 
34 Upper limb 488
David Limb & Sam Vollans
35 Hip and knee 511
Vikas Khanduja & Wasim Sardar Khan
36 Foot and ankle 524
Bob Sharp
37 Musculoskeletal tumours 534
Paul Cool & Craig Gerrand
38 Infection of the bones and joints 549
Martin A. McNally & Philippa C. Matthews
39 Paediatric orthopaedics 561
Deborah M. Eastwood
PART 6: SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS 
TISSUE
40 Skin and subcutaneous tissue 592
Adam R. Greenbaum & Christopher L.H. Chan
41 Burns 617
Michael P .H. Tyler & Sudip J. Ghosh
42 Plastic and reconstructive surgery 633
Tim Goodacre
PART 7: HEAD AND NECK 
43 Cranial neurosurgery 652
Harry J.C.J. Bulstrode & William P . Gray 
44 The eye and orbit 672
Keith R. Martin
45 Cleft lip and palate: developmental 
abnormalities of the face, mouth and jaws 686
David A. Koppel
46 The ear, nose and sinuses 703
Iain J. Nixon, Iain Hathorn & Alex Bennett
47 Pharynx, larynx and neck 725
Terry M. Jones
48 Oral cavity malignancy 760
Andrew G. Schache
49 Disorders of the salivary glands 776
Mark McGurk & Leandros-Vassilios F . Vassiliou
PART 8: BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
50 The thyroid gland 800
Iain J. Nixon & Richard M. Adamson
51 The parathyroid glands 823
Ruth S. Prichard
52 The adrenal glands and other abdominal 
endocrine disorders 838
Tom W .J. Lennard
53 The breast 860
Richard C. Sainsbury 
PART 9: CARDIOTHORACIC
54 Cardiac surgery 884
Jonathan R. Anderson & Mustafa Zakkar 
55 The thorax 914
Carol Tan & Ian Hunt
PART 10: VASCULAR
56 Arterial disorders 942
Rob Sayers & Robert S.M. Davies
57 Venous disorders 969
Ian C. Chetter & Dan Carradice
58 Lymphatic disorders 995
Gnaneswar Atturu, David A. Russell & Shervanthi 
Homer-Vanniasinkam
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   6 25/10/2017   14:47Contents vii
PART 11: ABDOMINAL
59 History and examination of the abdomen 1016
P . Ronan O’Connell
60 Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus 1022
Bruce Tulloh & Stephen J. Nixon
61 The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and 
retroperitoneal space 1047
Charles H. Knowles
62 The oesophagus 1067
Derek Alderson 
63 Stomach and duodenum 1106
Tim Underwood & John N. Primrose
64 Bariatric and metabolic surgery 1144
Richard Welbourn & Dimitri Pournaras 
65 The liver 1153
Robert P . Jones & Graeme J. Poston 
66 The spleen 1176
O. James Garden
67 The gallbladder and bile ducts 1188
Kevin C.P . Conlon
68 The pancreas 1212
Satyajit Bhattacharya
69 The small intestine 1240
Gordon Lawrence Carlson & Mattias Soop
70 The large intestine 1258
Gordon Lawrence Carlson & Jonathan Epstein
71 Intestinal obstruction 1280
Jim Hill
72 The vermiform appendix 1299
Jürgen Mulsow
73 The rectum 1318
David Jayne & Hiba Fatayer
74 The anus and anal canal 1339
Karen Nugent 
PART 12: GENITOURINARY
75 Urinary symptoms and investigations 1374
J. Kilian Mellon
76 Kidneys and ureters 1398
J. Kilian Mellon
77 The urinary bladder 1423
Freddie C. Hamdy
78 The prostate and seminal vesicles 1456
David E. Neal & Greg Shaw
79 Urethra and penis 1477
Ian Eardley
80 Testis and scrotum 1497
Ian Eardley
81 Gynaecology 1513
Monica Mittal, Prasanna Raj Supramaniam 
& Christian Becker 
PART 13: TRANSPLANTATION
82 Transplantation 1532
John Andrew Bradley
APPENDICES
Appendix 1: 
Common instruments used in general surgery 1560
Pradip K. Datta
Appendix 2: 
Fundamental principles in the operating theatre  
and the importance of global health 1563
Alan Norrish & Chris Lavy
Index 1567
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   7 25/10/2017   14:47When Hamilton Bailey and McNeil Love published the first 
edition of their venerated textbook in 1932 the surgical world 
was a very different place to that of today. There were no anti-
biotics, no joint replacement, no open heart surgery, no trans-
plantation and many other procedures that we now take for 
granted had simply not been invented. Medicine as a whole 
and surgery in particular never stands still. Surgeons contin -
ually strive to innovate so that they can tackle conditions 
and diseases previously thought to be beyond reach. They 
do this against a background of new discoveries in both the 
physical and biological sciences. Such breakthroughs make 
some surgical procedures redundant but others stimulate new 
approaches. This is seen in all specialties and consequently 
it is important for textbooks not only to keep pace with new 
developments but also to ensure that a balanced view is taken 
of their place in the therapeutic armamentarium. In develop-
ing the 27th edition of this much-loved textbook, we have 
striven to keep this in the forefront of our minds and those 
of our contributors. Nevertheless, in addition to considering 
the place of innovation, it is important not to ‘throw the baby 
out with the bathwater’. We have therefore ensured that the 
basic tenets of surgical practice that have stood the test of 
time remain where appropriate. 
Since the last edition great strides have been made in 
certain areas and we have ensured that these have been 
embedded in the book. For instance, in colorectal surgery a 
tipping point has been reached whereby more elective sur -
gery is performed laparoscopically than by open technique. 
Similarly, in vascular surgery there has been an explosion in 
the use of interventional radiology to treat conditions that 
were previously the sole province of the surgeon. Stenting of 
aortic aneurysms (EVAR), for instance, is rapidly replacing 
elective open operations and, in many instances, is being used 
for treating leaking aneurysms, with a concomitant marked 
reduction in mortality. Damage control surgery is an increas-
ingly important part of trauma management, in both civilian 
and conflict settings. Such developments also highlight the 
important role of the multidisciplinary team and the reali -
sation that modern surgical care can no longer be provided 
in isolation. This concept is reiterated throughout the book 
and is also why the importance of human factors is empha -
sised in the chapter on patient safety, which is a relatively 
new science of how humans behave physically and psycho -
logically in relation to particular environments. There is no 
more intense environment than an operating theatre, so how 
a surgical team interacts is crucial to the outcome for a patient 
undergoing a surgical procedure. This also applies, of course, 
outside the operating theatre because multidisciplinary work-
ing is now paramount to the delivery of safe and effective 
patient care. There is no doubt that in recent years regulation 
of medical practice has become tighter. Whereas in certain 
jurisdictions some may feel that this has become stifling, there 
is no doubt that regulation is here to stay. Needless to say, we 
should all be aware of our responsibilities to patients, both 
morally and ethically, and, although most need no remind -
ing, the law is continually changing as test cases are brought 
before the courts. Hence, we draw the attention of the reader 
to the revamped chapter on ethics and the law, the tenets of 
which we must all abide by.
Throughout the text, we have also endeavoured to point 
out where we and our authors think the specialty is moving. 
Exciting developments are on the horizon. For instance, 
genome sequencing will have a marked effect on how we 
practise in certain specialties, none more so than oncology. 
Robotics is likely to improve many more surgical procedures 
and tissue engineering will become more commonplace. In 
order to accommodate these advances, it has been necessary 
to streamline some of the more established chapters, other -
wise the book would become unwieldy. As a consequence, we 
have ensured that the ‘Further reading’ list at the end of each 
chapter has been brought up to date, allowing readers to delve 
further if they so wish. 
We are very conscious that the book is popular through -
out the world and consequently we have ensured that those 
diseases that are prevalent outside Europe and North America 
are included. Where relevant we have involved experts who 
are used to dealing with such maladies. The chapter on 
tropical infections and infestations is such an example. 
We have also endeavoured in this edition to be more 
consistent in its layout, ensuring that we use a similar format 
for tables, graphs and diagrams. Nevertheless, we have been 
sure to keep the biographical details of individual scientists 
and practitioners, which have been beloved of all readers 
throughout the generations. Similarly, we have retained the 
section on surgical instruments. Although some are now very 
much of historical interest, they are part of our heritage and 
students and indeed established practitioners will, we hope, 
find these vignettes fascinating. We have been told that the 
Summary boxes are very much appreciated by both under -
graduate and postgraduate students revising, sometimes in 
Preface to 27th Edition 
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   8 25/10/2017   07:21Preface to 27th Edition ix
haste, before exams and hence our authors have ensured that 
these are up to date.
A book as comprehensive as this could never have been 
completed without the dedication and professionalism of our 
contributors. They have invariably answered our demands 
with alacrity and accuracy, appreciating the responsibility 
that goes with informing the readership of such a respected 
and established textbook. We are extremely grateful for all 
their efforts because we are conscious that a textbook such as 
this can never rest on its laurels. If it is to remain in the higher 
echelons of surgical tomes it must have the very best contrib-
utors and we believe that we have brought together such a 
cadre in the present edition. This in no way diminishes the 
contributions of the authors from the previous edition who 
are no longer involved. They, for a variety of reasons including 
retirement, have passed on the baton. We are grateful to them 
for magnanimously stepping down and making way for ‘new 
blood’ and none more so than our previous co-editor Professor 
Christopher Bulstrode. Chris helped revamp the 23rd, 24th, 
25th and 26th Editions and these would never have been as 
successful without his dedicated efforts. Chris’s place in the 
editorial team has been taken by Andrew McCaskie who has 
streamlined the trauma and orthopaedic sections as well as 
overseeing other chapters.
Readers of Bailey & Love have always been an integral part 
of the development of the book over the years and the pres -
ent editorial group relish your feedback, which we know from 
experience will be forthcoming. Such input is vital if the book 
is to continue to reach the very high standards expected from 
each new edition. This has been a labour of love for all of us 
involved in this edition and we do hope it fulfils your needs, 
no matter whether you are an undergraduate student explor -
ing the exciting world of surgical practice for the first time, 
a postgraduate trainee studying for exams or an established 
consultant who wishes to refresh his or her memory. 
We wish you all well in your careers no matter which 
specialty you choose to practise in and we very much hope 
that the 27th and indeed subsequent editions of Bailey & Love 
accompany you on your travels through this most rewarding 
of professions.
Norman S. Williams
P . Ronan O’Connell
Andrew W . McCaskie
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   9 25/10/2017   07:21Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Contributors
Richard M. Adamson MBBS FRCS(ORL‑HNS)
Consultant Ear, Nose and Throat Surgeon
University of Edinburgh ENT Department
Edinburgh, UK
Muaaze Ahmad MBChB FRCR
Consultant Radiologist
Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK
Derek Alderson MD
President, Royal College of Surgeons of England 
Emeritus Professor of Surgery
University of Birmingham 
Honorary Consultant Surgeon
University Hospitals NHS Trust
Queen Elizabeth Hospital
Birmingham, UK
Gina Allen BM DCH MRCP MRCGP FRCR MFSEM
MScSEM DipESSR 
Musculoskeletal Radiologist and Sports Physician
Oxford University and St Lukes Radiology Oxford Ltd
Oxford, UK
Jonathan R. Anderson FRCS(C‑Th) FFST(Ed)
Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgeon 
Hammersmith Hospital
London, UK
Hutan Ashrafian BSc(Hons) MBBS PhD MBA MRCS
Department of Surgery and Cancer  
and Institute of Global Health Innovation
Imperial College London
Bariatric and Metabolic Surgical Unit
Chelsea and Westminster Hospital
London, UK
Gnaneswar Atturu MS ChM FRCS
Locum Consultant Vascular and Trauma Surgeon
Leeds Vascular Institute
Leeds General Infirmary
Leeds, UK
Sanjay De Bakshi MS(Cal) FRCS(Eng) FRCS(Ed)
Head of Department of Surgery 
Calcutta Medical Research Institute 
Kolkata, India
Christian Becker MD
Associate Professor
Consultant Gynaecologist and Subspecialist in Reproductive 
Medicine
Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
University of Oxford
John Radcliffe Hospital
Oxford, UK
Antonio Belli MD FRCS FRCS(SN)
Professor of Trauma Neurosurgery 
Director of the NIHR Surgical Reconstruction and 
Microbiology Research Centre
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK
Alex Bennett MBBS DLO FRCS(ORL‑HNS) MEd DIC
Consultant Ear, Nose and Throat Surgeon
University of Edinburgh ENT Department 
Edinburgh, UK
Satyajit Bhattacharya MS MPhil FRCS
Consultant Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgeon
The Royal London Hospital
London, UK
Ken Boffard BSc(Hons) MB BCh FRCS FRCS(Ed) FRCPS(Glas)
FCS(SA) FACS(Hon)
Professor Emeritus
Department of Surgery
University of the Witwatersrand
Trauma Director and Academic Head
Netcare Milpark Academic Trauma Centre
Johannesburg, South Africa
John Andrew Bradley PhD, FRCS
Emeritus Professor of Surgery
Cambridge University
Cambridge, UK
Karim Brohi FRCS FRCA
Professor of Trauma Sciences
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry
Queen Mary, University of London
London, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   10 25/10/2017   07:21Contributors xi
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Harry J.C.J. Bulstrode PhD
Clinical Lecturer in Neurosurgery 
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Gordon Lawrence Carlson BSc(Hons) MBChB(Hons) MD
FRCS FRCS(Gen) FRCS(Ed) 
Consultant Surgeon and Honorary Professor of Surgery
University of Manchester
Salford Royal Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
Salford, UK 
Dan Carradice MBChB MD(Hons) FRCS PGC Med US(Dist)
PGD(Health Econ)
Senior Lecturer 
Hull York Medical School
Consultant Vascular and Endovascular Surgeon
Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust
Hull and York, UK
Christopher L.H. Chan BSc(Hons) PhD FRCS(Eng)
FRCS(Gen Surg)
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK
Serene Hsi‑Lin Chang MBBS MD FRCA
Consultant Anaesthetist
Ng Teng Fong General Hospital
Singapore
Honorary Fellow, Pain and Anaesthesia Research Centre
St Bartholomew’s Hospital and Biomedical Engineering 
Research Group 
City University
London, UK
Ian C. Chetter MBChB MD FRCS PGC Med US(Dist) PGD Clin Ed
Chair of Surgery
Hull York Medical School
Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust
Hull and York, UK
Jon Clasper CBE DPhil DM FRCSEd(Orth) Col L/RAMC
Emeritus Professor and Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Military Clinical Director DMG (SE)
Visiting Professor in Bioengineering
Imperial College London
Clinical Lead
The Royal British Legion Centre for Blast Injury Studies
London, UK
Mark G. Coleman, MBChB MD(Hons) FRCS FRCPS(Glas)
FFST(RCSEd)
Consultant Surgeon
Derriford Hospital, Plymouth
Senior Lecturer (Associate Professor)
Plymouth University Peninsula School of Medicine and 
Dentistry
Plymouth, UK
Kevin C.P. Conlon MA MCh MBA FRCS(I) FACS FRCS(Ed)
FRCPS(Glas) FTCD
Professor of Surgery
Trinity College Dublin
Consultant HPB Surgeon 
St. Vincent’s University Hospital
Dublin, Ireland
Paul Cool MD MMedSc(Res) DipStat FRCS(Ed) FRCS(Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic and Oncological Surgeon
Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust
Oswestry, UK
John Crawford BSc MBBS FRCS FRCS(Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Spinal Surgeon
Department of Neurosurgery
Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Professor the Lord Darzi of Denham OM KBE PC FRS
FMedSci
Professor of Surgery
Imperial College London
St Mary’s Hospital Campus
London, UK
Pradip K. Datta MBE MS FRCS(Ed) FRCS(Eng) FRCS(I)
FRCS(Glas)
Honorary Consultant Surgeon
Caithness General Hospital
Wick, UK
Robert S.M. Davies MBChB MMedSci(Med Ed) MD FRCS
Consultant Vascular Surgeon and Honorary Senior Lecturer
University Hospitals of Leicester
Leicester, UK
Dan Deakin FRCS(T&O)
Consultant Orthopaedic Trauma Surgeon 
Nottingham University Hospital 
Nottingham, UK
Elias Degiannis MD PhD FRCS(Glasg) FCS(SA) FACS
Professor Emeritus, Department of Surgery 
University of the Witwatersrand Medical School
Netcare Milpark Academic Trauma Center and Leratong 
Hospital
Johannesburg, South Africa
Ian Eardley MA MChir FRCS(Urol) FEBU
Consultant Urologist
Leeds Teaching Hospital Trust
Leeds, UK
Michael John Earley MB MCh FRCS(I) FRCS(Plast)
Consultant Plastic Surgeon and Associate Clinical Professor
The Children’s University Hospital
Temple Street and Mater Misericordiae University Hospital
Dublin, Ireland
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   11 25/10/2017   07:21Contributorsxii
Jonothan J. Earnshaw DM FRCS
Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Cheltenham General Hospital
Cheltenham, UK
Deborah M. Eastwood MB FRCS
Consultant Paediatric Orthopaedic Surgeon 
Great Ormond St Hospital for Children and the 
Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital 
London, UK
Jonathan Epstein MA MD FRCS
Consultant Surgeon
Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust
Salford, UK
Hiba Fatayer MBBS MSc MRCS
Specialist Registrar in General Surgery
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust
Leeds, UK
Roger M. Feakins MB BCh BAO BA MD FRCPI FRCPath
Consultant Histopathologist and Professor of 
Gastrointestinal Pathology
Department of Histopathology
Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK
The late Professor Kenneth Fearon, MD, FRCPS(Glas)
FRCS(Ed) FRCS
Professor of Surgical Oncology and Honorary Consultant, 
Colorectal Surgeon, Clinical Surgery
School of Clinical Science
University of Edinburgh
Royal Infirmary
Edinburgh, UK
Pierre Foex DPhil FRCA FMedSci
Emeritus Nuffield Professor of Anaesthetics 
Nuffield Division of Anaesthetics
John Radcliffe Hospital
Oxford, UK
Brian J.C. Freeman MB BCh BAO DM(Nott) FRCS(T&O)
FRACS(Ortho) FAOrthA
Professor of Spinal Surgery
University of Adelaide 
Head of Spinal Services
Royal Adelaide Hospital
Adelaide
Senior Visiting Specialist
Women’s and Children’s Hospital 
Clinical Director
Centre for Orthopaedic and Trauma Research
Adelaide, Australia
O. James Garden CBE BSc MBChB MD FRCS(Ed) FRCP(Ed)
FRSE FRCS(Can)(Hons) FRACS(Hons) FACS(Hons) FRCS(Hons) 
FCSHK(Hons) FRCS(I)(Hons)
Regius Professor of Clinical Surgery
University of Edinburgh
Royal Infirmary
Edinburgh, UK
Craig Gerrand MD FRCS(Ed)(T&O)
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
North of England Bone and Soft Tissue Tumour Service
Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
Sudip J. Ghosh MBBS MS FRCS(Plast)
Consultant Plastic Reconstructive and Burns Surgeon
Stoke Mandeville Hospital 
Aylesbury, UK
Peter Giannoudis MD FACS FRCS
Professor of Trauma and Orthopaedic Surgery
School of Medicine
University of Leeds
Leeds, UK
Fay Gilder MBBS FRCA
Consultant Anaesthetist 
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Tim Goodacre MBBS BSc FRCS
Consultant Plastic Surgeon
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Oxford, UK
William P. Gray MB MD FRCS(I) FRCS(SN)
Professor of Neurosurgery
Director Wales BRAIN Unit
Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute
School of Medicine
Cardiff University
Cardiff, UK
Adam R. Greenbaum MBBS MBA PhD FRCS(Plast) FEBOPRAS
FACS
Consultant Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeon
Auckland and the Waikato
New Zealand
Freddie C. Hamdy MD MA FRCS FRCS(Ed)(Urol) FMedSci
Nuffield Professor of Surgery and Professor of Urology
University of Oxford
Director, Division of Surgery and Oncology
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Oxford, UK
Bob Handley MBChB FRCS
Consultant Trauma and Orthopaedic Surgeon 
John Radcliffe Hospital
Oxford, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   12 25/10/2017   07:21Contributors xiii
Iain Hathorn BSc MBChB DOHNS PGCME FRCSEd(ORL‑HNS)
Consultant Ear, Nose and Throat Surgeon
University of Edinburgh ENT Department 
Edinburgh, UK
Douglas Hay MBBS FRCS(Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Spinal Surgeon
Department of Neurosurgery
Cambridge University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Jim Hill MDChB ChM FRCS
Clinical Professor of Colorectal Surgery
Manchester Royal Infirmary and Manchester Academic 
Health Science Centre
Manchester, UK
Shervanthi Homer‑Vanniasinkam BSc MD FRCS(Ed) FRCS
Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Leeds Vascular Institute
Leeds General Infirmary
Leeds, UK
Ian Hunt FRCS(CTh)
Consultant Thoracic Surgeon 
Department of Thoracic Surgery 
St George’s Hospital 
London, UK
Ian Jackson MBChB FRCA
Chief Clinical Information Officer
York Teaching Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
York, UK
David Jayne BSc MBChB MD FRCS
Professor of Surgery
University of Leeds and Leeds Teaching Hospitals 
NHS Trust
Leeds, UK
Terry M. Jones BSc FRCSEd FRCS(ORL‑HNS) MD SFHEA
FASE(RCS)
Professor of Head and Neck Surgery
Institute of Translational Medicine
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
Robert P. Jones BSc MBChB PhD MRCS
Lecturer in Surgery
Institute of Translational Medicine
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
Frank B.V. Keane MD FRCS FRCS(I) FRCPS(Glas)(Hons)
FRCP(Ed)(Hons) FRCPI(Hons)
Joint Lead, National Clinical Programme in Surgery
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Former Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
Adelaide and Meath Hospital
Dublin, Ireland
Wasim Sardar Khan MBChB MSc PhD MRCS FRCS(Tr&Orth)
University Lecturer and Honorary Consultant Trauma and 
Orthopaedic Surgeon 
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Vikas Khanduja MA(Cantab) MSc FRCS FRCS(Tr&Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Research Lead – Elective Clinical Trials 
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Charles H. Knowles BChir PhD FRCS
Professor of Surgery and Honorary Consultant Colorectal 
Surgeon 
Barts Health NHS Trust
The Blizard Institute
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry
Queen Mary, University of London
London, UK
David A. Koppel MB BS BDS FDS FRCS
Consultant Craniofacial/Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon
Regional Maxillofacial Unit
Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Royal Hospital for 
Children
Glasgow, UK
Pawanindra Lal MS DNB MNAMS FIMSA FCLS FRCS(Ed)
FRCS(Glas) FRCS(Eng) FACS
Director Professor of Surgery 
Maulana Azad Medical College (University of Delhi) and 
Associated Lok Nayak Hospital
New Delhi, India
Peter Lamont MD FRCS FEBVS
Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Bristol, Bath and Weston Vascular Network
Bristol, UK
Anthony Lander PhD FRCS(Paed) DCH
Consultant Paediatric Surgeon
Birmingham Children’s Hospital
Birmingham, UK
Chris Lavy OBE MD MCh FRCS(Eng)
Professor of Orthopaedic and Tropical Surgery
University of Oxford
Honorary Consultant Spine Surgeon
Oxford University Hospitals
Oxford, UK
Tom W.J. Lennard MBBS MD FRCS
Professor of Surgery and Associate Dean 
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   13 25/10/2017   07:21Contributorsxiv
David Limb BSc FRCSEd(Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust
Leeds, UK
James O. Lindsay PhD FRCP
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Barts Health NHS Trust
The Royal London Hospital
Reader in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Queen Mary University of London
London, UK
Andrew W. McCaskie MMus MD FRCS FRCS(T&O)
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery and Head of Department 
of Surgery
University of Cambridge
Honorary Consultant 
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Stephen M. McDonnell MBBS BSc MD FRCS(T&O)
University Lecturer and Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
John MacFie MD FRCS(Eng) FRCS(Ed) FRCS(Glas) FRCP(Ed)
Professor of Surgery and Consultant Surgeon
University of Hull, York NHS Trust at Scarborough Hospital
Scarborough, UK
Mark McGurk MD BDS FRCS FDSRCS DLO
Professor of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
University College London Hospital
London, UK
Martin A. McNally MB BCH MD(Res) FRCS(Ed) FRCS(Orth)
Consultant in Limb Reconstruction
Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre
Oxford University Hospitals
Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer in Orthopaedic Surgery
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
Douglas McWhinnie MD(Hons) FRCS
Professor of Clinical Education and Consultant General and 
Vascular Surgeon
University of Buckingham
Milton Keynes University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust
Milton Keynes, UK
Keith R. Martin MA BM BCh DM MRCP FRCOphth
Professor of Ophthalmology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Matthew Matson MRCP FRCR
Divisional Director of Imaging
Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK
Philippa C. Matthews BMBS MRCP DTM&H DPhil(Oxon)
FRCPath
Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Fellow
Nuffield Department of Medicine
University of Oxford
Honorary Consultant in Infectious Diseases and 
Microbiology
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Oxford, UK
Ken Mealy MD FRCS(I) FRCS(Ed)
Joint Lead, National Clinical Programme in Surgery
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland
Consultant General Surgeon
Wexford General Hospital
Wexford, Ireland
Vivek Mehta MBBS MD FRCA FFPMRCA
Consultant in Pain Medicine and Neuromodulation
Director, Pain and Anaesthesia Research Centre
St Bartholomew’s and Royal London Hospital
Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK
J. Kilian Mellon MD FRCS(Urol)
Consultant Urological Surgeon
Leicester General Hospital
Leicester, UK
Monica Mittal Intercalated BSc MBBS MRCOG
Subspecialist Trainee in Reproductive Medicine and Surgery
Specialist Registrar in Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Oxford, UK
Chris Moran MD FRCS(Ed)
National Clinical Director for Trauma
NHS-England
Professor of Orthopaedic Trauma Surgery
Nottingham University Hospital
Nottingham, UK
Jürgen Mulsow MD FRCS(I)
Consultant General and Colorectal Surgeon
Department of Colorectal Surgery and National Centre for 
Peritoneal Malignancy
Mater Misericordiae University Hospital
Dublin, Ireland
Alastair Munro BSc FRCR FRCP(E) FRCS(Ed)
Honorary Professor
School of Medicine
University of St Andrews
St Andrews, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   14 25/10/2017   07:21Contributors xv
David E. Neal CBE FMedSci FRCS
Senior Visiting Fellow and Professor Emeritus of Surgical 
Oncology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
Iain J. Nixon MB ChB FRCS(ORL‑HNS) PhD
Consultant Ear, Nose and Throat Surgeon
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, UK
Stephen J. Nixon FRCS(Ed) FRCP(Ed)
Consultant Surgeon
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
Alan Norrish BSc(Hons) MB BChir LLM PhD FRCS(Orth)
Associate Lecturer
School of Clinical Medicine
University of Cambridge
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Karen Nugent MA MS MEd FRCS
Consultant Colorectal Surgeon
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
P. Ronan O’Connell MD FRCS(I) FRCPS(Glas) FRCS(Edin)
Professor, Head of Section of Surgery and Surgical 
Specialties
University College Dublin
St Vincent’s University Hospital
Dublin, Ireland
Hemant G. Pandit DPhil FRCS(T&O)
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery and Honorary Consultant
Director of Research and Innovation
University of Leeds
Leeds
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
Phill Pearce MA MBBS MRCS RAF
Registrar in General Surgery
Royal British Legion Centre for Blast Injury Studies
Imperial College London
London
Academic Department of Military Surgery and Trauma
Royal Centre for Defence Medicine
Frimley Park, UK
Graeme J. Poston MS DSc FRCS(Eng) FRCS(Ed)
Professor of Surgery
Northwestern Hepatobiliary Unit
Aintree University Hospital
Liverpool, UK
Dimitri Pournaras PhD FRCS
Registrar in Upper Gastrointestinal and General Surgery
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Niall Power MD MRCP(I) FRCR
Consultant Radiologist
Royal Free Hospital
London, UK
Ruth S. Prichard MD FRCS(I)
Consultant Endocrine and Breast Surgeon 
St Vincent’s University Hospital
Dublin, Ireland
John N. Primrose FMedSci
Professor of Surgery
University of Southampton 
Southampton General Hospital
Southampton, UK
Sanjay Purkayastha BSc MBBS MD FRCS(Gen Surg)
Consultant Surgeon
General, Laparoscopic, Bariatric and Upper GI Surgery
St Mary’s Hospital
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust
Senior Lecturer in Bariatric Surgery
Imperial College
London, UK
Mamoon Rashid FRCS FCPS(Pak)
Professor of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Shifa College of Medicine
Consultant Plastic Surgeon and Programme 
Director
Shifa International Hospital 
Islamabad, Pakistan
Lee Van Rensburg MBBCh FRCS(Tr&Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon 
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
David A. Russell MB ChB MD FRCS(Gen Surg)
Consultant Vascular Surgeon
Leeds Vascular Institute
Leeds General Infirmary
Leeds, UK
Richard C. Sainsbury MBBS MD FRCS
Honorary Reader in Surgery
University College London 
Consultant Surgeon
London Breast Clinic
London, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   15 25/10/2017   07:21Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Contributorsxvi
Anand Sardesai MB BS MD FRCA
Consultant Anaesthetist
Addenbrooke’s Hospital
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Cambridge, UK
Rob Sayers MD FRCS
Honorary Professor of Vascular Surgery
Leicester Royal Infirmary
Leeds, UK
Andrew G. Schache PhD FDSRCS FRCS(OMFS)
Clinical Senior Lecturer in Head and Neck Surgery
University of Liverpool
Honorary Consultant in Oral and Maxillofacial – Head and 
Neck Surgery
Aintree University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Liverpool, UK
Bob Sharp BM BCh MA FRCS FRCS(Tr&Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Oxford University Hospitals
The Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre
Oxford, UK
Greg Shaw MD FRCS(Urol)
Consultant Urologist
University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Honorary Senior Lecturer
University College and Queen Mary College
London, UK
Mattias Soop MD PhD
Consultant Surgeon and Honorary Reader in Surgery 
The University of Manchester
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre
Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust
Salford, UK
Robert J.C. Steele MB ChB MD FRCS(Ed) FRSE
Head of Academic Surgery and Head of Cancer Division
Medical Research Institute, Division of Cancer
Ninewells Hospital and Medical School
Dundee, UK
Prasanna Raj Supramaniam MBChB MSc MRCOG
Specialist Registrar in Obstetrics and Gynaecology
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
Oxford, UK
Carol Tan FRCS(C‑Th)
Consultant Thoracic Surgeon
Department of Thoracic Surgery
St George’s Hospital
London, UK
Bruce Tulloh MB MS(Melb) FRACS FRCS(Ed)
Consultant General Surgeon 
Department of Surgery
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
Michael P.H. Tyler MB CHM FRCS(Plast)
Consultant Plastic Reconstructive and Burns Surgeon 
Stoke Mandeville Hospital
Aylesbury, UK
Tim Underwood PhD FRCS
Professor of GI Surgery
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
Medha Vanarase‑Pandit MD FRCA Cert Med Ed
Consultant Anaesthetist
Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust
Leeds, UK
Leandros‑Vassilios F. Vassiliou DDS MD MSc FRCS
Department of Head and Neck
Guy’s Hospital
London, UK
Sam Vollans FRCS(Ed)(Orth)
Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon
Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust
Leeds, UK
Richard Welbourn MD FRCS
Consultant Upper Gastrointestinal and Bariatric Surgeon
Honorary Reader in Bariatric Surgery 
University of Bristol
Musgrove Park Hospital
Taunton, UK
Robert Wheeler MS LLB(Hons) LLM FRCS
Consultant Neonatal and Paediatric Surgeon
Director, Department of Clinical Law
University Hospital of Southampton
Southampton, UK
Birgit Whitman PhD
Head of Research Governance
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK
Philip Woodland MBBS PhD MRCP
Consultant Gastroenterologist
Barts Health NHS Trust
The Royal London Hospital
Honorary Senior Lecturer in Upper GI Medicine
Queen Mary, University of London
London, UK
Mustafa Zakkar PhD FRCS(C‑Th)
NIHR Clinical Lecturer in Cardiothoracic Surgery
University of Bristol and Bristol Heart Institute
Bristol, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   16 25/10/2017   07:21Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
In this day and age, it is impossible to produce a book like 
Bailey and Love without the contribution of numerous tal -
ented individuals. Although it is impractical to mention all 
those who have played a part in producing the 27th Edition, it 
would be remiss not to express our gratitude to the following 
key players.
Henry Spilberg initiated the new edition as commission-
ing editor under the supervision of Jo Koster and was very 
much involved in the early planning. His role was subse-
quently taken over by Miranda Bromage following his depar-
ture for pastures green. Miranda’s diligence and experience 
has been invaluable and we are enormously indebted to her 
wise counsel. Cherry Allen, as Editorial Assistant has been 
key in liaising with the editors and the contributors, ensuring 
manuscripts have been received on time and has been respon-
sible for ensuring the smooth handover of the text to the pro-
duction team. The latter has been headed by Paul Bennett 
who has provided an extremely professional service. His and 
his team’s attention to detail has been very much valued and 
we hope is reflected in a first class product.
Chapter 5, Surgical infection, contains some material 
from ‘Surgical infection’ by David J. Leaper. The material has 
been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 7, Basic surgical skills and anastomoses , con-
tains some material from ‘Basic surgical skills and anastomoses’ 
by David J. Leaper and William E.G. Thomas. The mater ial 
has been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 9, Principles of paediatric surgery, contains 
some material from ‘ Principles of paediatric surgery’  by Mark 
Stringer. The material has been revised and updated by the 
current author.
Chapter 12 , Surgical ethics and law , contains some 
material from ‘ Surgical ethics’ by Len Doyal. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 14, Diagnostic imaging, contains some material 
from ‘Diagnostic imaging’ by the current authors and Gina 
Allen, which has been revised and updated for this edition.
Chapter 17, Preoperative care including the high-risk 
surgical patient, contains some material from ‘Pre operative 
preparation’ by current authors Medha Vanarase-Pandit and 
Pierre Foex, and Kevin Tremper, Lisa Leonard and Sarah 
Barton, and ‘Perioperative management of the high-risk patient ’ 
by Mridula Rai, Kevin D. Johnston, Rupert M. Pearse and 
Richard M. Langford. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current authors. 
Chapter 18, Anaesthesia and pain relief , contains some 
material from ‘Anaesthesia and pain relief’  by current author 
Vivek Mehta, and Richard Langford and Jagannath Halder. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
authors.
Chapter 20, Postoperative care, contains some material 
from ‘Postoperative care’ by Jay Kini, current author Anand 
Sardesai, and Alistair Pace and Nicholas C.M. Armitage. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
authors.
Chapter 23,  Early assessment and management of 
trauma, contains some material from ‘Early assessment and 
management of trauma ’ by Dinesh Nathwani and Joseph 
Windley. The material has been revised and updated by 
the current authors.
Chapter 24 , Traumatic brain injury, contains some 
material from ‘Head injury ’ by Richard Stacey and John 
Leach. The material has been revised and updated by the 
current authors.
Chapter 25, Neck and spine, contains some material from 
‘Neck and spine’ by Ashley Poynton. The material has been 
revised and updated by the current authors.
Chapter 26, Maxillofacial trauma, contains some material 
from ‘Maxillofacial trauma’ by Charles Perkins. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 28,  Extremity trauma, contains some material 
from ‘Extremity trauma’ by Parminder Singh. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 31, History taking and clinical examination in 
musculoskeletal disease, contains some material from ‘His-
tory taking and clinical examination in musculoskeletal disease’ by 
Acknowledgements
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   17 25/10/2017   07:21Acknowledgementsxviii
Parminder Singh and current author Hemant G. Pandit. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
authors.
Chapter 32, Sports medicine and sports injuries, con-
tains some material from ‘Sports medicine and sports injuries ’ 
by D.L. Back and Jay Smith. The material has been revised 
and updated by the current authors.
Chapter 33, The spine, contains some material from ‘The 
spine’ by the current authors and Gavin Bowden, which has 
been revised and updated for this edition.
Chapter 34, Upper limb, contains some material from 
‘Upper limb – pathology, assessment and management’ by Vinay 
Takwale, Irfan Khan and Srinath Kamineni. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current authors.
Chapter 35, Hip and knee, contains some material from 
‘Hip and knee ’ by Hermant G. Pandit, Andrew Bernett, 
current author Vikas Khanduja and Richard N. V illar. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
authors.
Chapter 36, Foot and ankle , contains some material 
from ‘Foot and ankle ’ by Mark Davies, Matthew C. Solan 
and Vikas Khanduja. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current author.
Chapter 38, Infection of the bones and joints , contains 
some material from ‘Infection of the bones and joints ’ by the 
current authors and Philip Bejon, which has been revised 
and updated for this edition.
Chapter 39, Paediatric orthopaedics, contains some 
material from ‘Paediatric orthopaedics’ by the current author 
and Joanna Hicks, which has been revised and updated for 
this edition.
Chapter 43 , Cranial neurosurgery, contains some 
material from ‘ Elective Neurosurgery ’ by John Leach and 
Richard Kerr. The material has been revised and updated 
by the current authors.
Chapter 44, The eye and orbit , contains some material 
from ‘The eye and orbit’ by Colm O’Brien, Hugo Henderson 
and Jonathan Jagger. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current author.
Chapter 45, Cleft lip and palate: developmental abnor -
malities of the face, mouth and jaws , contains some 
material from ‘Cleft lip and palate: developmental abnormalities 
of the face, mouth and jaws’ by William P. Smith. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 46,  The ear, nose and sinuses, contains some 
material from ‘ The nose and sinuses’ by Robert W. Ruckley 
and current author Iain J. Nixon, and ‘ The ear’ by Grant 
Bates. The material has been revised and updated by the 
current authors.
Chapter 47, Pharynx, larynx and neck, contains some 
material from ‘Pharynx, larynx and neck ’ by Rishi Sharma, 
Martin Birchall, Jonathan D. Jagger and Hugo W .A. 
Henderson. The material has been revised and updated by 
the current author.
Chapter 48, Oral cavity malignancy , contains some 
material from ‘Oropharyngeal cancer’ by William P. Smith. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
author.
Chapter 49, Disorders of the salivary glands , con-
tains some material from ‘Disorders of the salivary glands’ , 
by William P. Smith. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current authors.
Chapter 50, The thyroid glands, contains some material 
from ‘The thyroid and parathyroid glands’ by Zygmunt H. 
Krukowski. The material has been revised and updated by 
the current author.
Chapter 51 , The parathyroid glands, contains some 
material from ‘The thyroid and parathyroid glands’ by Zygmunt 
H. Krukowski. The material has been revised and updated 
by the current author.
Chapter 52, The adrenal glands and other abdominal 
endocrine disorders, contains some material from ‘Adrenal 
glands and other endocrine disorders ’ by Matthias Rothmund. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
author.
Chapter 54 , Cardiac surgery, contains some material 
from ‘Cardiac surgery’ by current author Jonathan Anderson 
and Ian Hunt. The material has been revised and updated 
by the current authors.
Chapter 55, The thorax, contains some material from ‘The 
thorax’ by Tom Treasure. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current authors.
Chapter 56, Arterial disorders, contains some material 
from ‘Arterial disorders’ by John A. Murie. The material has 
been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 57, Venous disorders, contains some material 
from ‘Venous disorders’ by Peter McCollum, current author 
Ian Chetter and Kevin Burnand. The material has been 
revised and updated by the current authors.
Chapter 58, Lymphatic disorders, contains some material 
from ‘ Lymphatic disorders ’ by current author Shervanthi 
Homer-Vanniasinkam and Andrew Bradbury. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current authors.
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   18 25/10/2017   07:21Acknowledgements xix
Chapter 59, History and examination of the abdomen, 
contains some material from ‘History and examination of 
the abdomen’ , by Mohan de Silva, V . Sitaram and Simon 
Paterson-Brown. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current author.
Chapter 60, Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus, con-
tains some material from ‘ Hernias, umbilicus and abdominal 
wall’ by Andrew N. Kingsnorth, Giorgi Giorgobiani and 
David H. Bennett. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current authors.
Chapter 61, The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and 
retroperitoneal space, contains some material from ‘ The 
peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space ’ 
by Jerry Thompson. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current author.
Chapter 64, Bariatric and metabolic surgery , contains 
some material from ‘Bariatric surgery’ by John Baxter. The 
material has been revised and updated by the current 
author.
Chapter 65, The liver, contains some material from ‘The 
liver’ by Rahul S. Koti, Sanjeev Kanoria and Brian R. 
Davidson. The material has been revised and updated by 
the current authors.
Chapter 69, The small intestine, contains some material 
from ‘The small and large intestines’ by current author Gordon 
Carlson, Jonathan Epstein, Neil J. McC. Mortensen and 
Shazad Ashraf. The material has been revised and updated 
by the current authors.
Chapter 70, The large intestine, contains some material 
from ‘The small and large intestines’ by Neil J. McC. Mortensen 
and Shazad Ashraf. The material has been revised and 
updated by the current authors.
Chapter 71, Intestinal obstruction, contains some 
material from ‘ Intestinal obstruction ’ by Marc Christopher 
Winslet. The material has been revised and updated by the 
current author.
Chapter 72 , The vermiform appendix, contains some 
material from ‘The vermiform appendix’  by P . Ronan 
O’Connell. The material has been revised and updated by 
the current author.
Chapter 73 , The rectum, contains some material from 
‘The rectum’ by Sue Clark. The material has been revised 
and updated by the current author.
Chapter 74,  The anus and anal canal , contains some 
material from ‘The anus and anal canal’ by the current author 
and Peter Lunniss, which has been revised and updated for 
this edition.
Chapter 76, The kidneys and ureters , contains some 
material from ‘The kidneys and ureters’ by Christopher G. 
Fowler. The material has been revised and updated by the 
current author.
Chapter 77, The urinary bladder, contains some material 
from ‘The urinary bladder ’ by David E. Neal. The material 
has been revised and updated by the current author.
Chapter 79, Urethra and penis , contains some material 
from ‘ Urethra and penis ’ by Christopher G. Fowler. The 
material has been revised and updated by the current 
author.
Chapter 80, Testis and scrotum, contains some material 
from ‘ Testis and scrotum’ by Christopher G. Fowler. The 
material has been revised and updated by the current 
author.
Chapter 81,  Gynaecology, contains some material from 
‘Gynaecology’ by Stephen Kennedy and Enda McVeigh. 
The material has been revised and updated by the current 
author.
We acknowledge advice, beyond their chapter contribu-
tion, from Anand Sardesai in relation to anaesthetics, and 
Lee Van Rensburg, in relation to trauma.
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   19 25/10/2017   07:21Sayings of the great
Both Hamilton Bailey and McNeill Love, when medical stu -
dents, served as clerks to Sir Robert Hutchinson, 1871–1960, 
who was Consulting Physician to the London Hospital and 
President of the Royal College of Physicians. They never tired 
of quoting his ‘medical litany’, which is appropriate for all 
clinicians and, perhaps especially, for those who are surgically 
minded.
From inability to leave well alone;
From too much zeal for what is new and contempt for 
what is old;
From putting knowledge before wisdom, science before 
art, cleverness before common sense;
From treating patients as cases; and
From making the cure of a disease more grievous than 
its endurance,
Good Lord, deliver us.
To which may be added:
The patient is the centre of the medical universe around 
which all our works revolve and towards which all our 
efforts trend.
J.B. Murphy, 1857–1916, Professor of Surgery,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
To study the phenomenon of disease without books is 
to sail an uncharted sea, while to study books without 
patients is not to go to sea at all.
Sir William Osler, 1849–1919,
Professor of Medicine, Oxford, UK
A knowledge of healthy and diseased actions is not less 
necessary to be understood than the principles of other 
sciences. By and acquaintance with principles we learn 
the cause of disease. Without this knowledge a man 
cannot be a surgeon. … The last part of surgery, namely 
operations, is a reflection on the healing art; it is a tacit 
acknowledgement of the insufficiency of surgery. It is 
like an armed savage who attempts to get that by force 
which a civilised man would by stratagem.
John Hunter, 1728–1793, Surgeon, 
St George’s Hospital, London, UK
Investigating Nature you will do well to bear ever in 
mind that in every question there is the truth, whatever 
our notions may be. This seems perhaps a very simple 
consideration; yet it is strange how often it seems to be 
disregarded. If we had nothing but pecuniary rewards 
and worldly honours to look to, our profession would 
not be one to be desired. But in its practice you will 
find it to be attended with peculiar privileges; second 
to none in intense interest and pure pleasures. It is our 
proud office to tend the fleshy tabernacle of the immor-
tal spirit, and our path, if rightly followed, will be guided 
by unfettered truth and love unfeigned. In the pursuit 
of this noble and holy calling I wish you all God-speed.
Promoter’s address, Graduation in Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, August, 1876, by Lord Lister,
the Founder of Modern Surgery
Surgery has undergone many great transformations 
during the past fifty years, and many are to be thanked 
for their contributions – yet when we think of how 
many remain to be made, it should rather stimulate our 
inventiveness than fuel our vanity.
Sir Percival Pott, 1714–88, Surgeon,
St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK
If you cannot make a diagnosis at least make a decision!
Sir Harry Platt, 1897–1986,
Professor of Orthopaedics, Manchester, and 
President of the Royal College of Surgeons England,
London, UK
If the surgeon cuts a vessel and knows the name of that 
vessel, the situation is serious; if the anaesthetist knows 
the name of that vessel, the situation is irretrievable.
Maldwyn Morgan 1938–
Anaesthetist, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK
01_00-B&L27_Prelims_MainEdn.indd   20 25/10/2017   07:21PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
 1 Metabolic response to injury ..................................................................... 2
 2 Shock and blood transfusion...................................................................12
 3 Wounds, healing and tissue repair ........................................................24
 4 Tissue engineering and regeneration ..................................................33
 5 Surgical infection .........................................................................................42
 6 Tropical infections and infestations ......................................................57
 7 Basic surgical skills and anastomoses .................................................84
 8 Principles of laparoscopic and robotic surgery ............................. 105
 9 Principles of paediatric surgery ........................................................... 119
10 Principles of oncology ............................................................................. 139
11 Surgical audit and research .................................................................. 161
12 Surgical ethics and law ........................................................................... 170
13 Human factors, patient safety and quality improvement ........... 176
Basic principles
1
01-01A-B&L27_Pt1.indd   1 25/10/2017   07:24Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
1
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • Classical concepts of homeostasis
 • Mediators of the metabolic response to injury
 • Physiological and biochemical changes that  occur 
during injury and recovery
 • Changes in body composition that accompany
surgical injury
 • Avoidable factors that compound the metabolic 
response to injury
 • Concepts behind optimal perioperative care
Metabolic response to injury
BASIC CONCEPTS IN 
HOMEOSTASIS
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, a series of 
eminent scientists laid the foundations of our understand­
ing of homeostasis and the response to injury. The classical 
concepts of homeostasis and the response to injury are:
 ● ‘The stability of the “milieu intérieur” is the primary con­
dition for freedom and independence of existence’ (Claude 
Bernard); i.e. body systems act to maintain internal con ­
stancy.
 ● ‘Homeostasis: the coordinated physiological  process
which maintains most of the steady states of the organ­
ism’ ( Walter Cannon); i.e. complex homeostatic responses 
involving the  brain, nerves, heart, lungs, kidneys and 
spleen work to maintain body constancy.
 ● ‘There is a circumstance attending accidental injury
which does not belong to the disease, namely that the 
injury done, has in all cases a tendency to produce both 
the deposition  and means of cure’ (John Hunter); i.e. 
responses to injury are, in general, beneficial to the host 
and allow healing/survival.
In essence, the concept evolved that the constancy of the 
‘milieu intérieur’ allowed for the independence of organisms,  
that complex homeostatic responses sought to maintain this  
constancy, and that within this range of responses were the 
elements of healing and repair. These ideas pertained to nor­
mal physiology and mild/moderate injury. In the modern era, 
such concepts do not account for disease evolution  following 
major injury/sepsis or the injured patient who would have 
died but for artificial organ support. Such patients exemplify 
less of the classical homeostatic control system (signal detec­
tor–processor–effector regulated by a negative feedback loop) 
and more of the ‘open loop’ system, whereby only with med­
ical/surgical resolution of the primary abnormality is a return 
to classical homeostasis possible.
As a consequence of modern understanding of the meta­
bolic response to injury, elective surgical practice seeks to  
reduce the need for a homeostatic response by minimising 
the primary insult (minimal access surgery and ‘stress ­free’ 
perioperative care). In emergency surgery, where the pres ­
ence of  tissue trauma/sepsis/hypovolaemia often compounds 
the primary problem, there is a requirement to augment arti ­
ficially homeostatic responses (resuscitation) and to close 
the ‘open’ loop by  intervening to resolve the primary insult 
(e.g. surgical treatment of major abdominal sepsis) and pro­
vide organ support (critical care) while the patient comes 
back to a situation in which  homeostasis can achieve a 
return to normality.
Summary box 1.1
Basic concepts
●● Homeostasis is the foundation of normal physiology
●● ‘Stress-free’ perioperative care helps to preserve homeostasis
following elective surgery
●● Resuscitation, surgical intervention and critical care can
return the severely injured patient to a situation in which 
homeostasis becomes possible once again
Claude Bernard, 1813–1878, Professor of Physiology, The College de France, Paris, France.
Walter Bradford Cannon, 1871–1945, Professor of Physiology, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
John Hunter, 1728–1793, surgeon, St George’s Hospital, London, UK. He is regarded  as ‘The Father of Scientific Surgery’. To further his knowledge of 
venereal disease he  inoculated himself with syphilis in 1767.
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   2 25/10/2017   07:38
https://t.me/MedicalBooksStoreMediators of the metabolic response t o injury 3
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
This chapter aims to review the mediators of the stress  
response, the physiological and biochemical pathway 
changes associated with surgical injury and the changes 
in body composition that occur following surgical injury. 
Emphasis is laid on why knowledge of these events is 
important to understand  the rationale for modern ‘stress ­
free’ perioperative and critical  care.
THE GRADED NATURE OF THE 
INJURY RESPONSE
It is important to recognise that the response to injury is graded: 
the more severe the injury, the greater the response (Figure 
1.1). This concept not only applies to physiological/metabolic 
changes but also to immunological changes/sequelae. Thus, 
 following elective surgery of intermediate severity, there may 
be a transient and modest rise in temperature, heart rate, 
respira tory rate, energy expenditure and peripheral white 
cell count. Following major trauma/sepsis, these changes are 
accentuated, resulting in a systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS), hypermetabolism, marked catabolism, 
shock and even multiple organ dysfunction (MODS). It is 
important to recognise that genetic variability plays a key role 
in determining the intensity of the inflammatory response. 
Moreover, in certain circumstances, the severity of injury does 
not lead to a simple dose ­dependent metabolic response, but 
rather leads to quantitatively different responses.
Not only is the metabolic response graded, but it also 
evolves with time. In particular, the immunological 
sequelae of major injury evolve from a proinflammatory 
state driven primarily by  the innate immune system (macro­
phages,  neutrophils, dendritic cells) into a compensatory anti­ 
inflammatory response syndrome  (CARS) characterised by 
suppressed immunity and diminished  resistance to infection. 
In patients who develop infective complications, the latter 
will drive ongoing systemic inflammation, the acute phase 
response and continued catabolism.
MEDIATORS OF THE METABOLIC 
RESPONSE TO INJURY
The classical neuroendocrine pathways of the stress response  
consist of afferent nociceptive neurones, the spinal cord, thal­
amus, hypothalamus and pituitary (Figure 1.2). Corticotro­
phin­releasing factor (CRF) released from the hypothalamus 
increases adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) release 
from the anterior pituitary. ACTH then acts on the adrenals  
to increase the secretion of cortisol. Hypothalamic activation 
of the sympathetic nervous system causes release of adrenaline 
and also stimulates release of glucagon. Intravenous infusion 
of a cocktail of these ‘counter­regulatory’ hormones (glucagon, 
glucocorticoids and catecholamines) reproduces many aspects 
of the metabolic response to injury. There are, however, many 
other players, including alterations in insulin release and sensi­
tivity, hypersecretion of prolactin and growth hormone (GH) 
in the presence of low circulatory insulin­like growth factor­1 
(IGF­1) and inactivation of peripheral thyroid hormones and 
gonadal function. Of note, GH has direct lipolytic, insulin ­ 
antagonising and proinflammatory properties.
140Resting metabolic rate (%)
130
120
110
100
90
80
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 0 days
Minor trauma
Major trauma
Starvation
Normal
range
25
Nitrogen excretion
(g N/day) 
20
15
10
5
0
Minor trauma
Major trauma
Normal
range
Figure 1.1 Hypermetabolism and increased nitrogen excr etion are 
closely related to the magnitude of the initial injury and show a graded 
response.
Summary box 1.2
Neuroendocrine response to injury/critical illness
The neuroendocrine response to severe injury/critical illness is 
biphasic:
●● Acute phase characterised by an actively secreting pituitary
and elevated counter-regulatory hormones (cortisol, glucagon, 
adrenaline). Changes are thought to be beneficial for short-
term survival
●● Chronic phase associated with hypothalamic suppression
and low serum levels of the respective target organ hormones. 
Changes contribute to chronic wasting
The innate immune system (principally macrophages) 
interacts in a complex manner with the adaptive immune 
system (T  cells, B cells) in co ­generating the metabolic 
response to injury (Figure 1.2). Proinflammatory cytokines 
including interleukin­1 (IL­1), tumour necrosis factor alpha 
(TNFα), IL ­6 and IL ­8 are produced within the first 24 
hours and act directly on the  hypothalamus to cause pyrexia. 
Such cytokines also augment the hypothalamic stress response 
and act directly on skeletal muscle to induce proteolysis while 
inducing acute phase protein production in the liver. Pro­
inflammatory cytokines also play a complex role in the 
development of peripheral insulin resistance.  Other import­
ant proinflammatory mediators include nitric oxide ([NO]
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   3 25/10/2017   07:38CHAPTER 1  Metabolic response t o injury
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES4
via inducible nitric oxide synthetase [iNOS]) and a variety 
of prostanoids (via cyclooxygenase ­2 [Cox ­2]). Changes in  
organ function (e.g. renal hypoperfusion/impairment) may 
be induced by excessive vasoconstriction via endogenous 
factors such as endothelin ­1.
Within hours of the upregulation of proinflammatory  
 cytokines, endogenous cytokine antagonists enter the circula­
tion (e.g. interleukin ­1 receptor antagonist [IL ­1Ra] and  
TNF­ soluble receptors [TNF­sR­55 and 75]) and act to con ­
trol the proinflammatory response. A complex further series 
of adaptive changes includes the development of a Th2 ­type 
counterinflammatory response (regulated by IL ­4, ­5, ­9 and 
­13 and transforming growth factor beta [TGF β]) which, if 
accentuated and  prolonged in critical illness, is character ­
ised as the CARS and  results in immunosuppression and an 
increased susceptibility to opportunistic (nosocomial) infec­
tion. Within inflamed tissue the duration and magnitude of  
acute inflammation as well as the return to homeostasis are 
influenced by a group of local mediators known as specialised 
proresolving mediators (SPM) that include essential fatty 
acid­derived lipoxins, resolvins, protectins and maresins. 
These endogen ous resolution agonists orchestrate the uptake 
and clearance of  apoptotic polymorphonuclear neutrophils 
and microbial  particles, reduce proinflammatory cytokines and 
lipid mediators as  well as enhancing the removal of cellular 
debris in the inflammatory milieu. Thus, both at the systemic 
level (endogen ous cytokine antagonists – see above) and at the 
local tissue level, the body attempts to limit/resolve inflamma­
tion driven dyshomeostasis.
There are many complex interactions among the neu ­
roendocrine, cytokine and metabolic axes. For example, 
although cortisol is immunosuppressive at high levels, it acts 
synergistically with IL ­6 to promote the hepatic acute 
phase response.  ACTH release is enhanced by proinflam­
matory cytokines and  the noradrenergic system. The resulting 
rise in cortisol levels may form a weak feedback loop attempt­
ing to limit the proinflammatory stress response. Finally, 
hyperglycaemia may aggravate the  inflammatory response 
via substrate overflow in the mitochondria, causing the for­
mation of excess oxygen free radicals and also  altering gene 
expression to enhance cytokine production.
At the molecular level, the changes that accompany 
 systemic inflammation are extremely complex. In a recent 
study using  network­based analysis of changes in mRNA 
expression in leukocytes following exposure to endotoxin, 
there were changes in the expression of more than 3700 genes 
Bailey and Love
/f_ig. 1.02
Injury
Afferent
noiciceptive
pathways
Adaptive
immune
system
Innate
immune
system
Pancreas
Hypothalamus
Spinal cord
Pituitary
Sympathetic
nervous system
Adrenal
ACTH     GH ADIPOCYTE
LIPOLYSIS
HEPATIC
GLUCONEOGENESIS
SKELETAL MUSCLE
PROTEIN DEGRADATION
HEPATIC ACUTE PHASE
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
PYREXIA
HYPERMETABOLISM
ADRENALINE
PLASMA CHANGES IN
BODY METABOLISM
CORTISOL
GLUCAGON
IL-1
 TNFα
IL-6
IL-8
INSULIN
IGF-1
TESTOSTERONE
T3
CRF
Summary box 1.3
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome following 
major injury
●● Is driven initially by proinflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-1, IL-6 
and TNFα)
●● Is followed rapidly by increased plasma levels of cytokine 
antagonists and soluble receptors (e.g. IL-1Ra, TNF-sR)
●● If prolonged or excessive may evolve into a 
counterinflammatory response syndrome
Figure 1.2 The integrated r esponse to surgical injury (first 24–48 hours): there is a complex interplay between the neuroendocrine stress 
response and the proinflammatory cytokine response of the innate immune system.
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   4 25/10/2017   07:38The metabolic str ess response to surgery and trauma: the ‘ebb and flow’ model 5
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
with over half showing decreased expression and the remain­
der increased expression. The cell surface receptors, signalling 
mechanisms and transcription factors that initiate these events 
are also complex, but an  early and important player involves 
the nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB)/relA family of transcription 
factors. A simplified model of current understanding of events 
within skeletal muscle is shown in Figure 1.3.
THE METABOLIC STRESS 
RESPONSE TO SURGERY AND 
TRAUMA: THE ‘EBB AND FLOW’ 
MODEL
In the natural world, if an animal is injured, it displays a char­
acteristic response, which includes immobility, anorexia and 
catabolism.
Summary box 1.4
Physiological response to injury
The natural response to injury includes:
●● Immobility/rest
●● Anorexia
●● Catabolism
The changes are designed to aid survival of moderate injury in 
the absence of medical intervention.
Hypertrophy
Injury
Atrophy
TNF/H9251Myostatin
NF/H9260B
MyoD
E3 ligases Protein
degradation
NUCLEUS
CELL
MEMBRANE
IGF-1
Akt
mTOR
p70S6K
4E-BP-1
Protein
synthesis
PI3K
FOXO
/H11001
/H11001
/H11001
/H11002
/H11002
Figure 1.3  The major catabolic and anabolic signalling 
pathways involved in skeletal muscle homeostasis. FOXO, 
forkhead box sub-group O; mTOR, mammalian tar get of 
rapamycin; MyoD, myogenic differentiation factor D; NF κB, 
nuclear factor kappa B; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; 
p70S6K, p70S6 kinase; TNFα, tumour necrosis factor alpha; 
4E-BP-1, eukaryotic initiation translation factor 4E binding 
protein 1.
Injury
Ebb phase
Hours
Shock
Flow phase
Days
Catabolism
Recovery
Weeks
Anabolism
Figure 1.4  Phases of the physiological response to injury (after 
 Cuthbertson 1930).
Sir David Paton Cuthbertson, 1900–1989, biochemist, Director of the Rowett Research Institute, Glasgow, UK.
In 1930, Sir David Cuthbertson divided the metabolic 
response to injury in humans into ‘ebb’ and ‘flow’ phases 
(Figure 1.4 ). The ebb phase begins at the time of injury 
and lasts for approximately 24–48 hours. It may be attenu ­
ated by proper resuscitation, but not completely abolished. 
The ebb phase is characterised by hypovolaemia, decreased 
basal  metabolic rate, reduced cardiac output, hypothermia 
and  lactic acidosis. The predominant hormones regulating 
the ebb phase are catecholamines, cortisol and aldosterone 
(following activation of the renin–angiotensin system). The 
magnitude of this neuroendocrine response depends on the 
degree of blood loss and the stimulation of somatic afferent 
nerves at the site of injury. The main physiological role of the 
ebb phase is to conserve both circulating volume and energy 
stores for recovery and repair.
Following resuscitation, the ebb phase evolves into a hyper­
metabolic flow phase, which corresponds to SIRS. This phase 
involves the mobilisation of body energy stores for recovery 
and repair, and the subsequent replacement of lost or damaged 
tissue. It is characterised by tissue oedema (from vasodilatation 
and increased capillary leakage), increased basal metabolic 
rate (hypermetabolism), increased cardiac output, raised body 
temperature, leukocytosis, increased oxygen consumption and 
increased gluconeogenesis. The flow phase may be subdivided 
into an initial catabolic phase, lasting approximately 3–10 
days, followed by an anabolic phase, which may last for weeks 
if extensive recovery and repair are required following serious 
injury. During the catabolic phase, the increased production 
of counter ­regulatory hormones (including catecholamines, 
 cortisol, insulin and glucagon) and inflammatory cytokines 
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   5 25/10/2017   07:38CHAPTER 1  Metabolic response t o injury
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES6
(e.g. IL­1, IL­6 and TNFα) results in significant fat and protein 
mobilisation, leading to significant weight loss and increased  
urinary nitrogen excretion. The increased production of insu­
lin at this time is associated with significant insulin resistance 
and, therefore, injured patients often exhibit poor glycaemic 
control. The combination of pronounced or prolonged catab­
olism in association with insulin resistance places patients 
within this phase at increased risk of complications. Obviously, 
the development of complications will further aggravate the 
neuroendocrine and inflammatory stress responses, thus creat­
ing a vicious catabolic cycle.
Summary box 1.6
Hypermetabolism
Hypermetabolism following injury:
●● Is mainly caused by an acceleration of energy-dependent 
metabolic cycles
●● Is limited in modern practice on account of elements of 
routine critical care
Summary box 1.5
Purpose of neuroendocrine changes following injury
The constellation of neuroendocrine changes following injury 
acts to:
●● Provide essential substrates for survival
●● Postpone anabolism
●● Optimise host defence
These changes may be helpful in the short term, but may be 
harmful in the long term, especially to the severely injured 
patient who would otherwise not have survived without medical 
intervention.
KEY CATABOLIC ELEMENTS 
OF THE FLOW PHASE OF THE 
METABOLIC STRESS RESPONSE
There are several key elements of the flow phase that largely 
determine the extent of catabolism and thus govern the meta­
bolic and nutritional care of the surgical patient. It must be 
remembered that, during the response to injury, not all tissues 
are catabolic. Indeed, the essence of this coordinated response 
is to allow the body to reprioritise limited resources away from 
peripheral tissues (muscle, adipose tissue, skin) and towards key 
viscera (liver, immune system) and the wound (Figure 1.5).
Hypermetabolism
The majority of trauma patients (except possibly those with 
extensive burns) demonstrate energy expenditures approx­
Muscle
Peripheral tissues Central tissues
Adipose tissue
Skin
Amino
acids
Liver
Immune system
Wound
especially
Gln and
Ala
Figure 1.5  During the metabolic response to injury, the 
body reprioritises protein metabolism away from peripheral 
tissues and towards key central tissues such as the liver, 
immune system and wounds. One of the main reasons why 
the reutilisation of amino acids derived from muscle proteo-
lysis leads to net catabolism is that the increased glutamine 
and alanine ef flux from muscle is derived, in part, from the 
irreversible degradation of branched chain amino acids. Ala, 
alanine; Gln, glutamine.
imately 15–25% above predicted healthy resting values. 
The predominant cause appears to be a complex interaction 
between the central control of metabolic rate and peripheral 
energy utilisation. In particular, central thermo dysregulation 
(caused by the proinflammatory cytokine cascade), increased 
sympathetic activity, abnormalities in wound circulation 
(ischaemic areas produce lactate, which must be metabolised 
by the adenosine triphosphate [ATP]­consuming hepatic Cori 
cycle; hyperaemic areas cause an increase in cardiac output), 
increased protein turnover and nutritional support may all 
increase patient energy expenditure. Theoretically, patient 
energy expenditure could rise even higher than observed lev­
els following surgery or trauma, but several features of stan ­
dard intensive care (including bed rest, paralysis, ventilation 
and external temperature  regulation) counteract the hyper ­
metabolic driving forces of the stress response. Furthermore, 
the skeletal muscle wasting experienced by patients with pro­
longed catabolism actually limits the volume of metabolically 
active tissue (see below).
Alterations in skeletal muscle 
protein metabolism
Muscle protein is continually synthesised and broken down 
with a turnover rate in humans of 1–2%  per day, and with 
a greater amplitude of changes in protein synthesis (± two ­
fold) than breakdown (± 0.25 ­fold) during the diurnal 
cycle. Under  normal circumstances, synthesis equals break ­
down and muscle bulk remains constant. Physiological 
stimuli that promote net  muscle protein accretion include 
feeding (especially extracellular amino acid concentration) 
and exercise. Paradoxically, during exercise, skeletal muscle 
Carl Ferdinand Cori, 1896–1984, Professor of Pharmacology, and later of Biochemistry, Washington University Medical School, St Louis, MI, USA and his wife 
Gerty Theresa Cori, 1896–1957, who was also Professor of Biochemistry at the Washington University Medical School. In 1947 the Coris were awarded a share 
of the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine ‘for their discovery of how glycogen is catalytically converted’.
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   6 25/10/2017   07:38Key catabolic elements of the flow phase of the metabolic stress response 7
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
protein synthesis is depressed,  but it increases again during 
rest and feeding.
During the catabolic phase of the stress response, mus ­
cle wasting occurs as a result of an increase in muscle pro ­
tein degradation (via enzymatic pathways), coupled with 
a decrease in  muscle protein synthesis. The major site of 
protein loss is peripheral skeletal muscle, although nitrogen 
losses also occur in the  respiratory muscles (predisposing the 
patient to hypoventilation and chest infections) and in the 
gut (reducing gut motility).  Cardiac muscle appears to be 
mostly spared. Under extreme conditions of catabolism (e.g. 
major sepsis), urinary nitrogen losses  can reach 14–20  g/day; 
this is equivalent to the loss of 500  g of skeletal muscle per 
day. It is remarkable that muscle catabolism cannot be inhib­
ited fully by providing artificial nutritional support as long 
as the stress response continues. Indeed, in critical  care, it 
is now recognised that ‘hyperalimentation’ represents a met ­
abolic stress in itself, and that nutritional support should be 
at a modest level to attenuate rather than replace energy and 
protein losses.
The predominant mechanism involved in the wasting of  
skeletal muscle is the ATP ­dependent ubiquitin–proteasome 
pathway (Figure 1.6), although the lysosomal cathepsins and 
the calcium–calpain pathway play facilitatory and accessory 
roles.
Clinically, a patient with skeletal muscle wasting will 
experience asthenia, increased fatigue, reduced functional 
ability, decreased quality of life and an increased risk of mor­
bidity and mortality. In critically ill patients, muscle weakness 
may be further worsened by the development of critical illness 
myopathy, a multifactorial condition that is associated with 
impaired excitation–contraction coupling at the level of 
the sarcolemma and  the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane.
Bailey and Love
/f_ig. 1.06
Tripeptidyl peptidase
E1, E2, E3
26S pr oteasome 
AT P
AT P
AT P
Substrate unfolding and
proteolytic cleavage
19S
20S
19S
Ubiquitin
Amino acids
Oligopeptides
Ubiquitinated
protein
Myo/f_ibrillar
protein
Caspases, cathepsins
and calpains
Figure 1.6 The intercellular effector mechanisms involved 
in degrading myofibrillar protein into fr ee amino acids. The 
ubiquitin–proteasome pathway is a complex multistep pro -
cess, which requires adenosine triphosphate and results in 
the tagging of specific proteins with ubiquitin for degrada -
tion of proteasome. E1, ubiquitin-activating enzyme; E2, 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme; E3, ubiquitin ligase.
Summary box 1.7
Skeletal muscle wasting
●● Provides amino acids for the metabolic support of central 
organs/tissues
●● Is mediated at a molecular level mainly by activation of the 
ubiquitin–proteasome pathway
●● Can result in immobility and contribute to hypostatic 
pneumonia and death if prolonged and excessive
Alterations in hepatic protein 
metabolism: the acute phase protein 
response
The liver and skeletal muscle together account for >50% 
of daily body protein turnover. Skeletal muscle has a large  
mass but a low turnover rate (1–2%  per day), whereas  
the liver has a relatively small mass (1.5   kg) but a much 
higher protein turnover rate (10–20%  per day). Hepatic 
protein  synthesis is divided roughly 50:50 between renewal 
of structural proteins and synthesis of export proteins. Albu ­
min is the major export protein produced by the liver and is 
renewed at the rate of about 10% per day. The transcapillary 
escape rate (TER) of albumin is about ten times the rate of 
synthesis, and short­term changes in albumin concentration 
are most probably due to  increased vascular permeability. 
Albumin TER may be increased three ­fold following major 
injury/sepsis.
In response to inflammatory conditions, including sur ­
gery, trauma, sepsis, cancer or autoimmune conditions, circu­
lating peripheral blood mononuclear cells secrete a range of 
proinflammatory cytokines, including IL ­1, IL­6 and TNF α. 
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   7 25/10/2017   07:38CHAPTER 1  Metabolic response t o injury
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES8
These cytokines, in particular IL ­6, promote the hepatic 
synthesis of  positive acute phase proteins, e.g. fibrinogen 
and C ­reactive protein (CRP). The acute phase protein 
response (APPR)  represents a ‘double ­edged sword’ for sur ­
gical patients as it provides proteins important for recovery 
and repair, but only at the expense of valuable lean tissue and 
energy reserves.
In contrast to the positive acute phase reactants, the 
plasma concentrations of other liver export proteins (the 
negative acute  phase reactants) fall acutely following 
injury, e.g. albumin.  However, rather than represent ­
ing a reduced hepatic synthesis  rate, the fall in plasma 
concentration of negative acute phase reactants is thought 
principally to reflect increased transcapillary  escape, sec­
ondary to an increase in microvascular permeability (see 
above). Thus, increased hepatic synthesis of positive acute 
phase reactants is not  compensated for by reduced synthesis 
of negative reactants.
Summary box 1.8
Hepatic acute phase response
The hepatic acute phase response represents a reprioritisation of 
body protein metabolism towards the liver and is characterised 
by:
●● Positive reactants (e.g. CRP): plasma concentration ↑
●● Negative reactants (e.g. albumin): plasma concentration ↓
Insulin resistance
Following surgery or trauma, postoperative hyperglycaemia  
develops as a result of increased glucose production com ­
bined with decreased glucose uptake in peripheral tissues. 
Decreased glucose uptake is a result of insulin resistance which 
is transiently induced within the stressed patient. Suggested 
mechanisms for this phenomenon include the action of proin­
flammatory cytokines and the decreased responsiveness of 
insulin­regulated glucose transporter proteins. The degree 
of insulin resistance  is proportional to the magnitude of the 
injurious process.  Following routine upper abdominal sur ­
gery, insulin resistance  may persist for approximately 2 weeks.
Postoperative patients with insulin resistance behave in 
a similar manner to individuals with type II diabetes melli ­
tus. The mainstay of management of insulin resistance is 
intravenous insulin infusion. Insulin infusions may be used in 
either an intensive approach (i.e. sliding scales are manipu ­
lated to normalise the blood glucose level) or a conservative 
approach (i.e.  insulin is administered when the bloo d glu ­
cose level exceeds a defined limit and discontinued when the 
level falls). While some studies of  postoperatively ventilated 
patients in the intensive care unit  (ICU) have suggested 
that maintenance of normal glucose  levels using intensive 
insulin therapy can significantly reduce both morbidity and 
mortality, others have not. The risks of adverse events follow­
ing significant hypoglycaemia as a consequence of intensive 
insulin therapy have led most ICUs to adopt a more conven­
tional approach to glycaemic control. It should be noted that 
diabetic patients whose glycaemic control has been poor prior 
to their critical illness pose a particular challenge.
CHANGES IN BODY 
COMPOSITION FOLLOWING 
INJURY
The average 70­kg male can be considered to consist of 
fat (13  kg) and fat ­free mass (or lean bo dy mass: 57  kg). 
In such an individual, the lean tissue is composed primarily 
of protein (12 kg), water (42 kg) and minerals (3 kg) (Figure 
1.7). The protein mass can be considered as two basic com ­
partments, skeletal muscle (4  kg) and non ­skeletal muscle 
(8 kg), which includes the visceral protein mass. The water 
mass (42  litres) is divided into intracellular (28  litres) and 
extracellular (14  litres) spaces.  Most of the mineral mass is 
contained in the bony skeleton.
70
60 Fat
Protein
Minerals
Intracellular
water
Extracellular
water
50
40
Mass (kg)
FFM or LBM
30
20
10
0
Figure 1.7 The chemical body composition of a normal 70-kg male.
FFM, fat-free mass; LBM, lean body mass.
The main labile energy reserve in the body is fat, and 
the main labile protein reserve is skeletal muscle. While 
fat mass  can be reduced without major detriment to 
function, loss of  protein mass results not only in skeletal 
 muscle wasting, but  also i n depletion of visceral protein 
status. Within lean issue, each  1 g of nitrogen is contained 
within 6.25   g of protein, which is  contained in approxi­
mately 36  g of wet weight tissue. Thus, the  loss of 1  g of 
nitrogen in urine is equivalent to the breakdown of 36  g of 
wet weight lean tissue. Protein turnover in the whole body is 
of the order of 150–200  g per day. A normal human  ingests 
about 70–100  g protein per day , which is metabolised  and 
excreted in urine as ammonia and urea (i.e. approximately  
14 g N/day). During total starvation, urinary loss of nitrogen 
is rapidly attenuated by a series of adaptive changes. Loss of 
body weight follows a similar course (Figure 1.8), thus 
accounting for the survival of hunger strikers for a perio d 
of 50–60 days.  Following major injury , and particularly in 
the presence of ongoing septic complications, this adap ­
tive change fails to occur, and there is a state of ‘autocan ­
nibalism’, resulting in continuing  urinary nitrogen losses of 
10–20 g N/day (equivalent to 500 g of wet weight lean tissue 
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   8 25/10/2017   07:38Avoidable factors that compound the response to injury 9
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
per day). As with total starvation, once  loss of body protein 
mass has reached 30–40% of the total, survival is unlikely.
Critically ill patients admitted to the ICU with severe 
sepsis or major blunt trauma undergo massive changes in 
body composition (Figure 1.8). Body weight increases 
immediately on  resuscitation with an expansion of extra ­
cellular water by 6–10 litres within 24  hours. Thereafter, 
even with optimal metabolic  care and nutritional support, 
total body protein will diminish by  15% in the next 10 days, 
and body weight will reach negative balance as the expansion 
of the extracellular space resolves.  In marked contrast, it is 
now possible to maintain body weight and nitrogen equilib ­
rium following major elective surgery. This  can be achieved 
by blocking the neuroendocrine stress response with epidural 
analgesia/other related techniques and providing early oral/
enteral feeding. Moreover, the early fluid retention phase 
can be avoided by  careful intraoperative management of 
fluid balance, with avoidance of excessive administration of 
intravenous saline.
16
14
12
Weight gain
(%)
Weight loss
(%)
10
8
6
4
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2
24 68 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 days
Sepsis and multiorgan
failure
Uncomplicated major
surgery
Starvation
2
Figure 1.8 Changes in body weight that occur in serious 
sepsis, after uncomplicated surgery and in total starvation.
Summary box 1.9
Changes in body composition following major surgery/
critical illness
●● Catabolism leads to a decrease in fat mass and skeletal 
muscle mass
●● Body weight may paradoxically increase because of 
expansion of extracellular fluid space
Summary box 1.10
Avoidable factors that compound the response to injury
●● Continuing haemorrhage
●● Hypothermia
●● Tissue oedema
●● Tissue underperfusion
●● Starvation
●● Immobility
AVOIDABLE FACTORS THAT 
COMPOUND THE RESPONSE TO 
INJURY
As noted previously, the main features of the metabolic 
response are initiated by the immune system, cardiovascu­
lar system,  sympathetic nervous system, ascending reticular 
formation and limbic system. However , the metabolic stress 
response may be further exacerbated by anaesthesia, dehy ­
dration, starvation  (including preoperative fasting), sepsis, 
acute medical illness  or even severe psychological stress 
(Figure 1.9). Attempts to  limit or control these factors 
can be beneficial to the patient.
Volume loss
During simple haemorrhage, pressor receptors in the carotid 
artery and aortic arch, and volume receptors in the wall of 
the left atrium, initiate afferent nerve input to the central 
nervous system (CNS), resulting in the release of both aldo ­
sterone and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Pain can also 
stimulate ADH release. ADH acts directly on the kidney to 
cause fluid retention. Decreased pulse pressure stimulates the 
juxtaglomerular apparatus in the kidney and directly activates 
the renin–angiotensin system, which in turn increases aldo­
sterone release.
Aldosterone causes the renal tubule to reabsorb sodium  
(and consequently also conserve water). ACTH release also 
augments the aldosterone response. The net effects of ADH  
and aldosterone result in the natural oliguria observed after 
surgery and conservation of sodium and water in the extra­
cellular space. The tendency towards water and salt retention 
is exacerbated by resuscitation with saline­rich fluids. Salt and 
water retention can result in not only peripheral oedema, but 
also visceral oedema (e.g. in the stomach). Such visceral 
oedema has been associated with  reduced  gastric emptying, 
delayed resumption of foo d intake  and prolonged hospital 
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   9 25/10/2017   07:38CHAPTER 1  Metabolic response t o injury
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES10
stay. Careful limitation of intraoperative administration 
of balanced crystalloids so that there is no net weight gain 
following elective  surgery has been proven to reduce post­
operative complications and length of stay.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia results in increased elaboration of adrenal 
steroids and catecholamines. When compared with normo ­
thermic controls, even mild hypothermia results in a two ­ to 
three­fold increase in postoperative cardiac arrhythmias and 
increased catabolism. Randomised trials have shown that 
maintaining normothermia by an upper body forced­air heat­
ing cover reduces  wound infections, cardiac complications 
and bleeding and transfusion requirements.
Tissue oedema
During systemic inflammation, fluid, plasma proteins, leuko­
cytes, macrophages and electrolytes leave the vascular space 
and accumulate in the tissues. This can diminish the alveo ­
lar diffusion of oxygen and may lead to reduced renal func ­
tion. Increased capillary leak is mediated by a wide variety 
of mediators including cytokines, prostanoids, bradykinin and 
nitric oxide. Vasodilatation implies that intravascular volume 
decreases, which induces shock if inadequate resuscitation is 
not undertaken. Meanwhile, intracellular volume decreases, 
and this provides part of the volume necessary to replenish 
intravascular and extravascular extracellular volume.
Systemic inflammation and tissue 
underperfusion
The vascular endothelium controls vasomotor tone and 
microvascular flow, and regulates trafficking of nutrients 
Adreno-sympathetic
activation
Cytokine cascade
release
Immobilisation
Starvation
C
a
t
a
b
o
l
i
s
m
A
n
a
b
o
l
i
s
m
Wound
Hypothermia
Hypotension
Pain
Pyrexia
Acute phase response
Insulin resistance
Futile substrate cycling
Muscle protein degradation
/H11001
/H11001
/H11002
/H11002
and biologically active molecules. When endothelial acti­
vation is excessive,  compromised microcirculation and 
subsequent cellular hypoxia contribute to the risk of organ 
failure. Maintaining normoglycaemia with insulin infusion 
during  critical illness has been proposed to protect the 
endothelium, probably, in part, via inhibition of excessive 
iNOS­induced NO release.
Starvation
During starvation, the body is faced with an obligate need 
to generate glucose to sustain cerebral energy metabolism 
(100  g of glucose per day). This is achieved in the first 
24 hours by mobilising glycogen stores and thereafter by 
hepatic gluconeogenesis from amino acids, glycerol and 
lactate. The energy metabolism of other tissues is sustained 
by mobilising fat from adipose tissue. Such fat mobilisation 
is mainly dependent on a fall in circulating insulin levels. 
Eventually, accelerated loss of lean tissue (the main source 
of amino acids for hepatic gluconeogenesis) is reduced as 
a result of the liver converting free fatty acids into ketone 
bodies, which can serve as a substitute for glucose for cere ­
bral energy metabolism. Provision of 2  litres of intrave­
nous 4% dextrose/0.18% sodium chloride as maintenance 
intravenous fluids for surgical patients who are fasted pro ­
vides 80  g of glucose per day and has a significant pro ­
tein­sparing effect. Avoiding unnecessary fasting in the 
first instance and early oral/enteral/parenteral nutrition 
form the platform for avoiding loss of body mass as a result 
of the varying degrees of starvation observed in surgical 
patients. Modern guidelines on fasting prior to anaesthe ­
sia allow intake of clear fluids up to 2 hours before sur ­
gery. Administration of a carbohydrate drink at this time 
reduces perioperative anxiety and thirst and decreases 
postoperative insulin  resistance.
Figure 1.9 Factors that exacerbate the metabolic response to sur gical injury include hypothermia, uncontrolled pain, starvation, immobilisa -
tion, sepsis and medical complications.
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   10 25/10/2017   07:38Further reading 11
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Immobility
Immobility has long been recognised as a potent stimulus 
for inducing muscle wasting. Inactivity impairs the normal 
meal­derived amino acid stimulation of protein synthesis in 
skeletal muscle. Avoidance of unnecessary bed rest and active 
early mobilisation are essential measures to avoid muscle 
wasting as a consequence of immobility.
CONCEPTS BEHIND ENHANCED 
RECOVERY AFTER SURGERY
Current understanding of the metabolic response to surgical  
injury and the mediators involved has led to a reappraisal 
of traditional perioperative care. There is now a strong sci ­
entific rationale for avoiding unmodulated exposure to stress, 
prolonged fasting and excessive administration of intravenous 
(saline) fluids (Figure 1.10). The widespread adoption of 
minimal access (laparoscopic) surgery is a key change in sur ­
gical practice that can reduce the magnitude of surgical injury 
and enhance the rate  of patients’ return to homeostasis and 
recovery. It is also important to realise that modulating the 
stress/inflammatory response at the time of surgery may have 
long­term sequelae over periods  of months or longer. For 
example, β­blockers and statins have been shown to improve 
long­term survival after major surgery. It has been suggested 
that these effects may be due to  suppression of innate immu­
nity at the time of surgery . Equally, in ‘open’ surgery the use 
of epidural analgesia to reduce pain, block the cortisol  stress 
response and attenuate postoperative insulin resistance  may, 
via effects on the body’s protein economy, favourably affect  
many of the patient ­centred outcomes that are important to 
postoperative recovery. Due to the reduction in wound size 
and tissue trauma, it should be noted that epidural analgesia 
Surgery Multimodal ERAS intervention
Traditional care
WeeksDays
Functional capacity
Figure 1.10 Enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pr ogrammes 
can be modulated by multimodal enhanced recovery pr ogrammes 
(optimal nutritional and metabolic care to minimise the stress 
response).
is no longer recommended for laparoscopic surgery. Patient 
controlled analgesia is usually sufficient. Adjuncts such as ‘one 
shot’ spinal diamorphine and/or a 6–12­hour infusion of intra­
venous lidocaine have been suggested to be opiate sparing, to 
improve gut function and enhance overall recovery.
Summary box 1.11
A proactive approach to prevent unnecessary aspects 
of the surgical stress response
●● Minimal access techniques
●● Blockade of afferent painful stimuli (e.g. epidural analgesia, 
spinal analgesia, wound catheters)
●● Minimal periods of starvation
●● Early mobilisation
FURTHER READING
Bessey PQ, Watters JM, Aoki TT , Wilmore DW . Combined hormonal 
infusion simulates the metabolic response to injury. Ann Surg 1984; 
200: 264–81.
Cuthbertson DP . The disturbance of metabolism produced by bone and 
non­bony injury, with notes on certain abnormal conditions of bone. 
Biochem J 1930; 24: 1244.
Fearon KCH, Ljungqvist O, von Meyenfeldt M et al. Enhanced recovery 
after surgery: a consensus review of clinical care for patients  under­
going colonic resection. Clin Nutr 2005; 24: 466–77.
Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY et al ., NICE ­SUGAR Study Investiga ­
tors. Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critically ill 
patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 1283–97.
Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY et al ., NICE ­SUGAR Study Investiga ­
tors. Intensive versus conventional glucose control in critically ill 
patients with traumatic brain injury: long term follow ­up in a sub ­
group of patients from the NICE­SUGAR study. Intensive Care Med 
2015; 41: 1037–47.
Ljungqvist O. Insulin resistance and outcomes in surgery. J Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 2010; 95: 4217–19.
Lobo DN, Bostock KA, Neal KR et al. Effect of salt and water balance on 
recovery of gastrointestinal function after elective colonic resection: 
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2002; 359: 1812–18.
Moore FO. Metabolic care of the surgical patient . Philadelphia, PA: WB 
Saunders Company, 1959.
Scott MJ, Baldini G, Fearon KC et al. Enhanced Recovery After Surgery 
(ERAS) for gastrointestinal surgery, part 1: pathophysiological con­
siderations. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2015; 59: 1212–31.
Van den Berghe G, Wonters P , Weckers F et al. Intensive insulin therapy 
in the critically ill patient. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1359–67.
Vanhorebeek O, Langounche L, Van den Berghe G. Endocrine aspects 
of acute and prolonged critical illness. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol 
Metab 2006; 2: 20–31.
Wilmore DW. From Cuthbertson to fast­track surgery: 70 years of prog ­
ress in reducing stress in surgical patients. Ann Surg 2002; 236: 
643–8.
01_01B-B&L27_Pt1_Ch01.indd   11 25/10/2017   07:38Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
2
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The pathophysiology of shock and ischaemia–
reperfusion injury
 • The different patterns of shock and the principles and 
priorities of resuscitation
 • Appropriate monitoring and end points of resuscitation
 • Use of blood and blood products, the benefits and risks 
of blood transfusion
Shock and blood transfusion
INTRODUCTION
Shock is the most common and therefore the most important 
cause of death of surgical patients. Death may occur rapidly  
due to a profound state of shock, or be delayed due to the 
consequences of organ ischaemia and reperfusion injury. It 
is important therefore that every surgeon understands the 
pathophysiology, diagnosis and priorities in management of 
shock and haemorrhage.
SHOCK
Shock is a systemic state of low tissue perfusion that is inade­
quate for normal cellular respiration. With insufficient delivery 
of oxygen and glucose, cells switch from aerobic to anaerobic 
metabolism. If perfusion is not restored in a timely fashion, 
cell death ensues.
Pathophysiology
Cellular
As perfusion to the tissues is reduced, cells are deprived of oxy­
gen and must switch from aerobic to anaerobic meta  bolism. 
The product of anaerobic respiration is not carbon dioxide but 
lactic acid. When enough tissue is underperfused, the accumu­
lation of lactic acid in the blood produces a systemic metabolic 
acidosis.
As glucose within cells is exhausted, anaerobic respira ­
tion ceases and there is failure of sodium/potassium pumps in 
the cell membrane and intracellular organelles. Intracellular 
lysosomes release autodigestive enzymes and cell lysis ensues. 
Intracellular contents, including potassium, are released into 
the blood stream.
Microvascular
As tissue ischaemia progresses, changes in the local milieu 
result in activation of the immune and coagulation systems. 
Hypoxia and acidosis activate complement and prime neu ­
trophils, resulting in the generation of oxygen free radicals 
and cytokine release. These mechanisms lead to injury of the 
capillary endothelial cells. These, in turn, further activate the 
immune and coagulation systems. Damaged endothelium loses 
its integrity and becomes ‘leaky’. Spaces between endothelial 
cells allow fluid to leak out and tissue oedema ensues, exacer­
bating cellular hypoxia.
Systemic
CARDIOVASCULAR
As preload and afterload decrease, there is a compensatory 
baroreceptor response resulting in increased sympathetic 
activity and release of catecholamines into the circulation. 
This results in tachycardia and systemic vasoconstriction 
(except in sepsis – see below).
RESPIRATORY
The metabolic acidosis and increased sympathetic response 
result in an increased respiratory rate and minute ventilation 
to increase the excretion of carbon dioxide (and so produce a 
compensatory respiratory alkalosis).
RENAL
Decreased perfusion pressure in the kidney leads to reduced 
filtration at the glomerulus and a decreased urine output. The 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis is stimulated, resulting 
in further vasoconstriction and increased sodium and water 
 reabsorption by the kidney.
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   12 25/10/2017   07:39Shock 13
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
ENDOCRINE
As well as activation of the adrenal and renin–angiotensin 
systems, vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) is released from 
the hypothalamus in response to decreased preload and results 
in vasoconstriction and resorption of water in the renal col­
lecting system. Cortisol is also released from the adrenal 
cortex, contributing to the sodium and water resorption and 
sensitising cells to catecholamines.
Ischaemia–reperfusion syndrome
During the period of systemic hypoperfusion, cellular and organ 
damage progresses due to the direct effects of tissue hypoxia 
and local activation of inflammation. Further injury occurs 
once normal circulation is restored to these tissues. The 
acid and potassium load that has built up can lead to direct 
myocardial depression, vascular dilatation and further hypo­
tension. The cellular and humoral elements activated by the 
hypoxia (complement, neutrophils, microvascular thrombi) 
are flushed back into the circulation where they cause further 
endothelial injury to organs such as the lungs and the kidneys. 
This leads to acute lung injury, acute renal injury, multiple 
organ failure and death. Reperfusion injury can currently only 
be attenuated by reducing the extent and duration of tissue 
hypoperfusion.
Classification of shock
There are numerous ways to classify shock, but the most com­
mon and most clinically applicable is one based on the initi­
ating mechanism.
All states are characterised by systemic tissue hypoperfu ­
sion, and different states may coexist within the same patient.
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiogenic shock is due to primary failure of the heart to 
pump blood to the tissues. Causes of cardiogenic shock include 
 myocardial infarction, cardiac dysrhythmias, valvular heart 
disease, blunt myocardial injury and cardiomyopathy. Cardiac 
insufficiency may also be due to myocardial depression caused 
by endogenous factors (e.g. bacterial and humoral agents 
released in sepsis) or exogenous factors, such as pharmaceutical 
agents or drug abuse. Evidence of venous hypertension with 
pulmonary or systemic oedema may coexist with the classical 
signs of shock.
Obstructive shock
In obstructive shock there is a reduction in preload due to 
mechanical obstruction of cardiac filling. Common causes 
of obstructive shock include cardiac tamponade, tension 
 pneumothorax, massive pulmonary embolus or air embolus. In 
each case, there is reduced filling of the left and/or right sides 
of the heart leading to reduced preload and a fall in  cardiac 
output.
Distributive shock
Distributive shock describes the pattern of cardiovascular 
responses characterising a variety of conditions, including 
septic shock, anaphylaxis and spinal cord injury. Inadequate 
organ perfusion is accompanied by vascular dilatation with 
hypotension, low systemic vascular resistance, inadequate 
afterload and a resulting abnormally high cardiac output.
In anaphylaxis, vasodilatation is due to histamine release, 
while in high spinal cord injury there is failure of sympathetic 
outflow and adequate vascular tone (neurogenic shock). The 
cause in sepsis is less clear but is related to the release of 
 bacterial products (endotoxin) and the activation of cellu ­
lar and humoral components of the immune system. There 
is maldistribution of blood flow at a microvascular level with 
arteriovenous shunting and dysfunction of cellular utilization 
of oxygen.
In the later phases of septic shock there is hypovolaemia 
from fluid loss into interstitial spaces and there may be con ­
comitant myocardial depression, complicating the clinical 
picture (Table 2.1).
Endocrine shock
Endocrine shock may present as a combination of hypovolae­
mic, cardiogenic or distributive shock. Causes of endocrine 
shock include hypo­ and hyperthyroidism and adrenal insuf ­
ficiency. Hypothyroidism causes a shock state similar to that 
of neurogenic shock due to disordered vascular and cardiac 
responsiveness to circulating catecholamines. Cardiac output 
falls due to low inotropy and bradycardia. There may also be 
an associated cardiomyopathy. Thyrotoxicosis may cause a 
high­output cardiac failure.
Adrenal insufficiency leads to shock due to hypovolaemia 
and a poor response to circulating and exogenous catecho ­
lamines. Adrenal insufficiency may be due to pre ­existing 
 Addison’s disease or be a relative insufficiency due to a patho­
logical disease state, such as systemic sepsis.
Summary box 2.1
Classification of shock
●● Hypovolaemic shock
●● Cardiogenic shock
●● Obstructive shock
●● Distributive shock
●● Endocrine shock
Hypovolaemic shock
Hypovolaemic shock is due to a reduced circulating volume. 
Hypovolaemia may be due to haemorrhagic or non ­haemor­
rhagic causes. Non ­haemorrhagic causes include poor fluid 
intake (dehydration), excessive fluid loss due to vomiting, diar­
rhoea, urinary loss (e.g. diabetes), evaporation, or ‘third­spacing’ 
where fluid is lost into the gastrointestinal tract and interstitial 
spaces, as for example in bowel obstruction or pancreatitis.
Hypovolaemia is probably the most common form of 
shock, and to some degree is a component of all other forms 
of shock. Absolute or relative hypovolaemia must be excluded 
or treated in the management of the shocked state, regardless 
of cause.
Thomas Addison, 1799–1860, physician, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described the effects of disease of the suprarenal capsules in 1849.  
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   13 25/10/2017   07:39CHAPTER 2  Shock and blood transfusion
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES14
Severity of shock
Compensated shock
As shock progresses, the body’s cardiovascular and endocrine 
compensatory responses reduce flow to non ­essential organs 
to preserve preload and flow to the lungs and brain. In com ­
pensated shock, there is adequate compensation to maintain 
central blood volume and preserve flow to the kidneys, lungs 
and brain. Apart from a tachycardia and cool peripheries 
(vasoconstriction, circulating catecholamines), there may be 
no other clinical signs of hypovolaemia.
However, this cardiovascular state is only maintained 
by reducing perfusion to the skin, muscle and gastroin ­
testinal tract. There is a systemic metabolic acidosis and 
activation of humoral and cellular elements within the under­
perfused organs. Although clinically occult, this state will 
lead to  multiple organ failure and death if prolonged, due to  
the ischaemia–reperfusion effect described above under  
Ischaemia–reperfusion syndrome. Patients with occult hypo­
perfusion (metabolic acidosis despite normal urine output and 
cardiorespiratory vital signs) for more than 12 hours have a 
significantly higher mortality, infection rate and incidence of 
multiple organ failure (see below, Multiple organ failure).
Decompensation
Further loss of circulating volume overloads the body’ s com­
pensatory mechanisms and there is progressive renal, respira­
tory and cardiovascular decompensation. In general, loss of 
around 15% of the circulating blood volume is within  normal 
compensatory mechanisms. Blood pressure is usually well 
maintained and only falls after 30–40% of circulating volume 
has been lost.
Mild shock
Initially there is tachycardia, tachypnoea, a mild reduction in 
urine output and the patient may exhibit mild anxiety. Blood 
pressure is maintained although there is a decrease in pulse 
pressure. The peripheries are cool and sweaty with prolonged 
capillary refill times (except in septic distributive shock).
Moderate shock
As shock progresses, renal compensatory mechanisms fail, 
renal perfusion falls and urine output dips below 0.5 mL/kg per 
hour. There is further tachycardia, and now the blood pressure 
starts to fall. Patients become drowsy and mildly confused.
Severe shock
In severe shock, there is profound tachycardia and hypoten ­
sion. Urine output falls to zero and patients are unconscious 
with laboured respiration.
Pitfalls
The classic cardiovascular responses described ( Table 2.2 ) 
are not seen in every patient. It is important to recognise 
the limit ations of the clinical examination and to recognise 
patients who are in shock despite the absence of classic signs.
CAPILLARY REFILL
Most patients in hypovolaemic shock will have cool, pale 
peripheries, with prolonged capillary refill times. However, 
the actual capillary refill time varies so much in adults that it 
is not a specific marker of whether a patient is shocked, and 
patients with short capillary refill times may be in the early 
stages of shock. In distributive (septic) shock, the periph­
eries will be warm and capillary refill will be brisk, despite 
profound shock.
TACHYCARDIA
Tachycardia may not always accompany shock. Patients who 
are on beta ­blockers or who have implanted pacemakers are 
unable to mount a tachycardia. A pulse rate of 80 in a fit 
young adult who normally has a pulse rate of 50 is very abnor­
mal. Furthermore, in some young patients with penetrating 
trauma, where there is haemorrhage but little tissue damage, 
there may be a paradoxical bradycardia rather than tachycar­
dia accompanying the shocked state.
TABLE 2.1 Cardiovascular and metabolic characteristics of shock.
Hypovolaemia Cardiogenic Obstructive Distributive
Cardiac output
Vascular resistance
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
High
Low
Venous pressure Low High High Low
Mixed venous saturation
Base deficit
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
High
High
TABLE 2.2 Clinical features of shock.
Compensated Mild Moderate Severe
Lactic acidosis
Urine output
Conscious level
Respiratory rate
Pulse rate
Blood pressure
+
Normal
Normal
Normal
Mild increase
Normal
++
Normal
Mild anxiety
Increased
Increased
Normal
++
Reduced
Drowsy
Increased
Increased
Mild hypotension
+++
Anuric
Comatose
Laboured
Increased
Severe hypotension
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   14 25/10/2017   07:39Resuscitation 15
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
BLOOD PRESSURE
It is important to recognise that hypotension is one of the last 
signs of shock. Children and fit young adults are able to main­
tain blood pressure until the final stages of shock by dramatic 
increases in stroke volume and peripheral vasoconstriction. 
These patients can be in profound shock with a normal blood 
pressure.
Elderly patients who are normally hypertensive may 
 present with a ‘normal’ blood pressure for the general popu ­
lation but be hypovolaemic and hypotensive relative to their 
usual blood pressure. Beta­blockers or other medications may 
prevent a tachycardic response. The diagnosis of shock may 
be difficult unless one is alert to these pitfalls.
Consequences
Unresuscitatable shock
Patients who are in profound shock for a prolonged period 
of time become ‘unresuscitatable’. Cell death follows from 
 cellular ischaemia and the ability of the body to compensate 
is lost. There is myocardial depression and loss of responsive­
ness to fluid or inotropic therapy. Peripherally there is loss of 
the ability to maintain systemic vascular resistance and fur ­
ther hypotension ensues. The peripheries no longer respond 
appropriately to vasopressor agents. Death is the inevitable 
result.
This stage of shock is the combined result of the severity of 
the insult and delayed, inadequate or inappropriate resuscita­
tion in the earlier stages of shock. Conversely, when patients 
present in this late stage, and have minimal responses to 
 maximal therapy, it is important that the futility of treatment 
is recognised and valuable resources are not wasted.
Multiple organ failure
As techniques of resuscitation have improved, more and 
more patients are surviving shock. Where intervention is 
timely and the period of shock is limited, patients may make 
a rapid, uncomplicated recovery. However the result of pro­
longed  systemic ischaemia and reperfusion injury is end­organ 
 damage and multiple organ failure.
Multiple organ failure is defined as two or more failed organ 
systems. There is no specific treatment for multiple organ fail­
ure. Management is supporting of organ systems, with ventila­
tion, cardiovascular support and haemofiltration/dialysis until 
there is recovery of organ function. Multiple organ failure cur­
rently carries a mortality of 60%; thus, prevention is vital by 
early aggressive identification and reversal of shock.
RESUSCITATION
Immediate resuscitation manoeuvres for patients presenting 
in shock are to ensure a patent airway and adequate oxy ­
genation and ventilation. Once ‘airway’ and ‘breathing’ are 
assessed and controlled, attention is directed to cardiovascular 
resuscitation.
Conduct of resuscitation
Resuscitation should not be delayed in order to definitively 
diagnose the source of the shocked state. However, the tim ­
ing and nature of resuscitation will depend on the type of 
shock and the timing and severity of the insult. Rapid clinical 
 examination will provide adequate clues to make an appropri­
ate first determination, even if a source of bleeding or sepsis 
is not immediately identifiable. If there is initial doubt about 
the cause of shock, it is safer to assume the cause is hypo­
volaemia and begin with fluid resuscitation, and then assess 
the response.
In patients who are actively bleeding (major trauma, aortic 
aneurysm rupture, gastrointestinal haemorrhage), it is counter­
productive to institute high ­volume fluid therapy without 
controlling the site of haemorrhage. Increasing blood pressure 
merely increases bleeding from the site while fluid therapy 
cools the patient and dilutes available coagulation factors. 
Thus  operative haemorrhage control should not be delayed 
and resuscitation should proceed in parallel with  surgery.
Conversely, a patient with bowel obstruction and hypo ­
volaemic shock must be adequately resuscitated before under­
going surgery otherwise the additional surgical injury and 
hypovolaemia induced during the procedure will exacerbate 
the inflammatory activation and increase the incidence and 
severity of end­organ insult.
Fluid therapy
In all cases of shock, regardless of classification, hypovolaemia 
and inadequate preload must be addressed before other ther ­
apy is instituted. Administration of inotropic or chronotropic 
agents to an empty heart will rapidly and permanently deplete 
the myocardium of oxygen stores and dramatically reduce dia­
stolic filling and therefore coronary perfusion. Patients will 
enter the unresuscitatable stage of shock as the myocardium 
becomes progressively more ischaemic and unresponsive to 
resuscitative attempts.
First­line therapy, therefore, is intravenous access and 
administration of intravenous fluids. Access should be 
through short, wide ­bore catheters that allow rapid infusion 
of fluids as necessary. Long, narrow lines, such as central 
venous catheters, have too high a resistance to allow rapid 
infusion and are more appropriate for monitoring than fluid 
replacement therapy.
Type of fluids
There is continuing debate over which resuscitation fluid is 
best for the management of shock. There is no ideal resusci ­
tation fluid, and it is more important to understand how and 
when to administer it. In most studies of shock resuscitation 
Summary box 2.2
Effects of organ failure
●● Lung: Acute respiratory distress syndrome
●● Kidney: Acute renal insufficiency
●● Clotting: Coagulopathy
●● Cardiac: Cardiovascular failure
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   15 25/10/2017   07:39CHAPTER 2  Shock and blood transfusion
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES16
there is no overt difference in response or outcome between 
crystalloid solutions (normal saline, Hartmann’s solution, 
Ringer’s lactate) or colloids (albumin or commercially avail­
able products). Furthermore, there is less volume benefit to the 
administration of colloids than had previously been thought, 
with only 1.3 times more crystalloid than colloid administered 
in blinded trials. On balance, there is little evidence to sup­
port the administration of colloids, which are more expensive 
and have worse side­effect profiles.
Most importantly, the oxygen carrying capacity of crys ­
talloids and colloids is zero. If blood is being lost, the ideal 
replacement fluid is blood, although crystalloid therapy may 
be required while awaiting blood products.
Hypotonic solutions (dextrose etc.) are poor volume 
expanders and should not be used in the treatment of shock 
unless the deficit is free water loss (e.g. diabetes insipidus) or 
patients are sodium overloaded (e.g. cirrhosis).
Dynamic fluid response
The shock status can be determined dynamically by the car ­
diovascular response to the rapid administration of a fluid 
bolus. In total, 250–500 mL of fluid is rapidly given (over 5–10 
minutes) and the cardiovascular responses in terms of heart 
rate, blood pressure and central venous pressure are observed. 
Patients can be divided into ‘responders’, ‘transient respond ­
ers’ and ‘non­responders’.
Responders have an improvement in their cardiovascular 
status that is sustained. These patients are not actively losing 
fluid but require filling to a normal volume status.
Transient responders have an improvement, but this 
then reverts to the previous state over the next 10–20 min ­
utes. These patients have moderate ongoing fluid losses 
(either overt  haemorrhage or further fluid shifts reducing 
intravascular  volume).
Non-responders are severely volume depleted and are 
likely to have major ongoing loss of intravascular volume, 
usually through persistent uncontrolled haemorrhage.
Vasopressor and inotropic support
Vasopressor or inotropic therapy is not indicated as first ­line 
therapy in hypovolaemia. As discussed above, administration 
of these agents in the absence of adequate preload rapidly 
leads to decreased coronary perfusion and depletion of myo ­
cardial oxygen reserves.
Vasopressor agents (phenylephrine, noradrenaline) are 
indicated in distributive shock states (sepsis, neurogenic 
shock) where there is peripheral vaso dilatation, and a low 
systemic vascular resistance, leading to hypotension despite a 
high cardiac output. Where the vasodilatation is resistant to 
catecholamines (e.g. absolute or relative steroid deficiency) 
vasopressin may be used as an alternative vasopressor.
In cardiogenic shock, or where myocardial depression has 
complicated a shock state (e.g. severe septic shock with low 
cardiac output), inotropic therapy may be required to increase 
cardiac output and therefore oxygen delivery. The inodilator 
dobutamine is the agent of choice.
Monitoring
The minimum standard for monitoring of the patient in shock 
is continuous heart rate and oxygen saturation monitoring,  
 frequent non­invasive blood pressure monitoring and hourly  
urine output measurements. Most patients will need more 
aggressive invasive monitoring, including central venous pres­
sure and invasive blood pressure monitoring.
Summary box 2.3
Monitoring for patients in shock
Minimum
●● ECG
●● Pulse oximetry
●● Blood pressure
●● Urine output
Additional modalities
●● Central venous pressure
●● Invasive blood pressure
●● Cardiac output
●● Base deficit and serum lactate
Alexis Frank Hartmann, 1898–1964, paediatrician, St Louis, MO, USA, described the solution; should not be confused with the name of Henri Albert Charles 
Antoine Hartmann, French surgeon, who described the operation that goes by his name.
Sidney Ringer, 1835–1910, Professor of Clinical Medicine, University College Hospital, London, UK.
Cardiovascular
Cardiovascular monitoring at minimum should include con­
tinuous heart rate (ECG), oxygen saturation and pulse wave­
form and non­invasive bloo d pressure. Patients whose state 
of shock is not rapidly corrected with a small amount of fluid 
should have central venous pressure monitoring and con­
tinuous blood pressure monitoring through an arterial line.
CENTRAL VENOUS PRESSURE
There is no ‘normal’ central venous pressure ( CVP) for a 
shocked patient, and reliance cannot be placed on an indi ­
vidual pressure measurement to assess volume status. Some 
patients may require a CVP  of 5 cmH2O, whereas some may 
require a CVP of 15  cmH2O or higher. Further , ventricular 
compliance can change from minute to minute in the shocked 
state, and CVP is a poor reflection of end diastolic volume 
(preload).
CVP measurements should be assessed dynamically as 
response to a fluid challenge (see above). A fluid bolus (250–
500 mL) is infused rapidly over 5–10 minutes.
The normal CVP response is a rise of 2–5  cmH2O which 
gradually drifts back to the original level over 10–20 minutes. 
Patients with no change in their CVP are empty and require 
further fluid resuscitation. Patients with a large, sustained rise 
in CVP have high preload and an element of cardiac insuffi ­
ciency or volume overload.
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   16 25/10/2017   07:39Resuscitation 17
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
CARDIAC OUTPUT
Cardiac output monitoring allows assessment of not only the 
cardiac output but also the systemic vascular resistance and, 
depending on the technique used, end diastolic volume (pre­
load) and blood volume. Use of invasive cardiac monitoring 
with pulmonary artery catheters is becoming less frequent as 
new non ­invasive monitoring techniques, such as Doppler 
ultrasound, pulse waveform analysis and indicator dilution 
methods, provide similar information without many of the 
drawbacks of more invasive techniques.
Measurement of cardiac output, systemic vascular resist ­
ance and preload can help distinguish the types of shock 
present (hypovolaemia, distributive, cardiogenic), especially 
when they coexist. The information provided guides fluid and 
vasopressor therapy by providing real­time monitoring of the 
cardiovascular response.
Measurement of cardiac output is desirable in patients 
who do not respond as expected to first ­line therapy, or who 
have evidence of cardiogenic shock or myocardial dysfunc­
tion. Early consideration should be given to instituting car ­
diac output monitoring for patients who require vasopressor 
or inotropic support.
Systemic and organ perfusion
Ultimately, the goal of treatment is to restore cellular and 
organ perfusion. Ideally, therefore, monitoring of organ perfu­
sion should guide the management of shock. The best measure 
of organ perfusion and the best monitor of the adequacy of 
shock therapy remains the urine output. However, this is an 
hourly measure and does not give a minute­to­minute view of 
the shocked state. The level of consciousness is an important 
marker of cerebral perfusion, but brain perfusion is maintained 
until the very late stages of shock, and hence is a poor marker 
of adequacy of resuscitation (Table 2.3).
Currently, the only clinical indicators of perfusion of the 
gastrointestinal tract and muscular beds are the global meas ­
ures of lactic acidosis (lactate and base deficit) and the mixed 
venous oxygen saturation.
BASE DEFICIT AND LACTATE
Lactic acid is generated by cells undergoing anaerobic respira­
tion. The degree of lactic acidosis, as measured by serum lac­
tate level and/or the base deficit, is sensitive for both diagnosis 
of shock and monitoring the response to therapy. Patients 
with a base deficit over 6 mmol/L have a much higher morbid­
ity and mortality than those with no metabolic acidosis. Fur­
thermore, the length of time in shock with an increased base 
deficit is important, even if all other vital signs have returned 
to normal (see occult hypoperfusion below under End points 
of resuscitation).
These parameters are measured from arterial blood gas 
analyses, and therefore the frequency of measurements is 
limited and they do not provide minute ­to­minute data on 
systemic perfusion or the response to therapy. Nevertheless, 
the base deficit and/or lactate should be measured routinely 
in these patients until they have returned to normal levels.
MIXED VENOUS OXYGEN SATURATION
The percentage saturation of oxygen returning to the heart 
from the body is a measure of the oxygen delivery and 
extraction by the tissues. Accurate measurement is via analy­
sis of blood drawn from a long central line placed in the right 
atrium. Estimations can be made from blood drawn from lines 
in the superior vena cava, but these values will be slightly 
higher than those of a mixed venous sample (as there is rela ­
tively more oxygen extraction from the lower half of the body). 
Normal mixed venous oxygen saturation levels are 50–70%. 
Levels below 50% indicate inadequate oxygen delivery and 
increased oxygen extraction by the cells. This is consistent 
with hypovolaemic or cardiogenic shock.
High mixed venous saturations (>70%) are seen in sepsis 
and some other forms of distributive shock. In sepsis, there 
is disordered utilisation of oxygen at the cellular level, and 
arteriovenous shunting of blood at the microvascular level. 
Therefore, less oxygen is presented to the cells, and those cells 
cannot utilise what little oxygen is presented. Thus, venous 
blood has a higher oxygen concentration than normal.
TABLE 2.3 Monitors for organ/systemic perfusion.
Clinical Investigational
Systemic perfusion Base deficit
Lactate
Mixed venous oxygen saturation
Organ perfusion
Muscle – Near-infrared spectroscopy
Tissue oxygen electrode
Gut – Sublingual capnometry
Gut mucosal pH
Laser Doppler flowmetry
Kidney Urine output –
Brain Conscious level Tissue oxygen electrode
Near-infrared spectroscopy
Christian Johann Doppler, 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the Doppler principle in 1842.
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   17 25/10/2017   07:39CHAPTER 2  Shock and blood transfusion
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES18
Patients who are septic should therefore have mixed 
venous oxygen saturations above 70%; below this level, they 
are not only in septic shock but also in hypovolaemic or car ­
diogenic shock. Although the S vO2 level is in the ‘normal’ 
range, it is low for the septic state, and inadequate oxygen is 
being supplied to cells that cannot utilise oxygen appropri­
ately. This must be corrected rapidly. Hypovolaemia should 
be corrected with fluid therapy, and low cardiac output due to 
myocardial depression or failure should be treated with ino ­
tropes (dobutamine), to achieve a mixed venous saturation 
greater than 70% (normal for the septic state).
New methods for monitoring regional tissue perfusion and 
oxygenation are becoming available, the most promising of 
which are muscle tissue oxygen probes, near­infrared spectros­
copy and sublingual capnometry. While these techniques pro­
vide information regarding perfusion of specific tissue beds, it 
is as yet unclear whether there are significant advantages over 
existing measurements of global hypoperfusion (base deficit, 
lactate).
End points of resuscitation
It is much easier to know when to start resuscitation than 
when to stop. Traditionally, patients have been resuscitated 
until they have a normal pulse, blood pressure and urine out­
put. However, these parameters are monitoring organ systems 
whose blood flow is preserved until the late stages of shock. 
A patient therefore may be resuscitated to restore central 
perfusion to the brain, lungs and kidneys and yet continue 
to underperfuse the gut and muscle beds. Thus, activation of 
inflammation and coagulation may be ongoing and lead to 
reperfusion injury when these organs are finally perfused, and 
ultimately multiple organ failure.
This state of normal vital signs and continued underper ­
fusion is term ed ‘occult hypoperfusion’.  With current moni ­
toring techniques, it is manifested only by a persistent lactic 
acidosis and low mixed venous oxygen saturation. The time 
spent by patients in this hypoperfused state has a dramatic 
effect on outcome. Patients with occult hypoperfusion for 
more than 12 hours have two to three times the mortality of 
patients with a limited duration of shock.
Resuscitation algorithms directed at correcting global 
perfusion end points (base deficit, lactate, mixed venous oxy­
gen saturation) rather than traditional end points have been 
shown to improve mortality and morbidity in high­risk surgical 
patients. However, it is clear that, despite aggressive regimes, 
some patients cannot be resuscitated to normal parameters 
within 12 hours by fluid resuscitation alone. More research 
is underway to identify the pathophysiology behind this and 
investigate new therapeutic options.
HAEMORRHAGE
Haemorrhage must be recognised and managed aggressively to 
reduce the severity and duration of shock and avoid death and/
or multiple organ failure. Haemorrhage is treated by arresting 
the bleeding – not by fluid resuscitation or blood transfusion. 
Although necessary as supportive measures to maintain organ 
perfusion, attempting to resuscitate patients who have ongo ­
ing haemorrhage will lead to physiological exhaustion (coag­
ulopathy, acidosis and hypothermia) and subsequently death.
Pathophysiology
Haemorrhage leads to a state of hypovolaemic shock. The 
combination of tissue trauma and hypovolaemic shock leads 
to the development of an endogenous coagulopathy called 
acute traumatic coagulopathy (ATC). Up to 25% of trauma 
patients develop ATC within minutes of injury and it is asso­
ciated with a four ­fold increase in mortality . It is likely that 
ATC exists whenever there is the combination of shock and 
tissue trauma (e.g. major surgery). A TC is a component of 
trauma­induced coagulopathy (TIC), which is ultimately 
multifactorial (Figure 2.1).
Ongoing bleeding with fluid and red blood cell resuscita­
tion leads to a dilution of coagulation factors which worsens 
the coagulopathy. In addition, the acidosis induced by the 
hypoperfused state leads to decreased function of the coagu ­
lation proteases, resulting in coagulopathy and further haem­
orrhage. The reduced tissue perfusion includes reduced blood 
supply to muscle beds. Underperfused muscle is unable to 
generate heat and hypothermia ensues. Coagulation functions 
poorly at low temperatures and there is further haemorrhage, 
further hypoperfusion and worsening acidosis and hypother ­
mia. These three factors result in a downward spiral leading to 
physiological exhaustion and death (Figure 2.1).
Medical therapy has a tendency to worsen this effect. Intra­
venous blood and fluids are cold and exacerbate hypothermia. 
Further heat is lost by opening body cavities during surgery. 
Surgery usually leads to further bleeding and many crystalloid 
fluids are themselves acidic (e.g. normal saline has a pH of 6.7). 
Every effort must therefore be made to rapidly identify and stop 
haemorrhage, and to avoid (preferably) or limit physiological 
exhaustion from coagulopathy, acidosis and hypothermia.
ShockTrauma
ATC
Haemorrhage
AcidaemiaHypothermiaIn/f_lammation
Genetics Loss, dilution
TRAUMA-INDUCED
COAGULOPATHY (TIC)
Fibrinolysis
Figure 2.1 Trauma-induced coagulopathy.
Definitions
Revealed and concealed haemorrhage
Haemorrhage may be revealed or concealed. Revealed hae ­
morrhage is obvious external haemorrhage, such as exsan ­
guination from an open arterial wound or from massive 
haematemesis from a duodenal ulcer.
Concealed haemorrhage is contained within the body cavity 
and must be suspected, actively investigated and controlled. In 
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   18 25/10/2017   07:39Haemorrhage 19
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
trauma, haemorrhage may be concealed within the chest, abdo­
men, pelvis, retroperitoneum or in the limbs with contained 
vascular injury or associated with long­bone fractures. Examples 
of non­traumatic concealed haemorrhage include occult gastro­
intestinal bleeding or ruptured aortic aneurysm.
Primary, reactionary and secondary 
haemorrhage
Primary haemorrhage is haemorrhage occurring immediately 
due to an injury (or surgery). Reactionary haemorrhage is 
delayed haemorrhage (within 24 hours) and is usually due to 
dislodgement of a clot by resuscitation, normalisation of blood 
pressure and vasodilatation. Reactionary haemorrhage may 
also be due to technical failure, such as slippage of a ligature.
Secondary haemorrhage is due to sloughing of the wall of 
a vessel. It usually occurs 7–14 days after injury and is precip­
itated by factors such as infection, pressure necrosis (such as 
from a drain) or malignancy.
Surgical and non-surgical haemorrhage
Surgical haemorrhage is due to a direct injury and is amenable 
to surgical control (or other techniques such as angioemboli­
sation). Non­surgical haemorrhage is the general ooze from 
all raw surfaces due to coagulopathy and cannot be stopped 
by surgical means (except packing). Treatment requires cor ­
rection of the coagulation abnormalities.
Degree and classification
The adult human has approximately 5 litres of blood (70 mL/
kg children and adults, 80 mL/kg neonates). Estimation of the 
amount of blood that has been lost is difficult, inaccurate and 
usually underestimates the actual value.
External haemorrhage is obvious, but it may be difficult to 
estimate the actual volume lost. In the operating room, blood 
collected in suction apparatus can be measured and swabs 
soaked in blood weighed.
The haemoglobin level is a poor indicator of the degree of 
haemorrhage because it represents a concentration and not an 
absolute amount. In the early stages of rapid haemorrhage, the 
haemoglobin concentration is unchanged (as whole blood is 
lost). Later, as fluid shifts from the intracellular and interstitial 
spaces into the vascular compartment, the haemoglobin and 
haematocrit levels will fall.
The amount of haemorrhage can be classified into classes 
1–4 based on the estimated blood loss required to produce 
certain physiological compensatory changes ( Table 2.4). 
Although conceptually useful, there is variation across ages 
(the young compensate well, the old very poorly), variation 
among individuals (e.g. athletes versus the obese) and vari ­
ation due to confounding factors (e.g. concomitant medica ­
tions, pain).
Treatment should therefore be based upon the degree 
of hypovolaemic shock according to vital signs, preload 
assessment, base deficit and, most importantly, the dynamic 
response to fluid therapy. Patients who are ‘non ­responders’ 
or ‘transient responders’ are still bleeding and must have the 
site of haemorrhage identified and controlled.
Management
Identify haemorrhage
External haemorrhage may be obvious, but the diagnosis of 
concealed haemorrhage may be more difficult. Any shock 
should be assumed to be hypovolaemic until proven otherwise 
and, similarly, hypovolaemia should be assumed to be due to 
haemorrhage until this has been excluded.
Immediate resuscitative manoeuvres
Direct pressure should be placed over the site of external haem­
orrhage. Airway and breathing should be assessed and controlled 
as necessary. Large­bore intravenous access should be instituted 
and bloo d drawn for cross ­matching (see Cross-matching 
below). Emergency blood should be requested if the degree of 
shock and ongoing haemorrhage warrants this.
Identify the site of haemorrhage
Once haemorrhage has been considered, the site of haemor ­
rhage must be rapidly identified. Note this is not to identify 
the exact location definitively, but rather to define the next 
step in haemorrhage control (operation, angioembolisation, 
endoscopic control).
Clues may be in the history (previous episo des, known 
aneurysm, non ­steroidal therapy for gastrointestinal [GI] 
bleeding) or examination (nature of blood – fresh, melaena; 
abdominal tenderness, etc.). For shocked trauma patients, the 
external signs of injury may suggest internal haemorrhage, 
but haemorrhage into a body cavity (thorax, abdomen) must 
be excluded with rapid investigations (chest and pelvis x­ray, 
abdominal ultrasound or diagnostic peritoneal aspiration).
Investigations for blood loss must be appropriate to the 
patient’s physiological condition. Rapid bedside tests are more 
appropriate for profound shock and exsanguinating haemor ­
rhage than investigations such as computed tomography (CT) 
which take time. Patients who are not actively bleeding can 
have a more methodical, definitive work­up.
Haemorrhage control
The bleeding, shocked patient must be moved rapidly to a 
place of haemorrhage control. This will usually be in the oper­
ating room but may be the angiography or endoscopy suite. 
These patients require surgical and anaesthetic support and 
full monitoring and equipment must be available.
Haemorrhage control must be achieved rapidly to pre ­
vent the patient entering the triad of coagulopathy–acidosis– 
hypothermia and physiological exhaustion. There should be no 
unnecessary investigations or procedures prior to  haemorrhage 
TABLE 2.4 Traditional classification of haemorrhagic 
shock.
Class
1 2 3 4
Blood volume lost as 
percentage of total <15% 15–30% 30–40% >40%
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   19 25/10/2017   07:39CHAPTER 2  Shock and blood transfusion
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES20
control to minimise the duration and severity of shock. This 
includes prolonged attempts to volume resuscitate the patient 
prior to surgery, which will result in further hypothermia and 
clotting factor dilution until the bleeding is stopped. Attention 
should be paid to correction of coagulopathy with blood com­
ponent therapy to aid surgical haemorrhage control.
Surgical intervention may need to be limited to the min ­
imum necessary to stop bleeding and control sepsis. More 
definitive repairs can be delayed until the patient is haemo­
dynamically stable and physiologically capable of sustaining the 
procedure. This concept of tailoring the operation to match the 
patient’s physiology and staged procedures to prevent physio­
logical exhaustion is called ‘damage control surgery’ – a term 
borrowed from the military which ensures continued function­
ing of a damaged ship above conducting complete repairs which 
would prevent rapid return to battle.
Once haemorrhage is controlled, patients should be aggres­
sively resuscitated, warmed and coagulopathy corrected. Atten­
tion should be paid to fluid responsiveness and the end points of 
resuscitation to ensure that patients are fully resuscitated and to 
reduce the incidence and severity of organ failure.
infections is now very low, in recent years it has become appar­
ent that there is an immunological price to be paid from the 
transfusion of heterologous blood, leading to increased mor ­
bidity and decreased survival in certain population groups 
(trauma, malignancy). Supplies are also limited, and therefore 
the use of blood and blood products must always be judicious 
and justifiable for clinical need (Table 2.5).
TABLE 2.5 History of blood transfusion.
1492 Pope Innocent VIII suffers a stroke and receives a 
blood transfusion from three 10-year-old boys (paid a 
ducat each). All three boys died, as did the pope later 
that year
1665 Richard Lower in Oxford conducts the first successful 
canine transfusions
1667 Jean-Baptiste Denis reports successful sheep–human 
transfusions
1678 Animal–human transfusions are banned in France 
because of the poor results
1818 James Blundell performs the first successful 
documented human transfusion in a woman suffering 
post-partum haemorrhage. She received blood from 
her husband and survived
1901 Karl Landsteiner discovers the ABO system
1914 The Belgian physician Albert Hustin performed the 
first non-direct transfusion, using sodium citrate as an 
anticoagulant
1926 The British Red Cross instituted the first blood 
transfusion service in the world
1939 The Rhesus system was identified and recognised as 
the major cause of transfusion reactions
Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt, 1885–1946, neurologist, Kiel, Germany.
Alfons Maria Jakob, 1884–1931, neurologist, Hamburg, Germany.
Karl Landsteiner, 1868–1943, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, University of Vienna, Austria. In 1909 he classified the human blood groups into A, B, AB and 
O. For this he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1930.
Summary box 2.4
Damage control surgery
●● Arrest haemorrhage
●● Control sepsis
●● Protect from further injury
●● Nothing else
Damage control resuscitation
These concepts have been combined into a new paradigm for 
the management of trauma patients with active haemorrhage 
called damage control resuscitation (DCR). The four central 
strategies of DCR are:
1 Anticipate and treat acute traumatic coagulopathy.
2 Permissive hypotension until haemorrhage control.
3 Limit crystalloid and colloid infusion to avoid dilutional 
coagulopathy.
4 Damage control surgery to control haemorrhage and pre­
serve physiology.
Damage control resuscitation strategies have been shown 
to reduce mortality and morbidity in patients with exsangui ­
nating trauma and may be applicable in other forms of acute 
haemorrhage.
TRANSFUSION
The transfusion of blood and bloo d products has become 
commonplace since the first successful transfusion in 1818. 
Although the incidence of severe transfusion reactions and 
Blood and blood products
Blood is collected from donors who have been previously 
screened before donating, to exclude any donor whose bloo d 
may have the potential to harm the patient, or to prevent 
possible harm that donating a unit of blood may have on the 
donor. In the UK, up to 450 mL of blood is drawn, a maximum 
of three times each year. Each unit is tested for evidence of 
hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV­1, HIV­2 and syphilis. Donations 
are leukodepleted as a precaution against variant Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease (this may also reduce the immunogenicity of the 
transfusion). The ABO and rhesus D blood groups are deter ­
mined, as well as the presence of irregular red cell antibodies. 
The blood is then processed into subcomponents.
Whole blood
Whole blood is now rarely available in civilian practice 
because it has been seen as an inefficient use of the limited 
resource. However, whole blood transfusion has significant 
advantages over packed cells as it is coagulation factor rich 
and, if fresh, more metabolically active than stored blood.
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   20 25/10/2017   07:39Transfusion 21
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Packed red cells
Packed red blood cells are spun­down and concentrated packs 
of red blood cells. Each unit is approximately 330 mL and has 
a haematocrit of 50–70%. Packed cells are stored in a SAG­M 
solution (saline–adenine–glucose–mannitol) to increase shelf 
life to 5  weeks at 2–6°C. (Older storage regimes included 
storage in CPD: citrate–phosphate–dextrose solutions, which 
have a shelf life of 2–3 weeks.)
Fresh-frozen plasma
Fresh­frozen plasma (FFP) is rich in coagulation factors and 
is removed from fresh blood and stored at −40 to −50°C 
with a 2 ­year shelf life. It is the first ­line therapy in the 
treatment of coagulopathic haemorrhage (see below under 
 Management of coagulopathy ). Rhesus D ­positive FFP may 
be given to a rhesus D ­negative woman although it is pos­
sible for  sero conversion to occur with large volumes owing to 
the presence of red cell fragments, and Rh ­D immunisation 
should be considered.
Cryoprecipitate
Cryoprecipitate is a supernatant precipitate of FFP and is 
rich in factor VIII and fibrinogen. It is stored at −30°C with 
a 2­year shelf life. It is given in low fibrinogen states or factor 
VIII deficiency.
Platelets
Platelets are supplied as a pooled platelet concentrate and 
contain about 250  × 109/L. Platelets are stored on a special 
agitator at 20–24°C and have a shelf life of only 5 days. Plate­
let transfusions are given to patients with thrombocytopenia 
or with platelet dysfunction who are bleeding or undergoing 
 surgery.
Patients are increasingly presenting on antiplatelet ther ­
apy such as aspirin or clopidogrel for reduction of cardiovas ­
cular risk. Aspirin therapy rarely poses a problem but control 
of haemorrhage on the more potent platelet inhibitors can be 
extremely difficult. Patients on clopidogrel who are actively 
bleeding and undergoing major surgery may require almost 
continuous infusion of platelets during the course of the 
procedure. Arginine vasopressin or its analogues (DDA VP) 
have also been used in this patient group, although with lim­
ited success.
Prothrombin complex concentrates
Prothrombin complex concentrates  (PCC) are highly puri ­
fied concentrates prepared from pooled plasma. They contain 
factors II, IX and X. Factor VII may be included or pro duced 
separately. It is indicated for the emergency reversal of anti ­
coagulant (warfarin) therapy in uncontrolled haemorrhage.
Autologous blood
It is possible for patients undergoing elective surgery to predo­
nate their own blood up to 3 weeks before surgery for retrans­
fusion during the operation. Similarly, during surgery blood 
can be collected in a cell­saver which washes and collects red 
blood cells which can then be returned to the patient.
Indications for blood transfusion
Blood transfusions should be avoided if possible, and many 
previous uses of blood and blood products are now no longer 
considered appropriate. The indications for blood transfusion 
are as follows:
 ● Acute blood loss, to replace circulating volume and main­
tain oxygen delivery;
 ● Perioperative anaemia, to ensure adequate oxygen deliv ­
ery during the perioperative phase;
 ● Symptomatic chronic anaemia, without haemorrhage or 
impending surgery.
Transfusion trigger
Historically, patients were transfused to achieve a haemoglo­
bin >10 g/dL. This has now been shown not only to be unnec­
essary but also to be associated with an increased morbidity 
and mortality compared with lower target values. A haemo­
globin level of 6  g/dL is acceptable in patients who are not 
actively bleeding, not about to undergo major surgery and are 
not symptomatic. There is some controversy as to the opti ­
mal haemoglobin level in some patient groups, such as those 
with cardiovascular disease, sepsis and traumatic brain injury. 
Although, conceptually, a higher haemoglobin level improves 
oxygen delivery, there is little clinical evidence at this stage to 
support higher levels in these groups (Table 2.6).
TABLE 2.6 Perioperative red blood cell transfusion criteria.
Haemoglobin level (g/dL) Indications
<6 Probably will benefit from transfusion
6–8 Transfusion unlikely to be of benefit in 
the absence of bleeding or impending 
surgery
>8 No indication for transfusion in the 
absence of other risk factors
Blood groups and cross-matching
Human red cells have on their cell surface many different 
antigens. T wo groups of antigens are of major importance in 
surgical practice – the ABO and rhesus systems.
ABO system
These proteins are strongly antigenic and are associated with 
naturally occurring antibodies in the serum. The system con­
sists of three allelic genes – A, B and O – which control syn ­
thesis of enzymes that add carbohydrate residues to cell surface 
glycoproteins. A and B genes add specific residues while the O 
gene is an amorph and does not transform the glycoprotein. 
The system allows for six possible genotypes although there 
are only four phenotypes. Naturally occurring antibo dies are 
found in the serum of those lacking the corresponding antigen 
(Table 2.7).
Blood group O is the universal donor type as it contains no 
antigens to provoke a reaction. Conversely, group AB individ­
uals are ‘universal recipients’ and can receive any ABO blood 
type because they have no circulating antibodies.
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   21 25/10/2017   07:39CHAPTER 2  Shock and blood transfusion
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES22
Rhesus system
The rhesus D ( Rh(D)) antigen is strongly antigenic and is 
present in approximately 85% of the population in the UK. 
Antibodies to the D antigen are not naturally present in the 
serum of the remaining 15% of individuals, but their forma ­
tion may be stimulated by the transfusion of Rh ­positive red 
cells, or acquired during delivery of a Rh(D)­positive baby.
Acquired antibo dies are capable, during pregnancy, of 
crossing the placenta and, if present in a Rh(D)­negative 
mother, may cause severe haemolytic anaemia and even death 
(hydrops fetalis) in a Rh(D)­positive fetus in utero. The other 
minor blood group antigens may be associated with naturally 
occurring antibodies, or may stimulate the formation of anti­
bodies on relatively rare occasions.
Transfusion reactions
If antibodies present in the recipient’s serum are incompatible 
with the donor’s cells, a transfusion reaction will result. This 
usually takes the form of an acute haemolytic reaction. Severe 
immune­related transfusion reactions due to ABO incompat­
ibility result in potentially fatal complement ­mediated intra­
vascular haemolysis and multiple organ failure. Transfusion 
reactions from other antigen systems are usually milder and 
self­limiting.
Febrile transfusion reactions are non ­haemolytic and are 
usually caused by a graft­versus­host response from leukocytes 
in transfused components. Such reactions are associated with 
fever, chills or rigors. The blood transfusion should be stopped 
immediately. This form of transfusion reaction is rare with leu­
kodepleted blood.
Cross-matching
To prevent transfusion reactions, all transfusions are preceded 
by ABO and rhesus typing of both donor and recipient blood to 
ensure compatibility. The recipient’s serum is then mixed with 
the donor’s cells to confirm ABO compatibility and to test for 
rhesus and any other blood group antigen–antibody reaction.
Full cross­matching of blood may take up to 45 minutes 
in most laboratories. In more urgent situations, ‘type specific’ 
blood is provided which is only ABO/rhesus matched and can 
be issued within 10–15 minutes. Where blood must be given 
emergently, group O (universal donor) blood is given (O− to 
females, O+ to males).
When blood transfusion is prescribed and blood is admin­
istered, it is essential that the correct patient receives the cor­
rect transfusion. T wo healthcare personnel should check the 
patient details against the prescription and the label of the 
donor blood. In addition, the donor blood serial number should 
also be checked against the issue slip for that patient. Provided 
these principles are strictly adhered to the number of severe 
and fatal ABO incompatibility reactions can be minimised.
Complications of blood transfusion
Complications from blood transfusion can be categorised as 
those arising from a single transfusion and those related to 
massive transfusion.
Complications from a single transfusion
Complications from a single transfusion include:
 ● incompatibility haemolytic transfusion reaction;
 ● febrile transfusion reaction;
 ● allergic reaction;
 ● infection:
 ● bacterial infection (usually due to faulty storage);
 ● hepatitis;
 ● HIV;
 ● malaria;
 ● air embolism;
 ● thrombophlebitis;
 ● transfusion­related acute lung injury (usually from FFP).
Complications from massive transfusion
Complications from massive transfusion include:
 ● coagulopathy;
 ● hypocalcaemia;
 ● hyperkalaemia;
 ● hypokalaemia;
 ● hypothermia.
In addition, patients who receive repeated transfusions 
over long periods of time (e.g. patients with thalassaemia) may 
develop iron overload. (Each transfused unit of red blood cells 
contains approximately 250 mg of elemental iron.)
Management of coagulopathy
Correction of coagulopathy is not necessary if there is no active 
bleeding and haemorrhage is not anticipated (not due for sur­
gery). However , coagulopathy following or during massive 
transfusion should be anticipated and managed aggressively. 
Prevention of dilutional coagulopathy is central to the dam ­
age control resuscitation of patients who are actively bleeding. 
TABLE 2.7 ABO blood group system.
Phenotype Genotype Antigens Antibodies Frequency (%)
O OO O Anti-A, anti-B 46
A AA or AO A Anti-B 42
B BB or BO B Anti-A 9
AB AB AB None 3
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   22 25/10/2017   07:39Further reading 23
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
This is the prime reason for delivering balanced transfusion 
regimes matching red blood cell packs with plasma and plate­
lets. Based on moderate evidence, when red cells are trans ­
fused for active haemorrhage, it is best to match each red cell 
unit with one unit of FFP and one of platelets (1:1:1). This 
will reduce the incidence and severity of subsequent dilutional 
coagulopathy. Crystalloids and colloids should be avoided for 
the same reason.
The balanced transfusion approach cannot, however, 
correct coagulopathy. Therefore, coagulation should be mon­
itored routinely , either with point ­of­care testing (throm­
boelastometry) or with laboratory tests (fibrinogen, clotting 
times). Underlying coagulopathies should be treated in addi ­
tion to the administration of 1:1:1 balanced transfusions. 
There are pharmacological adjuncts to blood component 
therapy. The antifibrinolytic tranexamic acid is the most com­
monly administered. It is usually administered empirically 
to bleeding patients because effective point ­of­care tests of 
fibrinolysis are not yet routinely available. There is little evi ­
dence to support the use of other coagulation factor concen ­
trates at this time.
Blood substitutes
Blood substitutes are an attractive alternative to the costly 
process of donating, checking, storing and administering 
blood, especially given the immunogenic and potential infec­
tious complications associated with transfusion.
There are several oxygen­carrying blood substitutes under 
investigation in experimental animal or early clinical trials. 
Blood substitutes are either biomimetic or abiotic. Biomimetic 
substitutes mimic the standard oxygen ­carrying capacity of 
the blood and are haemoglobin based. Abiotic substitutes 
are synthetic oxygen carriers and are currently primarily per ­
fluorocarbon based.
Haemoglobin is seen as the obvious candidate for devel ­
oping an effective bloo d substitute. Various engineered mol ­
ecules are under clinical trials, and are based on human, 
bovine or recombinant technologies. Second ­generation 
perfluorocarbon emulsions are also showing potential in 
clinical trials.
FURTHER READING
Duchesne JC, McSwain NE Jr, Cotton BA et al. Damage control 
 resuscitation: the new face of damage control. J Trauma 2010; 69: 
976–90.
Glen J, Constanti M, Brohi K; Guideline Development Group. Assess ­
ment and initial management of major trauma: summary of NICE 
guidance. BMJ 2016; 353: i3051.
Harris T, Thomas GO, Brohi K. Early fluid resuscitation in severe trau­
ma. BMJ 2012; 345: e5752.
Nguyen HB, Jaehne AK, Jayaprakash N et al. Early goal­directed therapy 
in severe sepsis and septic shock: insights and comparisons to Pro ­
CESS, ProMISe, and ARISE. Crit Care 2016; 20(1): 160.
Pearse RM, Ackland GL. Perioperative fluid therapy. BMJ 2012; 344: 
e2865.
Rossaint R, Bouillon B, Cerny V et al. The European guideline on man­
agement of major bleeding and coagulopathy following trauma: 
fourth edition. Crit Care 2016; 20: 100.
Sihler KC, Nathans AB. Management of severe sepsis in the surgical 
patient. Surg Clin N Am 2006; 86: 1457–81.
01_02-B&L27_Pt1_Ch02.indd   23 25/10/2017   07:39Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
3
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • Normal healing and how it can be adversely affected
 • How to manage wounds of different types, of  different 
structures and at different sites
 • Aspects of disordered healing that lead to chronic 
wounds
 • The variety of scars and their treatment
 • How to differentiate between acute and chronic wounds
Wounds, healing and tissue repair
INTRODUCTION
Wound healing is a mechanism whereby the body attempts to 
restore the integrity of the injured part. This falls far short of  
tissue regeneration by pluripotent cells, seen in some amphi­
bians, and is often detrimental, as seen in the problems created 
by scarring, such as adhesions, keloids, contractures and cirrho­
sis of the liver. Several factors may influence healing. However, 
a clean incised wound in a healthy person where there is no skin 
loss will follow a set pattern as outlined below.
Summary box 3.1
Factors influencing healing of a wound
●● Site of the wound
●● Structures involved
●● Mechanism of wounding
Incision
Crush
Crush avulsion
●● Contamination (foreign bodies/bacteria)a
●● Loss of tissue
●● Other local factors
Vascular insufficiency (arterial or venous)
Previous radiation
Pressure
●● Systemic factors
Malnutrition or vitamin and mineral deficiencies
Disease (e.g. diabetes mellitus)
Medications (e.g. steroids)
Immune deficiencies (e.g. chemotherapy, acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS])
Smoking
a In explosions, the contamination may consist of tissue such as bone from another 
individual.
NORMAL WOUND HEALING
This is variously described as taking place in three or four 
phases, the most commonly agreed being:
1 the inflammatory phase;
2 the proliferative phase;
3 the remodelling phase (maturing phase).
Occasionally, a haemostatic phase is referred to as occur ­
ring before the inflammatory phase, or a destructive phase fol­
lowing inflammation consisting of the cellular cleansing of the 
wound by macrophages (Figure 3.1).
The inflammatory phase begins immediately after wound­
ing and lasts 2–3 days. Bleeding is followed by vasoconstric ­
tion and thrombus formation to limit blood loss. Platelets 
stick to the damaged endothelial lining of vessels, releasing 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which causes thrombocytic 
aggregates to fill the wound. When bleeding stops, the plate ­
lets then release several cytokines from their alpha granules. 
These are platelet ­derived growth factor (PDGF), plate ­
let factor IV and transforming growth factor beta (TGF β). 
These attract inflammatory  cells such as polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes (PMN) and macro phages. Platelets and the local 
injured tissue release vasoactive  amines, such as histamine, 
serotonin and prostaglandins, which increase vascular perme­
ability, thereby aiding infiltration of these inflammatory cells. 
Macrophages remove devitalised tissue  and microorganisms 
while regulating fibroblast activity in the  proliferative phase 
of healing. The initial framework for structural support of cells 
is provided by fibrin produced by fibrinogen. A more historical 
(Latin) description of this phase is described  in four words: 
rubor (redness), tumor (swelling), calor (heat) and dolor (pain).
The proliferative phase lasts from the third day to the 
third week, consisting mainly of fibroblast activity with the 
production of collagen and ground substance (glycosaminogly­
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   24 25/10/2017   07:40Abnormal healing 25
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
cans and proteoglycans), the growth of new blood vessels as  
capillary loops (angioneogenesis) and the re­epithelialisation 
of the wound surface. Fibroblasts require vitamin C to pro ­
duce collagen. The wound tissue formed in the early part of 
this phase is called granulation tissue. In the latter part of this 
phase, there is an increase in the tensile strength of the wound 
due to increased collagen, which is at first deposited in a ran­
dom fashion and consists of type III collagen. This proliferative 
phase with its increase of collagen deposition is associated with 
wound contraction, which can considerably reduce the surface 
area of a wound over the first 3 weeks of healing.
The remodelling phase is characterised by maturation 
of collagen (type I replacing type III until a ratio of 4:1 is 
achieved). There is a realignment of collagen fibres along 
the lines of tension, decreased wound vascularity, and wound 
contraction due to fibroblast and myofibroblast activity. This 
maturation of collagen leads to increased tensile strength in 
the wound which is maximal at the 12th week post injury and 
represents approximately 80% of the uninjured skin strength.
NORMAL HEALING IN SPECIFIC 
TISSUES
Bone
The phases are as above, but periosteal and endosteal prolifer­
ation leads to the formation of callus, which is immature bone 
consisting of osteoid (mineralised by hydroxyapatite and laid 
down by osteoblasts). In the remodelling phase, cortical struc­
ture and the medullary cavity are restored. If fracture ends are 
accurately opposed and rigidly fixed, callus formation is mini­
mal and primary healing occurs. If a gap exists, then secondary 
healing may lead to delayed union, non­union or malunion.
Nerve
Distal to the wound, W allerian degeneration occurs. Proxi­
mally, the nerve suffers traumatic degeneration as far as the last 
node of Ranvier. The regenerating nerve fibres are attracted 
to their receptors by neurotrophism, which is mediated by 
growth factors, hormones and other extracellular matrix tro ­
phins. Nerve regeneration is characterised by profuse growth 
of new nerve fibres which sprout from the cut proximal end. 
Overgrowth of these, coupled with poor approximation, may 
lead to neuroma formation.
Tendon
Although repair follows the normal pattern of wound heal ­
ing, there are two main mechanisms whereby nutrients, cells 
and new vessels reach the severed tendon. These are intrinsic, 
which consists of vincular blood flow and synovial diffusion, and 
extrinsic, which depends on the formation of fibrous adhesions 
between the tendon and the tendon sheath. The random nature 
of the initial collagen produced means that the tendon lacks 
tensile strength for the first 3–6 weeks. Active mobilisation pre­
vents adhesions limiting range of motion, but the tendon must 
be protected by splintage in order to avoid rupture of the repair.
ABNORMAL HEALING
Some of the adverse influences on wound healing are listed 
in Summary box 3.1. Delayed healing may result in loss of 
function or poor cosmetic outcome. The aim of treatment is 
to achieve healing by primary intention and so reduce the 
inflammatory and proliferative responses.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 3.1a-dTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a) (b)
(c)( d)
Figure 3.1 The phases of healing. (a) Early inflammatory phase with 
platelet-enriched blood clot and dilated vessels. (b) Late inflamma-
tory phase with increased vascularity and increase in polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes (round cells). (c) Proliferative 
phase with capillary buds and fibroblasts. (d) Mature contracted scar.
Summary box 3.2
Classification of wound closure and healing
●● Primary intention
Wound edges opposed
Normal healing
Minimal scar
●● Secondary intention
Wound left open
Heals by granulation, contraction and epithelialisation
Increased inflammation and proliferation
Poor scar
●● Tertiary intention (also called delayed primary intention)
Wound initially left open
Edges later opposed when healing conditions favourable
Augustus Volney Waller , 1816–1870, general practitioner of Kensington, London, UK (1842–1851), subsequently worked as a physiologist in Bonn, Germany; 
Paris, France; Birmingham, UK; and Geneva, Switzerland.
Louis Antoine Ranvier , 1835–1922, physician and histologist who was a professor in the College of France, Paris, France, described these nodes in 1878.
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   25 25/10/2017   07:40CHAPTER 3  Wounds, healing and tissue r epair
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES26
Healing by primary intention is also known as healing by first 
intention. This occurs when there is apposition of the wound  
edges and minimal surrounding tissue trauma that causes least 
inflammation and leaves the best scar. Delayed primary inten ­
tion healing occurs when the wound edges are not opposed 
immediately, which may be necessary in contaminated or untidy 
wounds. The inflammatory and proliferative phases of healing 
are well established when delayed closure of the wound is car ­
ried out. This is also called healing by tertiary intention in some 
texts and will result in a less satisfactory scar than would result 
after healing by primary intention. Secondary healing or healing 
by secondary intention occurs in wounds that are left open and 
allowed to heal by granulation, contraction and epithelialisation.
TYPES OF WOUNDS − TIDY 
VERSUS UNTIDY
The site injured, the structures involved in the injury and 
the mechanism of injury (e.g. incision or explosion) all 
influence healing and recovery of function. This has led 
to the management of wounds based upon their classi­
fication into tidy and  untidy (Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2). 
The surgeon’s aim is to convert untidy to tidy by removing 
all contaminated and devitalised tissue.
Primary repair of all structures (e.g. bone, tendon, vessel 
and nerve) may be possible in a tidy wound, but a contami­
nated wound with dead tissue requires debridement on one 
or several occasions before definitive repair can be carried 
out (the concept of ‘second look’ surgery). This is especially 
true in injuries caused by explosions, bullets or other missiles, 
where the external wound itself may appear much smaller 
than the wider extent of the injured tissues deep to the sur­
face. Multiple debridements are often required after crushing 
injuries in road traffic accidents or in natural disasters such as 
earthquakes, where fallen masonry causes widespread mus­
cle damage and compartment syndromes (see Compartment 
syndromes below). Any explosion where there are multiple 
victims at the same site or where there has been a suicide­ 
related explosion will carry the risk of tissue and viral con­
tamination. Appropriate tests for hepatitis viruses and 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are required.
TABLE 3.1 Tidy versus untidy wounds.
Tidy Untidy
Incised Crushed or avulsed
Clean Contaminated
Healthy tissues Devitalised tissues
Seldom tissue loss Often tissue loss
MANAGING THE ACUTE WOUND
The surgeon must remember to examine the whole patient 
according to acute trauma life support (A TLS) principles. A 
stab wound in the back can be missed just as easily in the reality 
of the accident and emergency room as in a fictitious detective 
novel. The wound itself should be examined, taking into con­
sideration the site and the possible structures damaged (Figure 
3.3). It is essential to assess movement and  sensation while 
Figure 3.2 (a) Tidy incised wound on the finger. (b) Untidy avulsed 
wound on the hand.
 The term ‘debridement’ was introduced by the great French surgeon in Napoleon’s army, Dominique Jean Larrey (1766–1842). He used it to describe the removal 
of bullets, bits of cloth, loose bits of bone and soft tissue.
Figure 3.3 Facial trauma – apparent tissue loss but none found after 
careful matching.
(a)
(b)
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   26 25/10/2017   07:40Some specific wounds 27
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
watching for pain and listening to the patient. Tetanus cover  
should be noted and appropriate treatment carried out.
A bleeding wound should be elevated and a pressure 
pad applied. Clamps should not be put on vessels blindly 
because nerve damage is likely and vascular anastomosis is ren­
dered impossible.
In order to facilitate examination, adequate analgesia and/
or anaesthesia (local, regional or general) are required. General 
anaesthesia is often needed in children. With limb injuries,  
particularly those of the hand, a tourniquet should be used 
in order to facilitate visualisation of all structures. Due care 
should be taken with tourniquet application, avoiding uneven 
pressure and noting the duration of tourniquet time.
After assessment, a thorough debridement is essential. 
Abrasions, ‘road rash’ (following a fall from a motorbike) 
and explosions all cause dirt tattooing and require the use of 
a scrubbing brush or even excision under magnification. A 
wound should be explored and debrided to the limit of blood 
staining. Devitalised tissue must be excised until bleeding 
occurs, with the obvious exceptions of nerves, vessels and 
tendons. These may survive with adequate revascularisation 
subsequently or after being covered with viable tissue such as 
that brought in by skin or muscle flaps.
The use of copious saline irrigation or pulsed jet lavage 
(where the instrumentation is available) can be less destruc ­
tive than knife or scissors when debriding. However, it has 
been suggested that pulsed jet lavage can implant dirt into a 
deeper plane and care should be taken to avoid this compli­
cation. Muscle viability is judged by the colour, bleeding pat­
tern and contractility. In a tidy wound, repair of all damaged 
structures may be attempted. Repair of nerves under magnifi­
cation (loupes or microscope) using 8/0 or 10/0 monofilament 
nylon is usual. Vessels such as the radial or ulnar artery may 
be repaired using similar techniques. Tendon repairs, particu­
larly those in the hand, benefit from early active mobilisation 
because this  minimises adhesions between the tendon and the 
tendon sheath (see above under Tendon for extrinsic tendon 
healing mechanism).
Skin cover by flap or graft may be required as skin closure 
should always be without tension and should allow for the 
oedema typically associated with injury and the inflammatory 
phase of healing. A flap brings in a new blood supply and can 
be used to cover tendon, nerve, bone and other structures that 
would not provide a suitable vascular base for a skin graft. A 
skin graft has no inherent blood supply and is dependent on 
the recipient site for nutrition.
SOME SPECIFIC WOUNDS 
Bites
Most bites involve either puncture wounds or avulsions. Bites 
from small animals are common in children (Figure 3.4) and 
require cleansing and treatment according to the principles out­
lined in Summary box 3.3, usually under general anaesthetic.
Injuries to the ear, tip of nose and lower lip are most usu­
ally seen in victims of human bites. A boxing ­type injury of 
the metacarpophalangeal joint may result from a perforating 
contact with the teeth of a victim. Anaerobic and aerobic 
organism prophylaxis is required as bite wounds typically have 
high virulent bacterial counts.
Puncture wounds
Wounds caused by sharp objects should be explored to the 
limit of tissue blood staining. Needle ­stick injuries should be 
treated according to the well ­published protocols because of 
hepatitis and HIV risks. X­ray examination should be carried 
out in order to rule out retained foreign bodies in the depth 
of the wound.
Haematoma
If large, painful or causing neural deficit, a haematoma may 
require release by incision or aspiration. In the gluteal or thigh 
region, there may be an associated disruption of fat in the form 
of a fat fracture, which results in an unsightly groove but intact 
skin. An untreated haematoma may also calcify and therefore 
require surgical exploration if symptomatic.
Degloving
Degloving occurs when the skin and subcutaneous fat are 
stripped by avulsion from the underlying fascia, leaving 
neuro vascular structures, tendon or bone exposed. A deglov ­
ing injury may be open or closed. An obvious example of an 
open degloving is a ring avulsion injury with loss of finger 
Figure 3.4 Dog bite in a child.
Summary box 3.3
Managing the acute wound
●● Cleansing
●● Exploration and diagnosis
●● Debridement
●● Repair of structures
●● Replacement of lost tissues where indicated
●● Skin cover if required
●● Skin closure without tension
●● All of the above with careful tissue handling and meticulous 
technique
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   27 25/10/2017   07:40CHAPTER 3  Wounds, healing and tissue r epair
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES28
skin (Figure 3.5). A closed degloving may be a rollover injury, 
typically caused by a motor vehicle over a limb. Such an injury 
will extend far further than expected, and much of the limb skin 
may be non ­viable (Figure 3.6). Examination under anaes ­
thetic is required with a radical excision of all non ­bleeding 
skin, as judged by bleeding dermis. Fluoroscein can be admin­
istered intravenously while the patient is anaesthetised. Under 
ultraviolet light, viable (perfused) skin will show up as a fluores­
cent yellowish green colour, and the non­viable skin for exci­
sion is clearly mapped out. However, the main objection to this 
method is that of possible anaphylactic shock due to fluoroscein 
sensitivity. Most surgeons therefore rely upon serial excision 
until punctate dermal bleeding is obvious. Split­skin grafts can 
be harvested from the degloved non ­viable skin and meshed 
(Figure 3.7) to cover the raw areas resulting from debridement.
Compartment syndromes
Compartment syndromes typically occur in closed lower limb 
injuries. They are characterised by severe pain, pain on passive 
movement of the affected compartment muscles, distal sen ­
sory disturbance and, finally, by the absence of pulses distally 
(a late sign). They can occur with an open injury if the wound 
does not extend into the affected compartment. 
Compartment pressures can be measured using a pressure 
monitor and a catheter placed in the muscle compartment. 
If pressures are constantly greater than 30  mmHg or if the 
above clinical signs are present, then fasciotomy should be 
performed. Fasciotomy involves incising the deep muscle fas­
cia and is best carried out via longitudinal incisions of skin, 
fat and fascia (Figure 3.8). The muscle will then be seen bulg­
ing out through the fasciotomy opening. The lower limb can 
be decompressed via two incisions, each being lateral to the 
subcutaneous border of the tibia. This gives access to the two 
posterior compartments and to the peroneal and anterior com­
partments of the leg. In crush injuries that present several days 
after the event, a late fasciotomy can be dangerous because 
dead muscle produces myoglobin which, if suddenly released 
into the blood stream, causes myoglobinuria with glomerular 
blockage and renal failure. In the late treatment of lower limb 
injuries, therefore, it may be safer to amputate the limb once 
viable and non­viable tissues have been demarcated.
High-pressure injection injuries
The use of high ­pressure devices in cleaning, degreasing 
and painting can cause extensive closed injuries through 
Figure 3.5 Degloving hand injury.
Figure 3.6 Degloving buttock injury.
Figure 3.7 Meshed split-skin graft.
Figure 3.8 Fasciotomy of the lower leg.
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   28 25/10/2017   07:40Chronic wounds 29
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
small entry wounds. The liquid injected spreads along fascial 
planes, a common site being from finger to forearm. The tis ­
sue damage is dependent upon the toxicity of the substance 
and the injection pressure. Treatment is surgical, with wide 
exposure, removal of the toxic substance and thorough 
debridement. Preoperative x­rays may be helpful where air or 
lead­based paints can be seen. It should be noted that ampu ­
tation rates following high ­pressure injection injuries are 
reported as being over 45%. Delayed or conservative treat ­
ment is therefore inappropriate.
CHRONIC WOUNDS
A chronic wound may be defined as one that fails to heal in 
the expected time for a wound of that type, which is usually 
less than 3 weeks. Delays in healing can occur at any phase but 
most often occur in the inflammatory phase.
Leg ulcers
In resource­rich countries, the most common chronic wounds 
are leg ulcers. An ulcer can be defined as a break in the epi ­
thelial continuity. A prolonged inflammatory phase leads to 
overgrowth of granulation tissue, and attempts to heal by 
scarring leave a fibrotic margin. Necrotic tissue, often at the 
ulcer centre, is called slough. The more common aetiologies 
are listed in Summary box 3.4.
A chronic ulcer, unresponsive to dressings and sim ­
ple treatments, should be biopsied to rule out neoplastic 
change, a squamous cell carcinoma known as a Marjolin’s 
ulcer being the most common. Effective treatment of any 
leg ulcer depends on treating the underlying cause, and 
diagnosis is therefore vital. Arterial and venous circulation 
should be assessed, as should sensation throughout the lower 
limb. Surgical treatment is only indicated if non ­operative 
treatment has failed or if the patient suffers from intractable 
pain. Meshed skin grafts (Figure 3.7) are more successful 
than sheet grafts and have the advantage of allowing mobili ­
sation, as any tissue exudate can escape through the mesh. It 
should be stressed that the recurrence rate is high in venous 
ulceration, and patient compliance with a regime of hygiene, 
elevation and elastic compression is essential.
Figure 3.9 Pressure ulcer.
Pressure sores
These can be defined as tissue necrosis with ulceration due to 
prolonged pressure. Less preferable terms are bed sores, pres ­
sure ulcers and decubitus ulcers. They should be regarded as 
preventable but occur in approximately 5% of all hospital ­
ised patients (range 3–12% in published literature). There is 
a higher incidence in paraplegic patients, in the elderly and 
in the severely ill patient. The most common sites are listed 
in Summary box 3.5.
A staging system for description of pressure sores devised 
by the American National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel is 
shown in Table 3.2.
Summary box 3.4
Aetiology of leg ulcers
●● Venous disease leading to local venous hypertension (e.g. 
varicose veins)
●● Arterial disease, either large vessel (atherosclerosis) or small 
vessel (diabetes)
●● Arteritis associated with autoimmune disease (rheumatoid 
arthritis, lupus, etc.)
●● Trauma – could be self-inflicted
●● Chronic infection – tuberculosis/syphilis
●● Neoplastic – squamous or basal cell carcinoma, sarcoma
Summary box 3.5
Pressure sore frequency in descending order
●● Ischium
●● Greater trochanter
●● Sacrum
●● Heel
●● Malleolus (lateral then medial)
●● Occiput
TABLE 3.2 Staging of pressure sores.
Stage Description
1 Non-blanchable erythema without a breach in the 
epidermis
2 Partial-thickness skin loss involving the epidermis and 
dermis
3 Full-thickness skin loss extending into the subcutaneous 
tissue but not through underlying fascia
4 Full-thickness skin loss through fascia with extensive 
tissue destruction, maybe involving muscle, bone, tendon 
or joint
If external pressure exceeds the capillary occlusive pressure 
(over 30 mmHg), blood flow to the skin ceases, leading to tis­
sue anoxia, necrosis and ulceration (Figure 3.9). Prevention 
Jean-Nicholas Marjolin , 1780–1850, surgeon, Paris, France, described the development of carcinomatous ulcers in scars in 1828.
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   29 25/10/2017   07:40CHAPTER 3  Wounds, healing and tissue r epair
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES30
is obviously the best treatment, with good skin care, special  
pressure dispersion cushions or foams, the use of low air loss 
and air­fluidised beds and urinary or faecal diversion in selected 
cases. Pressure sore awareness is vital, and the bed ­bound 
patient should be turned at least every 2 hours, with the wheel­
chair­bound patient being taught to lift themselves off their seat 
for 10 seconds every 10 minutes. It should be stressed that the 
most important treatment is to treat the cause of the pressure 
sore and that surgical treatment is a last resort often doomed to 
failure if the cause persists.
Surgical management of pressure sores follows the same 
principles involved in acute wound treatment ( Summary box 
3.4). The patient must be well motivated, clinically stable 
with good nutrition and adhere to the preventative measures 
advised postoperatively. Preoperative management of the 
pressure sore involves adequate debridement, and the use of 
vacuum­assisted closure (VAC) may help to provide a suitable 
wound for surgical closure (see below). The aim is to fill the 
dead space and to provide durable sensate skin. Large skin 
flaps that include muscle are best and, occasionally, an intact 
sensory innervated area can be included (e.g. extensor fascia 
lata flap with lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh). If possible, 
use a flap that can be advanced further if there is recurrence 
and that does not interfere with the planning of neighbouring 
flaps that may be used in the future.
Vacuum-assisted closure
This is now more correctly known as negative pressure wound 
closure. Applying intermittent negative pressure of approx ­
imately −125 mmHg appears to hasten debridement and the  
formation of granulation tissue in chronic wounds and ulcers. A 
foam dressing is cut to size to fit the wound. A perforated wound 
drain is placed over the foam, and the wound is sealed with 
a transparent adhesive film. A vacuum is then applied to the 
drain (Figure 3.10). Negative pressure may act by decreasing 
oedema, by removing interstitial fluid and by increasing blood 
flow. As a result, bacterial counts decrease and cell proliferation 
increases, thereby creating a suitable bed for graft or flap cover. 
NECROTISING SOFT-TISSUE 
INFECTIONS
These are rare but often fatal. They are most commonly poly­
microbial infections with Gram­positive aerobes (Staphylococ-
cus aureus, S. pyogenes), Gram­negative anaerobes (Escherichia 
coli, Pseudomonas, Clostridium, Bacteroides) and beta ­haemo­
lytic Streptococcus. There is usually a history of trauma or 
surgery with wound contamination. Sometimes, the patient’s 
own defence mechanisms may be deficient. These infections 
are characterised by sudden presentation and rapid progres ­
sion. The fact that deeper tissues are involved often leads to 
a late or missed diagnosis (Figure 3.11). Clinical signs are 
shown in Summary box 3.6.
There are two main types of necrotising infections: 
clostrid ial (gas gangrene) and non ­clostridial (streptococcal 
gangrene and necrotising fasciitis). The variant of necrotising 
fasciitis with toxic shock syndrome results from Streptococcus 
pyogenes and is often called the ‘flesh ­eating bug’ in this situ­
ation. Treatment consists of appropriate antibiotics with wide 
surgical excision. Tissue biopsies are essential for histological 
Figure 3.10 Vacuum-assisted closure dressing of a large wound. Figure 3.11 Necrotising fasciitis of the anterior abdominal wall.
Summary box 3.6
Signs and symptoms of necrotising infections
●● Unusual pain
●● Oedema beyond area of erythema
●● Crepitus
●● Skin blistering
●● Fever (often absent)
●● Greyish drainage (‘dishwater pus’)
●● Pink/orange skin staining
●● Focal skin gangrene (late sign)
●● Shock, coagulopathy and multiorgan failure
Hans Christian Joachim Gram  , 1853–1938, Professor of Pharmacology (1891–1900) and of Medicine (1900–1923), Copenhagen, Denmark, described this  
method of staining bacteria in 1884.
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   30 25/10/2017   07:40Avoidable scarring 31
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
diagnosis and culture to obtain appropriate antibiotic sensitiv­
ity information. The raw areas resulting from excision often 
require skin grafting. Treatment is surgical excision, with tis­
sue biopsies being sent for culture and diagnosis. W ide raw 
areas requiring skin grafting often result.
SCARS
The maturation phase of wound healing has been discussed 
above and represents the formation of what is described as a 
scar. The immature scar becomes mature over a period lasting 
a year or more, but it is at first pink, hard, raised and often 
itchy. The disorganised collagen fibres become aligned along 
stress lines with their strength being in their weave rather 
than in their amount (this has been compared with steel wool 
being slowly woven into a cable). As the collagen matures and 
becomes denser, the scar becomes almost acellular as the fibro­
blasts and blood vessels reduce. The external appearance of 
the scar becomes paler, while the scar becomes softer, flattens 
and its itchiness diminishes. Most of these changes occur over 
the first three months but a scar will continue to mature for 
one to two years. Tensile strength will continue to increase but 
would not be expected to exceed 60–80% that of normal skin.
Scars are often described as being atrophic, hypertro ­
phic and keloid. An atrophic scar is pale, flat and stretched 
in appearance, often appearing on the back and in areas of 
tension. It is easily traumatised as the epidermis and dermis 
are thinned. Excision and resuturing may only rarely improve 
such a scar.
A hypertrophic scar is defined as excessive scar tissue that 
does not extend beyond the boundary of the original incision 
or wound. It results from a prolonged inflammatory phase of 
wound healing and from unfavourable scar siting (i.e. across 
the lines of skin tension). In the face, these are known as the 
lines of facial expression.
A keloid scar is defined as excessive scar tissue that extends 
beyond the boundaries of the original incision or wound (Fig-
ure 3.12). Its aetiology is unknown, but it is associated with 
elevated levels of growth factor, deeply pigmented skin, an 
AVOIDABLE SCARRING
If an acute wound has been managed correctly (see Summary 
box 3.3), most of the problems described above should not 
occur. However, the surgeon should always stress to the patient 
that there will be a scar of some description after wounding, 
be it planned or accidental. A dirt ­ingrained (tattooed) scar 
is usually preventable by proper initial scrubbing and cleans ­
ing of the wound (Figure 3.13). Late treatment may require 
excision of the scar or pigment destruction by laser.
Mismatched or misaligned scars result from a failure to rec­
ognise normal landmarks, such as the lip vermilion/white roll 
interface, eyelid and nostril free margins and hair lines such as 
Summary box 3.7
Treatment of hypertrophic and keloid scars
●● Pressure – local moulds or elasticated garments
●● Silicone gel sheeting (mechanism unknown)
●● Intralesional steroid injection (triamcinolone)
●● Excision and steroid injectionsa
●● Excision and postoperative radiation (external beam or 
brachytherapy)a
●● Intralesional excision (keloids only)
●● Laser – to reduce redness (which may resolve in any event)
●● Vitamin E or palm oil massage (unproven)
aAll excisions are associated with high rates of recurrence.
Figure 3.12 Multiple keloid scars.
inherited tendency and certain areas of the body (e.g. a trian­
gle whose points are the xiphisternum and each shoulder tip).
The histology of both hypertrophic and keloid scars shows 
excess collagen with hypervascularity, but this is more marked 
in keloids where there is more type III collagen.
The treatment of both hypertrophic and keloid scars is 
difficult and is summarised in Summary box 3.7.
Hypertrophic scars improve spontaneously with time, 
whereas keloid scars do not.
Figure 3.13 Dirt-ingrained scar.
Laser  is an acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. A laser is an intense beam of monochromatic light.
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   31 25/10/2017   07:40CHAPTER 3  Wounds, healing and tissue r epair
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES32
those relating to eyebrows and moustache. Treatment consists 
of excision and resuturing.
Poorly contoured scars can be stepped, grooved or pincush­
ioned. Most are caused by poor alignment of deep structures 
such as muscle or fat, but trapdoor or pincushioned scars are 
often unavoidable unless the almost circumferential wound 
can be excised initially. Late treatment consists of scar exci ­
sion and correct alignment of deeper structures or, as in the 
case of a trapdoor scar, an excision of the scar margins and 
repair using W or Z­plasty techniques.
Suture marks may be minimised by using monofilament 
sutures that are removed early (3–5 days). Sutures inserted 
under tension will leave marks. Wounds can be strengthened 
post suture removal by the use of sticky strips. Fine sutures (6/0 
or smaller) placed close to the wound margins tend to leave 
less scarring. Subcuticular suturing avoids suture marks either 
side of the wound or incision.
CONTRACTURES
Where scars cross joints or flexion creases, a tight web may 
form restricting the range of movement at the joint. This may 
be referred to as a contracture and can cause hyperextension 
or hyperflexion deformity (Figure 3.14). In the neck, it may 
interfere with head extension (Figure 3.15). Treatment may 
be simple involving, multiple Z­plasties (Figure 3.16), or more 
complex, requiring the inset of grafts or flaps. Splintage and 
intensive physiotherapy are often required postoperatively.
Figure 3.15 Post-traumatic (chainsaw) midline neck contracture.
Figure 3.16 Multiple Z-plasty release of finger contracture.
Figure 3.14 Burn contractures showing hyperextended fingers and 
hyperflexed elbow.
FURTHER READING
Brown DL, Borschel GH. Michigan manual of plastic surgery. Baltimore, MD: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2004.
Georgiade GS, Riefkokl R, Levin LS. Georgiade plastic, maxillofacial and re-
constructive surgery, 3rd edn. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1997.
McGregor AD, McGregor, IA. Fundamental techniques of plastic surgery, 10th 
edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
Richards AM, MacLeod T, Dafydd H. Key notes on plastic surgery. Oxford: 
Wiley­Blackwell, 2012.
Thomas S. An introduction to the use of vacuum assisted closure. World Wide 
Wounds, 2001; available from: www.worldwidewounds.com.
Westaby S. Wound care. London: William Heinemann Medical Books Ltd, 
1985.
01_03-B&L27_Pt1_Ch03.indd   32 25/10/2017   07:40Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
4
Tissue engineering and regeneration
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The potential opportunities afforded by tissue 
engineering and regenerative medicine
 • The nature of stem cells, including somatic and adult 
stem cells, embryonic stem cells, fetal stem cells and 
induced pluripotent stem cells
 • The role and range of scaffolds for tissue engineering
 • The different approaches for seeding scaffolds and 
bioreactor technology
 • The main safety issues and current limitations to clinical 
application
INTRODUCTION
Tissue engineering and regenerative medicine are relatively 
new but rapidly expanding multidisciplinary fields of clinical 
medicine, which have the potential to revolutionise the treat-
ment of a wide range of human diseases. The ability of tissues 
to undergo spontaneous repair and regeneration is highly 
variable but in many cases very limited. Bone, for example, is 
one of the few tissues able to undergo effective regeneration, 
so long as the defective tissue is not too extensive. Adjacent 
cartilage, on the other hand, in common with most tissues, 
has little or no propensity for spontaneous regeneration, in 
terms of quality and quantity, following injury or arthritic dis-
ease. The limited ability of tissues to repair themselves has 
driven the desire to develop cell therapy and tissue engineer-
ing approaches to repair or replace diseased and damaged tis -
sues. In most cases this involves the implantation of cells and 
tissues that have been expanded in vitro (outside the body), 
either as a cell therapy or with cells seeded into natural or 
synthetically based tissue scaffolds. However, cells (with or 
without expansion) and cellularised or cell-free scaffolds may 
also be implanted into areas of tissue injury with the aim of 
promoting in vivo (inside the body) regeneration and repair of 
tissues. This chapter provides a brief overview of tissue engi -
neering and regenerative therapy, highlighting the opportuni-
ties, challenges and likely future directions. 
OPPORTUNITIES
The potential impact of tissue engineering and regenerative 
therapies is so far-reaching that practising surgeons should be 
aware of the opportunities afforded to improve radically the 
management of patients. Stem cell therapy has the potential 
to provide treatment for a wide range of diseases, including 
spinal cord injury and neurodegenerative conditions, cardio-
vascular disease, degenerative retinal conditions, type I dia -
betes and diseases of the musculoskeletal system. The field 
of tissue engineering is of particular relevance to surgeons 
because many of the potential future clinical applications are 
for conditions where surgeons are closely involved in assess-
ment and treatment (Table 4.1). Selected examples include 
TABLE 4.1 Examples of tissues created by tissue 
engineering and conditions they may be used to treat.
Tissue Conditions treated
Skin Burns and skin defects after excision 
or trauma
Cardiac muscle Heart failure
Heart valves Congenital and acquired valvular heart 
disease
Cartilage Degenerative and traumatic joint 
disorders
Trachea and bronchus Congenital and acquired stenosis and 
resection for malignancy
Bladder Congenital bladder malformation, and 
cystectomy
Anal/bladder sphincter Incontinence
Pancreatic islets Insulin-dependent diabetes
Large blood vessels Atheromatous, aneurysmal and 
traumatic arterial  disease
Oesophagus Benign stenosis, and resection for 
malignancy 
Small intestine Intestinal failure after surgical resection 
for Crohn’s disease, cancer or 
ischaemia
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   33 25/10/2017   07:41CHAPTER 4  Tissue engineering and regeneration
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES34
repair or replacement of injured or diseased cartilage, skin, 
pancreatic islets, bladder, intestine, heart tissue, arteries, 
larynx and bronchus. A longer -term goal in tissue engineer -
ing is the replacement of diseased whole organs such as the 
liver and kidney, although the technical challenges here are 
enormous. 
Surgeons are integral to many of the multidisciplinary 
research teams currently undertaking translational research 
in the field and will play a vital role in the future delivery 
and assessment of many of the treatments based on tissue 
engineering and regenerative therapy. In addition to its 
direct therapeutic application, tissue engineering also has the 
potential to provide in vitro tissues that can be used to model 
human disease and to test therapeutic drugs for efficacy and 
toxicity. It is important to emphasise, however, that while 
the potential benefit of cell therapy and tissue engineering is 
undeniable, there are many technical, regulatory and safety 
issues to be addressed for it to have wide clinical impact.
ment of the many different types of bioreactors that provide 
an appropriate physical environment for growing engineered 
tissues in vitro, outside the body in the laboratory. 
There is considerable commercial interest in tissue engi-
neering and regenerative therapy and this is contributing 
to the rapid pace of development in these areas. Notwith -
standing the potential offered by these therapies, it should 
be emphasised that the whole field is still at a relatively early 
stage of development. While there are examples where tis -
sue engineering and regenerative therapies have already been 
introduced into clinical practice (e.g. for repair of damaged 
cartilage), most potential regenerative therapies have not yet 
entered routine surgical practice, as there are considerable 
barriers to be overcome before this translational step can be 
achieved.
SOURCE OF CELLS FOR TISSUE 
ENGINEERING
Both fully differentiated cells (somatic cells) and stem cells 
are being used for tissue engineering and regenerative therapy, 
but most of the focus is on the use of stem cells, particularly 
somatic stem cells (SSCs) such as mesenchymal stem cells, 
and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). The major fea-
tures of the different cell types are listed in Table 4.2. 
Somatic cells
Fully differentiated specialised cells (somatic cells) obtained 
from normal tissues have been used for tissue engineering and 
Summary box 4.1
Tissue engineering and regenerative therapies have 
potential to provide:
●● Treatment for a wide range of diseases
●● Clinical applications in surgical assessment and treatment
●● Models to test therapeutic efficacy and toxicity
THE KEY AREAS OF 
UNDERPINNING SCIENCE
Advances in both the biological and physical sciences under-
pin the fields of tissue engineering and regenerative therapy 
(Figure 4.1). In the biological sciences, new discoveries in 
stem cell biology have been key, particularly an understand -
ing of the different types of stem cell, and how these can be 
derived and directed in vitro to differentiate into specialised 
cell types. In material sciences, major advances in the manu -
facture of scaffolds, on which to seed cells or to encourage 
specific interaction with host cells, have been key. In particu-
lar, design goals relate to scaffolds that possess both the physi-
cal and the biological characteristics that allow cells to create 
tissues, and potentially even organs, for therapeutic purposes. 
Key also have been engineering advances in the develop-
Figure 4.1  Underpinning science in tissue engineering and cell 
 therapy.
Engineered tissue 
Stem cell
biology
Cell
signalling
biology
Scaffold
design
Bioreactor
design 
Cell biology and biochemistry 
Materials science and engineering 
TABLE 4.2 Cells used in tissue engineering and regenerative therapy.
Cell type Somatic cells SSCs hESCs Fetal cells iPSCs
Ease of availability Limited Good Moderate Moderate Good
Expansion in vitro Limited Good Excellent Good Excellent
Pluripotency No Limited Excellent Limited Excellent
Ethical concerns No No Yes Yes Yes*
Risk of malignancy None Low Moderate Moderate Moderate
Autologous Yes Yes No No Yes
Likely future use Limited High Limited Limited High
hESCs, human embryonic stem cells; iPSCs, induced pluripotent stem cells; SSCs, somatic stem cells. *Note iPSCs avoid some of the ethical issues 
associated with hESCs.
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   34 25/10/2017   07:41Source of cells for tissue engineering 35
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
regenerative therapy with some degree of success. For example, 
skin has been engineered using cultured epithelial cells grown 
in vitro and used to treat patients with burn injuries. Chon-
drocytes have been isolated, expanded in vitro, and implanted 
into areas of deficient cartilage in a procedure called auto -
logous chondrocyte implantation. Bladder wall has also been 
engineered using a combination of smooth muscle cells and 
uroepithelial cells expanded in vitro and grown on a scaffold 
before reimplantation. Such tissues can be grown using cells 
obtained from the intended recipient by tissue biopsy (auto -
logous cells) or using cells obtained from deceased unrelated 
donors (allogeneic cells). The major advantage of the former 
source is that after implantation they are not rejected by the 
recipient’s immune system and hence there is no requirement 
for immunosuppression (see Chapter 82 for a description of 
immunosuppressive agents and their side effects). 
For other indications, the use of fully differentiated spe-
cialised cells is not practical in most situations because such 
cells are not readily available in sufficient numbers and they 
have only limited proliferative ability in vitro, which means 
their numbers cannot be readily expanded to sufficient levels. 
To overcome these limitations, the major focus in the field of 
cell therapy has been on the use of stem cells. 
Stem cells
Stem cells are undifferentiated or non-specialised cells that 
are able, through cell division, to renew themselves indefin -
itely. Crucially, they are also able, when provided with the 
appropriate stimuli, to differentiate into one or more of the 
different types of specialised cell found in tissues and organs. 
Because of their unique ability to undergo self-renewal when 
cultured in vitro and to be directed to differentiate into spe-
cialised cell types, they have enormous potential for use as 
cell-based therapies. There are several different types of stem 
cell with different characteristics, all of which have potential 
uses in regenerative medicine. 
Stem cells can be classified according to whether they are 
derived from the early embryo (embryonic stem cells), tissues 
from the fetus (fetal stem cells), later in development (adult 
or somatic stem cells) or whether they are derived by repro-
gramming adult specialised cells to become pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs).
Adult tissue resident or somatic stem 
cells (SSCs)
Stem cells resident in the different tissues and organs are 
responsible for providing replacements for specialised cells 
that have reached the end of their functional lifespan either 
through natural attrition or because of damage and disease. In 
certain tissues and organs, notably the bone marrow and gut, 
stem cells regularly divide and differentiate into specialised 
cells to replace senescent or damaged cells in the blood and 
the gastrointestinal mucosa, respectively. Stem cells in other 
organs, such as the heart or central nervous system, are less 
able to effect repair or replacement. SSCs have the capacity 
to differentiate into a limited number of specialised cell types 
(i.e. they are multipotent). Among the best characterised 
types of SSCs are haematopoeitic stem cells, mesenchymal 
stem or stromal cells (MSCs), endothelial progenitor cells 
and neural stem cells. While haematopoeitic stem cells are 
widely used for treatment of haematological malignancies, 
the somatic stem cell type that has been most widely used for 
tissue engineering and regenerative therapy is the MSC. 
Mesenchymal stem and stromal cells
MSCs are multipotent stromal cells that can be sourced from 
a variety of tissues, including bone marrow, adipose tissue 
and umbilical cord. Morphologically they resemble fibro -
blasts. They are adherent to plastic, express certain cell sur -
face markers (CD105, CD73 and CD90), and do not express 
the cell surface markers associated with haematopoietic stem 
cells (such as CD34 and CD45). MSCs were initially shown 
to have the ability to be directed to differentiate into a variety 
of specialised cell types of the mesodermal lineages, including 
osteoblasts, chondrocytes, adipocytes, tenocytes and myo-
cytes (Figure 4.2). Recent studies suggest that they may also 
be directed into cells of the ectoderm and endoderm lineages.
Of further clinical importance, MSCs have potent trophic 
and anti-inflammatory properties, attributable to their abil -
ity to produce growth factors (including vascular endothe -
lial growth factor (VEGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), 
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)), and prostaglandin E2. 
MSCs for therapeutic use can be isolated from bone marrow 
(iliac crest aspiration) or from subcutaneous fat (liposuction) 
which is less invasive and gives a high yield of MSCs. In both 
cases, MSCs are isolated in vitro on the basis of their adher -
ence to plastic. They can then be used either immediately, or 
after expansion of their numbers by in vitro culture. Alterna-
tively, MSCs can be differentiated into the desired lineage 
in vitro by addition of suitable growth factors and chemicals.
The relative ease of cell acquisition has meant that autol-
ogous MSCs have been used clinically in a variety of settings 
such as treatment of burns and to repair defects in cartilage. 
More clinical evidence is required in terms of efficacy and 
mechanism of action, as it is not entirely clear whether a 
given clinical effect resulting from MSC administration is 
attributable to their ability to contribute directly to tissue 
regeneration, or due to immunomodulatory and paracrine 
effects resulting from their ability to release trophic mediators 
that promote tissue repair by recipient cells (Figure 4.2).
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
In the embryo, stem cells are able to give rise to all of the 
different cell types of the body (i.e. they are totipotent). ESCs 
are obtained from the inner cell mass of the early human blas-
tocyst (days 4–5 after fertilisation) using embryos that have 
been created through in vitro fertilisation for treatment of 
infertility, and are surplus to those needed for reimplantation. 
The technique for isolating and growing hESCs in culture was 
developed by James Thompson at the University of Wiscon -
sin, Madison, USA in 1998. 
ESCs have much greater proliferative ability than MSCs 
and, as already noted, can differentiate into all types of 
specialised cells, unlike MSCs. However, their use has major 
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   35 25/10/2017   07:41CHAPTER 4  Tissue engineering and regeneration
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES36
limitations, one of which is ethical. The surplus embryos 
used for derivation of ESCs would otherwise be discarded, 
but because they need to be destroyed to obtain ESCs the 
approach has raised major ethical and political debate. The 
dominant view in many countries, including the UK, is that 
the potential therapeutic benefits of ESCs justify their use 
but there are very strict guidelines for their derivation, and to 
date their clinical use has been very limited. Cells from ESCs 
would be allogeneic and therefore be at risk of immunological 
rejection. It would, in principle, be possible to produce ESCs 
that were autologous for an intended recipient by the process 
of somatic cell nuclear transfer , i.e. transferring the nucleus 
from a somatic cell of the intended recipient into an oocyte 
that has had its nucleus removed. The transferred somatic 
cell nucleus, containing the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
genes and all of the other genetic information from the donor, 
is turned into a pluripotent stem cell that can be used as cell 
therapy for the donor of the nucleus.
Fetal stem cells
Stem cells can also be obtained from the blood, bone marrow 
and other tissues of aborted fetuses (fetal stem cells). These 
proliferate in vitro as efficiently as ESCs and are pluripotent. 
They have been used as cell therapy in a variety of clinical 
settings, including Parkinson’s disease, diabetes and spinal 
cord injury. In some studies they showed early promise but 
the magnitude of any clinical benefits is controversial. The 
use of fetal stem cells also poses ethical challenges, although 
perhaps not to the extent seen with ESCs.
Induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs)
The discovery in 2006 by Shinya Yamanaka, building on the 
earlier work of John Gurdon, that certain types of specialised 
adult cells could be reprogrammed using genetic manipulation 
to become embryonic-like iPSCs was a major breakthrough. 
Using retroviral or lentiviral transfection to introduce a com-
bination of transcription factors (OCT3/4, SOX2, and either 
Kruppel-like factor and C-MYC (together designated the 
OSKM reprogramming factors) or NANOG and LIN28), it 
was shown that specialised somatic cells can be reprogrammed 
to become stem cells. Moreover, iPSCs proliferate in vitro as 
efficiently as ESCs and are pluripotent, thereby circumventing 
concerns about the use of human embryos. Importantly, the 
development of iPSCs also means that, at least in principle, an 
intended recipient of stem cell therapy can themselves provide 
a source of stem cells (e.g. from a skin biopsy or blood sample) 
that can then be directed to differentiate into the desired spe-
cialised cell type for therapy; because such cells would be auto-
logous they would not provoke an immunological rejection  
response (Figure 4.3). Alternatively, iPSCs could be obtained 
from a number of volunteer donors selected on the basis of their 
Figure 4.2 Proposed characteristics of mesenchymal stem and stromal cells relevant to tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. 
Mesenchymal stem and stromal cells
+ve for CD90, CD73, CD105
–ve for CD34, CD45
Immunomodulation
Other
Osteoblast
Chondrocyte
Adipocyte
Other
Working with other 
cell populations
Differentiation into 
multiple lineages
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   36 25/10/2017   07:41Source of cells for tissue engineering 37
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
HLA type and stored to create a national or international tissue 
bank of iPSCs. Lines of iPSCs could then be chosen from the 
bank to provide a fully or partially matched cell transplant for 
recipients, eliminating or reducing the need for immunosup -
pression to prevent immunological rejection.
One of the problems of reprogramming somatic cells to 
become iPSCs using retroviruses is that genomic integration 
of the virus may lead to activation of oncogenic genes, caus -
ing tumorigenesis. To reduce this risk, non-retroviral vectors 
have been used (such as adenovirus and Sandai virus vectors, 
that do not insert their own genes into the host cell genome), 
or plasmids, episomal vectors and synthetic RNA. There has 
also been much recent progress in identifying combinations 
of small molecules, growth factors and chemicals that mimic 
the effect of viral transfection with transcription factors and 
obviate the need for viral vectors altogether. The production 
process from sourcing cells (e.g. skin fibroblasts or peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells) to obtaining an adequate number of 
validated iPSCs may take several weeks.
In vitro differentiation of stem cells to 
specialised tissue cells
There is an enormous research effort aimed at better under -
standing the factors responsible for cell fate decisions, and 
establishing effective and repro ducible protocols that can 
be used to differentiate stem cells in vitro  into the desired 
type of specialised cell. Typically such protocols use culture 
in chemically defined media containing cocktails of small 
molecules that stimulate or inhibit key signalling pathways, 
along with cytokines, growth factors and chemicals. Many 
protocols include the addition of critical amounts of Activin, 
bone-morphogenetic protein-4 (BMP4) and fibroblast growth 
factor-2 (FGF2) at specific time points during culture, but pro-
tocols vary widely. For example, exposure of iPSCs to a com-
bination of retinoic acid and BMP4 promotes differentiation 
along the ectoderm and then the keratinocyte lineage. Alter-
natively, culture of iPSCs on a Matrigel ® scaffold in defined 
media supplemented with ascorbic acid and exposed sequen -
tially to a glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) inhibitor followed 
by an inhibitor of Wnt signalling promotes the development 
of immature cardiomyocytes.
It is becoming increasingly clear that exposure to certain 
biomaterials and the physical attributes of a scaffold, includ -
ing its surface characteristics, also promote stem cell differ -
entiation along a particular lineage. Mechanical stress also 
influences cell fate decisions.
Protocols for differentiation often promote stem cells to 
differentiate in steps through intermediate stages that mirror 
normal in vivo development. In other words, sequential expo-
sure to different factors is used first to differentiate ESCs or 
Reprogramming
factors
Differentiation
factors
Peripheral blood – mononuclear cells
Skin biopsy – keratinocytes
Induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSC)
Cell therapy
Disease
modelling
Differentiated cells
Examples include:
chondrocytes
neurones
myocytes
pancreatic islet cells
Figure 4.3 Schematic diagram showing the principles of iPSC therapy. Mononuclear cells fr om peripheral blood or keratinocytes from a skin 
biopsy are cultured in vitro and then reprogrammed to become iPSC by addition of reprogramming factors. The iPSC are then expanded, and 
selected differentiation factors added to promote differentiation of iPSCs into the desired specialised cell type for use as therapy.
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   37 25/10/2017   07:41CHAPTER 4  Tissue engineering and regeneration
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES38
iPSCs into either endoderm, mesoderm or ectoderm lineages, 
followed by further differentiation into the specific lineage 
desired. After stem cells have been subjected to in vitro dif-
ferentiation, it is essential that the purity of the differentiated 
cells and the absence of undifferentiated stem cells are con -
firmed, to reduce the risk of tumour transmission. The cells 
must also be fully phenotyped and their function confirmed 
before they are used for therapeutic purposes. 
SCAFFOLDS FOR TISSUE 
ENGINEERING
The complex anatomical arrangement of the different cell 
types in tissues and organs is absolutely integral to their nor -
mal function, and the importance of structural integrity is 
evident in many diseases where deranged tissue structure and 
tissue remodelling is associated with a failure in function. 
Stem cells and their progeny are able, when cultured under 
conventional tissue culture conditions, to form cell sheets 
or small three-dimensional collections of cells (organoids), 
but they are not able under such conditions spontaneously 
to assume the complex anatomical relationships seen in 
normal tissues. To do so they need to be provided with an 
appropriate scaffold that gives physical support and shape to 
the engineered tissue, mimicking extracellular matrix. This 
allows cells to attach, and delivers the cell signals necessary 
to guide the cell growth, migration and differentiation to 
form a functional tissue. Tissue engineering typically utilises 
rigid or semi-rigid scaffolds (usually three-dimensional) that 
are porous (Figure 4.4) and act as templates on which to 
Figure 4.4 An example of a por ous scaffold in research develop -
ment, manufactured using collagen. (a) Macroscopic view of colla-
gen scaffold. (b) Overview of a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
image that shows the structure of collagen scaffold (courtesy of Prof 
S Best and Prof R Cameron, University of Cambridge).
Summary box 4.2
Regenerative scaffolds can:
●● Provide physical support and shape to the engineered tissue
●● Guide cell growth, migration and differentiation
●● Be natural or artificial
TABLE 4.3 Requirements of a scaffold used in tissue 
engineering.
Provide structural support for cells
Allow cells to attach, migrate and proliferate
Enable oxygen, nutrients and regulatory factors access to all cells
Deliver signals to promote cell migration and proliferation
Biocompatible, non-immunogenic and ideally biodegradable
seed donor cells and guide them to restore a functional tis -
sue or organ that can then be implanted in the recipient. 
Scaffolds may be derived from intact human tissue (natural 
scaffolds) or from engineered implantable biomaterials (arti -
ficial scaffolds). The general requirements that a scaffold 
must provide are listed in Table 4.3, and the choice of scaf -
folds that best fulfils the requirements for tissue engineering 
will depend on the nature of the tissue to be engineered.
Natural scaffolds
Natural scaffolds may be obtained by treatment of human (or 
other animal) tissues or organs to remove the resident cell 
types, leaving behind the extracellular matrix that preserves 
the intricate architecture of the tissue or organ, onto which 
to seed new cells. Natural scaffolds not only act as a physical 
scaffold that allows the natural architecture of the tissue to be 
preserved, but they may also provide key cell signals that guide 
the growth and differentiation of the cells used to repopulate 
the scaffold. Typically, natural scaffolds are obtained either by 
immersing tissues in detergent or perfusing them with deter -
gent via the arterial tree. This effectively destroys most or all 
of the cellular elements of the tissue or organ but leaves the 
collagen-rich extracellular matrix largely intact. Variable pro-
tocols have been used successfully to achieve decellurisation, 
and the optimal approach probably varies according to the 
type of tissue or organ being used to create the scaffold. The 
use of natural scaffolds may be particularly suited to certain 
applications where deceased donor tissue is relatively easy to 
source, for example to engineer lengths of trachea. The use 
of natural scaffolds to engineer whole organs such as the kid -
ney or liver has the advantage that the extremely intricate 
three-dimensional structure of the organ is preserved and this 
would be extremely challenging to achieve using engineered 
biocompatible materials. Moreover, decellularised organ 
scaffolds provide an opportunity to repopulate the scaffold 
with autologous cells derived from the potential recipient 
to create an organ that is not susceptible to immunological 
rejection, thereby avoiding the need for immunosuppressive 
drugs and their attendant side effects. However, a significant 
(a)
(b)
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   38 25/10/2017   07:41Scaffolds for tissue engineering 39
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
disadvantage of using decellularised scaffolds to engineer 
whole organs is the need to use a whole human organ for each 
organ to be engineered; the availability of such organs is likely 
to be limited. 
Historically, a limitation of traditional artificial scaffolds is 
that they do not incorporate a vasculature that can be used in 
the potential recipient to restore the vascular integrity of the 
transplanted tissue or organ. However, recent innovations that 
allow a vascular network to be created by three-dimensional 
printing suggest that this limitation may be overcome. Such 
technology also allows the design and production of scaffolds 
that have the structural properties (e.g. pore size and diffusion 
characteristics) needed to provide the necessary cues for 
cell differentiation and migration. Artificial scaffolds can be 
engineered to incorporate molecules that aid retention of 
particular cell growth factors, including angiogenic growth 
factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
to provide a local environment conducive to the growth of a 
functional tissue construct.
Summary box 4.3
Natural scaffolds:
●● Can be prepared by removal of the resident cell types from 
tissue, for example with detergent 
●● Consist of tissue extracellular matrix, which can preserve 
intricate anatomical structures
Summary box 4.4
Artificial scaffolds include:
●● Natural materials, synthetic polymers, bioactive ceramics and 
glasses
●● New or ‘smart’ materials that have biomimetic properties
Artificial scaffolds
The materials used to create artificial scaffolds are highly 
variable, and new materials are being developed continually. 
Different scaffold characteristics are required for engineering 
different types of tissue but all scaffolds need to be biocom -
patible and in most settings they should be biodegradable 
and bioreabsorbable. Scaffolds encompass both natural and 
synthetic materials. Natural materials used include various 
polysaccharides, collagen, fibrin, gelatin and cellulose, while 
synthetic materials include various synthetic polymers such as 
polylactide (PLA) and polyglycolide (PGA), and graphene. 
Bioactive ceramics such as calcium phosphates (e.g. hydroxy-
apatite) and bioactive glasses have been widely used for skel -
etal repair. Synthetic biodegradable polymers are commonly 
used and have the advantage that they can be produced under 
standard conditions that ensure reproducible physical charac-
teristics. Scaffolds can also be fabricated using a blend of nat-
ural and synthetic components to optimise their performance. 
Most artificial scaffolds are fabricated with a porous 
three-dimensional structure, and a wide variety of designs are 
in use. The application of computational design and three-  
dimensional printing technology has revolutionised the 
 development of artificial scaffolds. Hydrogel scaffolds com -
posed of cross-linked hydrophilic polymers are also increas -
ingly used in tissue engineering because of their favourable 
physical and chemical characteristics. They are able to absorb 
very large amounts of aqueous fluid while maintaining their 
three-dimensional shape and structural integrity. They are 
fabricated from naturally occurring (e.g. collagen and fibrin) 
or artificial (egg PLA) cross-linked polymers and can be 
impregnated with growth factors to promote cellularisation. 
Electrospinning technology is being utilised increasingly 
to produce scaffolds composed of fibres with a diameter at 
the nanoscale level. The fibres can be spun using blends of 
different synthetic polymers or blends of synthetic and natu -
ral polymers, depending on the desired characteristics of the 
scaffold. Scaffolds based on microspheres have also been uti -
lised. Recent developments in materials science have led to 
the creation of increasingly complex and innovative artificial 
scaffolds for tissue engineering, including composite materials 
(e.g. combining ceramics with polymers to gain the advan -
tages of each), and the production of so called ‘smart scaffolds’ 
having biomimetic properties that provide biophysical cues or 
cellular signals to instruct and guide cell behaviour. 
Approaches to cell seeding of 
scaffolds and bioreactors
Cellularisation of scaffolds can be achieved in vitro (outside 
the body) by a variety of metho ds and the most appropriate 
seeding system may to some extent depend on the type of tis-
sue being engineered (Table 4.4). This is a rapidly developing 
area and it is only possible here to outline the principles of 
different approaches to cell seeding. The aim is to achieve a 
rapid seeding of viable cells with high seeding efficiency and 
uniform and effective penetration of cells into the scaffold. 
Some systems incorporate mechanisms to deliver mechanical 
stress or electrical stimulation to promote cellularisation.
The most simple but possibly least effective method is 
static cell seeding, where a concentrated cell suspension is 
placed in direct contact with the scaffold. The seeding effi -
ciency and penetration of cells into the scaffold are generally 
low, although scaffolds can be coated with various agents to 
increase the efficiency of cell attachment. 
Dynamic cell seeding techniques include a range of 
systems in which either the scaffold is rotated in the medium 
containing the cells or both the scaffold and cell suspension 
are rotated together. Rotation in some systems occurs at 
TABLE 4.4 Approaches for seeding cells into scaffolds.
Static cell seeding
Dynamic cell seeding
Magnetic cell seeding
Pressure and vacuum seeding
Photopolymerised hydrogels
Bioreactor perfusion systems
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   39 25/10/2017   07:41CHAPTER 4  Tissue engineering and regeneration
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES40
a sufficiently high speed to generate centrifugal forces. 
Dynamic seeding techniques increase seeding efficiency, 
shorten the duration of the culture perio d needed and may 
help penetration of cells into the scaffold.
Magnetic cell seeding makes use of magnetic forces to 
direct cells into the scaffold. Essentially, the cells are first 
labelled, either by using supramagnetic microbeads coated 
with a ligand that specifically binds to molecules on the cell 
surface or by culturing them with cationic liposomes that con-
tain supramagnetic ferrous particles. Magnets are then used to 
attract the cells into the scaffold. This enables rapid seeding 
of the scaffold but a potential concern is that the magnetic 
particles used may have adverse effects. 
Photopolymerised hydrogel scaffolds offer a completely 
different approach to cell seeding. Essentially, the cells are 
suspended in an aqueous monomer solution and ultraviolet 
light is used to promote polymerisation of the hydrogel scaf-
fold. Alternatively, to increase cell adherence to the surface of 
polymerised hydrogel scaffolds, an arginine–glycine–aspartic 
acid adhesion peptide can be incorporated.
Another approach to cell seeding uses differential pressure 
or vacuum seeding systems to force cells into the pores of the 
scaffold. Again this reduces the time needed to seed cells but 
the pressures used may potentially reduce cell viability.
Finally, one of the more complex approaches to cell seed-
ing is to use scaffold perfusion systems. These may take the 
form of bioreactor perfusion systems for tissue engineering, or 
whole organ perfusion systems in the case of decellularised 
organ scaffolds.
CHALLENGES TO ENGINEERING 
TISSUE IN VITRO
There are many technical challenges to successful engi -
neering of tissues in vitro. Delivery of adequate oxygen and 
nutrients uniformly to three-dimensional tissue constructs is 
problematic, as is ensuring that the varying nutritional and 
growth requirements of different cell types grown simultane -
ously are met. 
The difficulties of tissue engineering vary considerably 
according to the nature of the tissue or organ being engi -
neered. Flat tissues such as skin, cornea and cartilage pres -
ent fewer problems than complex tubular structures such as 
trachea, bronchus and blood vessels. Hollow organs, such as 
bladder and gut, present a much greater challenge, and com-
plex solid organs such as the liver and kidney present the 
greatest challenge of all. Obtaining adequate numbers of dif -
ferentiated cells, maintaining their viability and ensuring that 
they maintain their function and do not revert to undesirable 
cell types are all important challenges.
IMPLANTATION OF ENGINEERED 
TISSUE
Irrespective of the nature of the engineered scaffold and 
the cell types used to populate it, after it is implanted it will  
only effect successful repair if it becomes fully integrated into 
adjacent normal tissue and can be remodelled appropriately 
in the recipient. An important consideration that is often 
not addressed sufficiently is that many tissues in the body, 
notably tissues in the musculoskeletal system and the cardio -
vascular system, are subject to considerable mechanical stress. 
Engineered tissues are not subjected to relevant mechanical 
stresses during their fabrication in vitro and their behaviour 
in response to mechanical loading after implantation is a 
major determinant of their ability to perform successfully. The 
development of innovative high-resolution three-dimensional 
imaging techniques to evaluate engineered tissue before and 
after implantation is key to refining the design of engineered 
tissues and assessing their functional integration after 
implantation.
SAFETY CONCERNS
The major safety concerns of cell-based therapy and tissue 
engineering are listed in Table 4.5 . One of the most serious 
concerns is that of tumour formation and malignant transfor-
mation. The risk of tumour formation varies according to the 
cell type used, the genetic modification strategy used to trans-
form the stem cells, the site of transplantation and whether 
the cells are autologous or allogeneic. The direct risk of tumour 
formation by the transplanted cells relates specifically to ESCs 
and iPSCs and there appears to be little risk with SSCs. The 
ability of stem cells to form teratomas is one of the hallmarks 
of pluripotency, and the risk of this happening following stem 
cell therapy may be reduced by ensuring that only cells that 
have been fully differentiated in vitro and not those that are 
still pluripotent are used for therapy. The risk of malignancy 
may also be reduced by the choice of in vitro strategy used to 
differentiate stem cells prior to use: use of viral vectors that do 
not integrate into the genome or of non-viral approaches to 
differentiation reduces the risk of malignant transformation. 
There is also interest in developing techniques for directly 
reprogramming somatic cells to adopt the function of a differ-
ent cell type without having to make them first revert back to 
the pluripotent state – so-called transdifferentiation. 
Another major concern is that of transmitting infection. 
It is essential that if allogeneic stem cells are used they are 
screened to exclude infection and that cells and engineered 
tissues are prepared according to Good Manufacturing Prac-
tice (GMP) guidelines to avoid bacterial infection during in 
vitro culture prior to use. As already noted, if allogeneic stem 
cells are used for tissue engineering and regenerative therapy 
they may be susceptible to graft rejection, and immunosup -
pressive therapy may be necessary.  
TABLE 4.5 Risks of cell-based therapy.
Tumour formation
Genetic and epigenetic abnormalities
Transmission of infection
Poor viability and loss of function
Differentiation to undesired cell-types
Rejection (allogeneic cells)
Side effects of immunosuppression (allogeneic cells)
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   40 25/10/2017   07:41Further reading 41
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Tissue engineering and regenerative strategies hold out great 
hope for effectively repairing or replacing tissues in a wide 
number of human diseases. The field is moving rapidly, under-
pinned by new developments in stem cells and scaffold design. 
The use of mesenchymal stem and stromal cell based thera -
pies and iPSC based therapies is likely to dominate, in con -
junction with improved bioactive scaffold designs that can be 
reproducibly manufactured and seeded, sometimes with mul -
tiple cell types, by sophisticated bioreactors that incorporate 
dynamic culture systems.
It is likely that patient stratification will further refine 
therapy options. The ability to phenotype, to genotype and to 
profile patients at a molecular level will allow more detailed 
characterisation of patient subgroups and staging of disease. 
This would refine the surgical approach to many diseases, 
including regenerative procedures.
Over the next decade it is likely that major advances will 
be made in the clinical translation of tissue engineering and 
regenerative therapies across a broad range of applications. 
Numerous clinical studies are currently being undertaken, 
many with promising early results, and the number of studies 
is set to rise considerably. However, caution is required and 
there are many examples where engineered tissues have failed 
to live up to their early promise. The pace of development is 
so rapid that regulatory authorities will have difficulty keep -
ing up. 
It is important that the clinical use of tissue engineering is 
subject to rigorous evaluation, and that novel developments 
are only used in the context of appropriate clinical trials 
where the potential benefits and limitations are fully exam -
ined before they are introduced into routine clinical practice. 
The field is becoming increasingly commercialised and the 
cost and practicality of regenerative therapies, especially per-
sonalised autologous therapies, will need to be addressed.
FURTHER READING
Fisher S. Handbook of regenerative medicine and tissue engineering . New 
York: Hayle Medical, 2015.
Giannoudis P, Jones E, Yang X, McGonagle D. Mesenchymal stem cells 
and skeletal regeneration. Cambridge: Academic Press, 2013.
Van Blitterswijk C, Jan De Boer J. Tissue engineering, 2nd edn. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2015.
Warburton D. Stem cells, tissue engineering and regenerative medicine . 
Singapore: World Scientific, 2014.
01_04-B&L27_Pt1_Ch04.indd   41 25/10/2017   07:41Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
5
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The characteristics of the common surgical pathogens 
and their sensitivities 
 • The factors that determine whether a wound will 
become infected
 • The classification of sources of infection and their severity
 • The clinical presentation of surgical infections
 • The indications for and choice of prophylactic 
antibiotics
 • The spectrum of commonly used antibiotics in surgery 
and the principles of therapy
To learn:
 • Koch’s postulates
 • The management of abscesses
To appreciate:
 • The importance of aseptic and antiseptic techniques 
and delayed primary or secondary closure in 
contaminated wounds
To be aware of:
 • The causes of reduced resistance to infection (host 
response)
To know:
 • The definitions of infection, particularly at surgical sites
 • What basic precautions to take to avoid surgically 
relevant hospital acquired infections
Surgical infection
HISTORY OF SURGICAL 
INFECTION
Surgical infection, particularly surgical site infection (SSI), 
has always been a major complication of surgery and trauma 
and has been documented for 4000–5000 years. The Egyptians 
had some concepts about infection, as they were able to pre -
vent putrefaction using their skills in mummification. Their 
medical papyruses also describe the use of salves and antisep -
tics to prevent SSIs. This ‘prophylaxis’ had also been known 
earlier by the Assyrians, although less well documented. It 
was described again independently by the Greeks. The Hip -
pocratic teachings described the use of antimicrobials, such 
as wine and vinegar, which were widely used to irrigate open, 
infected wounds before delayed primary or secondary wound 
closure. A belief common to all these civilisations, and indeed 
even later to the Romans, was that, whenever pus was local -
ised in an infected wound, it needed to be drained.
Galen recognised that this localisation of infection (sup -
puration) in wounds inflicted in the gladiatorial arena often 
heralded recovery, particularly after drainage ( pus bonum et 
laudabile). Sadly, this dictum of laudable pus was misunder -
stood by many later healers, who thought that it was the pro-
duction of pus that was desirable. Until well into the Middle 
Ages, some practitioners promoted suppuration in wounds 
by the application of noxious substances, including faeces, in 
the misguided belief that healing could not occur without pus 
formation. Theodoric of Cervia, Ambroise Paré and Guy de 
Chauliac observed that clean wounds, closed primarily, could 
heal without infection or suppuration.
An understanding of the causes of infection came in 
the nineteenth century. Microbes had been seen under the 
Hippocrates  was a Greek Physician, and by common consent ‘The Father of Medicine’. He was born on the Greek island of Cos off Turkey about 460 BC and 
probably died in 375 BC.
Galen , 130–200, Roman physician, commenced practice as Surgeon to the Gladiators at Pergamum (now Bregama in Turkey) and later became personal physician 
to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius and to two of his successors. He was a prolific writer on many subjects, amongst them anatomy, medicine, pathology and philoso-
phy. His work affected medical thinking for 15 centuries after his death. (Gladiator is Latin for ‘swordsman’.)
Theodoric of Cervia . Theodoric, 1210–1298, Bishop of Cervia, published a book on surgery ca. 1267.
Ambroise Paré , 1510–1590, French military surgeon, also worked at the Hotel Dieu, Paris, France.
Guy de Chauliac , ?1298–1368, physician and chaplain to Pope Clement VI at Avignon, France and the author of Chirurgia Magna, which was published about 
1363.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   42 25/10/2017   07:43History of sur gical infection 43
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Summary box 5.2
Advances in the control of infection in surgery
●● Aseptic operating theatre techniques have enhanced the use 
of antiseptics
●● Antibiotics have reduced postoperative infection rates after 
elective and emergency surgery
●● Delayed primary, or secondary, closure remains useful in 
heavily contaminated wounds
Summary box 5.1
Koch’s postulates proving whether a given organism is 
the cause of a given disease
●● It must be found in every case
●● It should be possible to isolate it from the host and grow it in 
culture
●● It should reproduce the disease when injected into another 
healthy host
●● It should be recovered from an experimentally infected host
microscope, but Koch laid down the first definition of infec -
tive disease (Koch’s postulates). Koch’s postulates do not cover 
every eventuality though. Organisms of low virulence may not 
cause disease in normal hosts but may be responsible for disease 
in immunocompromised hosts. Some hosts may develop sub-
clinical disease and yet still be a carrier of the organism capable 
of infecting others. Also, not every organism that causes dis -
ease can be grown in culture, the commonly quoted one being 
Mycobacterium leprae which causes leprosy.
abscesses of the face and eyes leading to a severe staphylococ-
cal bacteraemia. He responded to treatment and made a partial 
recovery before the limited batch of penicillin ran out, follow-
ing which he relapsed and died. Since then there has been a 
proliferation of antibiotics with broad-spectrum activity and 
antibiotics today remain the mainstay of antimicrobial therapy.
Many staphylococci today have become resistant to 
penicillin. Often bacteria develop resistance through the 
acquisition of b-lactamases, which break up the b-lactam 
ring present in the molecular structure of many antibiotics. 
The acquisition of extended spectrum b-lactamases (ESBLs) 
is an increasing concern in some gram-negative organisms 
that cause urinary tract infections because it is difficult to 
find an antibiotic effective against them. In addition, there 
is increasing concern about the rising resistance of many 
other bacteria to antibiotics, in particular the emergence 
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and 
glycopeptide-resistant enterococci (GRE), which are also 
relevant in general surgical practice.
The introduction of antibiotics for prophylaxis and for 
treatment, together with advances in anaesthesia and critical 
care medicine, has made possible surgery that would not pre -
viously have been considered. Faecal peritonitis is no longer 
inevitably fatal, and incisions made in the presence of such 
contamination can heal primarily without infection in over 
90% of patients with appropriate antibiotic therapy. Despite 
this, it is common practice in many countries to delay wound 
closure in patients in whom the wound is known to be con -
taminated or dirty. Waiting for the wound to granulate and 
then performing a delayed primary or secondary closure may 
be considered a better option in such cases.
The Austrian obstetrician Ignac Semmelweis showed that 
puerperal sepsis could be reduced from over 10% to under 2% 
by the simple act of hand washing between cases, particularly 
between postmortem examinations and the delivery suite. He 
was ignored by his contemporaries and died at the age of 47 
in an insane asylum before the value of his work was accepted 
two decades later with the recognition that infections were 
caused by microbes.
Louis Pasteur recognised through his germ theory that 
microorganisms were responsible for infecting humans and 
causing disease. Joseph Lister applied this knowledge to the 
reduction of colonising organisms in compound fractures by 
using antiseptics. The principles of antiseptic surgery were 
soon enhanced with aseptic surgery at the turn of the twenti-
eth century. As well as killing the bacteria on the skin before 
surgical incision (antiseptic technique), the conditions under 
which the operation was performed were kept free of bacteria 
(aseptic technique). This technique is still employed in mod-
ern operating theatres.
The concept of a ‘magic bullet’ ( Zauberkugel) that could 
kill microbes but not their host became a reality with the dis-
covery of sulphonamide chemotherapy in the mid-twentieth 
century. The discovery of the antibiotic penicillin is attributed 
to Alexander Fleming in 1928, but it was not isolated for clin-
ical use until 1941, by Florey and Chain. The first patient to 
receive penicillin was Police Constable Alexander in Oxford. 
He scratched his mouth while pruning roses and developed 
Robert Koch , 1843–1910, Professor of Hygiene and Bacteriology, Berlin, Germany, stated his ‘Postulates’ in 1882.
Ignac Semmelweis , 1818–1865, Professor of Obstetrics, Budapest, Hungary.
Louis Pasteur , 1822–1895, French chemist, bacteriologist and immunologist, Professor of Chemistry at the Sorbonne, Paris, France.
Joseph Lister (Lord Lister) , 1827–1912, Professor of Surgery, Glasgow, Scotland (1860–1869), Edinburgh, Scotland (1869–1877) and King’s College Hospital, 
London (1877–1892).
Sir Alexander Fleming , 1881–1955, Professor of Bacteriology, St Mary’s Hospital, London, England, discovered Penicillium notatum in 1928.
Howard Walter Florey (Lord Florey of Adelaide) , 1898–1968, Professor of Pathology, the University of Oxford, Oxford, England.
Sir Ernst Boris Chain , Professor of Biochemistry, Imperial College, London, England. Fleming, Florey and Chain shared the 1945 Nobel Prize for Physiology or 
Medicine for their work on penicillin.
Hans Christian Joachim Gram  , 1853–1938, Professor of Pharmacology (1891–1900) and of Medicine (1900–1923), Copenhagen, Denmark, described this  
method of staining bacteria in 1884.
Surgical site infection in patients who have contaminated 
wounds, who are immunosuppressed or who are undergoing 
prosthetic surgery is now the exception rather than the rule 
since the introduction of prophylactic antibiotics. The evi -
dence for this is of the highest level. The use of prophylactic 
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   43 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES44
antibiotics in clean, non-prosthetic surgery is of less value as 
infection rates are low and the indiscriminate use of antibiotics 
simply encourages the emergence of resistant strains of bacteria.
MICROBIOLOGY OF SURGICAL 
INFECTION
Common bacteria causing 
surgical infection
Streptococci
Streptococci form chains and are Gram positive on staining 
(Figure 5.1). The most important is the b-haemolytic Strepto-
coccus, which resides in the pharynx of 5–10% of the population. 
In the Lancefield A–G carbohydrate antigens classification, it 
is the group A Streptococcus, also called Streptococcus pyogenes, 
that is the most pathogenic. It has the ability to spread, causing 
cellulitis, and to cause tissue destruction through the release of 
enzymes such as streptolysin, streptokinase and streptodornase.
Streptococcus faecalis is an enterococcus in Lancefield 
group D. It is often found in synergy with other organisms, 
as are the g-haemolytic Streptococcus and Peptostreptococcus, 
which is an anaerobe.
Both Streptococcus pyogenes and Streptococcus faecalis may 
be involved in wound infection after large bowel surgery, but 
the a-haemolytic Streptococcus viridans is not associated with 
wound infections.
All the streptococci remain sensitive to penicillin and 
erythromycin. The cephalosporins are a suitable alternative 
in patients who are allergic to penicillin.
hospital workers, a potential source of infection after surgery. 
In parts of northern Europe, the prevalence of MRSA infec -
tions has been kept at very low levels using ‘search and destroy’ 
methods, which use screening techniques to look for MRSA in 
patients before they come in to hospital for elective surgery so 
that any carriers can be treated before their admission for sur-
gery. Local policies on the management of MRSA depend on 
the prevalence of MRSA, the type of hospital, the clinical spe-
cialty and the availability of facilities. Widespread swabbing, 
ward closures, isolation of patients and disinfection of wards by 
deep cleaning all have to be carefully considered.
Staphylococcal infections are usually suppurative and 
localised. Most hospital Staphylococcus aureus strains are now 
b-lactamase producers and so are resistant to penicillin, but 
many strains remain sensitive to flucloxacillin, vancomycin, 
aminoglycosides and some cephalosporins. There are several 
novel and innovative antibiotics becoming available that 
have high activity against resistant strains. Some have the 
advantage of good oral activity (linezolid), some have a wide 
spectrum (teicoplanin), some have good activity in bacterae-
mia (daptomycin) but all are relatively expensive, and some 
have side effects involving marrow, hepatic and renal toxicity. 
Their use is justified but needs to be controlled by tight local 
policies and guidelines that involve clinical microbiologists.
Staphylococcus epidermidis (previously Staphylococcus 
albus), also known as coagulase-negative staphylococcus, 
was regarded as a non-pathogenic commensal organism com-
monly found on the skin, but is now recognised as a major 
threat in vascular and orthopaedic prosthetic surgery and in 
indwelling vascular cannulas/catheters. The bacteria form 
biofilms which adhere to prosthetic surfaces and limit the 
effectiveness of antibiotics.
Clostridia
Clostridial organisms are gram-positive, obligate anaerobes, 
which produce resistant spores (Figure 5.3). Clostridium per-
fringens is the cause of gas gangrene, and C. tetani causes teta-
nus after implantation into tissues or a wound.
Clostridium difficile is the cause of pseudomembranous coli-
tis, where destruction of the normal colonic bacterial flora by 
Rebecca Graighill Lancefield , 1895–1981, American bacteriologist, classified streptococci in 1933.
Figure 5.1 Streptococci.
Figure 5.2 Staphylococcal pus.
Staphylococci
Staphylococci form clumps and are Gram positive (Figure 5.2). 
Staphylococcus aureus is the most important pathogen in this 
group and is found in the nasopharynx of up to 15% of the 
population. It can cause suppuration in wounds and around 
implanted prostheses. Some strains are resistant to many com-
mon antibiotics (especially methicillin resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, MRSA) and so are difficult to treat. MRSA can be found 
in the nose of asymptomatic carriers amongst both patients and 
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   44 25/10/2017   07:43Microbiology of sur gical infection 45
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
antibiotic therapy allows an overgrowth of the normal gut com-
mensal C. diff to pathological levels. Any antibiotic may cause 
this phenomenon, although the quinolones such as ciprofloxa-
cin seem to be the highest risk, especially in elderly or immuno-
compromised patients. In its most severe form, the colitis may 
lead to perforation and the need for emergency colectomy with 
an associated high mortality. Treatment involves resuscitation 
and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or vancomycin. 
The fibrinous exudate is typical and differentiates the colitis 
from other inflammatory diseases; laboratory recognition of the 
toxin is an early accurate diagnostic test.
Aerobic gram-negative bacilli
These bacilli are normal inhabitants of the large bowel. Esch-
erichia coli and Klebsiella spp. are lactose fermenting; Proteus is 
non-lactose fermenting. Most organisms in this group act in 
synergy with Bacteroides to cause SSIs after bowel operations 
(in particular, appendicitis, diverticulitis and peritonitis). Esch-
erichia coli is a major cause of urinary tract infection, although 
most aerobic gram-negative bacilli can be involved, particularly 
in relation to urinary catheterisation. There is increasing con-
cern about the development of extended spectrum b-lactamases 
(ESBLs) in many of this group of bacteria, which confer resis-
tance to many antibiotics, particularly cephalosporins.
Pseudomonas spp. tend to colonise burns and tracheostomy 
wounds, as well as the urinary tract. Once Pseudomonas has 
colonised wards and intensive care units, it may be difficult 
to eradicate. Surveillance of cross-infection is important in 
outbreaks. Hospital strains become resistant to b-lactamase as 
resistance can be transferred by plasmids. Wound infections 
need antibiotic therapy only when there is progressive or 
spreading infection with systemic signs. The aminoglycosides 
and the quinolones are effective, but some cephalosporins 
and penicillin may not be. Many of the carbapenems (e.g. 
meropenem) are useful in severe infections.
Bacteroides
Bacteroides are non-spore-bearing, strict anaerobes that col -
onise the large bowel, vagina and oropharynx. Bacteroides 
fragilis is the principal organism that acts in synergy with 
aerobic gram-negative bacilli to cause SSIs, including intra- 
abdominal abscesses after colorectal or gynaecological surgery. 
They are sensitive to the imidazoles (e.g. metronidazole) and 
some cephalosporins (e.g. cefotaxime).
Sources of infection
The infection of a wound can be defined as the invasion of 
organisms into tissues following a breakdown of local and sys-
temic host defences, leading to either cellulitis, lymphangitis, 
abscess formation or bacteraemia. The infection of most sur -
gical wounds is referred to as superficial surgical site infection 
(SSSI). The other categories include deep SSI (infection in 
the deeper musculofascial layers) and organ space infection 
(such as an abdominal abscess after an anastomotic leak).
Pathogens resist host defences by releasing toxins, which 
favour their spread, and this is enhanced in anaerobic or 
frankly necrotic wound tissue. Clostridium perfringens, which is 
responsible for gas gangrene, releases proteases such as hyalu-
ronidase, lecithinase and haemolysin, which allow it to spread 
through the tissues. Resistance to antibiotics can be acquired 
by previously sensitive bacteria by transfer through plasmids.
The human body harbours approximately 1014 organisms. 
They can be released into tissues before, during or after sur -
gery, contamination being most severe when a hollow viscus 
perforates (e.g. faecal peritonitis following a diverticular per -
foration). Any infection that follows surgery may be termed 
endogenous or exogenous, depending on the source of the 
bacterial contamination. Endogenous organisms are present 
on or in the patient at the time of surgery, whereas exogenous 
organisms come from outside the patient. In modern hospital 
practice, endogenous organisms colonising the patient are by 
far the most common source of infection. 
Figure 5.3 Clostridium tetani (drumstick spores).
Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs , 1834–1913, Professor of Bacteriology successively at Prague, Czechoslovakia, Zurich, Switzerland and The Rush Medical Col-
lege, Chicago, IL, USA.
Summary box 5.3
Classification of sources of infection
●● Endogenous: present in or on the host e.g. SSSI following 
contamination of the wound from a perforated appendix
●● Exogenous: acquired from a source outside the body such as 
the operating theatre (inadequate air filtration, poor antisepsis) 
or the ward (e.g. poor hand-washing compliance). The cause 
of hospital acquired infection (HAI)
Microorganisms are normally prevented from causing 
infection in tissues by intact epithelial surfaces, most notably 
the skin. These surfaces are broken down by trauma or sur -
gery. In addition to these mechanical barriers, there are other 
protective mechanisms, which can be divided into:
 ● chemical: low gastric pH;
 ● humoral: antibodies, complement and opsonins;
 ● cellular: phagocytic cells, macrophages, polymorphonu -
clear cells and killer lymphocytes.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   45 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES46
All of these natural mechanisms may be compromised by 
surgical intervention and treatment.
The chance of developing an SSI after surgery is also 
determined by the pathogenicity of the organisms present and 
by the size of the bacterial inoculum. The more virulent the 
organism or the larger the extent of bacterial contamination, 
the more likely is wound infection to occur. Host factors are 
also important, so a less virulent organism or a lower level of 
wound contamination may still result in a wound infection if 
the host response is impaired (see Summary box 5.5). Devital-
ised tissue, excessive dead space or haematoma, all the results 
of poor surgical technique, increase the chances of infection. 
The same applies to foreign materials of any kind, including 
sutures and drains. If there is a silk suture in tissue, the critical 
number of organisms needed to start an infection is reduced 
logarithmically. Silk should not be used to close skin as it 
causes suture abscesses for this reason. These principles are 
important to an understanding of how best to prevent infec -
tion in surgical practice.
immunosuppression caused by radiotherapy, chemotherapy or 
steroids (Figures 5.4 and 5.5).
Summary box 5.4
Factors that determine whether a wound will become 
infected
●● Host response
●● Virulence and inoculum of infective agent
●● Vascularity and health of tissue being invaded (including local 
ischaemia as well as systemic shock)
●● Presence of dead or foreign tissue
●● Presence of antibiotics during the ‘decisive period’
Summary box 5.5
Risk factors for increased risk of wound infection
●● Malnutrition (obesity, weight loss)
●● Metabolic disease (diabetes, uraemia, jaundice)
●● Immunosuppression (cancer, AIDS, steroids, chemotherapy 
and radiotherapy)
●● Colonisation and translocation in the gastrointestinal tract
●● Poor perfusion (systemic shock or local ischaemia)
●● Foreign body material
●● Poor surgical technique (dead space, haematoma)
The decisive period
There is up to a 4-hour interval before bacterial growth becomes 
established enough to cause an infection after a breach in the 
tissues, whether caused by trauma or surgery. This interval is 
called the ‘decisive period’ and strategies aimed at prevent-
ing infection from taking a hold become ineffective after this 
time period. It is therefore logical that prophylactic antibiotics 
should be given to cover this period and that they could be 
decisive in preventing an infection from developing, before 
bacterial growth takes a hold. The tissue levels of antibiotics 
during the period when bacterial contamination is likely to 
occur should be above the minimum inhibitory concentration 
(MIC90) for the expected pathogens.
Reduced resistance to infection
Reduced resistance to infection has several causes, partic -
ularly those that impair the inflammatory response. Host 
response is weakened by malnutrition, which can be rec -
ognised clinically, and most easily, as recent rapid weight loss 
that can be present even in the presence of obesity. Meta -
bolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, uraemia and jaundice, 
disseminated malignancy and acquired immmune deficiency 
syndrome (AIDS) are other contributors to infection and a 
poor healing response, as are iatrogenic causes including the 
Figure 5.4 Major wound infection and delayed healing presenting as 
a faecal fistula in a patient with Crohn’s disease on steroid treatment. 
Figure 5.5 Delayed healing relating to infection in a patient on high-
dose steroids.
When enteral feeding is suspended during the periopera -
tive period, and particularly with underlying disease such as 
cancer, immunosuppression, shock or sepsis, bacteria (par -
ticularly  aerobic gram-negative bacilli) tend to colonise the 
normally sterile upper gastrointestinal tract. They may then 
translocate to the mesenteric nodes and cause the release of 
endotoxins (lipopolysaccharide in bacterial cell walls), which 
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   46 25/10/2017   07:43Presentation of sur gical infection 47
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
can be one cause of a harmful systemic inflammatory response 
through the excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines 
and activation of macrophages (Figure 5.6). In the circum-
stances of reduced host resistance to infection, microorgan-
isms that are not normally pathogenic may start to behave as 
pathogens. This is known as opportunistic infection. Oppor -
tunistic infection with fungi is an example, particularly when 
prolonged and changing antibiotic regimes have been used.
Minor wound infections may discharge pus or infected 
serous fluid but are not associated with excessive discomfort, 
systemic signs or delay in return home (Figure 5.8). The 
differentiation between major and minor and the definition 
of SSI is important in audits and clinical trials of antibiotic 
prophylaxis. There are scoring systems for the severity of 
wound infection, which are particularly useful in surveillance 
and research. Examples are the Southampton (Table 5.1) and 
ASEPSIS systems (Table 5.2).
Accurate surveillance can only be achieved using trained, 
unbiased and blinded assessors. Most include surveillance 
for a 30-day postoperative period. The US Centers for Dis -
ease Control (CDC) definition insists on a 30-day follow-up 
period for non-prosthetic surgery and 1 year after implanted 
hip and knee surgery.
Cytokine
release
IL-6, TNF, etc.
MODS
SIRS
Release of
endotoxin
Macrophage
Colonisation by
aerobic gram-
negative bacilli
(in gut failure
and starvation)
Mesenteric
nodes
Translocation
(failure of gut-associated
lymphoid tissue,
villous atrophy)
Summary box 5.6
Major wound infections
●● Significant quantity of pus
●● Delayed return home
●● Patients are systemically ill
Figure 5.6 Gut failure, colonisation and translocation r elated to the 
development of systemic inflammatory response syndr ome (SIRS) 
and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). IL, interleukin; 
TNF , tumour necrosis factor. 
PRESENTATION OF SURGICAL 
INFECTION
Major and minor surgical site 
infection (SSI)
Infection acquired from the environment or the staff fol -
lowing surgery or admission to hospital is termed hospi-
tal acquired infection (HAI). There are four main groups: 
respiratory infections (including ventilator-associated pneu -
monia), urinary tract infections (mostly related to urinary 
catheters), bacteraemia (mostly related to indwelling vascu -
lar catheters) and SSIs. 
A major SSI is defined as a wound that either discharges 
significant quantities of pus spontaneously or needs a second-
ary procedure to drain it (Figure 5.7). The patient may have 
systemic signs such as tachycardia, pyrexia and a raised white 
cell count.
Figure 5.7 Major wound infection with superficial skin dehiscence. 
Figure 5.8 Minor wound infection that settled spontaneously without 
antibiotics. 
Localised infection
ABSCESS
An abscess presents all the clinical features of acute inflam -
mation originally described by Celsus: calor (heat), rubor (red-
ness), dolor (pain) and tumor (swelling). To these can be added 
functio laesa (loss of function: if it hurts, the infected part is 
not used). Abscesses usually follow a puncture wound of some 
kind, which may have been forgotten, as well as surgery, but 
can be metastatic in all tissues following bacteraemia.
Aulus Aurelius Cornelius Celsus , 25 BC–50 AD, Roman surgeon and the author of De Re Medico Libri Octo.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   47 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES48
Abscesses contain hyperosmolar material that draws in 
fluid. This increases the pressure and causes pain. If they 
spread, they usually track along planes of least resistance 
and point towards the skin. Wound abscesses may discharge 
spontaneously by tracking to a surface, but may need drainage 
through a surgical incision. Most abscesses relating to surgical 
wounds take 7–10 days to form after surgery. As many as 75% 
of SSIs present after the patient has left hospital and may thus 
be overlooked by the surgical team.
Abscess cavities need cleaning out after incision and 
drainage and are traditionally encouraged to heal by second-
ary intention. When the cavity is left open to drain freely, 
there is no need for antibiotic therapy as well. Antibiotics 
should be used if the abscess cavity is closed after drainage, 
but the cavity should not be closed if there is any risk of 
retained loculi or foreign material. Thus a perianal abscess 
can be incised and drained, the walls curretted and the skin 
closed with good results using appropriate antibiotic therapy, 
but a pilonidal abscess has a higher recurrence risk after such 
treatment because a nidus of hair may remain in the sub -
cutaneous tissue adjacent to the abscess. Some small breast 
abscesses can be managed by simple needle aspiration of the 
pus and antibiotic therapy.
Summary box 5.7
Abscesses
●● Abscesses need drainage
●● Modern imaging techniques may allow guided needle aspira-
tion
●● Antibiotics are indicated if the abscess cavity is not left open 
to drain freely
●● An open abscess cavity heals by secondary intention
TABLE 5.1 Southampton wound grading system.
Grade Appearance
0
I
Ia
Ib
Ic
II
IIa
IIb
IIc
IId
III
IIIa
IIIb
IIIc
IIId
Normal healing
Normal healing with mild bruising or erythema
Some bruising
Considerable bruising
Mild erythema
Erythema plus other signs of inflammation
At one point
Around sutures
Along wound
Around wound
Clear or haemoserous discharge
At one point only (≤2 cm)
Along wound (>2 cm)
Large volume
Prolonged (>3 days)
Major complication
IV
IVa
IVb
V
Pus
At one point only (≤2 cm)
Along wound (>2 cm)
Deep or severe wound infection with or without tissue 
breakdown; haematoma requiring aspiration
TABLE 5.2 The ASEPSIS wound score.
Criterion Points
Additional treatment
Antibiotics for wound infection
Drainage of pus under local anaesthesia
Debridement of wound under general 
anaesthesia
0
10
5
10
Serous dischargea Daily 0–5
Erythemaa Daily 0–5
Purulent exudatea Daily 0–10
Separation of deep tissuesa Daily 0–10
Isolation of bacteria from wound 10
Stay as inpatient prolonged over 14 days as 
result of wound infection
5
a  Scored for 5 of the first 7 days only, the remainder being scored if present in the first 
2 months.
Persistent chronic abscesses may lead to sinus or fistula 
formation. In a chronic abscess, lymphocytes and plasma cells 
are seen. There is tissue sequestration and later calcification 
may occur. Certain organisms are associated with chronicity, 
and sinus and fistula formation. Common ones are Mycobac-
terium and Actinomyces. They should not be forgotten when 
these complications occur and persist.
Perianastomotic contamination may be the cause of an 
abscess but, in the abdomen, abscesses are more usually the 
result of anastomotic leakage. An abscess in a deep cavity 
such as the pleura or peritoneum may be difficult to diagnose 
or locate even when there is strong clinical suspicion that it 
is present (Figure 5.9). Plain or contrast radiographs may not 
be helpful, but ultrasonography, computed tomo graphy (CT), 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and isotope labelled 
white cell scans are all useful and may allow guided aspiration 
without the need for surgical intervention.
CELLULITIS AND L YMPHANGITIS
Cellulitis is a non-suppurative, invasive infection of tissues, 
which is usually related to the point of injury.There is poor 
localisation in addition to the cardinal signs of spreading 
inflammation. Such infections presenting in surgical practice 
Pyogenic organisms, predominantly Staphylococcus aureus, 
cause tissue necrosis and suppuration. Pus is composed of dead 
and dying white blood cells, predominantly neutrophils, that 
have succumbed to bacterial toxins. An abscess is surrounded 
by an acute inflammatory response composed of a fibrinous 
exudate, oedema and the cells of acute inflammation. Gran-
ulation tissue (macrophages, fibroblasts and new blood vessel 
proliferation) forms later around the suppurative process and 
leads to collagen deposition. If it is not drained or resorbed 
completely, a chronic abscess may result. If it is partly steril -
ised with antibiotics, an antibioma may form.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   48 25/10/2017   07:43Presentation of sur gical infection 49
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
are typically caused by organisms such as b-haemolytic 
streptococci (Figure 5.10), staphylococci (Figure 5.11) and 
C.  perfringens. Tissue destruction, gangrene and ulceration 
may follow, which are caused by release of proteases.
Systemic signs (the old-fashioned term is toxaemia) are 
common, with chills, fever and rigors. These events follow 
the release of toxins into the circulation, which stimulate 
a cytokine-mediated systemic inflammatory response even 
though blood cultures may be negative. 
Lymphangitis is part of a similar process and presents as 
painful red streaks in affected lymphatics draining the source 
of infection. Lymphangitis is often accompanied by painful 
lymph node groups in the related drainage area.
Specific local wound infections
GAS GANGRENE 
Gas gangrene is caused by C. perfringens. These gram-posi tive, 
anaerobic, spore-bearing bacilli are widely found in nature, 
particularly in soil and faeces. This infection is particularly 
relevant to military and trauma surgery. Patients who are 
immunocompromised, diabetic or have malignant disease are 
at greater risk, particularly if they have wounds containing 
Figure 5.9 Plain radiograph showing a subphrenic abscess with a 
gas/fluid level (white arrow). Gastr ografin is seen leaking from the 
oesophagojejunal anastomosis (after gastrectomy) towards the 
abscess (black arrow). 
Figure 5.10  Streptococcal cellulitis of the leg following a minor 
puncture wound. 
Figure 5.11 Staphylococcal cellulitis of the face and orbit following 
severe infection of an epidermoid cyst of the scalp. 
Summary box 5.8
Cellulitis and lymphangitis
●● Non-suppurative, poorly localised
●● Commonly caused by streptococci, staphylococci or clos-
tridia
●● Blood cultures are often negative
Summary box 5.9
Gas gangrene
●● Caused by Clostridium perfringens
●● Gas and smell are characteristic
●● Immunocompromised patients are most at risk
●● Antibiotic prophylaxis is essential when performing amputa-
tions to remove dead tissue
necrotic or foreign material, resulting in anaerobic conditions. 
Military wounds provide an ideal environment as the kinetic 
energy of high-velocity missiles or shrapnel causes extensive 
tissue damage. The cavitation which follows passage of a mis-
sile through the tissues causes a ‘sucking’ entry wound, leaving 
clothing and environmental soiling in the wound in addition 
to devascularised tissue. Gas gangrene wound infections are 
associated with severe local wound pain and crepitus (gas in 
the tissues, which may also be visible on plain radiographs). 
The wound produces a thin, brown, sweet-smelling exudate, 
in which Gram staining will reveal bacteria. Oedema and 
spreading gangrene follow the release of collagenase, hyaluro-
nidase, other proteases and alpha toxin. Early systemic com -
plications with circulatory collapse and organ failure follow if 
prompt action is not taken.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   49 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES50
mised, with conditions such as diabetes mellitus. The wound 
initiating the infection may have been minor, but severely 
contaminated wounds are more likely to be the cause. Severe 
wound pain, signs of spreading inflammation with crepitus 
and smell are all signs of the infection spreading. Untreated, it 
will lead to widespread local gangrene and systemic multisys-
tem organ failure. The subdermal spread of gangrene is always 
much more extensive than appears from initial examination. 
Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy must be combined with 
aggressive circulatory support. Locally, there should be wide 
excision of necrotic tissue and laying open of affected areas. 
The debridement may need to be extensive, and patients who 
survive may need large areas of skin grafting.
Systemic infection
Bacteraemia
Bacteraemia is unusual following superficial SSIs, which tend 
to drain through the wound, but common after deep space SSIs 
such as follow an intestinal anastomotic breakdown. It is usu-
ally transient and can follow procedures undertaken through 
infected tissues (particularly instrumentation in infected bile 
or urine). It may also occur through bacterial infection of 
indwelling intravenous cannulae, which should be replaced 
regularly in order to avoid colonisation. Bacteraemia is import-
ant when a prosthesis has been implanted, as infection of the 
prosthesis can occur through haematogenous spread. Aerobic 
gram-negative bacilli are often responsible, but Staphylococcus 
aureus and fungi may be involved, particularly after the use of 
broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Antibiotic prophylaxis should always be considered in 
patients at risk, especially when amputations are performed 
for peripheral vascular disease with open necrotic ulceration. 
Once gas gangrene infection is established, large doses of 
intravenous penicillin and aggressive debridement of affected 
tissues are required.  
CLOSTRIDIUM TETANI
This is another anaerobic, terminal spore-bearing, gram-  
positive bacterium, which can cause tetanus following 
implantation into tissues or a wound (which may have 
been trivial or unrecognised and forgotten). The spores are 
widespread in soil and manure, and so the infection is more 
common in traumatic civilian or military wounds. The signs 
and symptoms of tetanus are mediated by the release of the 
exotoxin tetanospasmin, which affects myoneural junctions 
and the motor neurones of the anterior horn of the spinal 
cord. A short prodromal period, which has a poor prognosis, 
leads to spasms in the distribution of the short motor nerves 
of the face followed by the development of severe generalised 
motor spasms including opsithotonus, respiratory arrest and 
death. A longer prodromal period of 4–5 weeks is associated 
with a milder form of the disease. The entry wound may show 
a localised small area of cellulitis. Exudate or aspirate may 
give a sample that can be stained to show the presence of 
gram-positive rods. Prophylaxis with tetanus toxoid is the 
best preventative treatment but, in an established infection, 
minor debridement of the wound may need to be performed 
and antibiotic treatment with benzylpenicillin provided in 
addition. Relaxants may also be required, and the patient 
will require ventilation in severe forms, which are associated 
with a high mortality. The administration of antitoxin using 
human immunoglobulin ought to be considered for both 
at-risk wounds and established infection.
The toxoid is a formalin-attenuated vaccine and should 
be given in three separate doses to give protection for a 5-year 
period, after which a single 5-yearly booster confers immu -
nity. It should be given to all patients with open traumatic 
wounds who are not immunised. At-risk wounds are those 
when there is late presentation, when there is devitalisation 
of tissue or when there is wound soiling. For these wounds, 
a booster of toxoid should be given or, if the patient is not 
immunised at all, a three-dose course is given together with 
prophylactic benzylpenicillin, but the use of antitoxin is con-
troversial because of the risk of toxicity and allergy.
SYNERGISTIC SPREADING GANGRENE (SYNONYM: 
SUBDERMAL GANGRENE, NECROTISING FASCIITIS)
This condition is not caused by clostridia. A mixed pattern of 
organisms is responsible: coliforms, staphylococci, Bacteroides 
spp., anaerobic streptococci and peptostreptococci have all 
been implicated, acting in synergy. Often, aerobic bacteria 
destroy the living tissue, allowing anaerobic bacteria to thrive. 
Abdominal wall infections are known as Meleney’s synergis -
tic gangrene and scrotal infections as Fournier’s gangrene 
(Figure 5.12). Patients are almost always immunocompro -
Frank Lamont Meleney , 1889–1963, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
Jean Alfred Fournier , 1832–1915, syphilologist, the founder of the Venereal and Dermatological Clinic, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.
Figure 5.12  A classic presentation of Fournier’s gangrene of the 
scrotum with ‘shameful exposure of the testes’ following excision of 
the gangrenous skin.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   50 25/10/2017   07:43Presentation of sur gical infection 51
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Theodor Escherich , 1857–1911, Professor of Paediatrics, Vienna, Austria, discovered the Bacterium coli commune in 1886.
Summary box 5.10
Bacteraemia
●● Common after anastomotic breakdown
●● Dangerous if the patient has a prosthesis, which can become 
infected
●● May be associated with systemic organ failure
Summary box 5.11
Definitions of infected states
●● SSI is an infected wound or deep organ space
●● SIRS is the body’s systemic response to severe infection
●● MODS is the effect that SIRS produces systemically
●● MSOF is the end stage of uncontrolled MODS
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS)
SIRS is a systemic manifestation of sepsis (see Table 5.3), 
although the syndrome may also be caused by multiple 
trauma, burns or pancreatitis without infection. Serious infec-
tion, such as secondary peritonitis, may lead to SIRS through 
the release of lipopolysaccharide endotoxin from the walls of 
dying gram-negative bacilli (mainly Escherichia coli) or other 
bacteria or fungi. This and other toxins stimulate the release 
of cytokines from macrophages (see Figure 5.6). SIRS should 
not be confused with bacteraemia although the two may 
coexist.
Septic manifestations and multiple organ dysfunction syn-
drome (MODS) in SIRS are mediated by the release of proin-
flammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumour 
necrosis factor alpha (TNFa). These cytokines normally 
stimulate neutrohil adhesion to endothelial surfaces adjacent 
to the source of infection and cause them to migrate through 
the blood vessel wall by chemotaxis, where they can attack 
the bacterial invasion. A respiratory burst occurs within such 
activated neutrophils, releasing lysosomal enzymes, oxidants 
and free radicals which are involved in killing the invading 
bacteria, but which may also damage adjacent cells. Coagu -
lation, complement and fibrinolytic pathways are also stim-
ulated as part of the normal inflammatory response. This 
response is usually beneficial to the host and is an important 
aspect of normal tissue repair and wound healing. In the pres-
ence of severe sepsis or bacteraemia, this response may become 
harmful to the host if it occurs in excess, when it is known as 
the systemic inflammatory response syndrome or SIRS. There 
are high circulating levels of cytokines and activated neu -
trophils which stimulate fever, tachycardia and tachypnoea. 
The activated neutrophils adhere to vascular endothelium in 
key organs remote from the source of infection and damage 
it, leading to increased vascular permeability, which in turn 
leads to cellular damage within the organs, which become 
dysfunctional and give rise to the clinical picture of multi -
ple organ dysfunction syndrome or MODS. In its most severe 
form, MODS may progress into multiple system organ failure 
(MSOF). Respiratory, cardiac, intestinal, renal and liver fail-
ure ensue in combination with circulatory failure and shock. 
In this state, the body’s resistance to infection is reduced and 
a vicious cycle develops where the more organs that fail, the 
more likely it becomes that death will follow despite all that a 
modern intensive care unit can do for organ support.
TABLE 5.3 Definitions of systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) and sepsis.
SIRS is 
Two of:
hyperthermia (>38°C) or hypothermia (<36°C)
tachycardia (>90/min, no β-blockers) or tachypnoea (>20/min)
white cell count >12 × 109/litre or <4 × 109/litre
Sepsis is SIRS with a documented infection
Severe sepsis or sepsis syndrome is sepsis with evidence 
of failure of one or more organs: respiratory (acute respiratory 
distress syndrome), cardiovascular (septic shock follows 
compromise of cardiac function and fall in peripheral vascular 
resistance), renal (usually acute tubular necrosis), hepatic, blood 
coagulation systems or central nervous system
Viral infections relevant to surgery
Hepatitis
Both hepatitis B and hepatitis C carry risks in surgery as they 
are blood-borne pathogens that can be transmitted both from 
the surgeon to the patient and vice versa. The usual mode of 
transmission is blood to blood contact through a needle-stick 
injury or a cut. Many cases of hepatitis B are asymptomatic 
and a surgeon may carry the virus without being aware of 
it. As there is an effective vaccine against hepatitis B, sur -
geons should know their immune status to hepatitis B and 
be vaccinated against it. Hepatitis C infection often becomes 
chronic with the risk of significant liver damage, but is poten-
tially curable with interferon-alpha and ribavirin treatment, 
so surgeons who are exposed to an infection risk should seek 
medical advice and antibody measurement. Transmission of 
hepatitis C from surgeon to patient is extremely rare.
HIV
The type I human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is one of 
the viruses of surgical importance because it can be transmit-
ted by body fluids, particularly blood. It is a retrovirus that has 
become increasingly prevalent through sexual transmission 
(both homo- and heterosexual), intravenous drug addiction 
and in infected blood products used to treat haemophiliacs in 
particular. The risk in surgery is mostly through needle-stick 
injury during operations.
After exposure, the virus binds to CD4 receptors with a 
subsequent loss of CD4+ cells, T helper cells and other cells 
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   51 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES52
PREVENTION OF SURGICAL 
INFECTION
Preoperative preparation
A short preoperative hospital stay lowers the risk of acquiring 
MRSA, multiply resistant coagulase-negative staphylococci 
(MRCNS) and other antibiotic-resistant organisms from 
the hospital environment. Medical and nursing staff should 
always wash their hands after any patient contact. Alcoholic 
hand gels can act as a substitute for hand washing, but do not 
destroy the spores of Clostridium difficile, which may cause pseu-
domembranous colitis, especially in immunocompromised 
patients or those whose gut flora is suppressed by antibiotic 
therapy. Although the need for clean hospitals, emphasised 
by the media, is logical, the ‘clean your hands campaign’ is 
beginning to result in falls in the incidence of HAIs. Staff 
with open, infected skin lesions should not enter the oper -
ating theatres. Ideally, neither should affected patients, espe-
cially if they are having a prosthesis implanted. Antiseptic 
baths (usually chlorhexidine) are popular in Europe, but there 
is no hard evidence for their value in reducing wound infec -
tions. Preoperative skin shaving should be undertaken in the 
operating theatre immediately before surgery as the SSI rate 
after clean wound surgery may be doubled if shaving is per -
formed the night before, because minor skin injury enhances 
superficial bacterial colonisation. Cream depilation is messy 
and hair clipping is best, with the lowest rate of infection.
Scrubbing and skin preparation
When washing the hands prior to surgery, dilute alcohol-based 
antiseptic hand soaps such as chlorhexidine or povidone–
iodine should be used for hand washing, and the scrub should 
include the nails. 
One application of a more concentrated alcohol-based 
antiseptic is adequate for skin preparation of the operative site. 
This leads to a >95% reduction in bacterial count but caution 
should be taken not to leave a pool of alcohol-based fluid on the 
skin which could ignite with diathermy and burn the patient.
Theatre technique and discipline also contribute to low 
infection rates. Numbers of staff in the theatre and movement 
in and out of theatre should be kept to a minimum. Care -
ful and regular surveillance is needed to ensure the quality of 
instrument sterilisation, aseptic technique and theatre venti-
lation. Laminar flow systems direct clean, filtered air over the 
operating field, with any air potentially contaminated as it 
passes over the incision then directed away from the patient. 
Operator skill in gentle manipulation and dissection of tissues 
is much more difficult to audit, but dead spaces and haemato-
mas should be avoided. There is no evidence that drains, inci-
sion drapes or wound guards help to reduce wound infection.
There is a high level of evidence that both the perioperative 
avoidance of hypothermia and the use of supplemental oxy -
gen during recovery significantly reduce the rate of SSIs.
involved in cell-mediated immunity, antibody production 
and delayed hypersensitivity. Macrophages and gut-associated 
lymphoid tissue (GALT) are also affected. The risk of oppor-
tunistic infections (such as Pneumocystis carinii  pneumonia, 
tuberculosis and cytomegalovirus) and neoplasms (such as 
Kaposi’s sarcoma and lymphoma) is thereby increased.
In the early weeks after HIV infection, there may be a flu-
like illness and, during the phase of seroconversion, patients 
present the greatest risk of HIV transmission. It is during 
these early phases that drug treatment, highly active antiret -
roviral therapy (HAART), is most effective through the abil-
ity of these drugs to inhibit reverse transcriptase and protease 
synthesis, which are the principal mechanisms through which 
HIV can progress. These drugs suppress the virus but do not 
clear it completely from the body, and treated patients can 
still transmit the virus to others. Within 2 years, untreated 
HIV can progress to acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) in 25–35% of patients.
Involvement of surgeons with HIV or 
hepatitis patients (universal precautions)
Patients may present to surgeons for operative treatment if 
they have a surgical disease and they are known to be infected 
or ‘at risk’, or because they need surgical intervention related 
to their illness for vascular access or a biopsy when they are 
known to have hepatitis, HIV infection or AIDS. Particular 
care should be taken when there is a risk of splashing/aerosol 
formation, particularly with power tools. Universal precau -
tions have been drawn up by the CDC in the United States 
and largely adopted by the National Health Service (NHS) in 
the UK (in summary):
 ● use of a full face mask ideally, or protective spectacles;
 ● use of fully waterproof, disposable gowns and drapes, par -
ticularly during seroconversion;
 ● boots to be worn, not clogs, to avoid injury from dropped 
sharps;
 ● double gloving needed (a larger size on the inside is more 
comfortable);
 ● allow only essential personnel in theatre;
 ● avoid unnecessary movement in theatre;
 ● respect is required for sharps, with passage in a kidney dish;
 ● a slow meticulous operative technique is needed with 
minimised bleeding.
AFTER CONTAMINATION
Needle-stick injuries are commonest on the non-dominant 
index finger during operative surgery. Hollow needle injury 
carries the greatest risk of viral transmission. The injured 
part should be washed under running water and the inci -
dent reported. Local policies dictate whether post-exposure 
antiretroviral treatment should be given. Occupational 
health advice is required after high-risk exposure, together 
with the need for hepatitis/HIV testing and the option for 
continuation in an operative specialty.
Moritz Kaposi , 1837–1902, Professor of Dermatology, Vienna, Austria, described pigmented sarcoma of the skin in 1872.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   52 25/10/2017   07:43Prevention of surgical infection 53
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Prophylactic antibiotics
Prophylactic antibiotics are used when there is a risk of wound 
contamination with bacteria during surgery . The theoretical 
degree of contamination, proposed by the National Research 
Council (USA) over 40 years ago, relates well to infection 
rates (Table 5.4). The value of antibiotic prophylaxis is low in 
non-prosthetic clean surgery, with most trials showing no clear 
benefit because infection rates without antibiotics are so low. 
The exception to this is where a prosthetic implant is used, as 
the results of infection are so catastrophic that even a small risk 
of infection is unacceptable.There is undisputed evidence that 
prophylactic antibiotics are effective in reducing the risk of 
infection in clean-contaminated and contaminated operations.
When wounds are heavily contaminated or when an incision is 
made into an abscess, a 5-day course of therapeutic antibiotics 
may be justified on the assumption that the wound is inevitably 
infected and so treatment is needed rather than prophylaxis.
If antibiotics are given to prevent infection after surgery or 
instrumentation, they should be used before bacterial growth 
becomes established (i.e. within the decisive period). Ideally, 
maximal blood and tissue levels should be present at the time 
at which the first incision is made and before contamination 
occurs. Tissue levels of the antibiotic should remain high 
throughout the operation and antibiotics with a short tissue 
half life should be avoided. Intravenous administration at 
induction of anaesthesia is therefore optimal, as unexpected 
delays in the timing of surgery may occur before then and anti-
biotic tissue levels may fall off before the surgery starts. In long 
operations or when there is excessive blood loss, or when unex-
pected contamination occurs, antibiotics may be repeated at 
4-hourly intervals during the surgery, because tissue antibiotic 
levels often fall faster than serum levels. There is no evidence 
that further doses of antibiotics after surgery are of any value in 
prophylaxis against infection and the practice can only encour-
age the development of antibiotic resistance. The choice of 
an antibiotic depends on the expected spectrum of organisms 
likely to be encountered, which will depend on the site and 
type of surgery and whether or not the patient has any anti -
biotic allergies. Hospitals in the UK now have standardised 
antibiotic prophylaxis policies which take account of the above 
factors and are only deviated from with microbiological advice. 
Patients with known valvular disease of the heart (or with 
any implanted vascular or orthopaedic prosthesis) should 
have prophylactic antibiotics during dental, urological or 
open viscus surgery, to prevent bacterial colonisation of the 
valve or prosthesis during the transient bacteraemia which 
can occur during such surgery.  
TABLE 5.4 SSI rates relating to wound contamination with 
and without using antibiotic prophylaxis.
Type of surgery Infection 
rate with 
prophylaxis (%)
Infection 
rate without 
prophylaxis (%)
Clean (no viscus opened) 1–2 1–2
Clean-contaminated (viscus 
opened, minimal spillage)
3 6–9
Contaminated (open viscus 
with spillage or inflammatory 
disease)
6 13–20
Dirty (pus or perforation, or 
incision through an abscess)
7 40
Summary box 5.12
Antibiotic prophylaxis
●● Not required in clean surgery unless a prosthesis is implanted
●● Use antibiotics that are effective against expected pathogens 
within local hospital guidelines
●● Plan for single-shot intravenous administration at induction of 
anaesthesia
●● Repeat only during long operations or if there is excessive 
blood loss
●● Patients with heart valve disease or a prosthesis should be 
protected from bacteraemia caused by dental work, urethral 
instrumentation or visceral surgery
Postoperative wound infections
The majority of wound infections arise from endogenous 
sources within the patient, but exogenous SSI may also occur 
from bacteria present in the ward or staff and so can be related 
to poor hospital standards. Strict attention to ward cleanliness, 
gloving before touching patient wounds and hand washing 
between all patient contacts are important preventive mea-
sures. An outbreak of wound infections on the ward with bac-
teria having the same antibiotic sensitivity profile implies an 
exogenous source of infection, which needs to be investigated 
by swabbing all staff and work surfaces. It may need temporary 
ward closure and a deep clean to eradicate the infection source.
Now that patients are discharged more quickly after surgery 
and many procedures are performed as day cases, many SSIs are 
missed by the surgical team unless they undertake a prolonged 
and carefully audited follow-up with primary care doctors. Sup-
purative wound infections take 7–10 days to develop, and even 
cellulitis around wounds caused by invasive organisms (such as 
b-haemolytic Streptococcus) takes 3–4 days to develop. Major 
surgical infections with systemic signs (Figure 5.13), evidence 
of spreading infection, cellulitis or bacteraemia need treat -
ment with appropriate antibiotics. The choice may need to be 
empirical initially but is best based on culture and sensitivities 
of isolates harvested at surgery or from culture of wound fluids 
or wound swabs. Although the identification of organisms in 
surgical infections is necessary for audit and wound surveillance 
purposes, it is usually 2–3 days before sensitivities are known 
(Figures 5.14 and 5.15). It is illogical to withhold antibiotics 
until results are available but, if clinical response is poor by the 
time sensitivities are known, then antibiotics can be changed. 
Such changes are unusual if the empirical choice of antibiotics 
is sensible; change of antibiotics promotes resistance and risks 
complications, such as C. difficile enteritis.
If an infected wound is under tension, or there is clear 
evidence of suppuration, sutures or clips need to be removed, 
with curettage if necessary, to allow pus to drain adequately. 
In severely contaminated wounds, such as an incision made 
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   53 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES54
for drainage of an abscess, it is logical to leave the skin open. 
Delayed primary or secondary closure can be undertaken when 
the wound is clean and granulating (Figures 5.16 and 5.17). 
Some heavily infected wounds may be left to heal by secondary 
intention, with no attempt at closure, particularly where there 
is a loss of skin cover and healthy granulation tissue develops 
(Figure 5.18). While the end result may be excessive scarring, 
that can always be revised with plastic surgery under clean sur-
gical conditions at a later stage. Leaving wounds open after a 
‘dirty’ operation, such as laparotomy for faecal peritonitis, is 
not practised as widely in the UK as in the USA or mainland 
Europe. 
Summary box 5.13
Surgical incisions thr ough infected or contaminated 
tissues
●● When possible, tissue or pus for culture should be taken 
before antibiotic cover is started
●● The choice of antibiotics is empirical until sensitivities are 
available
●● Heavily contaminated wounds are best managed by delayed 
primary or secondary closure
250
240
230
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
170
40.5
MONTH
BOWELS:
HOSPITAL __________________________________
YEAR W ARD SURNAME DATE OF BIRTH
SEX CONSULTANT
UNIT NO
FIRST NAMES
DAY
HOURSTIMEMINUTES
40.0
39.5
39.0
38.5
37.5
37.0
36.0
36.5
35.5
34.5
34.0
35.0
38.0
160
150
140PULSE PER MINUTE
BLOOD PRESSURE mmHg
TEMPERATURE (∞CELSIUS)
RESPIRATION PER MINUTE
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
J
0
5th6th 7th 8th
1110181 11
1717
7
7 T
11
303030 17
1114 222222 25
21
220917 23 23 0
00 3
6 6
0
0
006
06
0
000
0
0
0
0
0
00
0
0
00
0
0
0 0
9th 10th 11th 12
0
AUGUST
0 0
f
Fan therapy
Fan therapy
20-30
___________ _____________ ___________
SURNAME
 DATE OF BIRTH
SEX
 CONSULCO TANT
UNIT NO
FIRST NAMES
J
 f
Figure 5.13 Classic swinging pyrexia r elated to a perianastomotic 
wound abscess that settled spontaneously on antibiotic therapy. 
Figure 5.14 Mixed streptococcal infection of a skin graft with very 
poor ‘take’. 
Figure 5.15  After 5–6 days of antibiotics, the infection shown in 
 Figure 5.14 is under control, and the skin grafts are clearly viable. 
Figure 5.16 (a, b)  Delayed primary closure of fasciotomy wound 
after 3–5 days. 
(a)
 (b)
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   54 25/10/2017   07:43Antimicrobial tr eatment of surgical infection 55
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
When taking pus from infected wounds, specimens should 
be sent fresh for microbiological culture. Swabs should be 
placed in transport medium, but the larger the volume of 
pus sent, the more likely is the accurate identification of 
the organism involved. Providing the microbiologist with as 
much information as possible and discussing the results with 
them gives the best chance of the most appropriate antibiotic 
treatment. If bacteraemia is suspected, but results are nega-
tive, then repeat specimens for blood culture may need to be 
taken. A rapid report on infective material can be based on an 
immediate Gram stain.
Topical antiseptics should only be used on heavily con -
taminated wounds for a short period to clear infection as they 
inhibit epithelial ingrowth and so impair wound healing.
ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT 
OF SURGICAL INFECTION
Principles
Antimicrobials may be used to prevent or treat established 
surgical infection.
Figure 5.18 Infected animal bite/wound of the upper thigh, treated 
by open therapy following virulent staphylococcal infection.
Figure 5.17 Skin layers left open to granulate after laparotomy for 
faecal peritonitis, ready for skin grafting. 
Summary box 5.14
Principles for the use of antibiotic therapy
●● Antibiotics do not replace surgical drainage of infection
●● Only spreading infections or signs of systemic infection justify 
the use of antibiotics
●● Whenever possible, the organism and sensitivity should be 
determined
antibiotic therapy. Antibiotics alone are rarely sufficient to treat 
SSIs, which may also need open drainage and debridement.
There are two approaches to antibiotic treatment:
 ● A narrow-spectrum antibiotic  may be used to treat a 
known sensitive infection; for example, MRSA (which 
may be isolated from pus) is usually sensitive to vancomy-
cin or teicoplanin, but not flucloxacillin.
 ● Combinations of broad-spectrum antibiotics can be used 
when the organism is not known or when it is suspected 
that several bacteria, acting in synergy, may be responsible 
for the infection. For example, during and following emer-
gency surgery requiring the opening of perforated or isch-
aemic bowel, any of the gut organisms may be responsible 
for subsequent peritoneal or bacteraemic infection. In this 
case, a broad spectrum antibiotic such as teicoplenin or 
meropenem effective against a wide range of aerobic bac-
teria is combined with metronidazole, effective against an-
aerobic bacteria. Alternatively, triple therapy is used with 
amoxacillin, gentamicin and metronidazole. The use of 
such broad-spectrum antibiotic strategies should be guid -
ed by specialist microbiological advice. If clincal response 
is poor after 3–4 days, there should be a re-evaluation with 
a review of charts and further investigations requested to 
exclude the development or persistence of infection such 
as a collection of pus.
Antibiotics used in treatment and 
prophylaxis of surgical infection
Antimicrobials may be produced by living organisms (anti -
biotics) or by synthetic methods. Some are bactericidal, e.g. 
penicillins and aminoglycosides, and others are bacteriostatic, 
e.g. tetracycline and erythromycin. In general, penicillins act 
upon the bacterial cell wall and are most effective against 
bacteria that are multiplying and synthesising new cell wall 
materials. The aminoglycosides act at the ribosomal level, 
preventing or distorting the production of proteins required 
to maintain the integrity of the enzymes in the bacterial cell. 
Hospital and Formulary guidelines should be consulted for 
doses and monitoring of antibiotic therapy.
The use of antibiotics for the treatment of established sur-
gical infection ideally requires recognition and determination 
of the sensitivities of the causative organisms. Antibiotic ther-
apy should not be held back if it is indicated, the choice being 
empirical and later modified depending on microbiological 
findings. Once antibiotics have been administered, it may not 
be possible to grow bacteria from the wound and so the oppor-
tunity to ascertain the most appropriate antibiotic sensitivities 
is lost if a patient’s condition does not improve on empirical 
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   55 25/10/2017   07:43CHAPTER 5  Surgical infection
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES56
Penicillin
Benzylpenicillin has proved most effective against gram- 
posi tive pathogens, including most streptococci, the clos -
tridia and some of the staphylococci that do not produce 
b-lactamase. It is still effective against Actinomyces, which is 
a rare cause of chronic wound infection. It may be used specif-
ically to treat spreading streptococcal infections. Penicillin is 
valuable even if other antibiotics are required as part of multi-
ple therapy for a mixed infection. Some serious infections, e.g. 
gas gangrene, require high-dose intravenous benzylpenicillin.
Flucloxacillin
Flucloxacillin is resistant to b-lactamases and is therefore of 
use in treating infections with penicillinase-producing staph-
ylococci which are resistant to benzylpenicillin, but it has 
poor activity against other pathogens. It has good tissue pene-
tration and therefore is useful in treating soft tissue infections 
and osteomyelitis.
Ampicillin, amoxicillin and co-amoxiclav
Ampicillin and amoxicillin are b-lactam penicillins and can 
be taken orally or may be given parenterally. Both are effec -
tive against Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus faecalis and the 
majority of group D streptococci, but not species of Klebsiella 
or Pseudomonas. Clavulanic acid has no antibacterial activ -
ity itself, but it does inactivate β-lactamases, so can be used 
in conjunction with amoxicillin. The combination is known 
as co-amoxiclav and is useful against β-lactamase producing 
bacteria that are resistant to amoxicillin on its own. These 
include resistant strains of Staphylococcus aureus, E. coli, Hae-
mophilus influenzae, Bacteroides and Klebsiella. 
Piperacillin and ticarcillin
These are ureidopenicillins with a broad spectrum of activity 
against a broad range of gram-positive, gram-negative and 
anaerobic bacteria. Both are used in combination with 
β-lactamase inhibitors (tazobactam with piperacillin and 
clavulanic acid with ticarcillin). They are not active against 
MRSA but are used in the treatment of septicaemia, hospital-
acquired pneumonia and complex urinary tract infections, 
where they are active against Pseudomonas and Proteus spp. 
and have a synergistic effect when used with aminoglycosides 
such as gentamicin.
Cephalosporins
There are several b-lactamase-susceptible cephalosporins that 
are of value in surgical practice: cefuroxime, cefotaxime and 
ceftazidime are widely used. The first two are most effective in 
intra-abdominal skin and soft-tissue infections, being active 
against Staphylococcus aureus and most Enterobacteriaceae. 
As a group, the enterococci (Streptococcus faecalis) are not 
sensitive to the cephalosporins. Ceftazidime, although active 
against the gram-negative organisms and Staphylococcus 
aureus, is also effective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These 
cephalosporins may be combined with an aminoglycoside, 
such as gentamicin, and an imidazole, such as metronidazole, 
if anaerobic cover is needed. 
Aminoglycosides
Gentamicin and tobramycin have similar activity and are effec-
tive against gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae. Gentamicin is 
effective against many strains of Pseudomonas, although resis-
tance has been recognised. All aminoglycosides are inactive 
against anaerobes and streptococci. Serum levels immediately 
before and 1 hour after intramuscular injection must be taken 
48 hours after the start of therapy, and dosage should be modi-
fied to satisfy peak and trough levels. Ototoxicity and nephro-
toxicity may follow sustained high toxic levels and therefore 
single, large doses may be safer. Use needs to be discussed with 
the microbiologist and local policies should be observed.
Vancomycin and teicoplanin
These glycopeptide antibiotics are most active against 
gram-positive aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and have 
proved to be effective against MRSA, so are often used as 
prophylactic antibiotics when there is a high risk of MRSA. 
They are ototoxic and nephrotoxic, so serum levels should be 
monitored. They are effective against C. difficile in cases of 
pseudomembranous colitis.
Carbapenems
Meropenem, ertapenem and imipenem are members of the 
carbapenems. They are stable to b-lactamase, have useful 
broad-spectrum anaerobic as well as gram-positive activity 
and are effective for the treatment of resistant organisms, 
such as ESBL-resistant urinary tract infections or serious 
mixed-spectrum abdominal infections (peritonitis).
Metronidazole
Metronidazole is the most widely used member of the imid -
azole group and is active against all anaerobic bacteria. It is 
particularly safe and may be administered orally , rectally or 
intravenously. Infections caused by anaerobic cocci and strains 
of Bacteroides and Clostridia can be treated, or prevented, by its 
use. Metronidazole is useful for the prophylaxis and treatment 
of anaerobic infections after abdominal, colorectal and pelvic 
surgery and in the treatment of C. difficile pseudomembranous 
colitis.
Ciprofloxacin
Quinolones, such as ciprofloxacin, have a broad spectrum of 
activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacte-
ria but are particularly useful against Pseudomonas infections. 
Many UK hospitals have restricted their use as a preventive 
measure against the development of C. difficile enterocolitis.
FURTHER READING
Fraise AP , Bradley C. Ayliffe’s control of healthcare associated infection: a 
practical handbook. London: Hodder Arnold, 2009.
Fry DE. Surgical infections. London: JP Medical Ltd, 2013.
Sawyer RG, Hedrick TL. Surgical infections, an issue of surgical clinics . 
New York: Elsevier – Health Sciences Division, 2014.
Thomas WEG, Reed MWR, Wyatt MG. Oxford textbook of fundamentals 
of surgery. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016. 
Torok E, Moran E, Cooke F . Oxford handbook of infectious diseases and 
microbiology, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.
01_05-B&L27_Pt1_Ch05.indd   56 25/10/2017   07:43Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To be able to list:
 • The common surgical infections and infestations that 
occur in the tropics
To appreciate:
 • That many patients do not seek medical help until late 
in the course of the disease because of socioeconomic 
reasons
To be able to describe:
 • The emergency presentations of the various conditions, 
as patients may not seek treatment until they are very ill
To be able to:
 • Diagnose and treat these conditions, particularly as 
emergencies. The ease of global travel has connected 
areas where tropical infections are common to areas 
where they are not. Patients with such an infection who 
are recently returned from the tropics will mostly present 
as emergencies
To realise:
 • That the ideal management involves a multidisciplinary 
approach between the surgeon, physician, radiologist, 
pathologist and microbiologist. In case of doubt, in 
a difficult situation, there should be no hesitation in 
seeking help from a specialist centre. 
Chapter
T ropical infections and infestations
6
INTRODUCTION
Most surgical conditions in the tropics (regions of the Earth 
surrounding the equator) are associated with parasitic infesta-
tions and infections related to poor hygeinic conditions. With 
the ease of international travel, diseases that are common in 
the tropics may present in areas of the world where they are 
not commonly seen, especially as emergencies.
This chapter deals with the conditions that a surgeon 
might occasionally see when working in an area where such 
diseases are uncommon. Typically the patient would be a vis-
itor from a tropical climate or a local resident who has visited 
the tropics either on holiday or to work. The life cycles of the 
parasites will not be described. For academic interest readers 
may refer to the 24th edition of this book should they wish 
to learn details of the parasitology. The principles of surgical 
treatment are dealt with in the appropriate sections although, 
for operative details, referral to a relevant textbook is  
advised.
AMOEBIASIS
Introduction
Amoebiasis is caused by Entamoeba histolytica. The disease 
is common in the Indian subcontinent, Africa and parts of 
Central and South America, where almost half the popula-
tion is infected. The majority remain asymptomatic carriers. 
The mode of infection is via the faeco-oral route, and the 
disease occurs as a result of substandard hygiene and sani -
tation; therefore, the population from the poorer socioeco -
nomic strata are more vulnerable. Amoebic liver abscess, 
the commonest extraintestinal manifestation, occurs in less 
than 10% of the infected population and, in endemic areas, 
is much more common than pyogenic abscess. Patients who 
are immunocompromised and alcoholics are more susceptible 
to infection.
Pathogenesis
The organism enters the gut through food or water contami -
nated with the cyst. In the small bowel, the cysts hatch, and 
a large number of trophozoites are released and carried to the 
colon where flask-shaped ulcers form in the submucosa. The 
trophozoites multiply, ultimately forming cysts, which enter 
the portal circulation or are passed in the faeces as an infec -
tive form that infects other humans as a result of insanitary 
conditions.
Having entered the portal circulation, the trophozoites 
are filtered and trapped in the interlobular veins of the liver. 
They multiply in the portal triads, causing focal infarction of 
hepatocytes and liquefactive necrosis as a result of proteolytic 
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   57 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES58
enzymes pro duced by the trophozoites. The areas of necro-
sis eventually coalesce to form the abscess cavity. The term 
‘amoebic hepatitis’ is used to describe the microscopic picture 
in the absence of macroscopic abscess, a differentiation only 
in theory because the medical treatment is the same.
The right lobe is involved in 80% of cases, the left in 10% 
and the remainder are multiple. One possible explanation 
for the more common involvement of the right lobe of the 
liver is that blood from the superior mesenteric vein runs on a 
straighter course through the portal vein into the larger lobe. 
The abscesses are most common high in the diaphragmatic 
surface of the right lobe. This may cause pulmonary symp -
toms and chest complications. The abscess cavity contains 
chocolate-coloured, odourless, ‘anchovy sauce’-like fluid that 
is a mixture of necrotic liver tissue and blood. There may be 
secondary infection of the abscess which causes the pus to 
smell. While pus in the abscess is sterile unless secondarily 
infected, trophozoites may be found in the abscess wall in a 
minority of cases. Untreated abscesses are likely to rupture.
Chronic infection of the large bowel may result in a gran-
ulomatous lesion along the large bowel, most commonly seen 
in the caecum, called an amoeboma.
Amoeboma
This is a chronic granuloma arising in the large bowel, 
most commonly seen in the caecum. It is prone to occur in 
longstanding amoebic infection that has been treated inter -
mittently with drugs without completion of a full course, a 
situation that arises from indiscriminate self-medication, par-
ticularly in resource-poor countries. Hence this is more often 
seen in such countries.
This can easily be mistaken for a carcinoma. An 
amoeboma should be suspected when a patient from an 
endemic area with generalised ill health and pyrexia has a 
mass in the right iliac fossa with a history of blood-stained 
mucoid diarrhoea. Such a patient is highly unlikely to have 
a carcinoma because altered bowel habit is not a feature 
of right-sided colonic carcinoma. While iron deficiency 
anaemia is a classical elective presentation of a caecal 
carcinoma, the same is present in an amoeboma because of 
chronic malnutrition.
Investigations
The haematological and biochemical investigations reflect the 
presence of a chronic infective process: anaemia, leukocyto -
sis, raised inflammatory markers – erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) – hypoalbuminae -
mia and deranged liver function tests, particularly elevated 
alkaline phosphatase.
Serological tests are more specific, with the majority of 
patients showing antibodies in serum. These can be detected 
by tests for complement fixation, indirect haemagglutination 
(IHA), indirect immunofluorescence and enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). These tests are extremely use-
ful in detecting acute infection in non-endemic areas. IHA 
has a very high sensitivity in acute amoebic liver abscess in 
non-endemic regions and remains elevated for some time. 
The persistence of antibodies in a large majority of the pop-
ulation in endemic areas precludes its use as a diagnostic 
investigation in those locations. In these cases, tests, such as 
counter-immunoelectrophoresis, are more useful for detecting 
acute infection.
While flexible sigmoidoscopy is routine in any patient 
with blood-stained altered bowel habit, an outpatient 
rigid sigmoidoscopy using a disposable instrument may be 
a prudent first choice if amoebic infection is suspected in 
the presence of bloody mucoid diarrhoea. Most amoebic 
ulcers occur in the rectosigmoid and are therefore within 
reach of the sigmoidoscope; shallow skip lesions and ‘flask-
shaped’ or ‘collar-stud’ undermined ulcers may be seen, and 
can be biopsied or scrapings can be taken along with mucus 
for immediate microscopic examination. The presence of 
trophozoites distinguishes the condition from ulcerative 
colitis.
Imaging techniques
On ultrasound, an abscess cavity in the liver is seen as a 
hypoechoic or anechoic lesion with ill-defined borders; inter-
nal echoes suggest necrotic material or debris (Figure 6.1). 
Summary box 6.1
Amoebiasis – pathology
●● Entamoeba histolytica is the most common pathogenic 
amoeba in humans
●● The vast majority of carriers are asymptomatic
●● Insanitary conditions and poor personal hygiene encourage 
transmission of the infection
●● In the small intestine, the parasite hatches into trophozoites, 
which invade the submucosa to produce flask-shaped ulcers
●● In the portal circulation, the parasite causes liquefactive 
necrosis in the liver, producing an abscess, the commonest 
extraintestinal manifestation
●● The majority of abscesses occur in the right lobe of the liver
●● A mass in the course of the large bowel may indicate an 
amoeboma
Clinical features
The typical patient with amoebic liver abscess is a young 
adult male with a history of  insidious onset of non-specific 
symptoms, such as abdominal pain, anorexia, fever, night 
sweats, malaise, cough and weight loss. These symptoms 
gradually progress to more specific symptoms of pain in the 
right upper abdomen and right shoulder tip, hiccoughs and a 
non-productive cough. A past history of bloody diarrhoea or 
travel to an endemic area raises the index of suspicion.
Examination reveals a patient who is toxic and anaemic. 
The patient will have upper abdominal rigidity, tender hep -
atomegaly, tender and bulging intercostal spaces, overlying 
skin oedema, a pleural effusion and basal pneumonitis – the 
last feature is usually a late manifestation. Occasionally, a 
tinge of jaundice or ascites may be present. Rarely, the patient 
may present as an emergency due to the effects of rupture of 
an abscess into the peritoneal, pleural or pericardial cavity.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   58 25/10/2017   07:44Amoebiasis 59
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
The investigation is very accurate and is used for aspiration, 
both diagnostic and therapeutic. Where there is doubt about 
the diagnosis, a computed tomography (CT) scan may be 
helpful (Figure 6.2).
Diagnostic aspiration is of limited value except for estab -
lishing the typical colour of the aspirate, which is sterile and 
odourless unless it is secondarily infected.
A CT scan may show a raised right hemidiaphragm, a 
pleural effusion and evidence of pneumonitis (Figure 6.3).
An ‘apple-core’ deformity on barium enema would arouse 
suspicion of a carcinoma. A colonoscopy with biopsy is man-
datory because the radiological and macroscopic appearance 
may be indistinguishable from a carcinoma. In doubtful cases, 
vigorous medical treatment is given, and the patient under -
goes colonoscopy again in 3–4 weeks, as these masses are 
known to regress completely on a full course of drug therapy. 
If symptoms persist even partially following full medical treat-
ment in a patient who has recently returned from an endemic 
area, a colonic carcinoma must be excluded forthwith. This 
is because a dormant colonic carcinoma may become appar -
ent as a result of infestation with amoebic dysentery causing 
‘traveller’s diarrhoea’. However, it must be borne in mind 
that an amoeboma and a carcinoma can coexist.
Summary box 6.2
Diagnostic pointers for infection with Entamoeba 
histolytica
●● Bloody mucoid diarrhoea in a patient from an endemic area or 
following a recent visit to such a country
●● Upper abdominal pain, fever, cough, malaise
●● In chronic cases, a mass in the right iliac fossa may be 
an amoeboma but caecal cancer must be excluded by 
colonoscopy and biopsy
●● Sigmoidoscopy shows typical ulcers – biopsy and scrapes 
may be diagnostic
●● Serological tests are highly sensitive and specific outside 
endemic areas
●● Ultrasound and CT scans are the imaging methods of choice
Figure 6.1  Ultrasound of the liver showing a large amoebic liver 
abscess with necrotic tissue in the right lobe.
Figure 6.2 Computed tomographic scan showing an amoebic liver 
abscess in the right lobe.
Figure 6.3 Computed tomographic scans showing multiple amoebic 
liver abscesses with extension into the chest.
Treatment
Medical treatment is very effective and should be the first 
choice in the elective situation, with surgery being reserved 
for complications. Metronidazole and tinidazole are the effec-
tive drugs. After treatment with metronidazole and tinida -
zole, diloxanide furoate, which is not effective against hepatic 
infestation, is used for 10 days to destroy any intestinal 
amoebae.
Aspiration is carried out when imminent rupture of an  
abscess is expected. Aspiration also helps the penetration of 
metronidazole, and so reduces the morbidity when carried out 
with drug treatment in a patient with a large abscess. If there is 
evidence of secondary infection, appropriate drug treatment is 
added. The threshold for aspirating an abscess in the left lobe 
should be lower because of its proximity to the pericardium.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   59 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES60
Surgical treatment should be reserved for the complica -
tions of rupture into the pleural (usually the right side), peri -
toneal or pericardial cavities. Resuscitation, drainage and 
appropriate lavage with vigorous medical treatment are the 
key principles. In the large bowel, severe haemorrhage and 
toxic megacolon are rare complications. In these patients, the 
general principles of a surgical emergency apply, the princi -
ples of management being the same as for any toxic mega -
colon. Resuscitation is followed by resection of bowel with 
exteriorisation. Then the patient is given vigorous support-
ive therapy. All such cases are managed in the intensive care 
unit, as would any patient with toxic megacolon whatever 
the cause.
An amoeboma that has not regressed after full medical 
treatment should be managed with colonic resection, particu-
larly if cancer cannot be excluded.
up to 8  weeks. The developed larvae reach the alveoli, are 
coughed up, swallowed and continue their maturation in the 
small intestine. Sometimes, the young worms migrate from 
the tracheobronchial tree into the oesophagus, thus finding 
their way into the gastrointestinal tract, from where they can 
migrate to the common bile duct or pancreatic duct. The 
mature female, once in the small bowel, produces innumer -
able eggs that are fertilised and thereafter excreted in the 
stool to perpetuate the life cycle. Eggs in the biliary tract can 
form a nidus for a stone.
Clinical features
The larval stage in the lungs causes pulmonary symptoms – 
dry cough, chest pain, dyspnoea and fever – referred to as 
Loeffler’s syndrome. The adult worm can grow up to 45 cm 
long. Its presence in the small intestine causes malnutrition, 
failure to thrive, particularly in children, and abdominal pain. 
Worms that migrate into the common bile duct can produce 
ascending cholangitis and obstructive jaundice, while fea-
tures of acute pancreatitis may be caused by a worm in the 
pancreatic duct.
Small intestinal obstruction can occur, particularly in 
children, due to a bolus of adult worms incarcerated in the 
terminal ileum. This is a surgical emergency. Rarely, perfo -
ration of the small bowel may occur from ischaemic pressure 
necrosis from the bolus of worms.
A high index of suspicion is necessary so as not to miss 
the diagnosis. If a person from a tropical country, or one who 
has recently returned after spending some time in an endemic 
area, presents with pulmonary, gastrointestinal, hepatobiliary 
and pancreatic symptoms, ascariasis should be high on the list 
of possible diagnoses.
Investigations
As with most parasitic infestations, an increase in the eosin -
ophil count is common. Stool examination may show ova. 
Sputum or bronchoscopic washings may show Charcot–  
Leyden crystals or the larvae.
Chest radiograph may show fluffy exudates in Loeffler’s syn-
drome. A barium meal and follow-through may show a bolus 
of worms in the ileum or lying freely within the small bowel 
(Figure 6.4). Ultrasound may show a worm in the common 
bile duct (Figure 6.5) or pancreatic duct. On magnetic res-
onance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), an adult worm 
may be seen in the common bile duct in a patient presenting 
with features of obstructive jaundice (Figure 6.6). In patients 
with intestinal obstruction, plain abdominal radiograph may 
show tubular structures within dilated small bowel, denoting 
the presence of worms, which would also show up on a con -
trast CT scan as curvilinear structures.
Summary box 6.3
Amoebiasis – treatment
●● Medical treatment is very effective
●● For large abscesses, repeated aspiration is combined with 
drug treatment
●● Surgical treatment is reserved for complications, such as 
rupture into the pleural, peritoneal or pericardial cavities
●● Acute toxic megacolon and severe haemorrhage are intestinal 
complications that are treated with intensive supportive 
therapy followed by resection and exteriorisation: subtotal 
colectomy with terminal ileostomy and closure of the rectal 
stump
●● When an amoeboma is suspected in a colonic mass, cancer 
should be excluded by appropriate imaging and biopsy
ROUNDWORM (ASCARIS 
LUMBRICOIDES)
Introduction
Ascaris lumbricoides, commonly called the roundworm, is the 
commonest intestinal nematode to infect humans and affects 
a quarter of the world’ s population. The parasite causes pul-
monary symptoms as a larva and intestinal symptoms as an 
adult worm.
Pathology and life cycle
The eggs can survive in a hostile environment for a long time. 
The hot and humid conditions in the tropics are ideally suited 
for the eggs to turn into embryos. The fertilised eggs are pres-
ent in soil contaminated with infected faeces. Faeco-oral con-
tamination causes human infection.
As the eggs are ingested, the released larvae travel to the 
liver via the portal system and then through the systemic 
circulation to reach the lung, the maturation process taking 
Wilhelm Loeffler , 1887–1972, Professor of Medicine, Zurich, Switzerland.
Jean Martin Charcot , 1825–1893, Physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Ernst von Leyden , 1832–1910, Professor of Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   60 25/10/2017   07:4461
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLESAscaris lumbricoides (roundworm)
Treatment
The pulmonary phase of the disease is usually self-limiting and 
requires symptomatic treatment only . For intestinal disease, 
patients should ideally be under the care of a physician for treat-
ment with anthelmintic drugs. Certain drugs may cause rapid 
death of the adult worms and, if there are many worms in the 
terminal ileum, the treatment may actually precipitate acute 
intestinal obstruction from a bolus of dead worms. Children 
who present with features of intermittent or subacute obstruc-
tion should be given a trial of conservative management in the 
form of intravenous fluids, nasogastric suction and hypertonic 
saline enemas. The last of these helps to disentangle the bolus 
of worms and also increases intestinal motility.
Surgery is reserved for complications, such as intestinal 
obstruction that has not resolved on a conservative regime, 
or when perforation is suspected. At laparotomy, the bolus 
of worms in the terminal ileum is milked through the ileo -
caecal valve into the colon for natural passage in the stool. 
Summary box 6.4
Ascariasis – pathogenesis
●● It is the commonest intestinal nematode affecting humans
●● Typically found in a humid atmosphere and poor sanitary 
conditions, hence is seen in the tropics and resource-poor 
countries
●● Larvae cause pulmonary symptoms; adult worms cause 
gastrointestinal, biliary and pancreatic symptoms
●● Distal ileal obstruction is due to a bolus of worms; ascending 
cholangitis and obstructive jaundice from infestation of the 
common bile duct
●● Acute pancreatitis occurs when a worm is lodged in the 
pancreatic duct
●● Perforation of the small bowel is rare
Figure 6.4 Barium meal and follow-through showing roundworms in 
the course of the small bowel with barium seen inside the worms in 
an 18-year-old patient who presented with bouts of colicky abdominal 
pain and bilious vomiting, which settled with conservative manage-
ment (courtesy of Dr P Bhattacharaya, Kolkata, India).
Figure 6.5 Ultrasound scan showing a roundworm in the common 
bile duct (CBD). The patient presented with obstructive jaundice and 
had asymptomatic gallstones. On endoscopic r etrograde cholan-
giopancreatography, part of the worm was seen outside the ampulla 
in the duodenum and was removed through the endoscope. Subse -
quent laparoscopic cholecystectomy was uneventful.
Figure 6.6 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showing 
a roundworm in the common bile duct (CBD). The worm could not be 
removed endoscopically. The patient underwent an open cholecys -
tectomy and exploration of the CBD.
BARIUM SEEN INSIDE 
THE ROUNDWORM
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   61 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES62
Postoperatively, hypertonic saline enemas may help in the 
extrusion of the worms. Strictures, gangrenous areas or per -
forations need resection and anastomosis. If the bowel wall is 
healthy, enterotomy and removal of the worms may be per -
formed (Figure 6.7).
Rarely, when perforation occurs due to roundworm, the 
parasites may be found lying free in the peritoneal cavity. It 
is safer to bring out the site of perforation as an ileostomy 
because, in the presence of a large number of worms, the 
 closure of an anastomosis may be at risk of breakdown from 
the activity of the worms. 
When a patient is operated upon as an emergency for a 
suspected complication of roundworm infestation, the actual 
diagnosis at operation may turn out to be acute appendicitis, 
typhoid perforation or a tuberculous stricture, and the pres-
ence of roundworms is an incidental finding. Such a patient 
requires the appropriate surgery depending upon the primary 
pathology.
Common bile duct or pancreatic duct obstruction from 
a roundworm can be treated by endoscopic removal, failing 
which laparoscopic or open exploration of the common bile 
duct is necessary. Cholecystectomy is also carried out. A full 
course of antiparasitic treatment must follow any surgical 
intervention.
ASIATIC CHOLANGIOHEPATITIS
Introduction
This disease, also called oriental cholangiohepatitis, is caused 
by infestation of the hepatobiliary system by Clonorchis sin-
ensis. It has a high incidence in the tropical regions of South 
East Asia, particularly amongst those living in the major sea 
ports and near river estuaries. The organism, which is a type 
of liver fluke, resides in snails and fish that act as intermediate 
hosts. Ingestion of infected fish and snails, when eaten raw or 
improperly cooked, causes the infection in humans and other 
fish-eating mammals, which are the definitive hosts.
Pathology
In humans, the parasite matures into the adult worm in the 
intrahepatic biliary radicles where they may reside for many 
years. The intrahepatic bile ducts are dilated, with epithelial 
hyperplasia and periductal fibrosis. These changes may lead to 
dysplasia, causing cholangiocarcinoma – the most serious and 
dreaded complication of this parasitic infestation.
The eggs or dead worms may form a nidus for stone forma-
tion in the gallbladder or common bile duct, which becomes 
thickened and much dilated in the late stages. Intrahepatic 
bile duct stones are also caused by the parasite producing 
mucin-rich bile. The dilated intrahepatic bile ducts may lead 
to cholangitis, liver abscess and hepatitis.
Diagnosis
The disease may remain dormant for many years. Clinical fea-
tures are non-specific and include fever, malaise, anorexia and 
upper abdominal discomfort. The complete clinical picture 
can consist of fever with rigors due to ascending cholangitis, 
obstructive jaundice, biliary colic and pruritus from stones in 
the common bile duct. Acute pancreatitis may occur because 
of obstruction of the pancreatic duct by an adult worm. Par -
ticularly when presenting in non-endemic areas, it should 
be noted that if a person from an endemic area complains 
Figure 6.7 (a) Roundworms seen thr ough the bowel wall (arr owed). (b) Roundworm being removed through enterototomy. (c) Removed 
roundworms.
Summary box 6.5
Ascariasis – diagnosis and management
●● Barium meal and follow-through will show worms scattered in 
the small bowel
●● Ultrasound may show worms in the common bile duct and 
pancreatic duct
●● Plain abdominal radiograph and contrast CT scan will show 
the worms as tubular or curvilinear structures
●● Conservative management with anthelmintics is the first line 
of treatment even in obstruction
●● Surgery is a last resort – various options are available
(a) (b) (c)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   62 25/10/2017   07:44Filariasis 63
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
of symptoms of biliary tract disease, Clonorchis infestation 
should be high in the differential diagnosis.
In advanced cases, liver function tests are abnormal. 
Confirmation of the condition is by examination of stool or 
duodenal aspirate, which may show the eggs or adult worms. 
Ultrasound scan findings may be characteristic, showing uni-
form dilatation of small peripheral intrahepatic bile ducts 
with only minimal dilatation of the common hepatic and 
common bile ducts, although the latter are much more dilated 
when the obstruction is caused by stones. The thickened duct 
walls show increased echogenicity and non-shadowing echo-
genic foci in the bile ducts representing the worms or eggs. 
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
will confirm these findings.
FILARIASIS
Introduction
Filariasis is mainly caused by the parasite Wuchereria bancrofti 
carried by the mosquito. Variants of the parasite called Brugia 
malayi and Brugia timori are responsible for causing the dis -
ease in about 10% of those infected. The condition affects 
more than 120 million people worldwide, two-thirds of whom 
live in India, China and Indonesia. According to the World 
Health Organization (WHO), after leprosy, filariasis is the 
most common cause of long-term disability.
Once the host has been bitten by the mosquito, the 
matured eggs enter the human circulation to hatch and grow 
into adult worms; the process of maturation takes almost a 
year. The adult worms mainly colonise the lymphatic system.
Diagnosis
It is mainly males who are affected, because females generally 
cover a greater part of their bodies with clothing, thus making 
them less prone to mosquito bites. In the acute presentation, 
there are episodic attacks of fever with lymphadenitis and 
lymphangitis.
Occasionally, adult worms may be felt subcutaneously. 
Chronic manifestations appear after repeated acute attacks 
over several years. The adult worms cause lymphatic obstruc-
tion, resulting in massive lower limb oedema. Obstruction to 
the cutaneous lymphatics causes skin thickening, not unlike 
the ‘peau d’orange’ appearance in breast cancer, thus exacer -
bating the limb swelling. Secondary streptococcal infection 
is common. Recurrent attacks of lymphangitis cause fibrosis 
of the lymph channels, resulting in a grossly swollen limb 
with thickened skin, producing the condition of elephantiasis 
(Figure 6.8). Bilateral lower limb filariasis is often associated 
with scrotal and penile elephantiasis. Early on, there may be a 
hydrocoele underlying scrotal filariasis (Figure 6.9).
Chyluria and chylous ascites may occur. A mild form of 
the disease can affect the respiratory tract, causing dry cough, 
and is referred to as tropical pulmonary eosinophilia. The con-
dition of filariasis is clinically very obvious, and thus investi -
gations in the full-blown case are superfluous. Eosinophilia is 
common, and a nocturnal peripheral blood smear may show 
Summary box 6.6
Asiatic cholangiohepatitis – pathogenesis and 
diagnosis
●● Occurs in the Far Eastern tropical zones
●● The causative parasite is Clonorchis sinensis
●● Produces bile duct hyperplasia, intrahepatic duct dilatation 
and stones
●● Increases the risk of cholangiocarcinoma
●● May remain dormant for many years
●● When active, there are biliary tract symptoms in a generally 
unwell patient
●● Stool examination for eggs or worms is diagnostic
●● Ultrasound scan of the hepatobiliary system and ERCP are 
also diagnostic
Summary box 6.7
Asiatic cholangiohepatitis – treatment
●● Medical treatment can be curative in the early stages
●● Surgical treatment is cholecystectomy, exploration of the 
common bile duct and some form of biliary–enteric bypass
●● Prevention – consider offering hepatobiliary ultrasound as 
a screening procedure to recently arrived migrants from 
endemic areas
Treatment
Praziquantel and albendazole are the drugs of choice. How -
ever, the surgeon faces a challenge when there are stones not 
only in the gallbladder but also in the common bile duct. 
Cholecystectomy with exploration of the common bile duct is 
performed when indicated. Repeated washouts are necessary 
during the exploration, as the common bile duct is dilated 
and contains stones, biliary debris, sludge and mud. This 
should be followed by choledochoduodenostomy. As this is a 
disease with a prolonged and relapsing course, some surgeons 
prefer to do a choledochojejunostomy to a Roux loop. The 
Roux loop is brought up to the abdominal wall, referred to as 
‘an access loop’, which allows the interventional radiologist 
to deal with any future stones.
As a public health measure, people who have emigrated 
from an endemic area should be offered screening for Clonor-
chis infestation in the form of ultrasound of the hepatobili -
ary system. This condition can be diagnosed and treated, and 
even cured, when it is in its subclinical form. Most impor -
tantly, the risk of developing the dreadful disease of cholan -
giocarcinoma is eliminated.
Cesar Roux , 1857–1934, Professor of Surgery and Gynaecology, Lausanne, Switzerland, described this method of forming a jejunal conduit in 1908.
Otto Eduard Heinrich Wucherer , 1820–1873, German physician who practised in Brazil, South America.
Joseph Bancroft , 1836–1894, English physician who worked in Australia.
Peau d’orange  is French for ‘orange skin’. 
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   63 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES64
the immature forms, or microfilariae. The parasite may also be 
seen in chylous urine, ascites and hydrocoele fluid.
Treatment
Medical treatment with diethylcarbamazine is very effective 
in the early stages before the gross deformities of elephantiasis 
have developed. In the early stages of limb swelling, intermit-
tent pneumatic compression helps, but the treatment has to 
be repeated over a prolonged period.
A hydrocoele is treated by the usual operation of excision 
and eversion of the sac with, if necessary, excision of redun -
dant skin. Operations for reducing the size of the limb are 
hardly ever done these days because the procedures are so 
rarely successful.
HYDATID DISEASE
Introduction and pathology
Hydatid disease is caused by Ecchinococcus granulosus, commonly 
called the dog tapeworm. The disease is globally distributed and, 
while it is common in the tropics, it is much less common in 
other countries; for example, in the UK the occasional patient 
may come from a rural sheep-farming community.
The dog is the definitive host and is the commonest source 
of infection transmitted to the intermediate hosts – humans, 
sheep and cattle. In the dog, the adult worm reaches the 
small intestine, and the eggs are passed in the faeces. These 
eggs are highly resistant to extremes of temperature and may 
survive for long periods. In the dog’s intestine, the cyst wall 
is digested, allowing the protoscolices to develop into adult 
worms. Close contact with an infected dog causes contamina-
tion by the oral route, with the ovum thus gaining entry into 
the human gastrointestinal tract.
The cyst is characterised by three layers, an outer pericyst 
derived from compressed host organ tissues, an intermediate 
hyaline ectocyst, which is non-infective, and an inner 
endocyst that is the germinal membrane and contains 
viable parasites which can separate forming daughter cysts. 
A variant of the disease occurs in colder climates caused by 
Echinococcus multilocularis, in which the cyst spreads from the 
outset by actual invasion rather than expansion.
Classification
In 2003, the WHO Informal Working Group on Echinococ -
cosis (WHO-IWGE) proposed a standardised ultrasound clas-
sification based on the status of activity of the cyst. This is 
universally accepted, particularly because it helps to decide 
on the appropriate management. Three groups have been 
recognised:
 ● Group 1: Active group – cysts larger than 2  cm and often 
fertile.
Summary box 6.8
Filariasis
●● Caused by Wuchereria bancrofti, which is carried by the 
mosquito
●● Lymphatics are mainly affected, resulting in gross limb 
swelling
●● Eosinophilia occurs; immature worms may be seen in a 
nocturnal peripheral blood smear
●● Gross forms of the disease cause a great deal of disability and 
misery
●● Early cases are very amenable to medical treatment
●● Intermittent pneumatic compression gives some relief
●● The value of various surgical procedures is largely unproven 
and hence they are rarely performed
Figure 6.8 Left lower limb filariasis – elephantiasis (courtesy of Pro -
fessor Ahmed Hassan Fahal, FRCS MD MS, Khartoum, Sudan).
Figure 6.9 Filariasis of the scrotum and penis (courtesy of Professor 
Ahmed Hassan Fahal, FRCS MD MS, Khartoum, Sudan).
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   64 25/10/2017   07:44Hydatid disease 65
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
 ● Group 2: Transition group – cysts starting to degenerate 
and entering a transitional stage because of host resistance 
or treatment, but may contain viable protoscolices.
 ● Group 3: Inactive group – degenerated, partially or totally 
calcified cysts; unlikely to contain viable protoscolices.
Clinical features
As the parasite can colonise virtually every organ in the body, 
the condition can be protean in its presentation. When a 
sheep farmer, who is otherwise healthy, complains of a grad -
ually enlarging painful mass in the right upper quadrant 
with the physical findings of a liver swelling, a hydatid liver 
cyst should be considered. The liver is the organ most often 
affected. The lung is the next most common. The parasite can 
affect any organ (Figures 6.10 and 6.11) or several organs in 
the same patient (Figure 6.12).
The disease may be asymptomatic and discovered coinci -
dentally at postmortem or when an ultrasound or CT scan is 
done for some other condition. Symptomatic disease presents 
with a swelling causing pressure effects. Thus, a hepatic lesion 
causes dull pain from stretching of the liver capsule, and a 
pulmonary lesion, if large enough, causes dyspnoea. Daughter 
cysts may communicate with the biliary tree, causing obstruc-
tive jaundice and all the usual clinical features associated with 
it in addition to symptoms attributable to a parasitic infesta -
tion (Figure 6.13). Features of raised intracranial pressure 
Figure 6.10 Computed tomographic scan showing a hydatid cyst of 
the pancreas. A differential diagnosis of hydatid cyst or a tumour was 
considered. At exploration, the patient was found to have a hydatid 
cyst, which was excised followed by 30 months of treatment with 
albendazole, and remains free of disease.
Figures 6.11 Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) views of computed 
tomographic scans showing a large hydatid cyst of the right adr enal 
gland. The patient presented with a mass in the right loin and under-
went an adrenalectomy (courtesy of Dr P Bhattacharaya, Kolkata, 
India).
Figure 6.12  Computed tomographic scan showing disseminated 
hydatid cysts of the abdomen. The patient was started on alben -
dazole but was lost to follow-up (courtesy of Dr P Bhattacharaya, 
Kolkata, India).
(a)
(b)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   65 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES66
or unexplained headaches in a patient from a sheep-rearing 
community should raise the suspicion of a cerebral hydatid 
cyst.
The patient may present as an emergency with severe 
abdominal pain following minor trauma, when the CT scan 
may be diagnostic (Figure 6.14). Rarely, a patient may pres-
ent as an emergency with features of anaphylactic shock 
without any obvious cause. Such a patient may subsequently 
cough up white material that contains scolices that have trav-
elled into the tracheobronchial tree from rupture of a hepatic 
hydatid on the diaphragmatic surface of the liver.
Diagnosis
There should be a high index of suspicion. Investigations show 
a raised eosinophil count; serological tests, such as ELISA and 
immunoelectrophoresis, point towards the diagnosis. Ultra -
sound and CT scan are the investigations of choice. The CT 
scan shows a smooth space-occupying lesion with several 
septa. Ultrasound of the biliary tract may show abnormality 
in the gallbladder and bile ducts, when hydatid infestation of 
the biliary system should be suspected. Ultimately, the diag-
nosis is made by a combination of good history and clinical 
examination supplemented by serology and imaging.
Summary box 6.9
Hydatid disease – diagnosis
●● In the UK, the usual sufferer is a sheep farmer
●● While any organ may be involved, the liver is by far the most 
commonly affected
●● Elective clinical presentation is usually in the form of a painful 
lump arising from the liver
●● Anaphylactic shock due to rupture of the hydatid cyst is the 
emergency presentation
●● CT scan is the best imaging technique – the diagnostic 
feature is a space-occupying lesion with a smooth outline with 
septa
Figure 6.13 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography show-
ing a large hepatic hydatid cyst with daughter cysts communicating 
with the common bile duct, causing obstruction and dilatation of the 
entire biliary tree (courtesy of Dr B Agarwal, New Delhi, India).
Figure 6.14 Computed tomographic (CT) scan of the upper abdo -
men showing a hypodense lesion of the left lobe of the liver; the 
periphery of the lesion shows a double edge. This is the lamellar 
membrane of the hydatid cyst that separated after trivial injury. The 
patient was a 14-year-old girl who developed a rash and pain in the 
upper abdomen after dancing. The rash settled down after a course 
of antihistamines. The CT scan was performed 2 weeks later for per -
sisting upper abdominal pain.
Treatment
Here, the treatment of hepatic hydatid is outlined because the 
liver is most commonly affected, but the same general princi-
ples apply whichever organ is involved.
These patients should be treated in a tertiary unit where 
good teamwork between an expert hepatobiliary surgeon, 
an experienced physician and an interventional radiologist 
is available. Surgical treatment by minimal access therapy is 
best summarised by the mnemonic P AIR (puncture, aspira -
tion, injection and reaspiration). This is done after adequate 
drug treatment with albendazole, although praziquantel has 
also been used, both of these drugs being available only on a 
‘named patient’ basis.
Whether the patient is treated only medically or in com -
bination with surgery will depend upon the clinical group 
(which gives an idea as to the activity of the disease), the 
number of cysts and their anatomical position. Radical total 
or partial pericystectomy with omentoplasty or hepatic seg -
mentectomy (especially if the lesion is in a peripheral part of 
the liver) are some of the surgical options. During the opera -
tion, scolicidal agents are used, such as hypertonic saline (15–
20%), ethanol (75–95%) or 1% povidone iodine (although 
some use a 10% solution). This may cause sclerosing chol -
angitis if biliary radicles are in communication with the cyst 
wall. A laparoscopic approach to these procedures is being 
tried (see below).
Obviously, cysts in other organs need to be treated in 
accordance with the actual anatomical site, along with the 
general principles described. An asymptomatic cyst which is 
inactive (group 3) may be left alone.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   66 25/10/2017   07:44Hydatid disease 67
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Laparoscopic management
Currently, surgeons trained in minimal access surgery perform 
hydatid surgery using minimal access. Laparoscopic marsu -
pialisation of the cyst (de-roofing), consisting of removal of 
the cyst containing the endocyst along with daughter cysts, 
is the most common procedure. In the initial steps, the cyst 
is aspirated, taking care not to spill any contents, using povi -
done iodine or hypertonic saline as a scolicidal agent. Any 
communication with the biliary tree is oversewn and pedicled 
omentum is sutured to the margins of the cyst.
If the cyst is small, superficial and in the left lobe, cysto-
pericystectomy is performed at centres experienced enough 
to do more advanced surgery, removing the entire cyst intact. 
Pulmonary hydatid disease
The lung is the second commonest organ affected after the 
liver. The size of the cyst can vary from very small to a con -
siderable size. The right lung and lower lobes are slightly more 
often involved. The cyst is usually single, although multiple 
cysts do occur and concomitant hydatid cysts in other organs, 
such as the liver , are not unknown. The condition may be 
silent and found incidentally. Symptomatic patients present 
with cough, expectoration, fever, chest pain and sometimes 
haemoptysis. Silent cysts may present as an emergency due to 
rupture or an allergic reaction.
Uncomplicated cysts present as rounded or oval lesions 
on chest radiography. Erosion of the bronchioles results in 
air being introduced between the pericyst and the laminated 
membrane and gives a fine radiololucent crescent, the ‘menis-
cus or crescent sign’ (Figure 6.15). This is often regarded as a 
sign of impending rupture. When the cyst ruptures, the crum-
pled collapsed endocyst floats in the residual fluid, giving rise 
to the ‘water-lily’ sign on CT scan (Figure 6.16). Rupture 
into the pleural cavity results in pleural effusion. CT scan 
defines the pathology in greater detail.
The mainstay of treatment of pulmonary hydatid is sur -
gery. Medical treatment is less successful and considered when 
surgery is not possible because of poor general condition or 
diffuse disease affecting both lungs, or recurrent or ruptured 
cysts. The principle of surgery is to preserve as much viable 
lung tissue as possible. The exact procedure can vary: cystot -
omy, capittonage, pericystectomy, segmentectomy or occa-
sionally pneumonectomy.
Summary box 6.10
Hydatid cyst of the liver – treatment
●● Ideally managed in a tertiary unit by a multidisciplinary team of 
hepatobiliary surgeon, physician and interventional radiologist
●● Leave asymptomatic and inactive cysts alone – monitor size 
by ultrasound
●● Active cysts should first be treated by a full course of 
albendazole
●● Several procedures are available – PAIR, pericystectomy 
with omentoplasty and hepatic segmentectomy; appropriate 
management is customised according to the particular patient 
and organ involved
●● Increasingly, a laparoscopic approach is being tried
Figures 6.15 Chest radiographs: (a) showing a smooth rounded 
cystic lesion in the right lower lobe; (b) showing a ‘meniscus or cres-
cent’ sign (courtesy of Professor Saibal Gupta, MS, FRCS, Professor 
of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kolkata, India and Dr Rupak Bhattacharya, 
Kolkata, India).
(a)
(b)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   67 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES68
LEPROSY
Introduction
Leprosy, also called Hansen’ s disease, is a chronic infectious 
disease caused by an acid-fast bacillus, Mycobacterium leprae, 
that is widely prevalent in the tropics. Globally, India, Brazil, 
Nepal, Mozambique, Angola and Myanmar account for 91% 
of all cases; India alone accounts for 78% of the world’s dis -
ease. Patients suffer not only from the primary effects of the 
disease but also from social discrimination, sadly compounded 
by use of the word ‘leper’ for one afflicted with this disease.
Close contact over a long duration (several years) is 
required for disease transmission. Ignorance of this fact on 
the part of the general public results in ostracism and social 
stigma. History records that in the distant past sufferers were 
made to wear cow bells so that other people could avoid them. 
The use of the term ‘leper’, still used metaphorically to denote 
an outcast, does not help to break down the social barriers 
that continue to exist against the sufferer.
Pathology
The bacillus inhabits the colder parts of the body – hence 
it is found in the nasal mucosa and skin in the region of the 
ears, thus involving the facial nerve as it exits from the sty -
lomastoid foramen. The disease is transmitted from the nasal 
secretions of a patient, the infection being contracted in 
childhood or early adolescence. After an incubation period of 
several years, the disease presents with skin, upper respiratory 
or neurological manifestations. The bacillus is acid fast but 
weakly so when compared with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
The disease is broadly classified into two groups – lepro -
matous and tuberculoid. In lepromatous leprosy, there is wide-
spread dissemination of abundant bacilli in the tissues, with 
macrophages and few lymphocytes. This is a reflection of the 
poor immune response, resulting in depleted host resistance 
from the patient. In tuberculoid leprosy, on the other hand, 
the patient shows a strong immune response with scant bacilli 
in the tissues, epithelioid granulomas, numerous lymphocytes 
and giant cells. The tissue damage is inversely proportional to 
the host’s immune response. There are various grades of the 
disease between the two main spectra.
Summary box 6.12
Mycobacterium leprae – pathology
●● Leprosy is a chronic curable infection caused by 
Mycobacterium leprae
●● It occurs mainly in tropical regions and resource-poor 
countries
●● The majority of cases are located in the Indian subcontinent
●● Transmission is through nasal secretions, the bacillus 
inhabiting the colder parts of the body
●● It is attributed to poor hygiene and insanitary conditions
●● The incubation period is several years
●● The initial infection occurs in childhood
●● Lepromatous leprosy denotes a poor host immune reaction
●● Tuberculoid leprosy occurs when host resistance is stronger 
than the virulence of the organism
Summary box 6.11
Pulmonary hydatid disease
●● The second most common organ involved
●● Size of the cyst has a wide variation 
●● May present as an incidental finding 
●● Clinical presentation may be elective or as an emergency due 
to rupture
●● Plain radiograph shows ‘meniscus or crescent’ sign; CT 
shows ‘water-lily’ sign
●● Ideal treatment is surgical – various choices are available
Figure 6.16 Computed tomographic scan showing the ‘water-lily’ 
sign. A young mountaineer, while on a high altitude trip, complained 
of sudden shortness of breath, cough and copious expectoration con-
sisting of clear fluid and flaky material. At first thought to be due to 
pulmonary oedema, it turned out to be ruptured hydatid cyst, suc -
cessfully treated by surgery (courtesy of Professor Saibal Gupta, MS, 
FRCS, Professor of Cardiovascular Surgery, Kolkata, India and Dr 
Rupak Bhattacharya, Kolkata, India).
 Owing to the stigma attached to the word ‘leper’, RG Cochrane suggested that the best name for leprosy is ‘Hansen’s disease’.
Gerhard Henrik Armauer Hansen , 1841–1912, physician in charge of a leper hospital near Bergen, Norway.
Robert Greenhill Cochrane , 1899–1985, medical missionary who became an international authority on leprosy; he devoted his time to leprosy patients in South 
East Asia, particularly India.
Clinical features and diagnosis
The disease is slowly progressive and affects the skin, upper 
respiratory tract and peripheral nerves. In tuberculoid lep -
rosy, the damage to tissues occurs early and is localised to one 
part of the bo dy, with limited deformity of that organ. Neu -
ral involvement is characterised by thickening of the nerves, 
which are tender. There may be asymmetrical well-defined 
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   68 25/10/2017   07:44Leprosy 69
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
anaesthetic hypopigmented or erythematous macules with 
elevated edges and a dry and rough surface – lesions called 
leprids. In lepromatous leprosy, the disease is symmetrical 
and extensive. Cutaneous involvement occurs in the form 
of several pale macules that form plaques and no dules called 
lepromas. The deformities produced are divided into primary, 
which are caused by leprosy or its reactions, and second -
ary, resulting from effects such as anaesthesia of the hands  
and feet.
Nodular lesions on the face in the acute phase of the 
lepromatous variety are known as ‘leonine facies’ (looking 
like a lion). Later, there is wrinkling of the skin, giving an 
aged appearance to a young individual. There is loss of the 
eyebrows and destruction of the lateral cartilages and sep-
tum of the nose with collapse of the nasal bridge and lifting 
of the tip of the nose (Figure 6.17). There may be paralysis 
of the branches of the facial nerve in the bony canal or of 
the zygomatic branch. Blindness may be attributed to expo-
sure keratitis or iridocyclitis. Paralysis of the orbicularis oculi 
causes incomplete closure of the eye, epiphora and conjunc -
tivitis (Figure 6.18). The hands are typically clawed (Figure 
6.19) because of involvement of the ulnar nerve at the elbow 
and the median nerve at the wrist. Anaesthesia of the hands 
makes these patients vulnerable to frequent burns and inju -
ries. Similarly, clawing of the toes (Figure 6.20) occurs as a 
result of involvement of the posterior tibial nerve. When the 
lateral popliteal nerve is affected, it leads to foot drop, and 
the nerve can be felt to be thickened behind the upper end 
of the fibula. Anaesthesia of the feet predisposes to trophic 
ulceration (Figure 6.21), chronic infection, contraction and 
autoamputation. Involvement of the testes causes atrophy, 
Figure 6.17 Lateral view of the face showing collapse of the nasal 
bridge due to destruction of nasal cartilage by leprosy.
Figure 6.18 Frontal view of the face showing eye changes in leprosy 
– paralysis of orbicularis oculi and loss of eyebrows.
Figures 6.19 (a, b) Typical bilateral claw hand 
from leprosy due to involvement of the ulnar and 
median nerves.
Figure 6.20  Claw toes fr om involvement of 
the posterior tibial nerve by lepr osy; also note 
autoamputation of toes of the right foot.
(a) (b)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   69 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES70
which in turn results in gynaecomastia (Figure 6.22). Con-
firmation of the diagnosis is obtained by a skin smear or skin 
biopsy, which shows the classical histological and microbio -
logical features. the WHO guidelines along with rifampicin and clofazimine. 
During treatment, the patient may develop acute manifesta -
tions. These are controlled with steroids. Multiple drug ther -
apy for 12 months is the key to treatment. A team approach 
between an infectious diseases specialist, plastic surgeon, oph-
thalmologist, and hand or orthopaedic surgeon is important.
Surgical treatment is indicated in advanced stages of the 
disease for functional disability of limbs, cosmetic disfigure-
ment of the face and visual problems. These entail major 
reconstructive surgery, the domain of the plastic surgeon.
Surgery for deformities in the hand is aimed at return -
ing the ability to achieve a grasp and a pinch grip. Tendon 
transfers are used to recreate the function of the lumbricals 
which have been lost due to damage to the ulnar nerve. In 
the foot, damage to the common peroneal nerve leads to a 
foot drop due to paralysis of tibialis anterior. If a foot-drop 
splint is not adequate then once again a tendon transfer 
(tibialis posterior into the dorsum of the foot) will improve 
function. Ulcers resulting from an insensate foot should 
be completely debrided followed by protection with a 
plaster cast.
Summary box 6.13
Leprosy – diagnosis
●● Typical clinical features and awareness of the disease should 
help to make a diagnosis
●● The face has an aged look, with collapse of the nasal bridge 
and ocular changes
●● Thickened peripheral nerves, patches of anaesthetic skin, 
claw hands, foot drop and trophic ulcers are characteristic
●● Microbiological examination of the acid-fast bacillus and 
typical histology on skin biopsy are confirmatory
Figure 6.21 Bilateral trophic ulceration of the feet due to anaesthesia 
of the soles resulting from leprosy; also note claw toes on the left foot.
Figure 6.22 Typical leonine facies and gynaecomastia in leprosy.
Gerhard Domagk , 1895–1964, German physician, Lecturer in Pathologic Anatomy, University of Munster, Germany, discovered prontosil in 1935, for which he 
was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1939.
Paul Wilson Brand  CBE, FRCS, 1914–2003, was born to missionary parents in Southern India, and qualified in London in 1943. He himself was a dedicated 
missionary who was ‘An extraordinary gifted orthopaedic surgeon who straightened crooked hands and unravalled the riddle of leprosy.’ As a pioneer in tendon 
transfer techniques, he established and practised initially in New Life Center, Vellore, South India and Schieffelin Leprosy Research Centre, Karigiri, South India. 
Initially he trained as a carpenter and builder and maintained that his training as a carpenter helped him in his expertise in tendon transplantation. When he was 
awarded the CBE, his wife, Margaret, came to know about it when she found a letter from Her Majesty’s Government informing him of the award, while emptying 
the pockets of his trousers before they were put into the wash. He later moved to Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, where he continued his work, and 
finally to Seattle as Emeritus Professor of Orthopaedics in the University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
Margaret Brand , alongside her husband, Paul Brand, also contributed immensely to the health of leprosy patients by concentrating on research to prevent blind-
ness in leprosy. She became known as ‘the woman who first helped lepers to see’.
Frank Tovey  OBE, b.1927, another English surgeon at about the same time (1951–1967), also performed extensive tendon transfers, facial and other recon -
structive surgery on leprosy patients in Southern India in the State of Mysore. In this he was helped by his wife, Winifred, who organised the physiotherapy and 
rehabilitation of the patients and established village diagnostic and treatment centres).
Treatment
A herbal derivative from the seeds of Hydrocarpus wightiana 
called chalmoogra oil was the mainstay of treatment, with 
some success, until the advent of dapsone (diamino-diphenyl 
sulphone). Dapsone, one of the principal drugs, was a deriv -
ative of prontosil red (Domagk). This is used according to 
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   70 25/10/2017   07:44Mycetoma 71
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
The general surgeon may be called upon to treat a patient 
when the deformity is so advanced that amputation is required 
or an abscess needs drainage as an emergency.
All surgical procedures obviously need to be done under 
antileprosy drug treatment. This is best achieved by a team 
approach. Educating patients about the dreadful sequelae of 
the disease so that they seek medical help early is important. 
It is also necessary to educate the general public that patients 
suffering from the disease should not be made social outcasts.
toma, invasion to deeper tissues occurs earlier and is more 
extensive. The tendons and nerves are spared until late in 
the disease. This may explain the rarity of neurological and 
trophic changes even in patients with long-standing disease. 
Trophic changes are rare because the blood supply is adequate.
Summary box 6.15
Mycetoma – pathogenesis
●● Mostly occurs in the ‘mycetoma belt’
●● There are two types – eumycetoma and actinomycetoma
●● Caused by fungi or bacteria entering through a site of trauma 
which may not be apparent; hence the foot is most commonly 
affected
●● Produces a chronic, specific, granulomatous, progressive, 
destructive inflammatory lesion
●● Results in tissue destruction, deformity, disability and 
sometimes death
Summary box 6.14
Leprosy – treatment
●● Multiple drug therapy for a year
●● Team approach
●● Surgical reconstruction requires the expertise of a hand 
surgeon, orthopaedic surgeon and plastic surgeon
●● Education of the patient and general public should be the 
keystone in prevention
MYCETOMA
(This section has been contributed by: Professor Ahmed Has-
san Fahal MBBS, FRCS, FRCSI, FRCSG, MD, MS, FRCP 
(London), Professor of Surgery, University of Khartoum, 
Khartoum, Sudan)
Introduction
Mycetoma is a chronic, specific, granulomatous, progressive, 
destructive inflammatory disease, which involves the skin, 
subcutaneous tissues and deeper structures. The causative 
organism may be true fungi, when the condition is called 
eumycetoma; when caused by bacteria it is called actinomyce-
toma. The pathognomonic feature is the triad of painless sub-
cutaneous mass, multiple sinuses and seropurulent discharge. 
It causes tissue destruction, deformity, disability, and death in 
extreme cases.
Epidemiology and pathogenesis
The condition predominently occurs in the ‘mycetoma belt’ 
that lies between the latitudes 15° south and 30° north, 
comprising the countries of Sudan, Somalia, Senegal, India, 
Yemen, Mexico, Venezuela, Columbia, Argentina and a few 
others. The route of infection is inoculation of the organ -
ism that is resident in the soil through a traumatised area. 
Although in the vast majority there is no history of trauma, 
the portal of entry is always an area of minor unrecognised 
trauma in a bare-footed individual walking in a terrain full of 
thorns. Hence the foot is the commonest site affected. Myce-
toma is not contagious.
Once the granuloma forms it increases in size, and the 
overlying skin becomes stretched, smooth, shiny and attached 
to the lesion. Areas of hypo- or hyperpigmentation sometimes 
develop. Eventually it invades the deeper structures. This is 
usually gradual and delayed in eumycetoma. In actinomyce -
Clinical presentation
As mycetoma is painless, presentation is late in the major -
ity. It presents as a slowly progressive, painless, subcutane-
ous swelling commonly at the site of presumed trauma. The 
swelling is variable in its physical characteristics: firm and 
rounded, soft and lobulated, rarely cystic, and is often mobile. 
Multiple secondary nodules may evolve; they may suppurate 
and drain through multiple sinus tracts. The sinuses may close 
transiently after discharge during the active phase of the dis-
ease. Fresh adjacent sinuses may open while some of the old 
ones may heal completely. They coalesce and form abscesses, 
the discharge being serous, serosanguineous or purulent. 
During the active phase of the disease the sinuses discharge 
grains, the colour of which can be black, yellow, white or red 
depending upon the organism. Pain supervenes when there is 
secondary bacterial infection. 
The common sites affected are those that come into 
 contact with soil during daily activities: the foot in 70% 
( Figure 6.23 ) and the hand in 12% (Figure 6.24). In 
endemic areas the knee (Figure 6.25), arm, leg, head and 
neck (Figure 6.26), thigh and perineum (Figure 6.27) can 
Figure 6.23 Mycetoma of the foot.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   71 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES72
be involved. Rare sites are the chest, abdominal wall, facial 
bones, mandible, testes, paranasal sinuses and eye. 
In some patients there may be areas of local hyperhidrosis 
over the lesion. This may be due to sympathetic overactiv -
ity or increased local temperature due to raised arterial blood 
flow caused by the chronic inflammation. In the majority 
of patients, the regional lymph nodes are small and shotty. 
Lymphadenopathy is common. This may be due to secondary 
bacterial infection, lymphatic spread of mycetoma or a local 
immune response to the disease.
The condition remains localised; constitutional distur -
bances are a sign of secondary bacterial infection. Cachexia 
and anaemia from malnutrition and sepsis may be seen in late 
cases. It can be fatal, especially in cases of cranial mycetoma. 
Spread
Local spread occurs predominantly along tissue planes. The 
organism multiplies to form colonies which spread along the 
fascial planes to skin and underlying structures. Lymphatic 
spread, more common in actinomycetoma, occurs to the 
regional lymph no des, and increases with repeated inade -
quate surgical excision procedures. During the active phase 
of the disease, these lymphatic satellites may suppurate and 
discharge; lymphadenopathy may also be due to secondary 
bacterial infection. Spread via the blood stream can occur.
The apparent clinical features of mycetoma are not always 
a reliable indicator of the extent and spread of the disease. 
Some small lesions with few sinuses may have many deep 
connecting tracts, through which the disease can spread 
quite extensively. Therefore surgery in mycetoma under local 
anaesthesia is contraindicated. 
Figure 6.24 Mycetoma of the hand.
Figure 6.25 Mycetoma of the knee.
Fibure 6.27  Extensive sattelite inguinal actinomycetoma from a 
primary foot lesion involving the anterior abdominal wall and perineum.
Figure 6.26 Actinomycetoma of the head and neck.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   72 25/10/2017   07:44Mycetoma 73
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Differential diagnosis
Mycetoma should be distinguished from Kaposi’s sarcoma, 
malignant melanoma, fibroma and foreign body (thorn) 
granuloma. A radiograph that demonstrates the presence of 
bone destruction in the absence of sinuses is suggestive of 
tuberculosis. The radiological features of advanced mycetoma 
are similar to those of primary osteogenic sarcoma. Primary 
osseous mycetoma is to be differentiated from chronic osteo -
myelitis, osteoclastoma, bone cysts and syphilitic osteitis. In 
endemic areas the dictum should be ‘any subcutaneous swell-
ing must be considered a mycetoma until proven otherwise’. 
Diagnosis
Several imaging techniques are available to confirm the 
diagnosis: plain radiography, ultrasound, CT and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). 
Plain radiograph
In the early stages, soft tissue shadows (often multiple) with 
calcification and obliteration of the fascial planes may be 
seen. As the disease progresses, the cortex may be compressed 
from the outside by the granuloma, leading to bone scallop -
ing. Periosteal reaction with new bone spicules may create 
a sun-ray appearance and Codman’s triangle, not unlike an 
osteogenic sarcoma (Figure 6.28). Late in the disease, there 
may be multiple punched-out cavities throughout the bone. 
Ultrasound 
This can differentiate between eumycetoma and actinomy -
cetoma as well as between mycetoma and other conditions. 
In eumycetoma, the grains produce numerous sharp bright 
hyper-reflective echoes. There are multiple thick-walled cav-
ities with absent acoustic enhancement. In actinomycetoma, 
the findings are similar but the grains are less distinct. The 
size and extent of the lesion can be accurately determined 
ultrasonically, a finding useful in planning surgical treatment.
MRI
This helps to assess bone destruction, periosteal reaction, and 
particularly soft tissue involvement (Figure 6.29). MRI usu-
ally shows multiple 2–5  mm lesions of high signal intensity, 
which indicates the granuloma, interspersed within a low-in-
tensity matrix denoting the fibrous tissue. The ‘dot-in-circle 
sign’, which indicates the presence of grains, is highly char -
acteristic. 
CT scan
CT findings in mycetoma are not specific but are helpful to 
detect early bone involvement.
Cavity
Soft tissue
swelling
Periosteal
reaction
Figure 6.28 Plain x-ray of the knee showing multiple large cavities 
involving the lower femur, upper tibia and fibula, with well-defined 
margins and periosteal reaction typical of eumycetoma.
Figure 6.29  (a) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the foot 
showing multiple lesions of high signal intensity, which indicates 
granuloma, interspersed within a low-intensity matrix, which is 
the fibrous tissue and the ‘dot-in-circle sign’, which indicates the 
presence of grains. (b) MRI showing massive upper thigh and lower 
abdominal actinomycetoma.
Moritz Kaposi , 1837–1902, Hungarian born, Professor of Dermatology, University of Vienna, Austria, was born to a Jewish family; originally his surname was 
Kohn. When he converted to Catholicism in 1871, he changed his surname to Kaposi. He described the sarcoma in 1872. The viral cause was discovered in 1994. 
Ernest Codman , 1869–1940, American surgeon. Codman’s triangle can be seen in osteosarcoma, Ewing’s sarcoma and subperosteal abscess and haematoma.
Granuloma
Dot-in-circle sign
(a)
(b)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   73 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES74
Histopathological diagnosis
Deep biopsy is obtained under general or regional anaesthe -
sia, although the chance of local spread is high. The biopsy 
should be adequate, contain grains and should be fixed imme-
diately in 10% formal saline. 
Three types of host tissue reaction occur against the 
organism.
 ● Type I: the grains are usually surrounded by a layer of 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The innermost neutro -
phils are closely attached to the surface of the grain, some-
times invading the grain and causing its fragmentation. 
The hyphae and cement substance disappear and only 
remnants of brown pigmented cement are left behind. 
Outside the zone of neutrophils there is granulation tissue 
containing macrophages, lymphocytes, plasma cells and 
few neutrophils. The mononuclear cells increase in num -
ber towards the periphery of the lesion. The outermost 
zone of the lesion consists of fibrous tissue.
 ● Type II: the neutrophils largely disappear and are re -
placed by macrophages and multinucleated giant cells 
which engulf grain material. This consists largely of pig-
mented cement substance although hyphae are sometimes 
identified. 
 ● Type III: this is characterised by the formation of a well 
organised epithelioid granuloma with Langhan’s type 
giant cells. The centre of the granuloma will sometimes 
contain remnants of fungal material. 
Fine needle aspiration cytology 
(FNAC)
Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) can yield an accu -
rate diagnosis and helps in distinguishing between eumyce -
toma and actinomycetoma. The technique is simple, rapid 
and sensitive. 
Culture
A variety of microorganisms are capable of producing myce -
toma that can be identified by their textural description, 
morphology and biological activities in pure culture. Deep 
surgical biopsy is always needed to obtain the grains which 
are the source of culture. The grains extracted through the 
sinuses are usually contaminated and not viable and hence 
should be avoided. Several media may be used to isolate and 
grow these organisms. 
In the absence of the classical triad of mycetoma, the 
demonstration of significant antibody titres against the caus-
ative organism may be of diagnostic value and aid follow up. 
The common serodiagnostic tests are immunoelectrophoresis 
and ELISA. 
Management
Ideally this should be a combined effort between the physi -
cian and the surgeon. In actinomycetoma, combined drug 
therapy with amikacin sulphate and co-trimoxazole in the 
form of cycles is the treatment of choice. Amoxicillin–  
clavulanic acid, rifampacin, sulphonamides, gentamicin and 
kanamycin are used as a second line of treatment. Long-term 
drug treatment can have serious side effects.
In eumycetoma, ketoconazole, intraconazole and 
voriconazole are the drugs of choice. They may need to be 
used for up to a year. Use of these drugs should be closely 
monitored for side effects. While not curative, these drugs 
help to localise the disease by forming thickly encapsulated 
lesions which are then amenable to surgical excision. Medical 
treatment for both types of mycetoma must continue until the 
patient is cured and also in the postoperative period.
Surgical treatment
Surgery is indicated for small localised lesions, resistance to 
medical treatment or for a better response after medical treat-
ment in patients with massive disease. Excision may need to 
be much more extensive than suggested at first on clinical 
appearance because the disease may extend to deeper planes 
which are not clinically apparent. The surgical options are 
wide local and debulking excisions and amputations. Amputa-
tion, used as a life-saving procedure, is indicated in advanced 
mycetoma (Figure 6.30) refractory to medical treatment 
with severe secondary bacterial infection.The amputation 
rate is 10–25%.
Postoperative medical treatment should continue for an 
adequate period to prevent recurrence. The recurrence rate 
varies from 25 to 50%. This can be local or distant, to regional 
lymph nodes. Recurrence is usually due to inadequate surgical 
excision, use of local anaesthesia, lack of surgical experience, 
non-compliance with drugs for financial reasons and lack of 
health education. 
Theodor Langhans , 1839–1915, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, University of Berne, Switzerland.
Summary box 6.16
Mycetoma – diagnosis
●● Usually presents late as it is painless
●● Triad of painless subcutaneous mass, multiple sinuses and 
seropurulent discharge
●● Clinical picture may be deceptive as there may be deep-
seated extension
●● May spread to lymph nodes
●● Can be confused with Kaposi’s sarcoma
●● Radiologically can be mistaken for osteosarcoma
●● MRI shows typical ‘dot-in-circle’ sign
●● Open biopsy and FNAC are confirmatory
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   74 25/10/2017   07:44Poliomyelitis 75
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
POLIOMYELITIS
Introduction
Poliomyelitis is an enteroviral infection that sadly still affects 
children in certain parts of the world – this is in spite of effec-
tive vaccination having been universally available for several 
decades. The virus enters the body by inhalation or ingestion. 
Clinically, the disease manifests itself in a wide spectrum of 
symptoms – from a few days of mild fever and headache to the 
extreme variety consisting of extensive paralysis of the bulbar 
form that may not be compatible with life because of involve-
ment of the respiratory and pharyngeal muscles.
Diagnosis
The disease targets the anterior horn cells, causing lower 
motor neurone paralysis. Muscles of the lower limb are affected 
twice as frequently as those of the upper limb (Figures 6.31 
and 6.32). Fortunately, only 1–2% of sufferers develop para -
lytic symptoms but, when they do occur, the disability causes 
much misery (Figure 6.33). When a patient develops fever 
with muscle weakness, Guillain–Barré syndrome needs to be 
Summary box 6.17
Mycetoma – management
●● Ideally combined management by physician and surgeon
●● Medical treatment with appropriate long-term antibiotics
●● In large lesions medical treatment to reduce the size followed 
by excision
●● Beware of serious drug side effects
●● Surgery in the form of wide excision and amputation as a life-
saving procedure
●● High recurrence rate
Figure 6.30 Hip disarticulation for a massive thigh eumycetoma.
Figure 6.31 Polio affecting 
predominantly the upper limb 
muscles with wasting of the 
intercostal muscles.
Georges Guillain , 1876–1961, Professor of Neurology, The Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France.
Jean Alexandre Barré , 1880–1967, Professor of Neurology, Strasbourg, France.
Guillain and Barré  described the condition in a joint paper in 1916 whilst serving as Medical Officers in the French Army during the First World War.
Figure 6.32 (a, b) A 12-year-old patient with polio showing marked 
wasting of the left upper arm muscles with flexion contractures of the 
left knee and hip; there is equinus deformity of the foot (courtesy of Dr 
SM Lakhotia, MS and Dr PK Jain, MD, DA, Kolkata, India).
(a)
(b)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   75 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES76
excluded. The latter has sensory symptoms and signs. Cere -
brospinal fluid (CSF) analysis should help to differentiate the 
two conditions.
Management
Surgical management is directed mainly towards the rehabil-
itation of the patient who has residual paralysis, the opera -
tions being tailored to the particular individual’s disability . 
Children especially may show improvement in their muscle 
function for up to 2 years after the onset of the illness. There-
after, many patients learn to manage their disability by incor-
porating various manoeuvres (‘trick movements’) into their 
daily life. The surgeon must be cautious in considering such a 
patient for any form of surgery.
Surgical treatment in the chronic form of the disease is the 
domain of a highly specialised orthopaedic surgeon who needs 
to work closely with the physiotherapist both in assessing and 
in rehabilitating the patient. Operations are only considered 
after a very careful and detailed assessment of the patient’s 
needs. A multidisciplinary team, consisting of the orthopae -
dic surgeon, neurologist, physiotherapist, orthotist and the 
family, should decide upon the need for and advisability of 
any surgical procedure. 
A description of the operations for the various disabilities 
is beyond the scope of this book. The reader should therefore 
seek surgical details in a specialist textbook. In 2012, WHO 
declared India a polio-free country.
TROPICAL CHRONIC 
PANCREATITIS
Introduction
Tropical chronic pancreatitis is a disease affecting the younger 
generation from poor socioeconomic strata in resource-poor 
countries, seen mostly in southern India. The aetiology 
remains obscure, with malnutrition, dietary , familial and 
genetic factors being possible causes. Alcohol ingestion does 
not play a part in the aetiology.
Aetiology and pathology
Cassava (tapioca) is a root vegetable that is readily available 
and inexpensive and is therefore consumed as a staple diet 
by people from a poor background. It contains derivatives of 
cyanide that are detoxified in the liver by sulphur-containing 
amino acids. The less well-off among the population lack such 
amino acids in the diet. This results in cyanogen toxicity, 
causing the disease. Several members of the same family have 
been known to suffer from this condition; this strengthens 
the theory that cassava toxicity is an important cause because 
family members eat the same food.
Macroscopically, the pancreas is firm and nodular with 
extensive periductal fibrosis, with intraductal calcium car -
bonate stones of different sizes and shapes that may show 
branches and resemble a staghorn. The ducts are dilated. 
Microscopically, intralobular, interlobular and periductal 
fibrosis is the predominant feature, with plasma cell and lym-
phocyte infiltration. There is a high incidence of pancreatic 
cancer in these patients.
Figure 6.33  A young patient with polio showing paralysis of the 
lower limb and paraspinal muscles causing marked scoliosis and a 
deformed pelvis.
Summary box 6.19
Pathology of tropical chronic pancreatitis
●● Almost exclusively occurs in resource-poor countries and is 
due to malnutrition; alcohol is not a cause
●● Cassava ingestion is regarded as an aetiological factor 
because of its high content of cyanide compounds
●● Dilatation of pancreatic ducts with large intraductal stones
●● Fibrosis of the pancreas as a whole
●● A high incidence of pancreatic cancer in those affected by the 
disease
Summary box 6.18
Poliomyelitis
●● A viral illness that is preventable
●● Presents with protean manifestations of fever, headache and 
muscular paralysis without sensory loss, more frequently 
affecting the lower limbs
●● Treatment is mainly medical and supportive in the early stages
●● Surgery should only be undertaken after very careful 
assessment as most patients learn to live with their disabilities
●● Surgery is considered for the various types of paralysis in the 
form of tendon transfers and arthrodesis, which is the domain 
of a specialist orthopaedic surgeon
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   76 25/10/2017   07:44Tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis 77
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Diagnosis
The patient, usually male, is almost always below the age of 
40 years and from a poor socioeconomic background. The 
clinical presentation is abdominal pain, thirst, polyuria and 
features of gross pancreatic insufficiency causing steatorrhoea 
and malnutrition. The patient looks ill and emaciated.
Initial routine blood and urine tests confirm that the 
patient has type 1 diabetes mellitus. This is known as fibro-
calculous pancreatic diabetes, a label that is aptly descriptive 
of the typical pathological changes. Serum amylase is usually 
normal; in an acute exacerbation, it may be elevated. A plain 
abdominal radiograph shows typical pancreatic calcification 
in the form of discrete stones in the duct (Figure 6.34). 
Ultrasound and CT scanning of the pancreas confirm the 
diagnosis. An ERCP , as an investigation, should only be done 
when the procedure is also being considered as a therapeutic 
manoeuvre for removal of ductal stones in the pancreatic 
head by papillotomy.
the management of malnutrition. Treatment of pain should 
be along the lines of the usual analgesic ladder: non-opioids, 
followed by weak and then strong opioids and, finally, referral 
to a pain clinic.
Surgical treatment is necessary for intractable pain, par -
ticularly when there are stones in a dilated duct. Removal of 
the stones, with a side-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy to a 
Roux loop, is the procedure of choice. As most patients are 
young, pancreatic resection is only very rarely considered, and 
only as a last resort, when all available methods of pain relief 
have been exhausted.
Summary box 6.21
Treatment of tropical chronic pancreatitis
●● Mainly medical – pain relief, insulin for diabetes and 
pancreatic supplements for malnutrition
●● Surgery is reserved for intractable pain when all other 
methods have been exhausted
●● Operations are side-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy; resection 
in extreme cases
Summary box 6.20
Diagnosis of tropical chronic pancreatitis
●● The usual sufferer is a type 1 diabetic under 40 years of age
●● Serum amylase may be elevated in an acute exacerbation
●● Plain radiograph shows stones along the pancreatic duct
●● Ultrasound and CT scan of the pancreas confirm the 
diagnosis
●● ERCP should be used as an investigation only when 
combined with a therapeutic procedure
Figure 6.34 Plain radiograph of the abdomen showing large stones 
along the main pancreatic duct typical of tropical chronic pancreatitis 
(courtesy of Dr V Mohan, Chennai, India).
TUBERCULOSIS
Although tuberculosis can affect all systems in the body, in the 
tropical world the surgeon is most often faced with tuberculo-
sis affecting the cervical lymph nodes and the small intestine. 
Therefore, in this chapter tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis 
and tuberculosis of the small bowel will be described.
TUBERCULOUS CERVICAL 
L YMPHADENITIS
Introduction
This is common in the Indian subcontinent. A young person 
who has recently arrived from an endemic area, presenting 
with cervical lymphadenopathy, should be diagnosed as hav -
ing tuberculous lymphadenitis unless otherwise proven. With 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) being globally 
prevalent, this is not as rare in the West in the indigenous 
population as it used to be.
Diagnosis
Any of the cervical group of lymph nodes (jugulo digastric, 
submandibular, supraclavicular, posterior triangle) can be 
involved. The patient has the usual general manifestations of 
tuberculosis: evening pyrexia, cough (maybe from pulmonary 
tuberculosis) and malaise; if the sufferer is a child, failure to 
thrive is a significant finding. Locally there will be regional 
lymphadenopathy where the lymph nodes may be matted; 
in late stages a cold abscess may form – a painless, fluctuant, 
mass which is not warm; significantly there are no signs of 
inflammation (Figure 6.35), hence it is called a ‘cold abscess’. 
This is a clinical manifestation of underlying caseation.
Left untreated, the cold abscess, initially deep to the 
deep fascia, bursts through into the space just beneath the 
Treatment
The treatment is mainly medical, with exocrine support using 
pancreatic enzymes, treatment of diabetes with insulin and 
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   77 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES78
superficial fascia. This produces a bilocular mass with cross 
fluctuation. This is called a ‘collar-stud’ abscess. Eventually 
this may burst through the skin, discharging pus and form -
ing a tuberculous sinus (Figure 6.36). The latter typically has 
watery discharge with undermined edges.
Investigations
Raised ESR and CRP , low haemoglobin and a positive 
 Mantoux test are usual, although the last is not significant in a 
patient from an endemic area. The Mantoux test (tuberculin 
skin test), although in use for over a hundred years, has now 
been superseded by interferon-gamma (IFN- γ) release assays. 
This is an in vitro blood test of cellular immune response. 
Antigens unique to Mycobacterium tuberculosis are used to 
stimulate and measure T cell release of IFN- γ. This helps to 
earmark patients who have latent or subclinical tuberculosis 
and thus will benefit from treatment.
Sputum for culture and sensitivity (the result may take 
several weeks) and staining by the Ziehl–Neelsen method for 
 A collar-stud abscess is so-called because it resembles a collar stud (which has two parts) used in shirts with detachable collars, now largely out of fashion.
Charles Mantoux , 1877–1947, physician, Le Cannet, Alpes Maritimes, France, described the intradermal tuberculin skin test in 1908.
Franz Heinrich Paul Ziehl , 1859–1926, neurologist, Lubeck, Germany.
Friedrich Carl Adolf Neelsen , 1854–1894, pathologist, Prosector, the Stadt-Krankenhaus, Dresden, Germany.
Figure 6.35 Cervical tuberculous: cold abscess about to burst.
Summary box 6.22
Tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis
●● This is a common condition at any age
●● A matted lymph nodal mass is the typical clinical feature
●● In later stages the mass may be cystic, denoting an abscess
●● The abscess denotes underlying caseation and does not 
show any features of inflammation – hence called a cold 
abscess
●● Ultimately the abscess may burst, forming a sinus
●● Diagnosis is clinched by culture of pus and biopsy of the 
lymph node
●● Involvement of other systems must be excluded
●● Treatment is mainly medical 
Figure 6.36  Cervical tuberculous sinus with typical overhanging 
edges (courtesy of Professor Ahmed Hassan Fahal, FRCS MD MS, 
Khartoum, Sudan).
acid-fast bacilli (the result is obtained much earlier) should 
be carried out.
Specific investigations would include aspiration of the pus 
from a cold abscess for culture and sensitivity. If the mass is 
still in the early stages of adenitis, excision biopsy should be 
done. Here, part of the lymph nodes should be sent fresh and 
unfixed to the laboratory, who should be warned of the arrival 
of the specimen so that the tissue can be appropriately pro -
cessed immediately.
Treatment
This must be combined management between the physician 
and the surgeon. Tuberculous infection at other sites must 
be excluded and suitably managed. Medical treatment is the 
mainstay. The reader is asked to look up details of medical 
treatment in an appropriate source.
TUBERCULOSIS OF SMALL 
INTESTINE
Introduction
Infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis is common in the 
tropics. In these days of international travel and increased 
migration, tuberculosis in general and intestinal tuberculosis 
in particular are no longer clinical curiosities in non-endemic 
countries. Any patient, particularly one who has recently 
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   78 25/10/2017   07:44Tuberculosis of small intestine 79
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
arrived from an endemic area and who has features of gener -
alised ill health and altered bowel habit, should arouse suspi -
cion for intestinal tuberculosis. The increased prevalence of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection worldwide 
has also made tuberculosis more common.
Pathology
There are two types: ulcerative and hyperplastic. In both 
types, there may be marked mesenteric lymphadenopathy.
 ● Ulcerative type: When a patient with pulmonary tuber -
culosis swallows infected sputum, the organism colonises 
the lymphatics of the terminal ileum, causing transverse 
ulcers with typical undermined edges. The serosa is usually 
studded with tubercles. Histology shows caseating gran-
uloma with giant cells (Figure 6.37). This pathological 
entity, referred to as the ulcerative type, denotes a severe 
form of the disease in which the virulence of the organism 
overwhelms host resistance.
 ● Hyperplastic type: This occurs when host resistance has 
the upper hand over the virulence of the organism. It is 
caused by drinking infected unpasteurised milk. There is 
a marked inflammatory reaction causing hyperplasia and 
thickening of the terminal ileum because of its abundance 
of lymphoid follicles, thus resulting in narrowing of the 
lumen and obstruction. Macroscopically, this type may be 
confused with Crohn’s disease. The small intestine shows 
areas of stricture and fibrosis, most pronounced at the ter-
minal ileum (Figure 6.38). As a result, there is shortening 
of the bowel with the caecum being pulled up into a sub -
hepatic position.
Clinical features
Patients present electively with weight loss, chronic cough, 
malaise, evening rise in temperature with sweating, vague 
abdominal pain with distension and alternating constipation 
and diarrhoea. As an emergency, they present with features 
of distal small bowel obstruction from strictures of the small 
bowel, particularly the terminal ileum. Rarely, a patient may 
present with features of peritonitis from perforation of a tuber-
culous ulcer in the small bowel (Figure 6.38).
Examination shows a chronically ill patient with a 
‘doughy’ feel to the abdomen from areas of localised asci -
tes. In the hyperplastic type, a mass may be felt in the right 
iliac fossa. In addition, some patients may present with  
Summary box 6.23
Tuberculosis – pathology
●● Increasingly being seen in non-endemic areas, mostly among 
immigrants from endemic areas
●● Two types are recognised – ulcerative and hyperplastic
●● The ulcerative type occurs when the virulence of the organism 
is greater than the host defence
●● The opposite occurs in the hyperplastic type
●● Small bowel strictures are common in the hyperplastic type, 
mainly affecting the ileocaecal area and presenting with 
obstructive symptoms
●● In the ulcerative type, the bowel serosa is studded with 
tubercles
●● Localised areas of ascites occur in the form of cocoons
●● The lungs and other organs, particularly of the genitourinary 
system, may also be involved simultaneously
Figure 6.37 Histology of ileocaecal tuberculosis showing epithelioid 
cell granuloma (black arrows) with caseation (blue arrows) (courtesy of 
Dr AK Mandal, New Delhi, India).
Figure 6.38 Emergency limited ileocolic resection: specimen show-
ing a tuber culous stricture in the terminal ileum and perforation of a 
transverse ulcer just proximal to the stricture.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described regional ileitis in 1932 along with Leon Ginzburg 
and Gordon Oppenhiemer.
Stricture in the
terminal ileum
Perforation in the 
terminal ileum
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   79 25/10/2017   07:44CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES80
fistula-in-ano, which is typically multiple with undermined 
edges and watery discharge.
As this is a disease mainly seen in certain resource-poor 
countries, patients may present late as an emergency from 
intestinal obstruction. Abdominal pain and distension, con-
stipation and bilious and faeculent vomiting are typical of 
such a patient, who is usually in extremis.
There may be involvement of other systems, such as the 
genitourinary tract, when the patient complains of frequency 
of micturition. Clinical examination does not show any 
abnormality. The genitourinary tract should then be inves-
tigated.
ically with a high subhepatic caecum with the narrow ileum 
entering the caecum directly from below upwards in a straight 
line rather than at an angle (Figures 6.39 and 6.40a). Lapa-
roscopy reveals the typical picture of tubercles on the bowel 
serosa, multiple strictures, a high caecum, enlarged lymph 
nodes, areas of caseation and ascites. Culture of the ascitic fluid 
may be helpful. A chest radiograph is essential (Figure 6.40b).
If the patient complains of urinary symptoms, urine is 
sent for microscopy and culture; the finding of sterile pyuria 
should alert the clinician to the possibility of tuberculosis of 
the urinary tract, when the appropriate investigations should 
be done. A flexible cystoscopy would be very useful in the 
presence of sterile pyuria. A contracted bladder (‘thimble’ 
bladder) with ureteric orifices that are in-drawn (‘golf-hole’ 
ureter) may be seen; these changes are due to fibrosis.
In the patient presenting as an abdominal emergency, urea 
and electrolytes show evidence of gross dehydration. A plain 
abdominal radiograph shows typical small bowel obstruction – 
valvulae conniventes of dilated jejunum and featureless ileum 
with evidence of fluid between the loops.
Summary box 6.25
Intestinal tuberculosis – investigations
●● Raised inflammatory markers, anaemia and positive sputum 
culture
●● Interferon-γ release assays for subclinical infection 
●● Ultrasound of the abdomen may show localised areas of 
ascites
●● Chest radiograph shows pulmonary infiltration
●● Barium meal and follow-through shows multiple small bowel 
strictures particularly in the ileum, with a subhepatic caecum
●● If symptoms warrant, the genitourinary tract is also 
investigated
Summary box 6.24
Tuberculosis – clinical features
●● Intestinal tuberculosis should be suspected in any patient 
from an endemic area who presents with weight loss, malaise, 
evening fever, cough, alternating constipation and diarrhoea 
and intermittent abdominal pain with distension
●● The abdomen has a doughy feel; a mass may be found in the 
right iliac fossa
●● The emergency patient presents with features of distal small 
bowel obstruction – abdominal pain, distension, bilious and 
faeculent vomiting
●● Peritonitis from a perforated tuberculous ulcer in the small 
bowel can be another emergency presentation
Investigations
General investigations are the same as those for suspected 
tuberculosis anywhere in the body . They have been detailed 
in the previous section.
A barium meal and follow-through (or small bowel enema) 
shows strictures of the small bowel, particularly the ileum, typ-
(a) (b)
SUBHEPATIC 
CAECUM
SUBHEPATIC 
CAECUM
Figures 6.39 (a, b) Series of a barium meal and follow-through showing strictures in the ileum, with the caecum pulled up into a subhepatic 
position.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   80 25/10/2017   07:45Tuberculosis of small intestine 81
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Treatment
On completion of medical treatment, the patient’s small bowel 
is reimaged to look for significant strictures. If the patient has 
features of subacute intermittent obstruction, bowel resection, 
in the form of limited ileocolic resection with anastomosis 
between the terminal ileum and ascending colon, stricture -
plasty or right hemicolectomy, is performed as deemed appro-
priate. The surgical principles and options in the elective 
patient are very similar to those for Crohn’s disease, where 
resections should be kept as conservative as possible.
The emergency patient presents a great challenge. Such a 
patient is usually from a poor socioeconomic background, hence 
the late presentation of acute, distal, small bowel obstruction. 
The patient is extremely ill from dehydration, malnutrition, 
anaemia and probably active pulmonary tuberculosis. Vigorous 
resuscitation should precede the operation. At laparotomy, the 
minimum life-saving procedure is carried out, such as a side-to-
side ileotransverse anastomosis for a terminal ileal stricture. If 
the general condition of the patient permits, a one-stage resec-
tion and anastomosis may be performed.
Thereafter, the patient should ideally be under the com -
bined care of the physician and surgeon for a full course of 
antituberculous chemotherapy and improvement in nutri -
tional status, which may take up to 3–6 months. The patient 
who had a simple bypass procedure is reassessed and, when 
the disease is no longer active (as evidenced by return to nor-
mal inflammatory markers, weight gain, negative sputum cul-
ture), an elective right hemicolectomy is done to remove the 
blind loop. This may be supplemented with strictureplasty for 
short strictures at intervals.
Perforation is treated by thorough resuscitation followed by 
resection of the affected segment. Anastomosis is performed, 
provided it is regarded as safe to do so, when peritoneal con -
tamination is minimal and widespread disease is not encoun-
tered; otherwise, as a first stage, resection and exteriorisation 
is done followed by restoration of bowel continuity as a second 
stage later on after a full course of antituberculous chemother-
apy and improvement in nutritional status.
Summary box 6.26
Tuberculosis – treatment
●● Patients should ideally be under the combined care of a 
physician and surgeon
●● Vigorous supportive and full drug treatment are mandatory in 
all cases
●● Symptomatic strictures are treated by the appropriate resection, 
e.g. local ileocolic resection or strictureplasty as an elective 
procedure once the disease is completely under control
●● Acute intestinal obstruction from distal ileal stricture is 
treated by thorough resuscitation followed by side-to-side 
ileotransverse bypass
●● Once the patient has recovered with medical treatment, then 
the second-stage definitive procedure of right hemicolectomy 
is done to remove the blind loop
●● One-stage resection and anastomosis can be considered if 
the patient’s general condition permits
●● Perforation is treated by appropriate local resection and 
anastomosis or exteriorisation if the condition of the patient 
is very poor; this is later followed by restoration of bowel 
continuity after the patient has fully recovered with anti-
tuberculous chemotherapy
(a) (b)
SUBHEPATIC 
CAECUM PULMONARY 
INFILTRATION
Figures 6.40 Barium meal and follow-through (a) and chest radio -
graph (b) in a patient with extensive intestinal and pulmonary tuber -
culosis, showing ileal strictures with high caecum and pulmonary 
infiltration.
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   81 25/10/2017   07:45CHAPTER 6  Tropical infections and infestations
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES82
TYPHOID
Introduction
Typhoid fever is caused by Salmonella typhi, also called the 
typhoid bacillus, a gram-negative organism. Like most infec -
tions occurring in the tropics, the organism gains entry into 
the human gastrointestinal tract as a result of poor hygiene 
and inadequate sanitation. It is a disease normally managed 
by physicians, but the surgeon may be called upon to treat the 
patient with typhoid fever because of perforation of a typhoid 
ulcer.
Pathology
Following ingestion of contaminated food or water, the organ-
ism colonises the Peyer’s patches in the terminal ileum, caus-
ing hyperplasia of the lymphoid follicles followed by necrosis 
and ulceration. The microscopic picture shows erythrophago-
cytosis with histiocytic proliferation (Figure 6.41). If the 
patient is left untreated or inadequately treated, the ulcers 
may lead to perforation and bleeding. The bowel may perfor-
ate at several sites including the large bowel.
H antigens of Salmonella typhi and paratyphi in the patient’s 
serum. In endemic areas, laboratory facilities may sometimes 
be limited. Certain other tests have been developed that 
identify sensitive and specific markers for typhoid fever. Prac-
tical and cheap kits are available for their rapid detection that 
need no special expertise and equipment. These are Multi-
Test Dip-S-Ticks to detect immunoglobulin G (IgG), Tubex 
to detect immunoglobulin M (IgM) and TyphiDot to detect 
IgG and IgM. These tests are particularly valuable when 
blood cultures are negative (due to prehospital treatment 
or self-medication with antibiotics) or facilities for such an 
investigation are not available.
In the second or third week of the illness, if there is 
severe generalised abdominal pain, this indicates a perforated 
typhoid ulcer unless otherwise proven. The patient, who is 
already very ill, deteriorates further with classical features of 
peritonitis. An erect chest radiograph or a lateral decubitus 
film (in the very ill, as they usually are) will show free gas in 
the peritoneal cavity. In fact, any patient being treated for 
typhoid fever who shows a sudden deterioration accompanied 
by abdominal signs should be considered to have a typhoid 
perforation until proven otherwise.
Daniel Elmer Salmon , 1850–1914, veterinary pathologist, Chief of the Bureau of Animal Industry, Washington, DC, USA.
Johann Conrad Peyer , 1653–1712, Professor of Logic, Rhetoric and Medicine, Schaffhausen, Switzerland, described the lymph follicles in the intestine in 1677.
Georges Fernand Isidore Widal , 1862–1929, Professor of Internal Pathology, and later of Clinical Medicine, The Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France.
Diagnosis
A typical patient is from an endemic area or has recently vis-
ited such a country and suffers from a high temperature for 
2–3 weeks. The patient may be toxic with abdominal disten -
sion from paralytic ileus and may have melaena due to haem-
orrhage from a typhoid ulcer; this can lead to hypovolaemia. 
Blood and stool cultures confirm the nature of the infec -
tion and exclude malaria. Although obsolete in some parts of 
the world, the Widal test is still done in the Indian subcon -
tinent. The test looks for the presence of agglutinins to O and 
Summary box 6.27
Diagnosis of bowel perforation secondary to typhoid
●● The patient presents in, or has recently visited, an endemic 
area
●● The patient has persistent high temperature and is very toxic
●● Positive blood or stool cultures for Salmonella typhi and the 
patient is already on treatment for typhoid
●● After the second week, signs of peritonitis usually denote 
perforation, which is confirmed by the presence of free gas 
seen on radiograph
Treatment
Vigorous resuscitation with intravenous fluids and antibiot -
ics in an intensive care unit gives the best chance of stabi -
lising the patient’s condition. Metronidazole, cephalosporins 
and gentamicin are used in combination. Chloramphenicol, 
despite its potential side effect of aplastic anaemia, is still used 
occasionally in resource-poor countries. Laparotomy is then 
carried out.
Several surgical options are available, and the most appro-
priate operative procedure should be chosen judiciously 
depending upon the general condition of the patient, the site 
of perforation, the number of perforations and the degree of 
peritoneal soiling. The alternatives are closure of the perfor -
ation (Figure 6.42) after freshening the edges, wedge resec -
tion of the ulcer area and closure, resection of bowel with 
or without anastomosis (exteriorisation), closure of the perfo-
ration and side-to-side ileotransverse anastomosis, ileostomy 
or colostomy where the perforated bowel is exteriorised after 
refashioning the edges. 
Figure 6.41 Histology of enteric perforation of the small intestine 
showing erythrophagocytosis (arrows) with predominantly histiocytic 
proliferation (courtesy of Dr AK Mandal, New Delhi, India).
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   82 25/10/2017   07:45Further reading 83
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Figures 6.42 (a, b) Typhoid perforation of the terminal ileum.
After closing an ileal perforation, the surgeon should look 
for other sites of perforation or necrotic patches in the small 
or large bowel that might imminently perforate, and deal with 
them appropriately. Thorough peritoneal lavage is essential. 
The linea alba is closed, leaving the rest of the abdominal 
wound open for delayed closure, as wound infection is almost 
inevitable and dehiscence not uncommon. In the presence 
of rampant infection, laparostomy may be a good alternative.
When a typhoid perforation occurs within the first week 
of illness, the prognosis is better than if it occurs after the 
second or third week because, in the early stages, the patient 
is less nutritionally compromised and the body’s defences are 
more robust. Furthermore, the shorter the interval between 
diagnosis and operation, the better the prognosis.
Wani RA, Parray FQ, Bhat NA et al. Non-traumatic terminal ileal per-
foration. World J Emerg Surg 2006; 10: 1–7.
ASIATIC CHOLANGIOHEPATITIS
Choi BI, Han JK, Hong ST, Lee KH. Clonorchiasis and cholangiocarci-
noma: etiologic relationship and imaging diagnosis. Clin Microbiol 
Rev 2004; 17(3): 540–52.
FILARIASIS
Manjula Y, Kate V, Ananthakrishnan N. Evaluation of sequential inter-
mittent pneumatic compression for filarial lymphoedema. Natl Med 
J India 2002; 15(4): 192–4.
Lim KH, Speare R, Thomas G, Graves P . Surgical treatment of genital 
manifestations of lymphatic filariasis: a systematic review. World J 
Surg 2015; 39(12): 2885–99.
HYDATID DISEASE
Barnes SA, Lillemore KD. Liver abscess and hydatid disease. In: Zinner 
NJ, Schwartz I, Ellis H (eds). Maingot’s abdominal operations , 10th 
edn, Vol. 2. New York: Appleton and Lange, McGraw Hill, 1997, 
pp. 1527–45.
Chiodini P . Parasitic infections. In: Russell RCG, Williams NS, Bul -
strode CJK (eds). Bailey & Love’s short practice of surgery , 24th edn. 
London: Arnold, 2004, pp. 146–74.
WHO Informal Working Group. International classification of ultra-
sound images in cystic echinococcosis for application in clinical and 
field epidemiological settings. Acta Trop 2003; 85(2): 253–61.
LEPROSY
Anderson GA. The surgical management of deformities of the hand in 
leprosy. Bone Joint J 2006; 88(3): 290–4.
MYCETOMA
Fahal AH. Management of mycetoma. Expert Rev Dermat 2010; 5(1): 
87–93.
Hassan MA, Fahal AH. Mycetoma. In: Kamil R, Lumby J (eds). Tropical 
surgery. London: Westminster Publications Ltd, 2004, pp. 786–90.
TROPICAL CHRONIC PANCREATITIS
Barman KK, Premlatha G, Mohan V . Tropical chronic pancreatitis. Post-
grad Med J 2003; 79: 606–15.
TYPHOID
Aziz M, Qadir A, Aziz M, Faizullah (2005) Prognostic factors in typhoid 
perforation. J Coll Phys Surg Pakistan 2005; 15(11): 704–7.
Olsen SJ, Pruckler J, Bibb W et al. Evaluation of rapid diagnostic tests for 
typhoid fever. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42(5): 1885–9.
Summary box 6.28
Treatment of bowel perforation from typhoid
●● Manage in intensive care
●● Resuscitate and give intravenous antibiotics
●● Laparotomy – choice of various procedures
●● Commonest site of perforation is the terminal ileum
●● Having found a perforation, always look for others
●● In the very ill patient, consider some form of exteriorisation
●● Close the peritoneum and leave the wound open for 
secondary closure
FURTHER READING
AMOEBIASIS
Barnes SA, Lillemore KD. Liver abscess and hydatid disease In: Zinner 
NJ, Schwartz I, Ellis H (eds). Maingot’s abdominal operations , 10th 
edn, Vol. 2. New York: Appleton and Lange, McGraw-Hill, 1997, 
pp. 1527–45.
Bruns BR, Scalea TM. Complex liver abscess. In: Complications in acute 
care surgery. Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 189–97.
ASCARIASIS
Das AK. Hepatic and biliary ascariasis. J Global Infect Dis 2014; 6(2): 65.
Steinberg R, Davies J, Millar AJ et al. Unusual intestinal sequelae after 
operations for Ascaris lumbricoides infestation. Paediatr Surg Int 2003; 
19(1–2): 85–7.
(a) (b)
01_06-B&L27_Pt1_Ch06.indd   83 25/10/2017   07:45Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Basic surgical skills and anastomoses
Chapter 7
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The principles of patient positioning and operating 
theatre safety
 • The principles of skin and abdominal incisions
 • The principles of laparoscopic trocar insertion
 • The principles of wound closure
To know the principles in performing:
 • Bowel anastomoses
 • Vascular anastomoses
To be aware of:
 • The principles of drain usage
 • The principles of diathermy and advanced energy 
devices
INTRODUCTION
Successful outcomes in surgery depend on knowledge, skills 
and judgement. While this chapter concentrates on techni-
cal skill, it is important for the modern surgeon to remember 
that non-technical skills, such as communication, empathy 
and teamwork, are but a few of the skills required. We used to 
think of technical skill starting with ‘knife to skin’; it is also 
important to realise that a successful outcome for a patient 
is dependent on a surgeon who takes responsibility to make 
sure that the patient reaches that point, with all factors, such 
as positioning and equipment, considered first. Teamwork 
includes adherence to modern ‘human factors’ principles, 
such as team brief and debrief, and the use of safety checklists.
PATIENT POSITIONING AND 
SAFETY ON THE OPERATING 
TABLE
The safety of the patient in the operating theatre is paramount 
at all times, and is a key responsibility of the surgeon, regardless 
of grade, experience or seniority. For all cases it is the surgeon’s 
responsibility to make sure the patient is placed on the table to 
maximise exposure for the procedure itself and to ensure risks of 
injury are avoided. These are categorised below.
Transfer to and from the operating 
table
The transfer of the anaesthetised patient is a critical moment 
where there are significant risks of falls, injuries and, rarely , 
death, not to mention injury to operating theatre personnel. 
Staff should all receive regular training in manual handling. 
Patients at additional risk include the obese, elderly and ema-
ciated. These groups require additional care and specialised 
equipment.
Positioning on the table
Safe and effective positioning of the anaesthetised patient also 
requires good training, appropriate equipment and attention 
to detail. The surgeon should take personal responsibility to 
maintain safety and to make sure exposure is adequate for the 
procedure. This includes placement of the passive diathermy 
electrode (‘pad’) to minimise the risk of electrosurgical burns 
and to account for metallic prostheses and pacemakers. The 
surgeon should also make sure that ancillary equipment, such 
as energy generators, suction, laparoscopic stack systems and 
the scrub assistants, is appropriately located around the sur -
geon and the patient on the operating table. The operating 
lights should also be placed in an optimal starting position. 
All these actions need to be undertaken before the surgical 
team scrubs, including any final checks before the patient is 
prepped and draped.
Pressure areas
Patients at risk from pressure sores include those with dia -
betes, immunodeficiency, obesity or malnutrition, and those 
undergoing prolonged procedures. The areas of the body prone 
to injury are the heels, sacrum and other bony prominences. 
These areas should receive particular attention during posi-
tioning with additional measures taken in the at-risk groups.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   84 25/10/2017   07:46Skin incisions 85
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Nerve injury
There are certain areas of the body where an anaesthetised 
patient can be exposed to neuropraxia (nerve injury) which 
in some cases can be permanent and disabling. These are the 
brachial plexus, ulnar nerve and common peroneal nerve. 
The surgeon should lead the theatre team in ensuring these 
areas are protected, particularly in high-risk groups and for 
long procedures.
Compartment syndrome
Acute postoperative compartment syndrome refers, in the con-
text of surgery, to the consequences of increased pressure in a  
muscle compartment, usually in the lower limb, that can result 
in permanent disability or amputation. This occurs as a result 
of underperfusion, usually during prolonged surgery, often with 
elevation of the leg. Postoperatively, the pressure in the affected 
compartment rises to the point beyond which irreversible 
ischaemic damage to muscles and nerves occurs. It manifests 
with pain, reduced power, swelling, numbness and tingling. 
Early recognition is essential and prompt surgical fasciotomy 
is required to avoid the disastrous and permanently disabling 
sequelae. 
Considerations for laparoscopic 
surgery
Laparoscopic surgery requires some different considerations to 
open surgery to ensure patient safety and to maximise the ergo-
nomic performance of the procedure. Often, steep angles of tilt 
to the side, or Trendelenberg (head down) and reverse-Trende-
lenberg (head up) positions are required to move the abdomi-
nal viscera, such as small bowel, away from the operative field. 
There is significant danger that the patient can slide, or in some 
cases, fall off the operating table and be injured. It is the sur -
geon’s responsibility to ensure the patient is safely and securely 
placed on the operating table with appropriate restraints if indi-
cated. So-called ‘side boards’ or arm restraints are best avoided 
in laparoscopic surgery as they can interfere with the laparo-
scopic instruments. Any restraints must be placed in such a way 
as to avoid or minimise the risk of nerve injury, e.g. the brachial 
plexus with shoulder supports. Devices such as suction bean 
bags and antislip mats can be used to help secure placement 
of the patient. Occasionally, laparoscopic surgery is performed 
in a lateral position to expose the target organ, e.g. kidney or 
spleen, with the aid of gravity. Experience and training are 
required to maintain safety and security for such procedures.
SKIN INCISIONS
Skin incisions should be made with a scalpel, with the blade 
being pressed firmly down at right angles to the skin and then 
drawn gently across the skin in the desired direction to create 
a clean incision, the site and extent of which should have been 
clearly planned by the surgeon. It is important not to incise 
the skin obliquely because such a shearing mechanism can lead 
to necrosis of the undercut edge. The incision is facilitated by 
tension being applied across the line of the incision by the fin-
gers of the non-dominant hand, but the surgeon must ensure 
that at no time is the scalpel blade directed at their own fingers 
as any slip may result in a self-inflicted injury. Blades for skin 
incisions usually have a curved cutting margin, while those 
used for an arteriotomy or drain-site insertion have a sharp tip 
(Figure 7.1). Scalpels should at all times be passed in a kidney 
dish rather than by a direct hand-to-hand process because the 
latter can lead to injury. Diathermy, laser, harmonic scalpels 
and combination devices can be used instead of blades when 
opening deeper tissues, as they can reduce blood loss and save 
operating time, and may reduce postoperative pain.
1011
15
22
23
Figure 7.1 Scalpel blade sizes and shapes. The 22-blade is often 
used for abdominal incisions, the 11-blade for arteriotomy and the 
15-blade for minor surgical procedures.
When planning a skin incision, four factors should be 
considered:
1 Skin tension lines (Langer’s lines). These lines represent 
the orientation of the dermal collagen fibres and any inci-
sion placed parallel to these lines results in a better scar 
(Figure 7.2).
2 Anatomical structure. Incisions should avoid bony prom-
inences and crossing skin creases if possible, and take into 
consideration underlying structures, such as nerves and 
vessels.
3 Cosmetic factors. Any incision should be made bearing in 
mind the ultimate cosmetic result, especially in exposed 
parts of the body , as an incision is the only part of the 
operation the patient sees.
4 Adequate access for the procedure. The incision must be 
functionally effective for the procedure in hand because 
any compromise purely on cosmetic grounds may render 
the operation ineffective or even dangerous. 
Occasionally, it may be necessary to excise a skin lesion 
with a circular incision in an area where the direction of 
Karl Ritter Von Langer , 1847–1888, Austrian anatomist.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   85 25/10/2017   07:46CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES86
Langer’s lines is not apparent. However, once the circular 
incision has been made, it can often be observed that the cir-
cular incision is converted to an ellipse, thus indicating the 
lines of tension. This circular incision should then be formally 
converted into an elliptical incision, remembering the rule 
of thumb that ‘an elliptical incision must be at least three 
times as long as it is wide’ for the wound to heal without ten-
sion. Occasionally, ‘dog ears’ remain in the corner of elliptical 
incisions in spite of adequate care having been taken during 
formation and primary closure of an elliptical wound. In these 
situations, it is advisable to pick up the ‘dog ear’ with a skin 
hook and excise it as shown in Figure 7.3. This allows for a 
satisfactory cosmetic outcome.
Abdominal incisions
As for skin incisions, all abdominal incisions should be 
planned in advance of surgery and take into consideration 
access to the relevant organs, surface landmarks, pain control 
and cosmetic outcome, e.g. transverse incisions tend to be 
associated with fewer respiratory complications and a better 
cosmetic outcome. In the past, traditional vertical midline or 
paramedian incisions were used for the majority of abdominal 
procedures, but there is a current trend to utilise transverse 
incisions wherever possible because these minimise post -
operative complications. The incision should be carried 
deeper through the subcutaneous tissues and then, depending 
on the site of the incision (Figure 7.4), the muscle layers 
should be divided or split, and the peritoneum displayed. This 
should be picked up between two clips and gently incised to 
ensure there is no damage to the underlying organs. This is 
particularly important in the emergency situation when there 
may be dilatation of the bowel. Every incision should be made 
with closure in mind, and the layers appropriately delineated. 
Mass closure of the abdominal wall is usually advocated, 
using large bites and short steps in the closure technique 
and either non-absorbable (e.g. nylon or polypropylene) or 
very slowly absorbable suture material (e.g. polydioxanone 
suture (PDS)). It has been estimated that, for abdominal wall 
closure, the length of the suture material should be at least 
four times the length of the wound to be closed to minimise 
the risk of abdominal dehiscence or later incisional hernia. 
Laparoscopic surgery
Similar attention to detail applies to laparoscopic surgery, 
where access is of equal importance to open surgery . Correct 
port site placement and closure are crucial to the success of 
the operative procedure. Laparoscopic surgery is covered in 
more detail in Chapter 8. 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Anterior Posterior
Figure 7.2 Langer’s lines. These depict the orientation of the der -
mal collagen fibres. Reproduced with permission from Thomas WEG, 
Senninger N (eds). Short stay surgery. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2008.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:19.3Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
XY
XY
XY
XY
Figure 7.3 Dealing with a ‘dog ear’ at the corner of an elliptical inci-
sion. Reproduced with permission fr om Thomas WEG, Senninger N 
(eds). Short stay surgery. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2008.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.4Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
12 3
4 5
6
7
8 9
10
11
Figure 7.4 Abdominal incisions. Reproduced with permission fr om 
Thomas WEG. Preparation and r evision for the MRCS . London: 
 Churchill Livingstone (Elsevier Limited), 2004. 1, Midline; 2, Kocher’s; 
3, thoracoabdominal; 4, rectus split; 5, paramedian; 6, transverse; 
7,  McBurney’s gridiron; 8, inguinal; 9, pfannenstiel; 10, McEvedy; 
11, Rutherford Morison.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   86 25/10/2017   07:46Skin incisions 87
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
The basic principles of port (trocar) site placement  in 
laparoscopic surgery are:
1 The umbilicus is a convenient and safe point of insertion 
of the first (primary) trocar because the skin here is fused 
to the peritoneum. Care must be taken to avoid bowel 
regardless of the technique employed. Great care and good 
technique must be employed to avoid injury to the major 
vessels (aorta, vena cava and iliac vessels), particularly in 
thin female patients, who are at greater risk. Elsewhere, 
the midline is safe for further (secondary) trocars, though 
care must be taken below the umbilicus to avoid the  
bladder. 
2 An ‘open’ or ‘semi-open’ technique is practised by many 
general surgeons to minimise, if not eradicate, the possi -
bility of injury to an underlying viscus during insertion of 
the primary trocar.
3 Scars should be avoided as bowel is more likely to be 
adherent to the undersurface; for midline scars, the pri -
mary trocar should be inserted away from the midline with 
an open cutdown or an optical trocar.
4 All secondary trocars should be inserted under direct 
vision to avoid damage to bowel, bladder and blood ves-
sels. A ‘two-handed’ technique should be used to avoid 
sudden trocar movements that may inadvertently punc-
ture a viscus.
5 Trocars should always be inserted perpendicular to the 
abdominal wall. Oblique insertion results in increased 
pressure or torque while instruments are being used, which 
fatigues the surgeon and causes increased trauma to the 
patient’s abdominal wall. This is of particular relevance in 
obese patients.
6 A hand’s breadth (the patient’ s hand) either side of the 
midline is the rectus sheath which contains the epigastric 
vessels. By placing non-midline trocars lateral to the rec -
tus sheath, usually in the mid-clavicular line, the  epigas-
tric vessels can be avoided.
7 Where possible, smaller diameter trocars should be used 
as they are associated with less postoperative pain, a lower 
incidence of port-site incisional hernia and better cosme-
sis. All port sites above 5 mm in diameter should undergo 
suture closure of the fascial layers to reduce the possibility 
of port-site hernia in the acute postoperative setting and 
incisional hernia longer term.
8 All secondary trocars should be removed under direct 
vision to observe for port site bleeding.
9 Bladed trocars should be avoided near blood vessels to 
reduce the risk of bleeding.
Technique for laparoscopic primary 
trocar insertion
There are a number of different techniques described for pri -
mary trocar insertion. In most cases the umbilicus is the pre -
ferred site because the skin is fused to the peritoneum, even 
in obese patients. The presence of a scar at the umbilicus is a 
relative contraindication as bowel may be adherent resulting 
in injury which can be overlooked and result in postopera -
tive peritonitis. The author uses a semi-open technique for a 
10–12 mm trocar and this is described here:
1 The umbilical cicatrix is everted with a tissue grasping 
forceps such as a Littlewood’ s. It is important to grasp 
the cicatrix directly as this is closest to the adherent 
peritoneum. Counter-traction is maintained throughout 
the subsequent steps until the primary trocar is inserted 
(Figure 7.5).
2 The umbilical stalk is palpated inferior to the everted 
cicatrix while maintaining cephalad (towards the head) 
traction.
3 A curved 10–12 mm transverse incision is made inferior to 
the cicatrix (Figure 7.6).
4 The umbilical stalk is exposed with sharp and blunt dis -
section to reveal the decussation (crossing) of fibres just 
above its junction with the linea alba (Figure 7.7).
5 A 5 mm vertical incision is made through the decussation 
with an 11-blade, taking care only to incise the fascia at 
this point and not to enter the peritoneum (Figure 7.8).
6 A blunt haemostat is then pushed through the preperito-
neal fat and peritoneum; the surgeon will feel a ‘pop’ as 
the instrument enters the peritoneal cavity (Figure 7.9).
7 A blunt-tipped 10 or 12 mm trocar is pushed through the 
same point of insertion as the haemostat and in the same 
direction (Figure 7.10).
8 The laparoscopic camera is used to confirm successful 
placement in the peritoneal cavity before insufflation with 
CO2 gas. 
9 CO2 gas insufflation is commenced at low flow (1–4 litres 
per minute) and increased to a maximum pressure of 
15 mmHg and with a maximum flow rate of 20  litres per 
minute.
10 For patients with scars from previous abdominal surgery, 
the safest technique is a full open approach at Palmer’ s 
Summary box 7.2
The principles of safe laparoscopic surgery
●● The umbilicus is preferred for primary trocar insertion
●● An open or semi-open technique is prefered by most 
surgeons
●● Open insertion away from the umbilicus is safer if there is a 
midline scar
●● Secondary trocars should be inserted and removed under 
direct vision
●● All trocars should be placed perpendicular to the abdominal 
wall 
●● All trocar sites above 5 mm in length should undergo closure 
of the fascial layer
Summary box 7.1
The benefits of laparoscopic surgery
●● Less postoperative pain
●● Better cosmesis
●● Earlier return of normal physiological function
●● Shorter hospital stay
●● Earlier resumption of normal activities
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   87 25/10/2017   07:46CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES88
Figure 7.5 The umbilical cicatrix is grasped 
with a tissue-grasping forceps (e.g. Little -
wood’s) and everted.
Figure 7.7 The skin is retracted to r eveal 
the junction of the stalk and the linea alba.
Figure 7.6 A curved subumblilical incision 
is made.
Figure 7.8 A small vertical incision is made 
in the junction using an 11 bladed scalpel.
Figure 7.9 A blunt, long haemostat is used 
to enter the peritoneum and enlarge the inci-
sion in the umbilical stalk.
Figure 7.10  A blunt primary trocar and 
cannula ar e inserted and their position is 
confirmed with the lapar oscopic camera 
before insufflation.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   88 25/10/2017   07:46Wound closure 89
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
point, 3  cm below the left subcostal margin in the mid-  
clavicular line. Adequate lighting and good assistance 
with retraction are essential.
11 In obese patients with scars from previous surgery an opti-
cal blunt trocar can be used to enter the peritoneal cavity 
under vision.
WOUND CLOSURE
The suturing of any incision or wound needs to take into con-
sideration the site and tissues involved, and the technique for 
closure should be chosen accordingly. There is no ideal wound 
closure technique that would be appropriate for all situations, 
and the ideal suture has yet to be pro duced, although many 
of the desired characteristics are listed in Summary box 7.3. 
Therefore, the correct choice of suture technique and suture 
material is vital, but will never compensate for inadequate 
operative technique, and, for any wound to heal well, there 
must be a good blood supply and no tension on the closure. 
Clean uninfected wounds with a good blood supply heal by 
primary intention and therefore closure simply requires accu-
rate apposition of the wound edges. However, if a wound is left 
open, it heals by secondary intention through the formation 
of granulation tissue, which is tissue composed of capillaries, 
fibroblasts and inflammatory cells. Wound contraction and 
epithelialisation assist in ultimate healing, but the process 
may take several weeks or months. Delayed primary closure, 
or tertiary intention, is utilised when there is a high probabil-
ity of the wound being infected. The wound is left open for a 
few days and, provided any infective process has resolved, the 
wound is closed to heal by primary intention. Skin grafting is 
another form of tertiary intention healing.
Summary box 7.3
Suture material: desired characteristsics
●● Easy to handle
●● Predictable behaviour in tissues
●● Predictable tensile strength
●● Sterile
●● Glides through tissues easily
●● Secure knotting ability
●● Inexpensive
●● Minimal tissue reaction
●● Non-capillary
●● Non-allergenic
●● Non-carcinogenic
●● Non-electrolytic
●● Non-shrinkage
When choosing suture materials, there are certain specific 
requirements depending on the tissues to be sutured; for 
example, vascular anastomoses require smooth, non-absorbable, 
non-elastic material, while biliary anastomoses require an 
absorbable material that will not promote tissue reaction or 
stone formation. When using absorbable material, the time 
for which wound support is required and maintained will vary 
according to the tissues in which it is inserted. Furthermore, 
certain tissues require wound support for longer than others, for 
example muscular aponeuroses compared with subcutaneous 
tissues. It is therefore crucial for the surgeon to select the suture 
material and suture technique that will most effectively achieve 
the desired objective for each wound closure or anastomosis.
Summary box 7.4
Types of wound healing
●● Primary intention
Clean wound
●● Secondary intention
Healthy granulation tissue
Overexuberant granulation tissue
Infected sloughy wound
Black eschar
●● Tertiary intention
Delayed closure
Skin grafting
Suture materials
History
Sutures are best made of soft thread, not too hard twisted 
that it may sit easier on the tissue, nor are too few nor too 
many of either of them to be put in.
Aurelius Cornelius Celsus, 25bc–ad50
Multiple examples of early surgery abound, with East African 
tribes ligating blood vessels with tendon strips, and closing 
wounds with acacia thorns pushed through the wound with 
strips of vegetable matter wound round these in a figure of 
eight. A South American method of wound closure involved 
using large black ants to bite the wound together with their 
pincers or jaws acting like skin clips, and then the ant’s body 
was twisted off leaving the head in place keeping the wound 
apposed. By 1000 bc, Indian surgeons were using horsehair, 
cotton and leather sutures while, in Roman times, linen 
and silk and metal clips, called fibulae, were commonly used 
to close gladiatorial wounds. By the end of the nineteenth 
century, developments in the textile industry led to major 
advances, and both silk and catgut became popular as suture 
materials. Lister believed that catgut soaked in chromic acid 
Aurelius Cornelius Celsus , Roman physician, 25bc–ad50.
Joseph Lister (Lord Lister) , Professor of Surgery in Glasgow, Edinburgh and King’s College Hospital, London and Vice President of Royal College of Surgeons of 
England, 1827–1912.
Alexis Carrel , 1873–1944, surgeon from Lyons in France, worked at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York, NY, USA. He received the Nobel 
Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1912 ‘in recognition for his works on vascular suture and the transplantation of blood vessels and organs’.
Gladiators  were so called because they fought with a Roman sword called a ‘gladius’.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   89 25/10/2017   07:46CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES90
(a form of tanning) prevented early dissolution in body flu -
ids and tissues, while Moynihan felt that chromic catgut was 
ideal as it could be sterilised, was non-irritant to tissues, kept 
its strength until its work was done and then disappeared. 
However, catgut is no longer in use as it causes an inflamma -
tory cellular reaction with release of proteases and may also 
carry the risk of prion transmission if of bovine origin.
Suture characteristics
There are five characteristics of any suture material that need 
to be considered:
1 Physical structure. Suture material may be monofilament 
or multifilament. Monofilament suture material is smooth 
and tends to slide through tissues easily without any saw -
ing action, but is more difficult to knot effectively. Such 
material can be easily damaged by gripping it with needle 
holder or forceps and this can lead to fracture of the suture 
material. Multifilament or braided sutures are much easier 
to knot, but have a surface area of several thousand times 
that of monofilament sutures and thus have a capillary 
action and interstices where bacteria may lodge and be 
responsible for persistent infection or sinuses. In order to 
overcome some of these problems, certain materials are 
produced as a braided suture, which is coated with silicone 
in order to make it smooth.
2 Strength. The strength of a suture material depends upon 
its constituent material, its thickness and how it is hand -
led in the tissues. Suture material thickness is classified 
according to its diameter in tenths of a millimetre ( Table 
7.1), although the figure assigned is also dependent upon 
the nature of the material, e.g. absorbable material and 
non-absorbable material, such as polypropylene, may dif -
fer in their designations. The tensile strength of a suture 
can be expressed as the force required to break it when 
pulling the two ends apart, but is only a useful approxi -
mation as to its strength in the tissues, because what mat-
ters is the material’s in vivo strength. Absorbable sutures 
show a decay of this strength with the passage of time and 
although a material may last in the tissues for the stated 
period in the manufacturer’s product profile, its tensile 
strength cannot be relied on in vivo for this entire period. 
TABLE 7.1 Size of suture material.
Metric (EurPh) Range of diameter (mm) USP (‘old’)
1
1.5
2
3
3.5
4
5
0.100–0.149
0.150–0.199
0.200–0.249
0.300–0.349
0.350–0.399
0.400–0.499
0.500–0.599
5–0
4–0
3–0
2–0
0
1
2
Materials, such as catgut (no longer in use in the UK), 
have a tensile strength that lasts only about a week, while 
PDS will remain strong in the tissues for several weeks. 
However, even non-absorbable sutures do not necessar -
ily maintain their strength indefinitely , and may degrade 
with time. Those non-absorbable materials of synthetic 
origin, such as polypropylene, probably retain their ten-
sile strength indefinitely and do not change in mass in the 
tissues, although it is still possible for them to fracture. 
Non-absorbable materials of biological origin, such as silk, 
will definitely fragment with time and lose their strength, 
and such materials should never be used in vascular anas-
tomoses for fear of late fistula formation.
3 Tensile behaviour . Suture materials behave differently 
depending upon their deformability and flexibility. Some 
may be ‘elastic’, where the material will return to its orig-
inal length once any tension is released, while others 
may be ‘plastic’, in which case this phenomenon does 
not occur. Sutures may be deformable, in that a circu -
lar cross-section may be converted to an oval shape, or 
they may be more rigid and have the somewhat irritat -
ing capacity to kink and coil. Many synthetic materials 
demonstrate ‘memory’, so that they keep curling up in the 
shape they adopted within the packaging. A sharp but 
gentle pull on the suture material helps to diminish this 
memory, but the more memory a suture material has, the 
lower is the knot security. Therefore, knotting technique 
also plays a significant role in any suture line’s tensile 
strength and it is important to recognise that sutures lose 
50% of their strength at the knot.
4 Absorbability. Suture materials may be non-absorbable 
(Table 7.2) or absorbable (Table 7.3) and this property must 
be taken into consideration when choosing suture mater -
ials for specific wound closures or anastomoses. Sutures for 
use in the biliary or urinary tract need to be absorbable in 
order to minimise the risk of stone production. However, 
a vascular anastomosis requires a non-absorbable material 
and it is wise to avoid braided material because platelet 
adherence may predispose to distal embolisation. Non- 
absorbable materials tend to be preferred where persistent 
strength is required and, as an artificial graft or prosthesis 
never heals fully or integrates into a host artery, persistent 
monofilament suture materials, such as polypropylene, are 
almost universally used.
5 Biological behaviour. The biological behaviour of suture 
material within the tissues depends upon the constituent 
raw material. Biological or natural sutures, such as catgut, 
are proteolysed, but this involves a process that is not 
entirely predictable and can cause local irritation, and 
such materials are therefore seldom used. Synthetic poly -
mers are hydrolysed and their disappearance in the tissues 
is more predictable. However, the presence of pus, urine or 
faeces influences the final result and renders the outcome 
more unpredictable. There is also some evidence that, in 
Berkley George Andrew Moynihan (Lord Moynihan of Leeds) , 1865–1936, Professor of Clinical Surgery, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. Moynihan felt that 
English surgeons knew little about the work of their colleagues both at home and abroad. Therefore, in 1909, he established a small travelling club which in 1929 
became the Moynihan Chirurgical Club. It still exists today. He took a leading part in founding the British Journal of Surgery in 1913 and became the first chair-
man of the editorial committee until his death.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   90 25/10/2017   07:46Wound closure 91
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
the gut, cancer cells may accumulate at sites where sutures 
persist, possibly giving rise to local recurrence. For this 
reason, synthetic materials that have a greater predictabil-
ity and elicit minimal tissue reaction may have an import-
ant non-carcinogenic property.
Barbed sutures
Recently, novel suture materials have helped surgeons to  
reduce or eradicate the need for knot tying in some situations, 
such as laparoscopic surgery. These sutures have unidirectional 
or bidirectional barbs that secure the suture in the tissues.
Suture techniques
There are four frequently used suture techniques.
1 Interrupted sutures. Interrupted sutures require the 
 needle to be inserted at right angles to the incision and 
then to pass through both aspects of the suture line and 
exit again at right angles (Figure 7.11). It is important for 
the needle to be rotated through the tissues rather than to 
be dragged through, to avoid unnecessarily enlarging the 
needle hole. As a guide, the distance from the entry point 
of the needle to the edge of the wound should be approx -
imately the same as the depth of the tissue being sutured, 
and each successive suture should be placed at twice this 
distance apart (Figure 7.12). Each suture should reach 
into the depths of the wound and be placed at right angles 
to the axis of the wound. In linear wounds, it is sometimes 
easier to insert the middle suture first and then to com -
plete the closure by successively inserting sutures, halving 
the remaining deficits in the wound length.
2 Continuous sutures. For a continuous suture, the first 
suture is inserted in an identical manner to an interrupted 
suture, but the rest of the sutures are inserted in a continu-
ous manner until the far end of the wound is reached (Fig-
ure 7.13). Each throw of the continuous suture should be 
inserted at right angles to the wound, and this will mean 
that the externally observed suture material will usually 
lie diagonal to the axis of the wound. It is important to 
have an assistant who will follow the suture, keeping it 
at the same tension in order to avoid either purse string -
ing the wound by too much tension, or leaving the suture 
material too slack. There is more danger of producing too 
much tension by using too little suture length than there 
is of leaving the suture line too lax. Postoperative oedema 
will often take up any slack in the suture material. At the 
far end of the wound, this suture line should be secured 
either by using an Aberdeen knot or by tying the free end 
to the loop of the last suture to be inserted.
3 Mattress sutures. Mattress sutures may be either verti-
cal or horizontal and tend to be used to produce either 
eversion or inversion of a wound edge (Figure 7.14). The 
initial suture is inserted as for an interrupted suture, but 
then the needle moves either horizontally or vertically, 
and traverses both edges of the wound once again. Such 
sutures are very useful in producing accurate approxima -
tion of wound edges, especially when the edges to be anas-
tomosed are irregular in depth or disposition.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.5Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 7.11 Interrupted suture technique. Reproduced with permis-
sion from Royal College of Sur geons of England. The intercollegiate 
basic surgical skills course participants handbook, edns 1–4. London: 
RCS.
Figure 7.12 The siting of sutures. As a rule of thumb, the distance of 
insertion from the edge of the wound should correspond to the thick-
ness of the tissue being sutured (X). Each successive suture should be 
placed at twice this distance apart (2X). Reproduced with permission 
from Royal College of Surgeons of England. The intercollegiate basic 
surgical skills course participants handbook, edns 1–4. London: RCS.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.6Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
X
X
X
2X
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.7Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 7.13 Continuous suture technique. Reproduced with permis-
sion from Royal College of Sur geons of England. The intercollegiate 
basic surgical skills course participants handbook, edns 1–4. London: 
RCS.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   91 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES92
TABLE 7.2 Non-absorbable suture materials.
Suture Types Raw material Tensile strength Absorption rate Tissue reaction Contraindications Frequent uses How supplied
Silk Braided 
or twisted 
multifilament. 
Dyed or undyed. 
Coated (with 
wax or silicone) 
or uncoated
Natural protein
Raw silk from 
silkworm
Loses 20% when 
wet; 80–100% 
lost by 6 months. 
Because 
of tissue 
reactions and 
unpredictability, 
silk is 
increasingly not 
recommended
Fibrous 
encapsulation in 
body at 2–3 weeks
Absorbed slowly 
over 1–2 years
Moderate to 
high
Not 
recommended
Consider 
suitable 
absorbable or 
non-absorbable
Not for use with vascular 
prostheses or in tissues 
requiring prolonged 
approximation under 
stress
Risk of infection and 
tissue reaction makes 
silk unsuitable for 
routine skin closure
Ligation and suturing 
when long-term tissue 
support is necessary
For securing drains 
externally
10/0–2 with 
needles, 4/0–1 
without needles
Linen Twisted Long staple flax 
fibres
Stronger when 
wet
Loses 50% at 
6 months; 30% 
remains at 2 
years
Non-absorbable
Remains 
encapsulated in 
body tissues
Moderate Not advised for use with 
vascular prostheses
Ligation and suturing 
in gastrointestinal 
surgery. No longer in 
common use in most 
centres
3/0–1 with needles, 
3/0–1 without 
needles
Surgical steel Monofilament or 
multifilament
An alloy of 
iron, nickel and 
chromium
Infinite (>1 year) Non-absorbable
Remains 
encapsulated in 
body tissues
Minimal Should not be used 
in conjunction with 
prosthesis of different 
metal
Closure of sternotomy 
wounds
Previously found favour 
for tendon and hernia 
repairs
Monofilament: 
5/0–5 with needles; 
multifilament: 5/0–
3/0 with needles
Nylon Monofilament 
or braided 
multifilament 
Dyed or undyed
Polyamide polymer Loses 15–20% 
per year
Degrades at 
approximately 
15–20% per year
Low None General surgical 
use, e.g. skin 
closure, abdominal 
wall mass closure, 
hernia repair, plastic 
surgery, neurosurgery, 
microsurgery, 
ophthalmic surgery
Monofilament: 
11/0–2 with 
needles (including 
loops in some 
sizes), 4/0–2 
without needles; 
multifilament: 
6/0–2 with needles, 
3/0–1 without 
needles
Polyester Monofilament 
or braided 
multifilament
Dyed or undyed
Coated 
(polybutylate 
or silicone) or 
uncoated
Polyester 
(polyethylene 
terephthalate)
Infinite (>1 year) Non-absorbable: 
remains 
encapsulated in 
body tissues
Low None Cardiovascular, 
ophthalmic, plastic and 
general surgery
Monofilament: 
(ophthalmic) 11/10; 
10/0 with needles; 
multifilament: 
5/0–1 with needles
Polybutester Monofilament. 
Dyed or undyed
Polybutylene 
terephthalate and 
polytetramethylene 
ether glycol
Infinite (>1 year) Non-absorbable: 
remains 
encapsulated in 
body tissues
Low None Exhibits a degree of 
elasticity. Particularly 
favoured for use in 
plastic surgery
7/0–1 with needles
Polypropylene Monofilament. 
Dyed or undyed
Polymer of 
propylene
Infinite (>1 year) Non-absorbable: 
remains 
encapsulated in 
body tissues
Low None Cardiovascular surgery, 
plastic surgery, 
ophthalmic surgery, 
general surgical 
subcuticular skin 
closure
10/0–1 with 
needles
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   92 25/10/2017   07:47Wound closure 93
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
TABLE 7.3 Absorbable suture materials.
Suture Types Raw material Tensile strength 
retention in vivo Absorption rate Tissue 
reaction Contraindications Frequent uses How supplied
Catgut Plain Collagen derived 
from healthy sheep 
or cattle
Lost within 7–10 days
Marked patient 
variability
Unpredictable and 
not recommended
Phagocytosis 
and enzymatic 
degradation within 
7–10 days
High Not for use in tissues 
that heal slowly and 
require prolonged 
support
Synthetic absorbables 
are superior
Ligate superficial vessels, 
suture subcutaneous tissues
Stomas and other tissues that 
heal rapidly
6/0–1 with 
needles; 4/0–3 
without needles
Catgut Chromic Collagen derived 
from healthy sheep 
or cattle
Tanned with 
chromium salts to 
improve handling and 
to resist degradation 
in tissue
Lost within 21–28 
days
Marked patient 
variability
Unpredictable and 
not recommended
Phagocytosis 
and enzymatic 
degradation within 
90 days
Moderate As for plain catgut
Synthetic 
absorbables superior
As for plain catgut 6/0–3 with 
needles; 5/0–3 
without needles
Polyglactin Braided 
multifilament
Copolymer of lactide 
and glycolide in a 
ratio of 90:10, coated 
with polyglactin and 
calcium stearate
Approximately 60% 
remains at 2 weeks
Approximately 30% 
remains at 3 weeks
Hydrolysis 
minimal until 5–6 
weeks. Complete 
absorption 60–90 
days
Mild Not advised for 
use in tissues that 
require prolonged 
approximation under 
stress
General surgical use where 
absorbable sutures required, 
e.g. gut anastomoses, vascular 
ligatures. Has become the 
‘workhorse’ suture for many 
applications in most general 
surgical practices, including 
undyed for subcuticular wound 
closures. Ophthalmic surgery
8/0–2 with 
needles; 5/0–2 
without needles
Polyglyconate Monofilament
Dyed or 
undyed
Copolymer of glycolic 
acid and trimethylene 
carbonate
Approximately 70% 
remains at 2 weeks
Approximately 55% 
remains at 3 weeks
Hydrolysis minimal 
until 8–9 weeks. 
Complete absorption 
by 180 days
Mild Not advised for 
use in tissues that 
require prolonged 
approximation under 
stress
Popular in some centres as an 
alternative to Vicryl and PDS
7/0–2 with 
needles
Polyglycolic 
acid
Braided 
multifilament
Dyed or 
undyed
Coated or 
uncoated
Polymer of 
polyglycolic acid. 
Available with coating 
of inert, absorbable 
surfactant poloxamer 
188 to enhance 
surface smoothness; 
87% excreted in urine 
within 3 days
Approximately 40% 
remains at 1 week
Approximately 20% 
remains at 3 weeks
Hydrolysis minimal 
at 2 weeks, 
significant at 4 
weeks. Complete 
absorption 60–90 
days
Minimal Not advised for 
use in tissues that 
require prolonged 
approximation under 
stress
Uses as for other absorbable 
sutures, in particular where 
slightly longer wound support 
is required
9/0–2 with 
needles; 9/0–2 
without needles
Polydioxanone 
(PDS)
Monofilament
Dyed or 
undyed
Polyester polymer Approximately 70% 
remains at 2 weeks
Approximately 50% 
remains at 4 weeks
Approximately 14% 
remains at 8 weeks
Hydrolysis minimal 
at 90 days.
Complete 
absorption at 180 
days
Mild Not for use in 
association with heart 
valves or synthetic 
grafts, or in situations 
in which prolonged 
tissue approximation 
under stress is 
required
Uses as for other absorbable 
sutures, in particular where 
slightly longer wound support 
is required
Polydioxanone 
suture (PDS)
10/0–2 with 
needles
Polyglycaprone Monofilament Copolymer of 
glycolite and 
caprolactone
21 days maximum 90–120 days Mild No use for extended 
support
Subcuticular in skin, ligation, 
gastrointestinal and muscle 
surgery
8/0–2 with 
needles
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   93 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES94
4 Subcuticular suture. This technique is used in skin where a 
cosmetic appearance is important and where the skin edges 
may be approximated easily (Figure 7.15). The suture mate-
rial used may be either absorbable or non-absorbable. For 
non-absorbable sutures, the ends may be secured by means 
of a collar and bead, or tied loosely over the wound. When 
absorbable sutures are used, the ends may be secured using 
a buried knot. Small bites of the subcuticular tissues are 
taken on alternate sites of the wound and then gently pulled 
together, thus approximating the wound edges without the 
risk of the cross-hatched markings of interrupted sutures.
Needles
In the past, needles had eyes in them and suture material had to 
be loaded into them, which was not only time consuming, but it 
meant that the needle holes in tissues were considerably larger 
than the suture material being used. Currently, needles are eye-
less or ‘atraumatic’, with the suture material embedded within 
the shank of the needle. The needle has three main parts:
1 shank;
2 body;
3 point.
The needle should be grasped by the needle holder approx-
imately one-third to one-half of the way back from the rear 
of the needle, avoiding both the shank and the point. The 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.8aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.8bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.9Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  3      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 7.14 (a, b) Mattress suture techniques. Reproduced with per-
mission from Royal College of Surgeons of England. The intercollegiate 
basic surgical skills course participants handbook, edns 1–4. London: 
RCS.
Figure 7.15 Subcuticular suture technique. Repr oduced with per -
mission from Royal College of Sur geons of England. The intercolle-
giate basic surgical skills course participants handbook, edns 1–4. 
London: RCS.
closer the needle holder is to the tip of the needle, the greater 
the accuracy of suture placement and the less the degree of 
rotation of the surgeon’s hand required in suturing. The nee-
dle should never be grasped nearer than one-third of the way 
back from the rear of the needle.
The body of the needle is either round, triangular or flat -
tened. Round-bodied needles gradually taper to a point, while 
triangular needles have cutting edges along all three sides. The 
actual point of the needle can be round with a tapered end, 
conventional cutting which has the cutting edge facing the 
inside of the needle’s curvature, or reverse cutting in which 
the cutting edge is on the outside (Figure 7.16). Round- 
 bodied needles are designed to separate tissue fibres rather 
than cut through them and are commonly used in intestinal 
and cardiovascular surgery. Cutting needles are used where 
tough or dense tissue needs to be sutured, such as skin and fas-
cia. Blunt-ended needles are now being advocated in certain 
situations, such as closure of the abdominal wall, in order to 
diminish the risk of needle-stick injuries in this era of blood-
borne infectious diseases. The choice of needle shape tends 
to be dictated by the accessibility of the tissue to be sutured, 
and the more confined the operative space, the more curved 
the needle. Hand-held straight needles may be used on skin, 
although today it is advocated that needle holders should be 
used in all cases to reduce the risk of needle-stick injuries. 
Half circle needles are commonly utilised in the gastrointes -
tinal tract, while J-shaped needles, quarter circle needles and 
compound curvature needles are used in special situations, 
such as the vagina, eye and oral cavity, respectively. The size 
of the needle tends to correspond with the gauge of the suture 
material, although it is possible to get similar sutures with dif-
fering needle sizes.
Knotting techniques
Knot tying is one of the most fundamental techniques in sur-
gery and yet is often performed poorly. The principles behind 
a secure knot are poorly understoo d by many surgeons and 
sadly a poorly constructed knot may jeopardise an otherwise 
successful surgical procedure. The general principles behind 
knot tying include:
 ● The knot must be tied firmly, but without strangulating 
the tissues.
 ● The knot must be unable to slip or unravel.
 ● The knot must be as small as possible to minimise the 
amount of foreign material.
 ● The knot must be tightened without exerting any  tension 
or pressure on the tissues being ligated, i.e. the knot should 
be bedded down carefully, only exerting pressure against 
counter-pressure from the index finger or thumb.
 ● During tying, the suture material must not be ‘sawed’ as 
this weakens the thread.
 ● The suture material must be laid square during tying, 
otherwise tension applied during tightening may cause 
breakage or fracture of the thread.
 ● When tying an instrument knot, the thread should only 
be grasped at the free end, as gripping the thread with 
artery forceps or needle holders can damage the material 
and again result in breakage or fracture.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   94 25/10/2017   07:47Wound closure 95
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
1/4 circle 3/8 circle 1/2 circle
1/2 curved
Straight
Compound curveJ needle
Cutting needles for stitching skin
Needles used for suturing the bowel
The threads are swaged into the needles
Needles used for suturing the abdominal
wall:
Round-bodied needles for peritoneum,
muscles and fat
Cutting needles for aponeurosis
5/8 circle
Cross-
section
Figure 7.16 Types of needle.
 ● The standard surgical knot is the reef knot (Figure 7.17), 
with a third throw for security, although with monofila -
ment sutures, such as used for vascular surgery, six to eight 
throws are required for security.
 ● A granny knot involves two throws of the same type of 
throw and is a slip knot. It may be useful in achieving the 
right tension in certain circumstances, but must be fol -
lowed by a standard reef knot to ensure security.
 ● When added security is required, a surgeon’s knot using a 
two throw technique is advisable to prevent slippage.
 ● When using a continuous suture technique, an Aberdeen 
knot may be used for the final knot. The free end of the 
suture is partially pulled through the final loop several 
times before being pulled through a final time completely 
prior to cutting.
 ● When the suture is cut after knotting, the ends should 
be left about 1–2 mm long to prevent unraveling. This is 
 particularly important when using monofilament material.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   95 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES96
Alternatives to sutures
Many alternatives to standard suture techniques now exist 
and are in common usage.
Skin adhesive strips
For the skin, self-adhesive tapes or steristrips may be used where 
there is no tension and not too much moisture, such as after a 
wide excision of a breast lump. They may also be used to min-
imise ‘spreading’ of a scar. Other adhesive polyurethane films, 
such as Opsite, Tegaderm or Bioclusive, may provide a simi-
lar benefit, while such transparent dressings also allow wound 
inspection and may protect against cross-infection.
Tissue glue
Tissue glue is also available, based upon a solution of 
n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate monomer. When it is applied to a 
wound, it polymerises to form a firm adhesive bond, but the 
wound does need to be clean, dry, with near perfect haemo -
stasis and under no tension. Some specific uses have been 
described, such as closing a laceration on the forehead of a 
fractious child in Accident and Emergency, thus dispensing 
with local anaesthetic and sutures. Although it is relatively 
expensive, it is quick to use, does not delay wound healing 
and is associated with an allegedly low infection rate. Other 
tissue glues involve fibrin and work on the principles of con-
verting fibrinogen to fibrin by thrombin with crosslinking by 
factor XIII, and the addition of aprotinin to slow the breaking 
up of the fibrin network by plasmin. This process has good 
adhesive properties and has been used for haemostasis in the 
liver and spleen, for dural tears, in ear, nose and throat (ENT) 
and ophthalmic surgery, to attach skin grafts and also to pre-
vent haemoserous collections under flaps. Fibrin glues have 
also been used to control gastrointestinal haemorrhage endo-
scopically, but do not work when the bleeding is brisk.
Laparoscopic wound closure
Laparoscopic wounds are generally 3–12  mm in length. As 
with all incisions they should be parallel to Langer’ s lines 
where possible. Skin closure can be carried out with sutures, 
using curved or straight needles, or glue, and can be further 
secured with adhesive strips.
Staples
Mechanical stapling devices were first used successfully by 
Hümer Hültl in Hungary in 1908 to close the stomach after 
resection. Today, there is a wide range of mechanical devices 
with linear, side-to-side and end-to-end stapling devices that 
can be used both in the open surgery setting and laparoscop -
ically. Most of these devices are disposable and relatively 
expensive, but their cost is offset by the saving of operative 
time and the potential increase in the range of surgery possi -
ble (see below).
STAPLING DEVICES
In the gastrointestinal tract, stapling devices tend to apply 
two rows of staples, offset in relation to each other, to produce 
a sound anastomosis (Figure 7.18). Many of them also simul-
taneously divide the bowel or tissue that has been stapled 
while other devices merely insert the staples and the bowel 
has to be divided separately. For all stapling devices, it is cru-
cial for the surgeon to understand the principles behind the 
device and to know intimately the mechanism and function 
of the instrument.
 ● End-to-end anastomoses. Circular stapling devices allow 
tubes to be joined together, and such instruments are 
in common use in the oesophagus and low rectum. The 
detached stapling head/anvil is intro duced into one end 
of the bowel, usually being secured within it by means of a 
purse-string suture. The body of the device is then inserted 
into the other end of the bowel, either via the rectum for 
a low rectal anastomosis, or via an enterotomy for an 
oesophago-jejunostomy, and the shaft is either extended 
through a small opening in the bowel wall or secured by 
a further purse-string suture. The head/anvil is reattached 
to the shaft and the two ends approximated. Once the 
device is fully closed, as indicated by the green indicator 
in the window, the device is fired, and, after unwinding, 
the stapler is gently withdrawn. It is important to assess the 
integrity of the anastomosis by examining the ‘doughnuts’ 
of tissue excised for completeness. It is essential that no 
extraneous tissue is allowed to become interposed between 
the two bowel walls on closing the stapler.
Half-hitch Crossed half-hitch
Reef or square knot Granny knot
Surgeon's knotExtra half-hitch on
reef knot
Figure 7.17 Standard knotting formations.
Hümer Hültl , surgeon, St Stephen’s Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, described his gastric stapler in 1908.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   96 25/10/2017   07:47The principles of anast omoses 97
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
may be helpful to use such a device with a moveable head 
(roticulator).
 ● Intraluminal anastomoses. These instruments have two 
limbs which can be detached. Each limb is intro duced 
into a loop of bowel, the limbs reassembled and the device 
closed. On firing, two rows of staples are inserted either 
side of the divided bowel, the division occurring by means 
of a built-in blade that is activated at the same time as 
the insertion of staples. Such an instrument may be used 
in fashioning a gastro-jejunostomy or jejuno-jejunostomy 
and is used in ileal pouch formation.
 ● Other devices. Other devices are produced that will  staple/
ligate and divide blood vessels. Skin closure may also be 
undertaken using hand-held stapling devices rather than 
individually picking up staples/clips and inserting them as 
described above. 
LAPAROSCOPIC STAPLING DEVICES
Since the early 1990s, increasingly complex surgical proce -
dures have been performed laparoscopically. This revolution 
in practice has gone hand-in-hand with rapid evolutions in 
technology to allow existing open instruments and devices to 
be used laparoscopically, including surgical staplers. Many of 
the intestinal stapling devices are now adapted to be inserted 
down trocars during laparoscopic surgery, and although they 
look very different, the principles of function are identical to 
their open surgical equivalent. Linear cutting staplers allow 
bowel and blood vessels to be sealed and divided. Linear and 
circular staplers also allow intracorporeal anastomoses to be 
performed. As with open staplers, the surgeon must be trained 
in their safe use and aware of the principles, including differ -
ent staple sizes.
THE PRINCIPLES OF 
ANASTOMOSES
Bowel anastomoses
The word anastomosis comes from the Greek ‘ana’, without, 
and ‘stoma’, a mouth, reflecting the join of a tubular viscus 
(bowel) or vessel (usually arteries) after a resection or bypass 
procedure. Prior to the nineteenth century, intestinal surgery 
was limited to exteriorisation by means of a stoma, or closure 
of simple lacerations. Lembert then described his seromuscular 
suture technique for bowel anastomosis in 1826, while Senn 
advocated a two-layer technique for closure. Kocher’s method 
utilised a two-layer anastomosis, first a continuous all-layer 
suture using catgut, then an inverting continuous (or inter -
rupted) seromuscular layer suture using silk, which became 
the mainstay of bowel anastomoses for many years (Figure 
7.19). However, Halsted favoured a one-layer extramucosal 
closure, and this was subsequently advocated by Matheson as 
Antoine Lembert , 1802–1851, surgeon, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France.
Nicolas Senn , 1844–1908, Professor of Surgery, Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL, USA.
Emil Theodor Kocher , 1841–1917, Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland. In 1909, he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his work on 
the thyroid. William Stewart Halsted , 1852–1922, Professor of Surgery, Johns Hopkins Hospital Medical School, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Norman Alistair Matheson , 1907–1966, formerly surgeon, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, UK.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.18 (a–c) Standard stapling devices.
 ● Transverse anastomoses. These instruments, which come 
in different sizes, simply provide two rows of staples for a 
single transverse anastomosis. They are useful for closing 
bowel ends, and the larger sizes have been used to create 
gastric tubes and gastric partitioning. One technical point 
of importance is that the bowel should be divided before 
the instrument is reopened after firing, as the instrument 
is designed with a ridge along which to pass a scalpel to 
ensure that the cuff of bowel that remains adjacent to the 
staple line is of the correct length. Down in the pelvis it 
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   97 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES98
For all intestinal anastomoses, the bowel ends must be 
brought together without tension. Stay sutures, which avoid 
the need for tissue forceps, are invaluable for displaying the 
bowel ends and help with the accurate alignment of the 
bowel and the placement of the sutures. If the anastomosis is 
being undertaken on mobile bowel, the anterior wall layer of 
sutures can be inserted, either in a continuous or interrupted 
manner, and then the bowel rotated and the posterior wall 
sutured in an identical manner to the anterior wall. As the 
mesenteric edge of the bowel is the most difficult, especially 
when a fatty mesentery is present, this angle should be dealt 
with first, with the final sutures being inserted at the antimes-
enteric border which is far more accessible and visible. The 
apposition of bowel edges should be as accurate as possible 
and the suture bites should be approximately 3–5 mm deep 
and 3–5 mm apart, depending on the thickness of the bowel 
wall. The suture materials should be of 2/0–3/0 size and made 
of an absorbable polymer, which can be braided (e.g. polygla-
ctin) or monofilament (e.g. polydioxanone), mounted on an 
atraumatic round-bodied needle. Braided, coated sutures are 
the easiest to handle and knot. 
It is crucial that only bowel of similar diameter is brought 
together to form an end-to-end anastomosis. In cases of major 
size discrepancy, a side-to-side or end-to-side anastomosis may 
be safer. In cases where the size discrepancy is not marked, 
a Cheatle split (making a cut into the antimesenteric bor -
der) may help to enlarge the lumen of distal, collapsed bowel 
and allow an end-to-end anastomosis to be fashioned. After 
all anastomoses, the mesentery should always be closed to 
avoid the later risk of an internal hernia through a persistent 
mesenteric defect. Care must be taken during closure of this 
defect to prevent damage to any mesenteric vessels running in 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.14Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.15Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Summary box 7.5
Intestinal anastomoses
●● Ensure good blood supply to both bowel ends before and 
after formation of anastomosis
●● Ensure the anastomosis is under no tension
●● Avoid risk to mesenteric vessels by clamps or sutures
●● Use atraumatic bowel clamps to minimise contamination
●● Interrupted and continuous single-layer suture techniques are 
adequate and safe
●● Stapling devices are an alternative when speed is required or 
access is a major factor
Figure 7.19  Standard two-layer bowel anastomosis. Reproduced 
with permission from Kocher T, Harder F , Thomas WEG (eds). Anas-
tomosis techniques in the gastrointestinal tract , 1st edn. Wollerau: 
Covidien, 2007.
Figure 7.20  Extramucosal technique taking care to include the 
submucosa. Reproduced with permission from Kocher T, Harder F , 
Thomas WEG (eds). Anastomosis techniques in the gastrointestinal 
tract, 1st edn. Wollerau: Covidien, 2007.
Sir George Lenthal Cheatle , 1865–1951, surgeon, King’s College Hospital, London, UK.
clamps should be used across the lumen of the bowel. Clamps 
should not impinge on the mesentery or the vasculature of the 
bowel for fear of damage to the vessels resulting in ischaemic 
changes. Ideally, the bowel edges should be pink and bleed -
ing prior to anastomosis. The gold standard for a good blood 
supply for any anastomosis is the presence of arterial bleeding 
from the marginal vessel immediately adjacent to the cut end 
of the bowel and the absence of venous congestion. Excessive 
bleeding from the bowel wall may need oversewing if natural 
haemostasis is inadequate. 
it was felt to cause the least tissue necrosis or luminal narrow-
ing (Figure 7.20). This technique has now become widely 
accepted, although it is essential that this is not confused with 
a seromuscular suture technique. The extramucosal suture 
must include the submucosa because this has a high collagen 
content and is the most stable suture layer in all sections of 
the gastrointestinal tract. There are several prospective ran -
domised trials comparing two-layer and single-layer anasto -
moses demonstrating that there is probably little to choose 
between these techniques, provided basic essentials as high -
lighted in Summary box 7.5 are observed. However, catgut and 
silk have been replaced by synthetic, usually absorbable, poly-
mers. In the past, great emphasis was placed on good bowel 
preparation prior to any anastomosis. The rationale was that, 
with good bowel preparation and an empty bowel, there was 
less likelihood of faecal contamination and therefore it was 
probably not necessary to apply bowel clamps (even of the 
soft occlusion type). However, this tradition is now being 
challenged, and there is evidence to suggest that conven -
tional bowel preparation provides little benefit, and indeed 
at times may prove detrimental to the outcome. In spite of 
this, many surgeons still use some form of bowel preparation, 
especially for colorectal surgery. Furthermore, if there is any 
risk of intestinal spillage during anastomosis, when bowel is 
unprepared or obstructed for example, atraumatic intestinal 
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   98 25/10/2017   07:47Drains 99
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
the edge of the mesentery. In certain situations, as indicated 
above, stapling devices are used to fashion the anastomosis, 
but as they are expensive, many surgeons reserve them for 
specific indications, such as oesophageal, rectal and gastric 
pouch procedures. Several studies have shown them not to be 
cost effective in routine small bowel surgery, although many 
surgeons still use them for ease of use and to save time.
Vascular anastomoses
Vascular anastomoses require an extremely accurate closure as 
they must be immediately watertight at the end of the oper -
ation when the vascular clamps are removed. In many cases, 
some form of prosthetic material or graft may be used which 
will never be integrated into the body tissues and so the integ-
rity of the suture line needs to be permanent. For this rea -
son, polypropylene is one of the best sutures because it is not 
biodegradable. It is used in its monofilament form, mounted 
on an atraumatic, curved, round-bodied needle. Knot security 
is important, and as polypropylene is monofilament and the 
anastomosis often depends on one final knot, several throws 
(between six and eight) of a well-laid reef knot are required. 
The suture line must be regular and watertight with a smooth 
intimal surface to minimise the risk of thrombosis and 
embolus, as well as to avoid any leakage. Suture size depends 
on vessel calibre: 2/0 is suitable for the aorta, 4/0 for the femo-
ral artery and 6/0 for the popliteal to distal arteries. Microvas-
cular anastomoses are made using a loupe and an interrupted 
suture down to 10/0 size. All vessel walls must be treated with 
great care, avoiding causing any damage to the intima. If 
any significant manipulation is necessary, atraumatic forceps 
(such as DeBakey’s) are utilised. Vascular clamps should be 
applied with great care, particularly for calcified vessels, and 
in some cases encircling rubber loops or intraluminal balloon 
catheters may be less traumatic for control.
Vessels should always be sewn with the needle moving 
from within to without on the downstream edge of the vessel 
to avoid creating an intimal flap and to fix any atherosclerotic 
plaque. The tip of the needle should be inserted at right angles 
to the surface of the intima and the curve of the needle fol -
lowed to prevent vessel trauma. The assistant should ‘follow’ 
by keeping the suture taut and, once the closure is complete, 
the distal clamp is released first, before the final watertight 
knot is made. This allows backflow to clear any clot or air from 
the anastomosis. The proximal clamp can then be released, 
a process which minimises the risk of distal embolus. Suture 
bites should be placed an equal distance apart, with the bite 
size dependent on the vessel diameter. Care needs to be taken 
to avoid damaging the suture, which should not be gripped by 
any surgical instrument. All haemostats that are used to hold 
any suture material should be shod with soft rubber to prevent 
suture material damage. A transverse arteriotomy is less likely 
to stenose following closure than a longitudinal arteriotomy, 
but may not give adequate access, and a longitudinal arteriot-
omy is easier to make.
A vein patch can be used if there is any danger of steno -
sis or doubt about the size of the lumen (Figure 7.21). The 
suture line can be started at the apex of the arteriotomy with 
a double-ended suture, and then carried down each side with 
the final knot being placed at the midpoint of the vein patch 
graft, and not at the far end. The suture should go from out -
side to inside on the graft and from inside to outside on the 
artery, again to minimise the risk of intimal flap formation. 
When prosthetic materials or grafts are used, similar non-  
absorbable monofilament sutures are used with the same 
in–out technique to ensure eversion of the graft edge and a 
smooth intimal surface. Again the needle should go from out-
side to inside on the graft and from inside to outside on the 
artery. Double-ended sutures make the procedures easier.
Summary box 7.6
Vascular anastomosis
●● Non-absorbable monofilament suture material should be 
used, e.g. polypropylene
●● A smooth intimal suture line is essential
●● Knots require multiple throws in order to ensure security
●● The suture must pass from within outwards on the downflow 
aspect of the anastomosis
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.16aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.16b Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
Figure 7.21 (a, b) Arteriotomy being closed by vein patch. The tech-
nique involves a double armed suture, ensuring that the final knot is half 
way along one side of the arteriotomy. Reproduced with permission 
from Royal College of Surgeons of England. The intercollegiate basic 
surgical skills course participants handbook, edns 1–4. London: RCS.
Laparoscopic anastomosis
The same principles apply to laparoscopic anastomosis as to 
open anastomosis: good blood supply, the avoidance of tension 
and gentle tissue handling. Both sutured and stapled anas -
tomoses can be performed using laparoscopic needle holders 
and staplers adapted to laparoscopic surgery. If the ends of the 
bowel have been adequately mobilised, and there is a spec-
imen extraction site (e.g. right hemicolectomy), an extra -
corporeal anastomosis can be performed using open surgical 
techniques. If one or both ends of the bowel to be anastomo-
sed cannot be exteriorised, an intracorporeal anastomosis can 
be performed. In intra-abdominal surgery, enterotomies are 
performed in the proximal and distal ends to be anastomosed 
and a linear stapler is used to join the two ends. The resulting 
common enterotomy is then closed with a running suture. 
DRAINS
Drains are inserted to allow fluid or air that might collect at 
an operation site or in a wound to drain freely to the surface. 
The fluid to be drained may include blood, serum, pus, urine, 
Michael Ellis DeBakey , b.1908, Professor of Surgery, Baylor University, Houston, TX, USA.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   99 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES100
faeces, bile or lymph. Drains may also allow wound irriga -
tion in certain specific circumstances. The adequate drainage 
of fluid collections prevents the development of cavities 
or spaces that may delay wound healing. Their use can be 
regarded as prophylactic in elective surgery and therapeutic 
in emergency surgery. Three basic principles apply in the use 
of drains:
1 Open drains that utilise the principle of gravity
2 Semi-open drains that work on the principle of the cap -
illary effect
3 Closed drain systems that utilise suction.
They may be placed through the wound or through a sepa-
rate incision, although it has been clearly shown that placing 
them through the wound leads to an increased risk of wound 
infection. With regard to the indications for drainage, drains 
were in common use ever since Lawson T ait suggested, in 
1887, ‘when in doubt drain!’ However, this edict has come 
under strong criticism recently and the value and use of drains 
has been the subject of close scrutiny; their use remains con -
troversial.
Protagonists suggest that the use of drains may:
 ● remove any intraperitoneal or wound collection of ascites, 
serum, bile, chyle, pancreatic or intestinal secretion;
 ● act as a signal for any postoperative haemorrhage or anas-
tomotic leakage;
 ● provide a track for later drainage.
However, the antagonists claim that the presence of a 
drain may:
 ● increase intra-abdominal and wound infections;
 ● increase anastomotic insufficiency;
 ● increase abdominal pain;
 ● increase hospital stay;
 ● decrease pulmonary function.
In reality, the use of drains currently tends to depend 
on a surgeon’ s individual preference. There are randomised 
controlled trials suggesting that their use in gastric, duode-
nal, small bowel, appendix and biliary surgery is unnecessary 
and may cause more problems than benefits, and this is now 
reflected in current practice. There are also randomised con -
trolled trials to suggest that they are also not required in col-
orectal, liver and pancreatic surgery, and yet in today’s practice 
the majority of surgeons will still utilise drains in these forms 
of surgery. The only area of alimentary tract surgery where 
drains are still routinely advocated is for oesophageal surgery, 
although even here the evidence is low, with the level of evi-
dence being only 5 and the level of recommendation being 
‘D’ (i.e. based on expert opinion).
Specialist uses of drains
There are certain clinical situations where specialist forms of 
drainage are required.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.17Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 7.22  Underwater sealed chest 
drain. Reproduced with permission 
from Thomas WEG. Basic principles. In: 
Kingsnorth A, Majid A (eds). Principles 
of surgical practice. London: Greenwich 
Medical, 2001.
Robert Lawson Tait , 1845–1899, surgeon, Birmingham, UK.
Ruggero Oddi , 1864–1913, Italian physician.
Chest drains
These are indicated for a pneumothorax, pleural effusion, 
haemothorax or to prevent the collection of fluid or air after 
thoracotomy. Once the drain has been inserted, it should be 
connected to an underwater sealed drain (Figure 7.22). This 
system allows air to leave the pleural cavity, but it cannot 
be drawn back in by the negative pressure that is created in 
the intrathoracic cavity. During the respiratory process, it 
should be checked that the meniscus of the fluid is swinging, 
to ensure that the tube is not blocked. Suction can be applied 
to the venting tube at the bottle whenever there is significant 
drainage of fluid or air expected. Between 10 and 20 mm of 
mercury is adequate to obtain a gentle flow of bubbles from 
the chest cavity.
T-tube drains
After exploration of the common bile duct, a T-tube (Figure 
7.23) may be inserted into the duct which allows bile to drain 
while the sphincter of Oddi is in spasm postoperatively. Once 
the sphincter relaxes, bile drains normally down the bile duct 
and into the duodenum. To assist choleresis, it is often advis-
able to convert the lumen of the limb of the T into a gutter, 
which also facilitates removal.
Image guided drainage
For many intra-abdominal collections or abscesses, drains 
may be inserted under ultrasound or computed tomography 
(CT) control. In order for such drains to remain in site, the 
end is often fashioned with a pigtail to discourage inadvertent 
removal. These techniques have been in increasing use as a 
less invasive method to manage both primary and secondary 
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   100 25/10/2017   07:47The principles of diathermy: electr osurgery 101
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
(after surgery) collections of fluid. In the context of sepsis they 
are often used with intravenous or oral antimicrobial therapy. 
Removal of drains
A drain should be removed as soon as it is no longer required 
because, if left in, it can itself predispose to fluid collection 
as a result of tissue reaction. Indeed there is evidence that by 
7 days only 20% of drains are still functioning. It should be 
stressed how important it is to define the objective of each 
individual drain and to ensure that once that objective has 
been met, the drain is removed. If a drain is used at all, the 
following principles may apply.
 ● Drains put in to cover perioperative bleeding may usually 
be removed after 24 hours, e.g. thyroidectomy.
 ● Drains put in to drain serous collections usually can be 
removed after 5 days, e.g. mastectomy.
 ● Drains put in because of infection should be left until the 
infection is subsiding or the drainage is minimal.
 ● Drains put in to cover colorectal anastomoses should be 
removed at about 5–7 days. However, it should be stressed 
that in no way does a drain prevent any intestinal leakage, 
but merely may assist any such leakage to drain externally 
rather than to produce life-threatening peritonitis.
 ● Common bile duct T-tubes should remain in for 10 days. 
However, once the T-tube cholangiogram has shown that 
there is free flow of bile into the duodenum and that there 
are no retained stones, some surgeons like to clamp the 
T-tube prior to removal. The 10-day period is required 
to minimise the risk of biliary peritonitis after removal. 
T-tubes are traditionally and intentionally made of latex 
Figure 7.23  T-tube. Repr oduced with permission from Thomas 
WEG. Basic principles. In: Kingsnorth A, Majid A (eds). Principles of 
surgical practice. London: Greenwich Medical, 2001.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.18Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
to stimulate fibrosis, which results in the formation of a 
tract to allow the drainage of bile if required. It is import-
ant to use an alternative to latex if the patient is allergic, 
bearing in mind the decreased potential for fibrosis of sili-
cone-based T-tubes. The increase in less invasive means of 
intervention for bile duct pathology has resulted in fewer 
T-tubes being used.
 ● Any suction drain should have the suction taken off prior 
to removal of the drain. Even in the absence of suction, 
a blocked drain may be difficult to remove owing to the 
creation of a relative vacuum as it is pulled out. This can 
be released by twisting the drain on removal or flushing 
with a small volume of sterile saline under aseptic con -
ditions.
 ● During removal of a chest drain, the patient should be 
asked to breathe in and hold their breath, thus doing a 
Valsalva manoeuvre. In this way, no air is sucked into the 
pleural cavity as the tube is removed. Once the drain is 
out, a previously inserted purse-string suture should be 
tied.
Laparoscopic surgery is often accompanied by ‘Enhanced 
Recovery after Surgery’ pathways. These pathways comprise a 
package of pre-, peri- and postoperative care whose objectives 
are to reduce complications and hospital stay. Such pathways 
often discourage the use of drains. However the laparoscopic 
surgeon should always be prepared to use drains where indi -
cated.
THE PRINCIPLES OF 
DIATHERMY: ELECTROSURGERY
Development of the first commercial electrosurgical device is 
credited to William T Bovie, who developed the first electro-
surgical device while employed at Harvard University. The 
first use of an electrosurgical generator in an operating room 
occurred in 1926 at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital  in Boston, 
Massachusetts. The operation – removal of a mass from a 
patient’s head – was performed by Harvey Cushing. 
For many years, short wave diathermy has proved a most 
valuable and versatile aid to surgical technique. Its most 
common use is in securing haemostasis by means of coag-
ulation, but by varying the strength or wave form of the 
current produced, it can also result in a cutting effect. Both 
these effects have been used in open surgery, as well as in 
laparoscopic surgery or down intraluminal endoscopes, as in 
transurethral resection of the prostate. However, although 
diathermy is a valuable surgical tool, many accidents have 
occurred due to surgeons being unaware of, or not fully 
understanding, the principles of its use. Most accidents are 
avoidable if the diathermy or electrocautery is used with 
care. It is therefore vital for a surgeon to have a sound 
understanding of the principles and practice of diathermy, 
and how to avoid complications.
Antonio Maria Valsalva , 1666–1723, Italian physician and anatomist.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   101 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES102
Principle of diathermy
When an electrical current passes through a conductor, some 
of its energy appears as heat. The heat produced depends on:
 ● the intensity of the current;
 ● the wave form of the current;
 ● the electrical property of the tissues through which the 
current passes;
 ● the relative sizes of the two electrodes.
There are two basic types of diathermy system in use, 
monopolar diathermy and bipolar diathermy (Figure 7.24). 
In monopolar diathermy, which is the most commonly used 
form, an alternating current is produced by a suitable gener -
ator and passed to the patient via an active electrode which 
has a very small surface area. The current then passes through 
the tissues and returns via a very large surface plate (the pas -
sive electrode) back to the earth pole of the generator. As 
the surface area of contact of the active electrode is small in 
comparison to the passive electrode, the concentrated pow -
erful current produces heat at the operative site. However, 
the large surface area electrode of the patient plate spreads 
the returning current over a wide surface area, so it is less 
concentrated and produces little heat. In bipolar diathermy, 
the two active electrodes are usually represented by the limbs 
of a pair of diathermy forceps. Both forceps ends are therefore 
active and current flows between them, and only the tissue 
held between the limbs of the forceps heats up. This form of 
diathermy is used when it is essential that the surrounding 
tissues should be free from either the risk of being burned or 
having current passed through them.
Effects of diathermy
Diathermy can be used for three purposes:
1 Coagulation: the sealing of blood vessels.
2 Fulguration: the destructive coagulation of tissues with 
charring.
3 Cutting: used to divide tissues during bloodless surgery.
In coagulation, a heating effect leads to cell death by 
dehydration and protein denaturation. Bleeding is therefore 
stopped by a combination of the distortion of the walls of the 
blood vessel, coagulation of the plasma proteins, dried and 
shrunken dead tissue and stimulation of the clotting mecha -
nism. In an ideal situation, intracellular temperatures should 
not reach boiling during coagulation, because if this occurs an 
unwanted cutting effect may be experienced. Cutting occurs 
when sufficient heat is applied to the tissue to cause cell water 
to explode into steam. The cut current is a continuous wave 
form and monopolar diathermy is most effective when the 
active electrode is held a very short distance from the tissues. 
This allows an electrical discharge to arc across the gap, cre -
ating a series of sparks which produce the high temperatures 
needed for cutting. In fulguration, the diathermy machine is 
set to coagulation and a higher effective voltage is used to 
make larger sparks jump an air gap, thus fulgurating the tissues. 
This can continue until carbonisation or charring occurs. The 
voltage and power output can be varied by adjusting the dura-
tion of bursts of current, as well the intensity, to give a com -
bination of both cutting and coagulation. This is known as 
blended current and provides both forms of diathermy activity. 
Complications of diathermy
Electrocution
Today, diathermy machines are manufactured to very high 
safety standards which minimise the risk of any part of the 
machine becoming live with mains current. However, as 
with any such instrument, there must be regular and expert 
servicing.
Explosion
Sparks from the diathermy equipment can ignite any 
volatile or inflammable gas or fluid within the theatre. 
Alcohol-based skin preparations can catch fire if they are 
allowed to pool on or around the patient. Furthermore, 
diathermy should not be used in the presence of explosive 
gases, including those which may occur naturally in the 
Active cable Active electrode
Diathermy unit
Dispersive cable
Patient plate
Monopolar diathermy
Active cable
Two small
active electrodes
Diathermy unit
(a)
(b) Bipolar diathermy
Figure 7.24 The principles of diathermy. (a) Monopolar diathermy. 
(b) Bipolar diathermy. Reproduced with permission from Royal Col -
lege of Surgeons of England. The intercollegiate basic surgical skills 
course participants handbook, edns 1–4. London: RCS.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   102 25/10/2017   07:47Principles of advanced energy devices 103
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
colon, especially after certain forms of bowel preparation, 
such as mannitol, which has now been banned for this use 
for this very reason.
Burns
These are the most common type of diathermy accidents in 
both open and endoscopic surgery. They occur when the cur-
rent flows in some way other than that which the surgeon 
intended and are far more common in monopolar than bipo -
lar diathermy. Burns may occur as a result of:
 ● Faulty application of the indifferent electrode with inade-
quate contact area.
 ● The patient being earthed by touching any metal object, 
e.g. the Mayo table, the bar of an anaesthetic screen, an 
exposed metal arm rest or a leg touching the metal stirrups 
used in maintaining the lithotomy position.
 ● Faulty insulation of the diathermy leads, either due to 
cracked insulation or instruments, such as towel clips, 
pinching the cable.
 ● Inadvertent activity, such as the accidental activation of 
the foot pedal, or accidental contact of the active elec -
trode with other metal instruments, such as retractors, 
instruments or towel clips.
Channelling
Heat is produced wherever the current intensity is greatest. 
Normally, this would be at the tip of the active electrode, but 
if current passes up a narrow channel or pedicle to the active 
electrode, enough heat may be generated within this channel 
or pedicle to coagulate the tissues. This can prove disastrous, 
for example:
 ● coagulation of the penis in a child undergoing circumci -
sion;
 ● coagulation of the spermatic cord when the electrode is 
applied to the testis. 
In such situations, diathermy should not be used or, if it is 
necessary, bipolar diathermy should be employed.
Pacemakers
Diathermy currents can interfere with the working of a pace-
maker, with obvious potential danger to the patient’s health. 
Modern pacemakers are designed to be inhibited by high 
frequency interference, so the patient may receive no pac -
ing stimulation at all while the diathermy is in use. Certain 
demand pacemakers may revert to the fixed rate of pacing and 
therefore it is important for the anaesthetist to have a magnet 
to deactivate the device during surgery.
Laparoscopic surgery
Diathermy burns are a particular hazard of laparoscopic sur -
gery owing to relative lack of visibility of the instrumentation 
and the actual structure of the instruments used. Such burns 
may occur by:
 ● Diathermy of the wrong structure because of lack of clarity 
of vision or misidentification.
 ● Faulty insulation of any of the laparoscopic instruments 
or equipment.
 ● Intraperitoneal contact of the diathermy with another 
metal instrument while activating the pedal.
 ● Inadvertent activation of the pedal while the diathermy 
tip is out of vision of the camera.
 ● Retained heat in the diathermy tip touching susceptible 
structures, such as bowel.
 ● Capacitance coupling (Figure 7.25). This is a phenome -
non in which a capacitor is created by having an insulator 
sandwiched between two metal electrodes. This can be 
created in situations where there is a metal laparoscopic 
port and the diathermy hook is passed through it. The 
insulation of the diathermy hook acts as the sandwiched 
insulator and, by means of electromagnetic induction, the 
diathermy current flowing through the hook can induce 
a current in the metal port, which can potentially dam-
age intraperitoneal structures. In most cases, this current 
is dissipated from the metal port through the abdominal 
wall, but if a plastic cuff is used this dissipation of cur -
rent does not occur and the danger of capacitance cou-
pling is significantly increased. Therefore, metal ports 
should never be used with a plastic cuff. The danger of 
capacitance coupling can be prevented by using entirely 
plastic ports. Reusable instruments are subject to damage 
and ‘wear and tear’ through use, cleaning and sterilisation, 
which can lead to direct coupling that can activate an 
otherwise passive instrument. Therefore, it is important 
for the operator, assistants and scrub team to inspect such 
instruments for damage that may compromise safety. 
Figure 7.25  Capacitance coupling during laparoscopic sur gery. 
Reproduced with permission fr om Royal College of Surgeons of 
England. The intercollegiate basic surgical skills course participants 
handbook, edns 1–4. London: RCS.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 19.20Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Point of contact
with bowel
Diathermy hook
Metal laparoscopic
port
PRINCIPLES OF ADVANCED 
ENERGY DEVICES
Advanced laparoscopic procedures have become widely 
adopted over the last 25 years. Such ‘image based surgery’ has 
driven a parallel explosion in novel technologies which facil-
itate the performance of such procedures. This is particularly 
the case for energy devices. Monopolar diathermy still plays 
a vital and effective role in laparoscopic surgery but has lim-
itations in terms of sealing larger blood vessels and is accom -
panied by the risks outlined above. Therefore, surgeons have 
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   103 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 7  Basic surgical skills and anast omoses
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES104
increasingly used advanced energy devices to facilitate dissec-
tion and to seal and divide blood vessels up to 7 mm diameter. 
There are three main types of advanced energy device: 
bipolar electrosurgery, harmonic scalpel and combination 
devices. In all cases the surgeon needs to be aware of the char-
acteristics of these devices and their capacity to cause thermal 
injury in order to use them safely.
Bipolar electrosurgery devices
Advanced bipolar tissue fusion technology is a vessel sealing 
system that is used in both open and laparoscopic surgery. It 
actually fuses the vessel walls to create a permanent seal and is 
in wide use in a range of surgical specialties, including gynae-
cology, colorectal, urology and general surgery. It uses a com-
bination of pressure and energy to create vessel fusion which 
can withstand up to three times the normal systolic pressure. 
New technology, such as the Ligasure system™ (Medtronic), 
involves advanced bipolar technology that uses the body’s 
own collagen and elastin to both seal and divide, allowing 
surgeons to reduce instrument handling when dissecting, 
ligating and grasping – a valuable asset particularly during 
laparoscopic surgery. The feedback sensing technology incor-
porated in the instrument is designed to manage the energy 
delivery in a precise manner and results in an automatic dis -
continuation of energy once the seal is complete, thus remov-
ing any concern that the surgeon has to use guesswork as to 
when the seal is complete. The newer instruments actively 
monitor tissue impedance and provide a real-time adjustment 
of the energy being delivered. Using this technology, Liga-
sure can seal vessels of up to 7 mm diameter, with an average 
seal time of 2–4 seconds, as well as pedicles, tissue bundles 
and lymphatics, with a consistent controlled and predictable 
effect on tissue, including less desiccation. Therefore, the 
new Ligasure Advance™ (Medtronic) can dissect, seal and 
divide and was designed to be the only tool that a surgeon 
would need.
Harmonic scalpel devices
The harmonic scalpel is an instrument that uses ultrasound 
technology to cut tissues while simultaneously sealing them. 
It utilises a hand-held ultrasound transducer and scalpel 
which is controlled by a hand switch or foot pedal. During 
use, the scalpel vibrates in the 20  000–50 000 Hz range and 
cuts through tissues, effecting haemostasis by sealing vessels 
and tissues by means of protein denaturation caused by vibra-
tion rather than heat (in a similar manner to whisking an egg 
white). It provides cutting precision, even through thickened 
scar tissue, and visibility is enhanced because less smoke is 
created by this system during use when compared with rou -
tine electrosurgery. However, the harmonic scalpel does take 
longer to cut and coagulate tissues than diathermy, and while 
diathermy can be used to coagulate a bleeding vessel at any 
time, the harmonic scalpel can only coagulate as it cuts. It is 
claimed that patients experience less swelling, bleeding and 
bruising after the use of the harmonic scalpel than when a 
conventional scalpel is used, and blood vessels are sealed with 
a much lower temperature than conventional diathermy and 
so there is less thermal damage to adjacent tissue, with less 
charring and desiccation. Furthermore, it is suggested that 
the use of the harmonic scalpel reduces operative time and 
recovery is thus enhanced. Currently, the harmonic scalpel is 
in common use during laparoscopic procedures, as well as in 
open surgery, such as thyroidectomy, and several plastic sur -
gery operations, e.g. cosmetic breast surgery. There are several 
such devices on the market, which vary in form and function. 
Surgeons need to be aware of, and trained in the use of such 
devices to prevent, complications such as thermal injury of 
vital structures near to where the energy is activated. There 
are several manufacturers of harmonic scalpels and the latest 
versions can seal and divide arteries and veins up to 7 mm in 
diameter.
Combination energy devices
In the last 5  years, technology has evolved with respect to 
both harmonic and bipolar advanced energy devices. One 
product, the Thunderbeat S™ (Olympus), has combined 
both modalities in a single device. By simultaneously using 
ultrasonic vibration and bipolar diathermy, this device is able 
to seal and divide arteries and veins up to 7 mm in diameter. 
There is also a ‘seal only’ mode activated by a separate button, 
which activates bipolar diathermy only.
FURTHER READING
Carol EH Scott-Conner (Ed.) The Sages manual: Volume 1 basic laparos -
copy and endoscopy. Berlin: Springer, 2012. 
Kirk RM. Basic surgical techniques , 6th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Liv -
ingstone, 2010.
Pignata G, Bracale U, Fabrizio Lazzara F (Eds.) Laparoscopic surgery: key 
points, operating room setup and equipment. Berlin: Springer, 2016. 
Royal College of Surgeons of England. Intercollegiate basic surgical skills 
course (participant handbook), 4th edn. London: Royal College of Sur-
geons of England, 2007.
www.websurg.com (website) This is one of the best educational websites 
for laparoscopic surgery.
01_07-B&L27_Pt1_Ch07.indd   104 25/10/2017   07:47Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Principles of laparoscopic and 
robotic surgery
Chapter 8
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The principles of laparoscopic and robotic surgery
 • The advantages and disadvantages of such surgery
 • The safety issues and indications for laparoscopic and 
robotic surgery
 • The principles of postoperative care
DEFINITION
Minimal access surgery is a product of modern technology and 
surgical innovation that aims to accomplish surgical thera -
peutic goals with minimal somatic and psychological trauma. 
This type of surgery has reduced wound access trauma, as well 
as being less disfiguring than conventional techniques. It can 
offer cost-effectiveness to both health services and employ -
ers by shortening operating times, shortening hospital stays, 
improving operative precision compared to open surgery in 
some (but not all) cases and allowing faster recuperation.
EXTENT OF MINIMAL ACCESS 
SURGERY
The first introduction of an experimental laparoscopic pro-
cedure was by Georg Kelling of Dresden in 1901 (he termed 
it ‘celioscopy’ and used a Nitze-cystoscope). This was fol-
lowed by Hans Christian Jacobaeus’ successful application 
in humans in Sweden. Despite the work of these pioneers, 
it took another 70 years before Patrick Steptoe applied this 
approach to patients in the United Kingdom in 1980, and 
Phillipe Mouret’s first video-laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
was performed in Lyon, France in 1987. However, since its 
mainstream adoption in the mid-1990s, minimal access 
 surgery has crossed all traditional boundaries of specialties 
and disciplines. Shared, borrowed and overlapping technol -
ogies and information are encouraging a multidisciplinary 
approach that serves the whole patient, rather than a specific 
organ  system.
The core principles of minimal access surgery (indepen-
dent of procedure or device) can be summarized by the acro-
nym I-VITROS: 
 ● Insufflate/create space – to allow surgery to take place in 
the minimal access setting 
 ● Visualise – the tissues, anatomical landmarks and the 
environment for the surgery to take place
 ● Identify – the specific structures for surgery
 ● Triangulate – surgical tools (such as port placement) to 
optimise the efficiency of their action, and ergonomics by 
minimising overlap and clashing of instruments
 ● Retract – and manipulate local tissues to improve access 
and gain entry into the correct tissue planes
 ● Operate – incise, suture, anastomose, fuse
 ● Seal/haemostasis.
Broadly speaking, minimal access techniques can be cate-
gorised as follows:
Laparoscopy
A rigid endoscope (laparoscope) is introduced through a 
port into the peritoneal cavity . This is insufflated with car -
bon dioxide to produce a pneumoperitoneum. Further ports 
are inserted to enable instrument access and their use for 
dissection (Figure 8.1). It is generally accepted that lapa -
roscopic cholecystectomy has revolutionised the surgical 
management of cholelithiasis and has become the main-
stay of management of uncomplicated gallstone disease. 
With improved instrumentation, advanced procedures, 
such as laparoscopic colectomies for malignancy, previously 
regarded as controversial, have also become fully accepted. 
There continues to be substantive evidence demonstrat -
ing the short-term benefits of laparoscopic surgery over 
open surgery with regard to postoperative pain, length of 
stay and earlier return to normal activities; however, the 
equivalence of the benefits in long-term outcomes, such 
as oncological quality and cancer-related survival, has not 
been established.
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   105 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES106
Thoracoscopy
A rigid endoscope is introduced through an incision in the 
chest to gain access to the thoracic contents. Usually there is no 
requirement for gas insufflation, as the operating space is held 
open by the rigidity of the thoracic cavity. In specific cases, such 
as mediastinal tumour resection and diaphragmatic surgery, gas 
insufflation at low pressure (5–8 mmHg) may be applied.
Endoluminal endoscopy
Flexible or rigid endoscopes are introduced into hollow organs 
or systems, such as the urinary tract, upper or lower gastroin -
testinal tract, and respiratory and vascular systems.
Perivisceral endoscopy
Body planes can be accessed even in the absence of a nat -
ural cavity . Examples are mediastinoscopy, retroperitone -
oscopy and retroperitoneal approaches to the kidney, aorta 
and lumbar sympathetic chain. Extraperitoneal approaches 
to the retroperitoneal organs, as well as hernia repair, are 
now becoming increasingly commonplace, further decreasing 
morbidity associated with visceral peritoneal manipulation. 
Other, more recent, examples include subfascial ligation of 
incompetent perforating veins in varicose vein surgery.
Arthroscopy and intra-articular joint 
surgery
Orthopaedic surgeons have applied arthroscopic access to the 
knee for some time and are applying this modality to other 
joints, including the shoulder, wrist, elbow and hip.
Combined approach
The diseased organ is visualised and treated by an assort-
ment of endoluminal and extraluminal endoscopes and other 
imaging devices. Examples include the combined laparoen -
doscopic approach for the management of biliary lithiasis, 
colonic polyp excision and several urological procedures, 
such as pyeloplasty and donor nephrectomy. In some cases 
the application of this combined approach offers the ability 
to execute operations via a single incision, thereby better 
adhering to the minimally invasive approach. The evidence 
for improved outcomes using these combined approaches 
remains limited for the majority of procedures.
SURGICAL TRAUMA IN OPEN, 
MINIMALL Y INVASIVE AND 
ROBOTIC SURGERY
Most of the trauma of an open procedure is inflicted because 
the surgeon must have a wound that is large enough to give 
adequate exposure for safe dissection at a target site. The 
wound is often the cause of morbidity, including infection, 
dehiscence, bleeding, herniation and nerve entrapment. 
Wound pain prolongs recovery time and, by reducing mobil-
ity, contributes to an increased incidence of pulmonary 
atelectasis, chest infection, paralytic ileus and deep venous 
thrombosis.
Mechanical and human retractors cause additional trauma. 
Body wall retractors can inflict localised damage that may be 
as painful as the wound itself. In contrast, during laparoscopy, 
the retraction is provided by the low-pressure pneumoperito -
neum, giving a diffuse force applied gently and evenly over 
the whole body wall, causing minimal trauma.
Exposure of any body cavity to the atmosphere also causes 
morbidity through cooling and fluid loss by evaporation. 
There is also evidence that the incidence of postsurgical 
adhesions has been reduced by the use of the minimally inva-
sive (laparoscopic, thoracoscopic) and robotic approaches, 
which has been suggested to result from less damage to deli -
cate serosal coverings. In the manual handling of intestinal 
loops, the surgeon and assistant disturb the peristaltic activity 
of the gut and provoke adynamic ileus.
Figure 8.1 (a) Common laparoscopic trocars. (b) Common laparo-
scopic instruments (photo courtesy of Daniel Leff).
(a)
(b)
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   106 25/10/2017   07:47Limitations of minimal access surgery 107
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Minimal access surgery has many advantages, such as 
a reduction in the trauma of access and exposure and an 
improvement in visualisation. While minimal access meth -
ods have been an established mo dality in some elective sur -
gical procedures, they are now also being increasingly applied 
with success in emergency surgical procedures (including 
perforated viscus repair, such as omental patch repair of the 
stomach, and washout of localised perforation of diverticular 
disease).
many procedures have been successfully performed without 
‘traditional sense’ of tactile feedback). This is an area of ongo-
ing research in haptics and biofeedback systems. Early work 
suggested that laparoscopic ultrasonography might be a sub-
stitute for the need to ‘feel’ in intraoperative decision-making. 
The rapid progress in advanced laparoscopic techniques, in -
cluding biliary tract exploration and surgery for malignancies, 
has provided a strong impetus for the development of lapa -
roscopic ultrasound. Now more developed, this technique 
already has advantages that far outweigh its disadvantages.
In more advanced techniques, large pieces of resected 
tissue, such as the lung or colon, may have to be extracted 
from the body cavity. Occasionally, the extirpated tissue may 
be removed through a nearby natural orifice, such as the 
rectum or the mouth. At other times, a novel route may be 
employed. For instance, a benign colonic specimen may be 
extracted through an incision in the vault of the vagina. Sev-
eral innovative tube systems have been shown to facilitate 
this extraction. Although tissue ‘morcellators, mincers and 
liquidisers’ can be used in some circumstances, they have the 
disadvantage of reducing the amount of information available 
to the pathologist. Previous reports of tumour implantation 
in the locations of port sites raised important questions about 
the future of the laparoscopic treatment of malignancy, but 
large-scale trials have shown this claim to be false. Although 
emerging evidence from large-scale international prospective 
trials implicates surgical skill as an important aetiological 
factor, it is important to consider the biological implications 
of minimally invasive strategies on the tumours. The use of 
carbon dioxide and helium as insufflants causes locoregional 
hypoxia and may also change pH. The resultant modulation 
of the behaviour of spilled tumour cells is increasingly being 
studied, although the risks of recurrence at port sites seem to 
be minimised by appropriate tissue handling, separating any 
tumours by bagging, and washing and protecting the site.
Hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery is a well-developed 
technique. It involves the intra-abdominal placement of a 
hand or forearm through a minilaparotomy incision, while 
pneumoperitoneum is maintained. In this way, the surgeon’s 
hand can be used as in an open procedure. It can be used 
to palpate organs or tumours, reflect organs atraumatically, 
retract structures, identify vessels, dissect bluntly along a tis -
sue plane and provide finger pressure to bleeding points, while 
proximal control is achieved. This approach has been sug -
gested to offer technical and economic efficiency when com -
pared with a totally laparoscopic approach, in some instances, 
reducing both the number of laparoscopic ports and the num-
ber of instruments required. Some advocates of the technique 
claim that it is also easier to learn and perform than totally 
laparoscopic approaches, and that there may be increased 
patient safety.
There has been a continued improvement in dissection 
techniques in laparoscopic/thoracoscopic surgery beyond 
that of standard electrosurgery/diathermy and laser technol-
ogy to improve dissection precision and haemostatic efficacy. 
Ultrasonic dissection, tissue fusion devices and tissue removal 
continue to be adopted across specialties and practitioners. 
This has taken place as a consequence of continuous and 
incremental technical improvements in devices, increased 
Summary box 8.1
Advantages of minimal access surgery
●● Decrease in wound size
●● Reduction in wound infection, dehiscence, bleeding, 
herniation and nerve entrapment
●● Decrease in wound pain
●● Improved mobility
●● Decreased wound trauma
●● Decreased heat loss
●● Improved visualisation
LIMITATIONS OF MINIMAL 
ACCESS SURGERY
Despite its many advantages, minimal access surgery has its 
limitations. To perform minimal access surgery with safety , 
the surgeon must operate remote from the surgical field, using 
an imaging system that provides a two-dimensional (2D) 
representation of the operative site. The endoscope offers a 
whole new anatomical landscape, which the surgeon must 
learn to navigate without the usual ‘open approach’ clues that 
make it easy to judge depth. The instruments are longer and 
sometimes more complex to use than those commonly used in 
open surgery. This results in the novice being faced with sig -
nificant problems of hand–eye coordination. Here there is a 
well-described learning curve for novice surgeons and experi-
enced ‘open’ surgeons when adopting the minimally invasive 
approach.
Some of the procedures performed by these new 
approaches are more technically demanding and are slower to 
perform, and they often have a more difficult learning curve 
as tactile feedback to the surgeon is lost. Indeed, on occasion, 
a minimally invasive operation is so technically demanding 
that both patient and surgeon are better served by conver -
sion to an open procedure. Unfortunately, there seems to be 
a sense of shame associated with conversion, which is quite 
unjustified. It is vital for surgeons and patients to appreciate 
that the decision to close or to convert to an open operation 
is not a complication but, instead, usually implies sound sur -
gical judgement in favour of patient safety.
Another problem occurs when there is intraoperative 
arterial bleeding. Haemostasis may be very difficult to achieve 
endoscopically because blood obscures the field of vision and 
there is a significant reduction of the image quality due to 
light absorption.
Another disadvantage of laparoscopic surgery is the loss of 
tactile feedback in the context of some procedures (although 
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   107 25/10/2017   07:47CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES108
familiarity with their use and some improvements in cost of 
access. The adaptation of the technology to minimally inva-
sive surgery grew out of the search for alternative, possibly 
safer, methods of dissection. Some current units combine the 
functions of three or four separate instruments, reducing the 
need for instrument exchanges during a procedure. This flex-
ibility, combined with the ability to provide a clean, smoke-
free field, has the potential to improve safety and shorten 
operating times.
Although dramatic cost savings are possible with laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy when compared with open cholecys -
tectomy, the position was less clear-cut with other procedures 
initially. There is another factor that may complicate the 
computation of the cost–benefit ratio. A significant rise in the 
rate of cholecystectomy followed the introduction of the lapa-
roscopic approach because the threshold for referring patients 
for surgery became lower. The increase in the number of pro-
cedures performed has led to an overall increase in the cost of 
treating symptomatic gallstones.
Three-dimensional (3D) imaging systems have been avail-
able for some time, but remain expensive and currently are 
not commonplace, partially because many surgeons feel that 
3D technology has not yet offered the ability to perform pro -
cedures with significant technical enhancement or to improve 
safety or outcomes across a range of operations. Stereoscopic 
imaging for laparoscopy and thoracoscopy is still progressing. 
Future improvements in these systems carry the potential 
to enhance manipulative ability in critical procedures, such 
as knot tying and dissection of closely overlapping tissues. 
There are, however, some drawbacks, such as reduced display 
brightness and interference with normal vision because of the 
need to wear specially designed glasses for some systems. It is 
likely that brighter projection displays will be developed, at 
increased cost. However, the need to wear glasses will not be 
easily overcome.
Looking further to the future, it is evident that the con-
tinuing reductions in the costs of elaborate image-processing 
techniques will result in a wide range of transformed presen-
tations becoming available. It should ultimately be possible 
for a surgeon to call up any view of the operative region that 
is accessible to a camera and present it stereoscopically in 
any size or orientation, superimposed on past images taken in 
other modalities. Such augmented reality systems have been 
available for several years but continue to improve. It is for 
the medical community to decide which of these many poten-
tial imaginative techniques will contribute most to effective 
surgical procedures.
ROBOTIC SURGERY
A robot is a mechanical device that performs automated phys-
ical tasks according to direct human supervision, a predefined 
program or a set of general guidelines, using artificial intelli-
gence techniques. In terms of surgery, robots have been used 
to assist surgeons during procedures. This has been primarily 
in the form of automated camera systems and telemanipulator 
systems, thus resulting in the creation of a human–machine 
interface.
Even though laparoscopic surgery has progressed greatly 
over the last two decades, owing to its widespread use and 
dissemination in that time, there are, as discussed above, limi-
tations. To those already mentioned may be added reduced 
degrees of freedom of movement and ergonomically difficult 
positions for the surgeon. Such problems undoubtedly affect 
surgical precision. This has led to interest in robotic surgical 
systems, which currently exist as two main categories:
 ● Teleoperated systems: a human surgeon performs an 
operation via a robot and its robotic instruments through 
a televisual computerised platform, either via onsite con -
nections or remotely through the internet or other digital 
channels – hence the publicity of ‘operating on a patient 
from another country’ (such ‘remote’ operations are cur -
rently rarely performed but their existence is established).
 ● Image-guided systems: A surgical robot completes a pre -
programmed surgical task which is guided by preoperative 
imaging and real-time anatomical constraints and cues 
through the application of inbuilt navigation systems.
In the current era the concept of the master–slave system 
prevails (where the surgeon is the master, i.e. the operator, 
and the robot is the slave). The two are linked by underly -
ing hardware and software components within an advanced 
computer construction. Such devices have been available for 
the past 30 years and have become more available during the 
past two decades. They still remain a relative rarity owing to 
a multitude of factors including cost, applicability and bene-
fits for a particular operation/pathology, training requirements 
and the support that is necessary, beyond just that of the indi-
vidual surgeon but rather at whole institution level.
Since their first clinical use in 1985, with the PUMA 560 
being used for a brain biopsy, surgical robots have been con -
sidered to offer many benefits, which have arisen as a result 
of new technology in lenses, cameras and computer soft-
ware. Just as laparoscopic surgery benefited from advances in 
light technology, allowing the targeted transmission of light 
down tubing, robotic surgery benefited from computer inte -
gration of mechanical (surgical) arms that paved the way for 
computer-integrated surgery (CIS). The advantages of robotic 
surgery are two-fold: first for the patient (as for laparoscopic 
surgery, see Summary box 8.1 ) and second for the surgeon. 
The advantages for the surgeon include better visualisation 
(higher magnification) with stereoscopic views; elimination 
of hand tremor allowing greater precision; improved manoeu-
vring as a result of the ‘robotic wrist’, which in some systems 
allows up to seven degrees of freedom; and the fact that large 
external movements of the surgical hands can be scaled 
down and transformed to limited internal movements of the 
Summary box 8.2
Limitations of minimal access surgery
●● Reliance on remote vision and operating
●● Loss of tactile feedback
●● Dependence on hand–eye coordination
●● Difficulty with haemostasis
●● Reliance on new techniques
●● Extraction of large specimens
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   108 25/10/2017   07:47Robotic surgery 109
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
‘robotic hands’, extending the surgical ability to perform com-
plex technical tasks in a limited space. Also, the surgeon is 
able to work in an ergonomic environment with less stress 
and to achieve higher levels of concentration. The computer 
may also be able to compensate for the beating movement 
of the heart, making it unnecessary to stop the heart during 
cardiothoracic surgery. There may also be less need for assis -
tance once surgery is under way.
Many surgical specialties have embraced the progres -
sion of robot-assisted techniques, including general surgery, 
cardiothoracic surgery, urology, orthopaedics, ear, nose and 
throat (ENT) surgery, gynaecology and paediatric surgery. 
Specialties that use microsurgical techniques also benefit 
from this technology. Current robotic systems were designed 
to offer multifunctionality including multi-anatomy and spe -
ciality capability in both operating theatre and remote envi -
ronments. In the current era, however, these devices seem 
most often applied in pelvic surgery (typically urology, col-
orectal and gynaecology) within inhouse operating areas. 
One major operative barrier to adoption remains the pro-
hibitive costs for many healthcare environments. As a result 
the current robotic surgical market is dominated by the master–
slave da Vinci system (Intuitive Surgical, MenloPark, CA, 
USA) (Figure 8.2), although there are several other commer-
cially available robots and a market open to a small number 
of new entrants, but also a history of unsuccessful (financially 
Figure 8.2 (a) The DaVinci Xi system. (b) The surgical console. (c) The robotic arms draped for a robotic coronary artery bypass grafting 
procedure. (d) Robotic distal coronary anastomosis.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   109 25/10/2017   07:48CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES110
or functionally) or withdrawn/ removed devices. This is partly 
because of the high cost of design and development of new  
robot technologies and surgical instruments compatible with 
them, which all require design, translation and intellectual 
property costs. In addition to the remote master–slave plat -
form design, direct robot systems exist and include: 
 ● tremor suppression robots;
 ● active guidance systems;
 ● articulated mechatronic devices;
 ● force control systems; 
 ● haptic feedback devices. 
Each of these systems offers different advantages to the 
operating surgeon, ranging from reducing the need for assis -
tants and providing better ergonomic operating positions to 
providing experienced guidance from surgeons not physically 
present in the operating theatre.
Robotic surgery – the first 30 years
The largest systematic overview of all robot surgical proce -
dures from inception and covering the field’s first 30 years 
revealed only 99 prospective or randomised studies reporting 
clinical outcomes from over 28  000 peer-reviewed research 
articles that mentioned the term ‘robotic surgery’. The 99 
studies revealed data from approximately 14  500 patients in 
trials undergoing robotic surgical procedures versus open and 
minimally invasive operations. The overall pooled results, 
regardless of specialty, revealed a decrease in blood loss and 
blood transfusion rate with robotic surgery when compared 
with both open surgery and minimally invasive surgery. Spe -
cifically, when compared with open surgery, robotic proce -
dures demonstrated that there was a reduction in length of 
hospital stay and overall complication rate. However, robotic 
procedures did suffer from significantly longer operative 
times and their cost-effectiveness varied depending on oper -
ative site, technique, patient and healthcare setting. While 
this reveals an overall perspective from the first 30 years of 
robotics surgery, there remains an incumbent need to offer 
clearer clinical evidence regarding the most apposite opera -
tive method and technology for each individual patient.
PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
Preparation of the patient
Although the patient may be in hospital for a shorter period, 
careful preoperative management is essential to minimise 
morbidity.
History
Patients must be fit for general anaesthesia and open opera -
tion if necessary. Potential coagulation disorders (e.g. associ -
ated with cirrhosis) are particularly dangerous in laparoscopic 
surgery. As adhesions may cause problems, previous abdomi-
nal operations or peritonitis should be documented.
Examination
Routine preoperative physical examination is required as 
for any major operation. Although, in general, laparoscopic/
thoracoscopic surgery allows quicker recovery, it may involve 
longer operating times and the establishment of the pneumo-
peritoneum may provoke cardiac arrhythmias. Severe chronic 
obstructive airways disease and ischaemic heart disease may 
be contraindications to the laparoscopic approach. Particular 
attention should be paid to the presence or absence of jaun -
dice, abdominal scars, palpable masses or tenderness. Moder -
ate obesity does not increase operative difficulty significantly, 
but massive obesity may make pneumoperitoneum difficult 
and standard instrumentation may be too short. Access may 
prove difficult in very thin patients, especially those with 
severe kyphosis.
Premedication
Premedication is the responsibility of the anaesthetist, with 
whom coexisting medical problems should be discussed.
Prophylaxis against thromboembolism
Venous stasis induced by the reverse T rendelenburg position 
during laparoscopic surgery may be a particular risk factor 
for deep vein thrombosis, as is a lengthy operation and the 
obesity of many patients. Subcutaneous low molecular weight 
heparin and antithromboembolic stockings should be used 
routinely, in addition to pneumatic leggings during the opera-
tion. Patients already taking warfarin for other reasons should 
have this stopped temporarily or converted to intravenous 
heparin, depending on the underlying condition, as it is not 
safe to perform laparoscopic surgery in the presence of a sig-
nificant coagulation deficit.
Urinary catheters and nasogastric tubes
In the early days of laparoscopic surgery, routine bladder cath-
eterisation and nasogastric intubation were advised. Most 
surgeons now omit these, but it remains essential to check 
that the patient is fasted and has recently emptied their blad-
der, particularly before the blind insertion of a Verres needle. 
However, currently, most general surgeons prefer the direct 
cut-down technique into the abdomen for the introduction of 
the first port for the establishment of the pneumoperitoneum 
(Hasson technique and modified Hasson approaches). More 
Janos Verres , 1903–1979, chest physician and chief of the Department of Internal Medicine, The Regional Hospital, Kapuvar, Hungary.
Harrith Hasson , Professor of Gynaecology, Chicago, IL, USA.
Summary box 8.3
Preparation for laparoscopic or robotic surgery
●● Overall fitness: cardiac arrhythmia, emphysema, medications, 
allergies
●● Previous surgery: scars, adhesions
●● Body habitus: obesity, skeletal deformity
●● Normal coagulation
●● Thromboprophylaxis
●● Informed consent
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   110 25/10/2017   07:48General intraoperative principles 111
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
recently, direct optical entry has been used, especially in the 
setting of bariatric surgery.
Informed consent
The basis of many complaints and much litigation in surgery, 
especially laparoscopic surgery, relates to the issue of informed 
consent. It is essential that the patient understands the nature 
of the procedure, the risks involved and, when appropriate, 
the alternatives that are available. A locally prepared explan-
atory booklet concerning the laparoscopic procedure to be 
undertaken is extremely useful.
In an elective case, a full discussion of the proposed oper-
ation should take place in the outpatient department with a 
surgeon of appropriate seniority, preferably the operating sur-
geon, before the decision is made to operate. On admission, it 
is the responsibility of the operating surgeon and anaesthetist 
to ensure that the patient has been fully counselled, although 
the actual witnessing of the consent form may have been 
delegated. The patient should understand what laparoscopic 
surgery involves and that there is a risk of conversion to 
open operation. If known, this risk should be quantified, for 
example the increased risk with acute cholecystitis or in the 
presence of extensive upper abdominal adhesions. The con -
version rate will also vary with the experience and practice of 
the surgeon. Common complications should be mentioned, 
such as shoulder tip pain and minor surgical emphysema, 
as well as rare but serious complications, including injury 
to the bile ducts and visceral injury from trocar insertion or 
diathermy.
Preparation is very similar to that for open surgery and 
aims to ensure that:
 ● The patient is fit for the procedure.
 ● The patient is fully informed and has consented.
 ● Operative difficulty is predicted when possible.
 ● Appropriate theatre time and facilities are available (espe-
cially important for robotic cases).
THEATRE SET UP AND TOOLS
Operating theatre design, construction and layout are key to 
its smooth running on a daily basis. Originally, the video and 
diathermy equipment and other key tools used in laparoscopic 
surgery were moved around on stacks, taking up valuable floor 
space and cluttering up the theatre environment, which was 
not always ergonomic for the operating team. New theatres 
are designed with moveable booms that come down from the 
ceiling; these are easy to place and do not have long leads 
or wires trailing behind them (Figure 8.3). The equipment 
consists of at least two high-resolution liquid crystal display 
(LCD) monitors (and, more recently, high definition (HD) 
monitors for even clearer images), the laparoscopic kit for 
maintaining pneumoperitoneum and the audiovisual kit. The 
advent of DVD and other digital recording equipment has 
also led to these being incorporated into the rigs so that cases 
can be recorded with ease. This is further facilitated by cam -
eras being inserted into the light handles of the main over -
head lights so that open surgery can also be recorded without 
distracting the surgeons.
Figure 8.3 Modern laparoscopic theatre set up.
Image quality is vital to the success of laparoscopic surgery. 
New camera and lens technology allows the use of smaller 
cameras. Many centres now use 5-mm laparoscopes routinely. 
Automatic focusing and charge-coupled devices (CCDs) are 
used to detect different levels of brightness and adjust for 
the best image possible. Flat panel monitors with HD images 
are used to give the surgeon the best views possible and 3D 
technology is now being used for visualisation more routinely 
in some centres. The usability of the kit has also improved; 
touch screen panels and even voice-activated systems are now 
available on the market.
As minimally invasive and robotic procedures have 
become routine in some institutions, the dedicated theatre 
team for such procedures has also evolved. Surgeons and 
anaesthetists, as well as scrub and circulating nurses, have 
become familiar with working with the equipment and 
each other. The efficient working of the team is crucial to 
high-quality surgery and quick yet safe turnover. Laparoscopic 
tools have also changed. Disposable equipment is more read-
ily available, which does unfortunately increase the cost of 
the surgery. However, easy to use, ergonomically designed 
and reliable surgical tools are essential for laparoscopic and 
robotic surgery. Simple designs for new laparoscopic ports are 
now being studied, with the aim of reducing the incidence of 
port-site hernias; see-through (optical) ports that allow the 
surgeon to cut down through the abdomen while observing 
the layers through the cameras, and new light sources within 
the abdomen may be simple ideas that affect surgical tech -
nique in the near future.
GENERAL INTRAOPERATIVE 
PRINCIPLES
Laparoscopic and thoracoscopic principles have specific prin-
ciples that require careful clinical consideration. As such, they 
are not purely a less invasive equivalent of an open operation. 
For example, laparoscopic cholecystectomy is now the ‘gold 
standard’ for operative treatment of symptomatic gallstone 
disease. The main negative aspect of the technique is the 
increased incidence of bile duct injury compared with open 
cholecystectomy. Better understanding of the mechanisms 
of injury, coupled with proper training, will avoid most of 
these errors. The following sections highlight the important 
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   111 25/10/2017   07:48CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES112
technical steps that should be taken during any form of lapa -
roscopic surgery to avoid complications.
Creating a pneumoperitoneum
There are two methods for creation of a pneumoperitoneum: 
open and closed.
The closed method involves blind puncture using a Verres 
needle. Although this method is fast and relatively safe, there 
is a small but significant potential for intestinal or vascular 
injury on introduction of the needle or first trocar.
The routine use of the open technique for creating a pneu-
moperitoneum avoids the morbidity related to a blind punc-
ture. To achieve this, a 1  cm vertical or transverse incision 
is made at the level of the umbilicus. The umbilicus carries 
importance as it is a reliable anatomical landmark deriving 
from the embryological coalescence of the rectus sheath and 
peritoneum and is devoid of other myofascial planes that 
could complicate subsequent entry into the peritoneum. T wo 
small retractors are used to dissect bluntly the subcutaneous 
fat and expose the midline fascia. T wo sutures are inserted 
each side of the midline incision (into the rectus sheath con-
fluence), followed by the creation of a 1 cm opening in the fas-
cia. Free penetration into the abdominal cavity is confirmed 
by the gentle introduction of a finger. Finally, a Hasson trocar 
(or other blunt-tip trocar) is inserted and anchored with the 
fascial sutures (Figure 8.4). This is considered the Hasson or 
‘modified Hasson’ approach. The term ‘modified’ is used here 
to denote the same principle as the original Hasson with the 
midline exposure and access, except that the exact technique 
has been changed to suit an individual surgeon, such as the 
adoption of a particular angle of retraction of the umbilicus 
before an incision into the midline is made to get access to 
the peritoneum.
Rarely, a third, or combination, approach may be 
employed. Here an open technique is followed with a smaller 
than usual midline incision. Once access to the peritoneum 
is visualised, a Verres needle is inserted under direct vision, 
and then insufflation is carried out. This small open approach 
then allows the introduction of a laparoscopic port with a 
view to reducing trauma of the pneumoperitoneum. Such an 
approach may have benefits for complex cases, such as those 
for ‘re-do’ procedures, where the risk of umbilical adhesions 
during pneumoperitoneum may be high.
The open technique may initially appear time consum-
ing and even cumbersome; however, with practice, it is quick, 
efficient and safe overall. Optical entry to the abdomen under 
direct vision using optical ports (especially in bariatric sur -
gery) is gaining favour with many laparoscopic surgeons. This 
allows quick and safe entry to the peritoneal cavity using 
bladeless see-through trocars that allow the different layers to 
be dissected through using the laparoscope within an optical 
port to be inserted into the abdomen.
Preoperative problems
Previous abdominal surgery
Previous abdominal surgery is no longer a contraindication to 
laparoscopic surgery, but preoperative evaluation is necessary 
to assess the type and location of surgical scars. As mentioned 
earlier, the open technique for insertion of the first trocar is 
safer. Before trocar insertion, the introduction of a finger -
tip helps to ascertain penetration into the peritoneal cavity 
and also allows adhesions to be gently removed from the 
entry site. After the tip of the cannula has been introduced, 
a laparoscope is used as a blunt dissector to tease adhesions 
gently away and form a tunnel towards the quadrant where 
the operation is to take place. This step is accomplished by 
a careful pushing and twisting motion under direct vision. 
With experience, the surgeon learns to differentiate visually 
between thick adhesions that may contain bowel and should 
be avoided and thin adhesions that would lead to a window 
into a free area of the peritoneal cavity.
Obesity
Laparoscopic and robotic surgery has proved to be safe and 
effective in the obese population. In fact, some procedures 
are less difficult than their open counterparts for the morbidly 
obese patient, e.g. in bariatric surgery. Technical difficulties 
occur, however, in obtaining pneumoperitoneum, reaching 
the operative region adequately and achieving adequate expo-
sure in the presence of an obese colon. Increased thickness of 
the subcutaneous fat makes insufflation of the abdominal cav-
ity more difficult. With the closed technique, a larger Verres 
needle is often required for morbidly obese patients. Pulling 
the skin up for fixation of the soft tissues is better accom-
plished with towel clamps. Only moderate force should be 
used, to avoid separating the skin farther from the fascia. The 
needle should be passed at nearly a right angle to the skin and 
preferably above the umbilicus, where the peritoneum is more 
firmly fixed to the midline. The open technique of inserting a 
Hasson trocar is easier and safer for obese patients, but tech -
nically demanding in morbidly obese patients, where optical 
entry is now more commonplace. The main difficulty is reach-
ing the fascia. A larger skin incision (1–3 cm), starting at the 
umbilicus and extending superiorly, may facilitate this. To 
reach the operative area adequately, the location of some of 
the ports has to be modified and, in some instances, larger and 
Figure 8.4 Open technique with Hasson port. Apply safe principles 
of closed technique.
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   112 25/10/2017   07:48General intraoperative principles 113
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
longer instruments are necessary. When the length of the lap-
aroscope appears to be insufficient to reach the operative area 
adequately, the initial midline port should be placed nearer to 
the operative field. Recently, the use of optical port entry for 
laparoscopic bariatric surgery has revolutionised port entry for 
morbid obesity cases.
Operative problems
Intraoperative perforation of a viscus
Perforation of any viscus, such as bowel, solid organs and 
blood vessels (including the aorta), is a potential hazard of 
using the laparoscopic approach and these complications 
may be minimised with surgical experience, education, 
preparation and patient selection. One example, in a 
common laparoscopic procedure such as cholecystectomy , 
includes perforation of the gallbladder. This is more com -
mon with the laparoscopic technique than with the open 
technique (see also Chapter 67). Some authors have 
reported an incidence of up to up to 30%, but it does not 
appear to be a factor in increasing the early postoperative 
morbidity. However , it is well known that bile is not a 
sterile fluid and bacteria can be present in the absence 
of cholecystitis. Unless the perforation is small, closure 
with endoloops or endoclips should be attempted to avoid 
contamination prior to extraction, which should be with the 
use of an endobag. Bilious leakage should be suctioned and 
washed out. If there is stone spillage, every attempt must 
be made to collect and extract the stones, and if there is a 
possibility of stones being retained in the peritoneum, then 
an ultrasound should be arranged 6  weeks postoperatively to 
assess a collection around a stone and the patient should be 
informed of this outcome postoperatively.
Antibiotics to manage known sepsis or 
septicaemia in a patient undergoing surgery
Operating on a patient with established septicaemia or sepsis 
is not typically recommended unless the operation will con -
tribute to removing or minimising infectious origins. Where 
necessary pre-, peri- and postoperative antibiotics should 
be administered, in accordance with local microbiological 
advice.
Antibiotics to prevent infections and sepsis
A single dose of antibiotics should be administered within 
1 hour of skin incision; in contaminated, semi-contaminated 
or complex procedures, additional doses should be adminis -
tered, based on local microbiological advice.
Bleeding
In some of the larger series, bleeding has been the most com-
mon cause of conversion to an open procedure. Bleeding 
plays a more important role in laparoscopic surgery because 
of factors inherent to the technique. These include a limited 
field that can easily be obscured by relatively small amounts 
of blood, magnification that makes small arterial bleeding 
appear to be a significant haemorrhage and light absorption 
that obscures the visual field.
HOW TO AVOID BLEEDING
As in any surgical procedure, the best way to handle intra-
operative bleeding is to prevent it from happening. This can 
usually be accomplished by identifying patients at high risk 
of bleeding, having a clear understanding of the laparoscopic 
anatomy and employing careful surgical technique.
Risk factors that predispose to increased bleeding include:
 ● cirrhosis;
 ● inflammatory conditions (acute cholecystitis, diverticuli -
tis);
 ● patients on clopidogrel and or dipyridamole;
 ● coagulation defects: these are contraindications to a lapa-
roscopic procedure.
BLEEDING FROM A MAJOR VESSEL
Damage to a large vessel requires immediate assessment of 
the magnitude and type of bleeding. When the bleeding ves -
sel is identified, a fine-tip grasper can be used to grasp it and 
apply either electrocautery or a clip, depending on its size. 
When the vessel is not identified early and a pool of blood 
forms, compression should be applied immediately with a 
blunt instrument, a cotton swab (ENT or mastoid swab) or 
with the adjacent organ. Good suction and irrigation are of 
utmost importance. Once the area has been cleaned, pressure 
should be released gradually to identify the site of bleeding. 
Insertion of an extra port may be required to achieve adequate 
exposure and at the same time to enable the concomitant use 
of a suction device and an insulated grasper. Although most 
bleeding vessels can be controlled laparoscopically, judge -
ment should be used in deciding when not to prolong bleed -
ing, but to convert to an open procedure at an early stage. 
Surgicel® (absorbable fibrillar oxidized cellulose polymer) or 
other clot-promoting strips, tissue glues or other haemostatic 
agent may also be used laparoscopically to aid haemostasis. If 
at any stage bleeding is difficult to stem laparoscopically, there 
should be no delay in converting to an open procedure in the 
interests of patient safety.
BLEEDING FROM ORGANS ENCOUNTERED DURING 
SURGERY
Intraoperative bleeding from organs can usually be prevented 
by performing the dissection in the correct plane. As pre -
viously mentioned, the common laparoscopic example of a 
cholecystectomy requires understanding the management 
of bleeding from the gallbladder bed. When a bleeding site 
appears during detachment of the gallbladder, the dissection 
should be carried a little farther to expose the bleeding point 
adequately. Once this step has been performed, direct applica-
tion of electrocautery usually controls the bleeding. If bleed-
ing persists, indirect application of electrocautery is useful 
because it avoids detachment of the formed crust. This pro -
cedure is accomplished by applying pressure to the bleeding 
point with a blunt, insulated grasper and then applying elec -
trocoagulation by touching this grasper with a second insu -
lated grasper that is connected to the electrocautery device. 
One must be careful to keep all conducting surfaces of the 
graspers within the visual field while applying the electrocau-
tery current.
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   113 25/10/2017   07:48CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES114
BLEEDING FROM A TROCAR SITE
Bleeding from the trocar sites is usually controlled by applying 
upwards and lateral pressure with the trocar itself. Consider -
able bleeding may occur if the falciform ligament is impaled 
with the substernal trocar or if one of the epigastric vessels is 
injured. If significant continuous bleeding from the falciform 
ligament occurs, haemostasis is achieved by percutaneously 
inserting a large, straight needle at one side of the ligament. 
A monofilament suture attached to the needle is passed into 
the abdominal cavity and the needle is exited at the other 
side of the ligament using a grasper (Figure 8.5). The loop 
is suspended and compression is achieved. Maintaining com-
pression throughout the procedure usually suffices. After the 
procedure has been completed, the loop is removed under 
direct laparoscopic visualisation to ensure complete haemo -
stasis. When significant continuous bleeding from the abdom-
inal wall occurs, haemostasis can be accomplished either by 
pressure or by suturing the bleeding site. Pressure can be 
applied using a Foley balloon catheter. The catheter is intro -
duced into the abdominal cavity through the bleeding trocar 
site wound, the balloon is inflated and traction is placed on 
the catheter, which is bolstered in place to keep it under ten-
sion. The catheter is left in situ for 24 hours and then removed. 
Although this method is successful in achieving haemostasis, 
the authors favour direct suturing of the bleeding vessel. This 
manoeuvre is accomplished by extending the skin incision by 
3 mm at both ends of the bleeding trocar site wound. T wo 
figure-of-eight sutures are placed in the path of the vessel at 
both ends of the wound. Devices such as the EndoClose may 
also be used to apply transabdominal sutures under direct lap-
aroscopic view to close port sites that bleed.
EVACUATION OF BLOOD CLOTS
The best way of dealing with blood clots is to avoid them. As 
mentioned, careful dissection and identification of the cys -
tic artery and its branches, as well as identifying and carrying 
out dissection of the gallbladder in the correct plane, help to 
prevent bleeding from the cystic vessels and the hepatic bed. 
Nevertheless, clot formation takes place when unsuspected 
bleeding occurs or when inflammation is severe and a clear 
plane is not present between the gallbladder and the hepatic 
bed. The routine use of 5000–7000 units of heparin per litre 
of irrigation fluid helps to avoid the formation of clots. When 
extra bleeding is foreseen, a small pool of irrigation fluid can 
be kept in the operative field to prevent clot formation. After 
clots have formed, a large bore suction device should be used 
for their retrieval. Care should be taken to avoid suctioning 
in proximity to placed clips.
Principles of electrosurgery during 
laparoscopic surgery
Electrosurgical injuries during laparoscopy are potentially 
serious. The vast majority occur following the use of mono -
polar diathermy. The overall incidence is between one and 
two cases per 1000 operations. Electrical injuries are usually 
unrecognised at the time that they occur, with patients com-
monly presenting 3–7 days after injury with complaints of 
fever and abdominal pain. As these injuries usually present 
late, the reasons for their occurrence are largely speculative. 
The main theories are: (1) inadvertent touching or grasp-
ing of tissue during current application; (2) direct coupling 
between a portion of bowel and a metal instrument that is 
touching the activated probe (Figure 8.6); (3) insulation 
breaks in the electrodes; (4) direct sparking to bowel from 
the diathermy probe; and (5) current passage to the bowel 
from recently coagulated, electrically isolated tissue. Bipolar 
diathermy is safer and should be used in preference to mono -
polar diathermy, especially in anatomically crowded areas. If 
monopolar diathermy is to be used, important safety measures 
include attainment of a perfect visual image, avoiding exces-
sive current application and meticulous attention to insula -
tion. Alternative methods of performing dissection, such as 
the use of ultrasonic devices, may improve safety.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
The postoperative care of patients after laparoscopic surgery 
is generally straightforward, with a low incidence of pain or 
other problems. The most common routine postoperative 
symptoms are a dull upper abdominal pain, nausea and pain 
Figure 8.5 Management of bleeding from a surgical trocar site.
Figure 8.6 Direct coupling between bowel and laparoscope, which 
is touching the activated probe.
Frederic Eugene Basil Foley , 1891–1966, urologist, Ankher Hospital, St Paul, MN, USA.
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   114 25/10/2017   07:48Postoperative care 115
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
around the shoulders (referred from the diaphragm). There 
has been some suggestion that the instillation of local anaes -
thetic to the operating site and into the suprahepatic space, or 
even leaving 1 litre of normal saline in the peritoneum, serves 
to decrease postoperative pain. It is a good general rule that 
if the patient develops a fever or tachycardia, or complains 
of severe pain at the operation site, something is wrong and 
close observation is necessary. In this case, routine investi -
gation should include a full blood count, C  reactive protein 
(CRP) measurement, liver function tests, an amylase test 
and, probably, an ultrasound scan of the upper abdomen to 
detect fluid collections. If bile duct leakage is suspected, endo-
scopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) may be 
needed. If in doubt, relaparoscopy or laparotomy should be 
performed earlier rather than later. Death following technical 
errors in laparoscopic cholecystectomy has often been associ-
ated with a long delay in deciding to re-explore the abdomen.
In the absence of problems, patients should be fit for dis -
charge within 24 hours. They should be given instructions to 
telephone the unit or their general practitioner and to return 
to the hospital if they are not making satisfactory progress.
Nausea
About half of patients experience some degree of nausea after 
laparoscopic surgery and, rarely, this may be severe. It usually 
responds to an antiemetic, such as ondansetron, and settles 
within 12–24 hours. It is made worse by opiate analgesics and 
these should be avoided.
Shoulder tip pain
The patient should be warned about this preoperatively and 
told that the pain is referred from the diaphragm and not due 
to a local problem in the shoulders. It can be at its worst 24 
hours after the operation. It usually settles within 2–3 days 
and is relieved by simple analgesics, such as paracetamol.
Abdominal pain
Pain in one or other of the port site wounds is not uncommon 
and is worse if there is haematoma formation. It usually set-
tles very rapidly. Increasing pain after 2–3 days may be a sign 
of infection and, with concomitant signs, antibiotic therapy 
is occasionally required. Occasionally , herniation through a 
port may account for localised pain and this can sometimes 
be due to a Richter’s hernia, such that the patient exhibits no 
sign of intestinal obstruction. Successful laparoscopic surgery 
should not cause a patient increasing or undue pain. If there 
are any clinical concerns postoperatively due to worsening 
pain, tachycardia and or pyrexia, senior review with a view 
to imaging, or increasingly commonly relaparoscopy, should 
be considered.
Analgesia
A 100-mg diclofenac suppository may be given at the time of 
the operation (if this medication is not contraindicated). It is 
important that the patient provides separate consent for this 
if the suppository is to be administered peroperatively. Sup -
positories may be administered a further two or three times 
postoperatively for relief of more severe pain. Otherwise, 
500–1000 mg of paracetamol 4-hourly usually suffices (orally 
or, if more pain, intravenously). Opiate analgesics cause nau-
sea and should be avoided unless the pain is very severe. In 
this case, suspect a postoperative complication (as above). 
The majority of patients require between one and four doses 
of 1  g of paracetamol postoperatively. Severe pain after rou -
tine laparoscopic cases should warn the clinician that there 
may be an iatrogenic or surgical cause of this pain that may 
need further investigation with blood tests, imaging and even 
relaparoscopy
Orogastric tube
An orogastric tube may be placed during the operation if the 
stomach is distended and obscuring the view. It is not neces -
sary in all cases. It should be removed as soon as the operation 
is over and before the patient regains consciousness. This is 
more routinely used in bariatrics and oesophagogastric sur -
gery, where a larger (32F or 34F) tube is used.
Oral fluids
There is no significant ileus after laparoscopic surgery, except 
in resectional procedures, such as colectomy or small bowel 
resection. Patients can start taking oral fluids as soon as they 
are conscious; they usually do so 4–6 hours after the end of 
the operation.
Oral feeding
Provided that the patient has an appetite, a light meal can be 
taken 4–6 hours after the operation. Some patients remain 
slightly nauseated at this stage, but almost all eat a normal 
breakfast on the morning after the operation.
Patients will require advice about what they can eat at 
home. They should be told that they can eat a normal diet 
but should avoid excess. It seems sensible to avoid high-fat 
meals for the first week, although there is no clear evidence 
that this is necessary.
Urinary catheter
This depends on the operation. If a urinary catheter has been 
placed in the bladder during an operation with likely short 
stay, it should be removed before the patient regains con -
sciousness if the procedure has proceeded well. The patient 
should be warned of the possibility and symptoms of postop -
erative cystitis and told to ask advice in the unlikely event of 
this occurring.
Drains
The use of postoperative drains in laparoscopy patients 
depends on the operation performed. Drains are used to assess 
postoperative blood loss if this is a clinical concern or to assess 
the nature of intraperitoneal fluids, depending on procedure 
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   115 25/10/2017   07:48CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES116
and postoperative monitoring needs. Some surgeons drain 
the abdomen at the end of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, 
although this is controversial. If a drain is placed to vent 
the remaining gas and peritoneal fluid, it should be removed 
within 1 hour of the operation. If it has been placed because 
of excessive hepatic bleeding or bile leakage it should be 
removed when that problem has resolved, usually after 12–24 
hours. Continued blood loss from a drain is an indication for 
re-exploration of the abdomen.
quietly for the first 2–3 days, interspersing increasing exercise 
with rest. After the third day, patients will have undertaken 
increasing amounts of activity. The average return to work is 
about 10 days.
THE PRINCIPLES OF COMMON 
LAPAROSCOPIC PROCEDURES
The principles of common laparoscopic procedures are 
described in the appropriate chapters:
 ● laparoscopic cholecystectomy (Chapter 67);
 ● laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair (Chapter 60);
 ● laparoscopic antireflux surgery (Chapter 63);
 ● laparoscopic appendicectomy (Chapter 72);
 ● laparoscopic bariatric surgery (Chapter 64);
 ● laparoscopic colectomy/anterior resection (Chapters 70 
and 73);
 ● laparoscopic upper gastrointestinal (GI) surgery (Chap-
ters 62, 63 and 69)
Other elective minimally invasive (laparoscopic, thoraco-
scopic) or robotic procedures that are now widely utilised in 
certain specialist centres include:
 ● colectomy;
 ● gastrectomy;
 ● splenectomy;
 ● nephrectomy;
 ● adrenalectomy;
 ● prostatectomy (typically robotic);
 ● thyroid and parathyroid surgery;
 ● aortic aneurysm surgery;
 ● single-vessel coronary artery bypass surgery;
 ● video-assisted thorascopic surgery (VATS);
 ● laparoscopic hernia surgery (inguinal, femoral, paraumbil-
ical, incisional).
Laparoscopy has also been used in certain emergency 
situations (in stable patients) in the hands of experienced 
laparoscopic surgeons. These include laparoscopic appen -
dicectomy (typically the most common minimally inva -
sive emergency procedure), repair of a perforated duodenal 
ulcer, laparoscopic cholecystectomy in severe cholecystitis 
(so-called ‘hot’ cholecystectomies), and treatment of intes -
tinal obstruction secondary to adhesions, strangulated her -
nia repairs and, also, the laparoscopic evaluation of stable 
trauma patients.
Procedures that have been carried out using robotically 
assisted minimally invasive surgery include all of those listed 
above. Currently, robotic surgery still has certain disadvan-
tages:
 ● increased cost;
 ● increased set up of the system and operating time;
 ● socioeconomic implications;
 ● significant risk of conversion to conventional techniques;
 ● prolonged learning curve;
 ● multiple repositioning of the arms can cause trauma;
 ● haemostasis;
 ● collision of the robotic arms in extreme positions.
Summary box 8.4
Surgical principles
●● Meticulous care in the creation of a pneumoperitoneum
●● Controlled dissection of adhesions
●● Adequate exposure of operative field
●● Avoidance and control of bleeding
●● Avoidance of organ injury
●● Avoidance of diathermy damage
●● Vigilance in the postoperative period
DISCHARGE FROM HOSPITAL
Patient discharge is based on clinical indicators and their 
fitness for recuperating in a non-hospital environment. One 
of the core drivers for the application of minimally invasive 
surgery is an earlier recovery and therefore discharge from 
hospital. For the common laparoscopic procedure of chole -
cystectomy, most surgeons discharge a significant proportion 
of their laparoscopic cholecystectomy patients on the day of 
surgery, but some are kept in overnight and discharged the 
following morning. Patients should not be discharged until 
they are seen to be comfortable, have passed urine and are 
eating and drinking satisfactorily. They should be told that if 
they develop abdominal pain or other severe symptoms they 
should return to the hospital or to their general practitioner. 
Even for more major cases, including procedures such as lap -
aroscopic anterior resection, some units have demonstrated a 
safe and feasible protocol for a 23-hour stay.
Skin sutures
If non-absorbable sutures or skin staples have been used, they 
can be removed from the port sites after 7 days.
Mobility and convalescence
Patients can get out of bed to go to the toilet as soon as they 
have recovered from the anaesthetic and they should be 
encouraged to do so. Such movements are remarkably pain 
free when compared with the mobility achieved after an open 
operation. Similarly, patients can cough actively and clear 
bronchial secretions, and this helps to diminish the incidence 
of chest infections. Many patients are able to walk out of hos-
pital on the evening of their operation and almost all are fully 
mobile by the following morning. Thereafter , the postopera-
tive recovery is variable. Some patients prefer to take things 
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   116 25/10/2017   07:48The future 117
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Until these are overcome, by continued development of the 
technology and the drive of surgeons to progress in the field, 
robotically assisted surgery will not be commonplace. How -
ever, the potential for such systems is immense and continued 
research and clinical trials will pave the way for future gener-
ations of surgeons and patients alike.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS 
THAT HAVE MADE MINIMALL Y 
INVASIVE SURGERY EVEN LESS 
INVASIVE
Single incision laparoscopic 
surgery
Laparoscopy has reduced the trauma from surgery, compared 
with open techniques, and is now used routinely for benign 
and oncological surgery in many centres. However , there is 
continued work on how to reduce the trauma and scarring 
from the incisions used in laparoscopic surgery because mul -
tiple port sites are needed for most procedures. Natural ori -
fice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) (see below) 
addresses this but, at present, the safety of the transgastric 
route is not sufficient for the routine use of this approach to 
surgery. Advanced laparoscopists have therefore turned to 
focussing on the single incision for open entry via the umbi -
licus as an alternative. Single incision laparoscopic surgery 
(SILS) is a technique adopted by some surgeons to insert all 
the instrumentation via a single incision, through a multi-
ple channel port via the umbilicus, to carry out the proce -
dure. The benefit is that only one incision, through a natural 
scar (the umbilicus), is made, therefore these procedures 
are virtually ‘scarless’. Second, the use of fewer port sites 
around the abdomen gives the potential for less pain, less 
risk of port site bleeding and reduced incidence of port site 
hernia. This technique has many other synonyms, including 
laparoendoscopic single site surgery (LESS) and single port 
access (SPA) surgery among many others, although SILS 
has gained the most recognition. It does require specially 
manu factured multichannel ports and often roticulating 
instruments. There has been an explosion of activity in SILS 
procedures in the last few years and, in some units, laparo -
scopic cholecystectomies and hernias are routinely started 
as SILS cases. The clinical benefit and cost-effectiveness of 
this technique, which has a difficult and steep learning curve 
and specific instrument requirements, remain under review, 
although it has been adopted as a routine approach for 
some procedures in some units. Early evidence understand -
ably demonstrated better cosmetic outcomes and less pain 
in the immediate postoperative period; however, this needs 
to be further corroborated with higher levels of evidence 
with longer-term follow-up results. Specifically, because the 
SILS approach was not designed for improving clinical out-
comes when compared with standard minimally invasive 
approaches, any improvements in pain and cosmesis between 
SILS and standard minimally invasive approaches require 
further elucidation.
Natural orifice translumenal 
endoscopic surgery (NOTES)
This technique, whereby surgeons enter the peritoneal cavity 
via endoscopic puncture of a hollow viscus, has been much 
publicised in recent years. The NOTES approach has been 
utilised in nearly every body system and operative speciality 
addressing the pelvis, abdomen and thorax. Worldwide adop-
tion rates compared to standard open and minimally invasive 
approaches remain very low. Transvaginal NOTES chole -
cystectomies have been performed in humans successfully, 
although hybrid procedures (joint laparoscopy and NOTES) 
are still employed regularly for safety reasons. The closure of 
the visceral puncture site is the issue that has prevented wide-
spread uptake of this technique, as transgastric and transco -
lonic closure of peritoneal entry sites in a routinely safe way 
remains unperfected for general use. Also, the equipment 
needed has significant cost and training needs (including 
surgeons and a large variety of ancillary team members that 
range from scrub nurses to anaesthetists) and requires a large 
number of practitioners in the team at present. Nevertheless, 
it has much promise to be a technique for truly scarless surgery 
in the future and much research continues in this field, which 
is less widely adopted at present than SILS.
THE FUTURE
Although there is no doubt that minimal access surgery has 
changed the practice of surgeons, it has not changed the 
nature of disease. The basic principles of good surgery still 
apply, including appropriate case selection, excellent expo -
sure, adequate retraction and a high level of technical exper-
tise. If a procedure makes no sense with conventional access, 
it will make no sense with a laparoscopic approach. Laparo -
scopic and robotic surgery training is key to allow the spe-
cialty to progress. The pioneers of yesterday have to teach 
the surgeons of tomorrow not only the technical and dextrous 
skills required, but also the decision-making and innovative 
skills necessary for the field to continue to evolve. Training 
is often perceived as difficult, as trainers have less control 
over the trainees at the time of surgery and caseloads may be 
smaller, especially in centres where laparoscopic and robotic 
procedures are not common. However, trainees now rightly 
expect exposure to these procedures, and training systems 
should be adaptable for international exposure so that these 
techniques can be disseminated worldwide. The predomi -
nant video and digital component of these new techniques 
opens the door for simulation approaches for training in 
these modalities, which has demonstrated benefits in reduc-
ing learning curves and in turn is aimed at improving patient 
outcomes. The ultimate goal for this educational approach is 
to develop expert surgeons through the ‘totally safe’ and ‘risk 
free’ environment of simulation before they actually have to 
operate on patients. The current status for laparoscopic train-
ees reflects their decreased experience in open approaches so 
that they feel less comfortable converting cases such as lapa -
roscopic cholecystectomies to open cases. It is important that 
the ‘straight to minimally invasive’ trainees continue to have 
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   117 25/10/2017   07:48CHAPTER 8  Principles of lapar oscopic and robotic  surgery
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES118
training in open skills so that they can apply both approaches 
where necessary.
Improvements in instrumentation, the continued progress 
of robotic surgery and the development of structured training 
programmes are key to the future of minimal access surgery . 
The use of robots in surgery has increased dramatically in 
the last decade. Indeed, robots are now available not only for 
assisting in surgery, but also for aiding in the perioperative 
management of surgical patients. The remote presence sys -
tems (In Touch Health, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) allow  
clinicians to assess patients in real time and interact with 
them while they are not on site or even on a different con -
tinent. Applying established devices in different contexts 
also offers the introduction of innovation; for example, the 
LABEL procedure (Laser Assisted Bile duct Exploration by 
Laparoendoscopy for choledocholithiasis) was developed 
when the concept of laser stone management in urology 
was applied to laparoscopic biliary tree surgery. Continued 
advances in related technologies, such as computer science, 
will allow the incorporation of augmented reality systems 
alongside robotic systems to enhance surgical precision in 
image-guided surgery. Endoluminal robotic surgery remains in 
its infancy, but systems are being developed that will enable 
navigation within the colon to allow surgery on lesions in 
spaces that are accessible from the outside without an exterior 
incision being made. The advent of nanotechnology should 
also bring about much change in surgery. Miniaturisation 
may be possible, potentially allowing surgery at a cellular 
level to be carried out.
At present, work has already started on single-port laparos-
copy (see above under Single incision laparoscopic surgery), 
in which a single port may act as a camera and have unfolding 
instruments that open up once they are inside the peritoneum 
to perform the surgery, therefore reducing the number of port 
sites needed. Extensive research is also being carried out in 
the field of NOTES. Minimising the potential contamination 
of the peritoneum and the ability to carry out a safe closure 
of the peritoneal entry site are the main technical challenges 
of this type of minimally invasive and essentially ‘scarless’ or 
‘incisionless’ surgery. It is certain that there is much that is 
new in minimal access surgery. Only time will tell how much 
of what is new is truly better.
Specifically, the future evolution of robotic systems 
includes full integration with next generation technologies 
such as advanced augmented reality, autobionics, neuromor -
phic visual processing and real-time diagnostics and thera-
nostics, exemplified by the i-Knife (real-time tissue metabolic 
profiling and tissue-level diagnosis, developed by Zoltan 
Takats at Imperial College London). Large master–slave con-
structions with multiple arms are likely to give way to flexible 
access bio-inspired (FAB) systems. These will probably offer 
full robotic arm articulation in much more portable devices 
with low energy needs. They would be totally modular with 
integrated imaging and would have platforms to offer multi -
purpose usage to increase utilisation and cost efficiency. These 
systems would also result in a smaller physical footprint, with 
cheaper devices offering more utility, precision and dexterity 
on platforms that allow both master–slave and direct func-
tionality.
One major obstacle in minimally invasive technology 
includes the ‘Achilles heel’ of cost efficiency and device 
financing in an increasingly rationed global healthcare envi-
ronment; this is an issue which will require surgical liaison 
with hospital management and national policy providers. 
Surgeons need to continue to have a dialogue, discussing their 
experiences and ideas regarding all the minimally invasive 
approaches. None of these techniques needs to exist in isola-
tion. The future can offer hybridisation of these approaches, 
including a vast array of possibilities such as Robotic-SILS, 
Robotic-NOTES or even endoscopic NOTES-augmented 
SILS (endoscopes passed through a SILS port). Such cross-  
fertilisation can offer new innovation and techniques; thus, 
harvesting the advantages of newer procedures and discarding 
the individual weaknesses of others can ultimately improve 
patient outcomes and results.
The cleaner and gentler the act of operation, the less the 
patient suffers, the smoother and quicker his convales -
cence, the more exquisite his healed wound.
Berkeley George Andrew Moynihan (1920)
FURTHER READING
Acharya MN, Ashrafian H, Athanasiou T, Casula R. Is totally endoscop-
ic coronary artery bypass safe, feasible and effective? Interact Cardio-
vasc Thorac Surg 2012; 15(6): 1040–6.
Antonakis PT, Ashrafian H, Isla AM. Laparoscopic gastric surgery for 
cancer: where do we stand? World J Gastroenterol 2014; 20(39): 
14280–91.
Ashrafian H, Darzi A, Athanasiou T. Autobionics: a new paradigm in 
regenerative medicine and surgery. Regen Med 2010; 5(2): 279–88.
Ashrafian H, Navarro-Sanchez A, Athanasiou T, Sherman DI, Isla A. 
Thoracoscopic esophageal repair of a spontaneous Barrett’s ulcer 
perforation. Ann Thorac Surg 2015; 99(1): 331–3.
Athanasiou T, Ashrafian H, Rao C, Yang GZ, Darzi A. The tipping point 
of robotic surgery in healthcare: from master–slave to flexible access 
bio-inspired platforms. Surg Technol Int 2011; 21: 28–34.
Athanasiou T, Ashrafian H, Rowland SP , Casula R. Robotic cardiac sur-
gery: advanced minimally invasive technology hindered by barriers 
to adoption. Future Cardiol 2011; 7(4): 511–22.
Hoeckelmann M, Rudas IJ, Fiorini P , Kirchner F , Haidegger T. Current 
capabilities and development potential in surgical robotics. Int J Adv 
Robot Syst 2015; 12.
Navarro-Sanchez A, Ashrafian H, Laliotis A, Qurashi K, Martinez-Isla 
A. Single-stage laparoscopic management of acute gallstone pancre-
atitis: outcomes at different timings. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int  
2016; 15(3): 297–301.
Navarro-Sanchez A, Ashrafian H, Segura-Sampedro JJ, Martinez-Isla A. 
LABEL procedure: laser-assisted bile duct exploration by laparoen -
doscopy for choledocholithiasis: improving surgical outcomes and 
reducing technical failure. Surg Endosc 2017; 31(5): 2103–8.
Tan A, Ashrafian H, Scott AJ et al. Robotic surgery: disruptive innova -
tion or unfulfilled promise? A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
the first 30 years. Surg Endosc 2016; 30(10): 4330–52.
01_08-B&L27_Pt1_Ch08.indd   118 25/10/2017   07:48Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Chapter 9
Principles of paediatric surgery 
Learning objectives
At the end of this chapter, you will be able to:
 • Describe clinically important differences between adults 
and children
 • Explain the principles of trauma management in 
children
 • Safely prescribe perioperative fluids in children
 • Avoid the pitfalls that often delay the diagnosis of 
common emergency conditions
 • Outline some congenital malformations managed by 
neonatal surgeons that may present later to general 
surgeons
 • Recognise common safeguarding issues in children and 
know how to proceed if abuse is suspected
INTRODUCTION
Premature and term neonates differ in their anatomy, physi­
ology, neurology, psychology, pathology and pharmacology, 
just as infants differ from school­age children and adolescents 
from adults. These differences underpin the principles of pae­
diatric surgery. As you progress through this chapter and con­
sider children of different ages (Table 9.1) you should make 
your own list of differences and their clinical implications; 
a few examples appear in Table 9.2 and in Figure 9.1 to get 
you started.
Paediatric surgeons study developmental biology and ter ­
atology but because some anomalies first present to adult ser ­
vices (e.g. duplications, malrotation) this knowledge can help 
adult surgeons. Adult services also need to cater for the tran ­
sitional needs of those graduating to adulthood, sometimes 
after complex paediatric surgical care. Most children escape 
the comorbidities of degenerative diseases but no longer are 
they free from lifestyle problems. Paediatric bariatric surgery 
is now developing in a multidisciplinary context with psy ­
chologists, dieticians and gastroenterologists.
We start with three important areas: thermoregulation, 
airway and fluid management, and then outline trauma, some 
common problems in older children, a collection of neonatal 
surgical conditions, oncology and conclude with safeguarding. 
MAINTAINING TEMPERATURE
In comparison with older children, infants have less subcuta­
neous fat, immature vasomotor control, greater heat loss from 
TABLE 9.1 Common terms.
Preterm <37 completed weeks of gestation
Full term Between 37 and 42 completed weeks of gestation
Neonate Newborn baby up to 28 days after the estimated 
date of delivery (EDD)
Infant Up to 1 year of age
Child All ages up to 16 years (minimum school leaving 
age), divided into preschool child (usually <5 
years), child and adolescent (puberty up to 
16 years).
Young person A popular term referring to anyone under 18 years
TABLE 9.2 Some example differences between adults 
and children.
Facts Infants and small children have a wide abdomen, 
a broad costal margin and a shallow pelvis
The edge of the liver comes below the costal 
margin and the bladder is largely intra-abdominal
The ribs are more horizontal and are flexible
The umbilicus is relatively low lying
Implications Transverse supraumbilical incisions give greater 
access than vertical midline ones for open surgery
Trauma (including surgical access) can easily 
damage the liver or bladder
The geometry of the ribs means that ventilation 
requires greater diaphragmatic movement. Their 
flexibility means that rib fractures are rare and 
often a sign of abuse
A stoma in the lower abdomen of a neonate must 
be carefully sited for its bag not to interfere with 
the umbilicus
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   119 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES120
pulmonary evaporation and their surface area to weight ratio 
is higher. Consider these when managing sick children in the 
Emergency Department, anaesthetic room or theatre. These 
environments must be warm and the infant’s head (20% of 
surface area, cf. 9% in an adult) should be insulated. Infusions 
are warmed and respiratory gases both warmed and humidi­
fied. Core temperature is monitored and safe direct warming 
is needed for lengthy operations.
AIRWAY
Anatomical differences in the airway have clinical implica ­
tions (see Figure 9.2). The infant’s large head and short neck 
predispose to flexion. The large tongue can obstruct the air ­
way when the infant is unconscious and impede the airway 
and laryngoscopy. The epiglottis projects posteriorly and the 
larynx is high; a straight ­bladed laryngoscope is favoured in 
those under 1 year of age. Uncuffed tubes are preferred as the 
cricoid ring is the narrowest region (cf. the larynx in an adult) 
and this is covered in loose epithelium that is easily irritated; 
damage can result in subglottic stenosis. 
PERIOPERATIVE FLUIDS IN 
CHILDREN
Before prescribing fluids (or drugs), it is important to know 
the child’s weight, their vital signs and their fluid and elec­
trolyte requirements and consider these in relation to normal 
values and ranges (see Table 9.3). Dehydration is difficult to 
assess: moderate dehydration (5% loss of total body water) 
may manifest in poor urine output, dry mouth, and sunken 
eyes and fontanelle; severe dehydration (>10%) in decreased 
skin turgor, drowsiness, tachycardia and poor capillary refill 
(>2 seconds) and signs of hypovolaemia. 
Children develop hyponatraemic encephalopathy at 
higher sodium levels than adults because they have a higher 
brain:skull ratio. A few children have had symptomatic hypo­
natraemic encephalopathy attributable to poor prescription 
and monitoring of fluids; some have died and others have 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Costal
margin
Umbilicus
Pubic
symphysis
Infant
(width > height)
Adolescent
(height > width)
Figure 9.1 Topographical differences in the abdomen.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Sur gery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Loose teeth
Large tongue
Narrow
nostrils
Compressible /f_loor
of mouth
Horseshoe-shaped
epiglottis
High anterior larynx
Figure 9.2 Summary of upper airway anatomy in an infant.
TABLE 9.3 Basic paediatric data.
(a) Weight
Age Weight (kg)
Term neonate 3.5
1 year 10
5 years 20
10 years 30
(b) Vital signs
Age (years) Heart rate 
(bpm)
Systolic blood 
pressure 
(mmHg)
Respiratory 
rate 
(b/min)
<1 110–160 70–90 30–40
2–5 90–140 80–100 25–30
5–12 80–120 90–110 20–25
(c) Maintenance fluid requirements
Weight Daily fluid requirement 
(mL/kg/day)
mL/kg/hour
Neonate 120–150 5
First 10 kg 100 4
Second 10 kg 50 2
Each subsequent kg 20 1
(d) Maintenance electrolyte requirements
Weight Sodium 
(mmol/kg/day)
Potassium 
(mmol/kg/day)
Energy 
(kcal/kg/day)
<10 kg 2–4 1.5–2.5 110
>10 kg 1–2 0.5–1.0 40–75
Approximate guide: weight (kg) = 2 × (age in years +4), or use a Broselow tape which 
estimates the weight from the height.
Systolic blood pressure = 80 + (age in years × 2) mmHg.
Circulating blood volume = 80 mL/kg (90 mL/kg in infants).
permanent neurological disability. Problems have arisen 
when: (1) hypotonic maintenance fluids (e.g. 0.18% saline) 
have been inappropriately given to resuscitate or replace 
loses, or (2) maintenance fluids have been given in excess 
(3–5 times requirements).
UK National Guidelines are that maintenance fluid admin­
istration should contain sodium levels of 131–154 mmol/L. 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   120 25/10/2017   07:50Operative sur gery 121
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Learning objectives for this section are to:
 ● Know the four reasons for giving intravenous (IV) fluids.
 ● Be able to calculate fluid rates for children of different 
weights (see Table 9.3).
 ● Understand the risks of low­sodium containing fluids.
 ● Understand how the body’s response to stress and illness 
affects fluid balance.
 ● Know how to recognise and manage hyponatraemia 
(<135 mmol/L).
Tonicity and osmolarity
The term ‘isotonic’ is now considered in relation to the ton­
icity of the electrolyte components of fluids. Thus, isosmolar 
fluids, such as 0.18% saline with 4% glucose, and hyperos ­
molar fluids, such as 0.45% saline with 5% glucose, are now 
considered hypotonic because the glucose is ignored. 
Prescribing intravenous fluids.
The four reasons for prescribing fluids are detailed in Sum-
mary box 9.1. The body’ s response to stress is to hold on to 
water, which can promote hyponatraemia. The stresses that 
drive the non ­osmotic retention of water include trauma, 
head injury, chest infections and the postoperative state. 
Restricting maintenance fluids to 70% can be appropriate 
for 24 hours after major surgery. In sick patients, raising the 
maintenance rate is best guided by the trend in daily electro­
lyte levels. Urine output often decreases after major surgery 
without morbidity but a common response can be to increase 
maintenance fluids inappropriately, leading to hyponatrae ­
mia. A postoperative bolus of fluid is appropriate if there is 
hypovolaemia, hypotension or poor peripheral perfusion but 
giving it simply because urine output is low can be inap­
propriate. 
Hyponatraemia in the surgical patient is usually a conse ­
quence of too much free water and not of insufficient sodium. 
If mild and asymptomatic (e.g. 135 mmol/L) then fluid restric­
tion is appropriate. If symptomatic with headache, lethargy 
or seizures and the Na concentration is <125  mmol/L a rapid 
infusion of 3% hypertonic saline (1 mL/kg over 15 minutes) is 
needed and paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) admission 
is required.
Summary box 9.1 
Fluids in children
Fluids are given intravenously for four reasons:
●● Circulatory support in resuscitating vascular collapse
0.9% saline 
blood
4.5% albumin
colloid 
●● Replacement of previous fluid and electrolyte deficits
0.9% saline + 0.15% KCl 
Hartmann’s solution
●● Replacement of ongoing losses 
0.9% saline + 0.15% KCl 
Hartmann’s solution
●● Maintenance outside neonatal period
Plasmalyte 148
Hartmann’s ± glucose
0.9% saline + 0.15% KCl ± glucose
●● Maintenance in the neonate
In term neonates in the first 48 hours of life 10% glucose 
at 60 mL/kg/day 
Sodium 0.18% and potassium 0.15% are added on day 2
From day 3 around 4–5 mL/kg/hour or 100–120 mL/kg/day 
Preterm babies or those <2 kg may require 180 mL/kg/day 
of fluid
Consider impaired gluconeogenesis: monitor and keep 
glucose above 2.6 mmol/L
Given as a bolus of 10 or 20 mL/kg 
over periods up to 20 minutes with 
close monitoring of the response. Can 
be repeated up to 40 mL/kg then seek 
urgent help
5
Given over a longer period 
(up to 48 hours) with clinical 
and biochemical review5
Or a fluid tailored to the 
losses e.g. 4.5% albumin if 
protein loss is great. Replace 
losses mL for mL5
Hypotonic 0.18% 
saline should not 
be used outside the 
neonatal period5
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
Time, patience and a genuine interest help establish a goo d 
rapport with the child and their parents or carers. An oppor ­
tunistic rather than a systematic approach to the history and 
examination may be needed but appropriate areas must be 
covered. Do not forget to explore perinatal problems and the 
family and social background. Children should be told what 
to expect from an examination, investigation or surgical pro­
cedure in terms that they can understand. Fear, anxiety and 
pain can be reduced by involving the parents and by looking 
after the child in an appropriate environment. For elective 
surgery a preadmission service and anaesthetic review should 
be considered, with general health concerns being redirected 
to a paediatrician. Consent for surgery in the young child is 
obtained from someone with parental responsibility.
OPERATIVE SURGERY
A well­prepared patient who has not been excessively fasted, 
with appropriate consent, is anaesthetised in a child ­friendly 
anaesthetic room. Surgery benefits from meticulous and 
gentle technique, strict haemostasis, fine suture materials  
and magnification. Basic principles apply: maintaining well ­ 
vascularised tissues, avoiding tension, minimising tissue 
necrosis and contamination. The intestine can be anasto ­
mosed with single ­layer interrupted or continuous extramu ­
cosal sutures. Abdominal wounds are closed with absorbable 
sutures using a layered or a mass closure. W ound dehiscence 
is rare and usually the result of poor technique. Clean skin 
incisions are best closed with absorbable subcuticular sutures. 
Endoscopic minimally invasive approaches can be used at all 
ages with instruments and insufflation pressures tailored to 
the size of the child. Postoperatively, children recover swiftly. 
Analgesia must be adequate and appropriate, recognising the 
potential for respiratory depression with opioids. Appropri ­
ately trained staff monitor the airway, vital signs, oxygen sat ­
uration, fluid balance, temperature, pain control and glucose 
levels during recovery.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   121 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES122
Stomas are necessary in some children. A gastrostomy 
may be required for nutritional support, particularly in the 
neurologically disabled child (often with a fundoplication). 
Temporary intestinal stomas are used in the management 
of anorectal malformations, necrotising enterocolitis and 
Hirschsprung’s disease. Infants with a proximal stoma and 
high losses frequently require salt or bicarbonate supplements 
to avoid deficits, which can cause poor weight gain and aci ­
dosis. Ileostomies and colostomies are usually spouted but 
mucous fistulas may be flush.
The long­term outcomes of paediatric surgical conditions 
should be considered. For example, ileal resection in the 
neonate may later be complicated by vitamin B12 deficiency, 
malabsorption of fat ­soluble vitamins, gallstones, renal oxa ­
late stones and perianastomotic ulceration. Long ­term con­
cerns with other treated anomalies include the impact on 
continence, fertility, sexual activity, psychosocial adaptation 
and the potential risk of late malignancy (e.g. undescended 
testis, choledochal cyst, duplication cysts, oesophageal 
 atresia).
PAEDIATRIC TRAUMA
Trauma remains a leading cause of avoidable death in chil ­
dren and adolescents worldwide. Surgeons should attend the 
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) programme which 
covers trauma in children. Some of the important differences 
for children follow: 
 ● Avoid overextension of the neck which can obstruct the 
airway.
 ● Use a Broselow tape if the weight is not known.
 ● Blood pressure is often normal until >25% of the circulat­
ing blood volume is lost.
 ● Cardiorespiratory arrest is usually due to hypoxia and not 
vascular disease.
 ● Non­operative management is often possible for splenic 
and liver injuries. 
Resuscitation
For fluids see Summary box 9.1. High­flow oxygen is required 
if there is cardiorespiratory compromise, and endotracheal 
intubation and ventilation are required if oxygenation is 
inadequate, to control a flail chest or in children with a seri ­
ous head injury (Glasgow Coma Scale score ≤8). Seriously 
injured children require two large peripheral intravenous can­
nulae. The following veins can be used: long saphenous at the 
ankle, femoral, external jugular and, in babies, scalp veins. 
Central venous access should only be attempted by an expert. 
Intraosseous infusion, however, is straightforward and partic­
ularly useful in children (Figure 9.3). 
Summary box 9.3
Surgical technique in children
●● Gentle tissue handling
●● Abdominal incisions can be closed with absorbable sutures
●● Bowel can be anastomosed with interrupted or continuous 
single-layer extramucosal sutures
●● Skin can be closed with absorbable subcuticular sutures or 
glue
Summary box 9.2
Fasting instructions
●● Two hours for clear fluids
●● Four hours for breast milk
●● Six hours for solids
 The Glasgow Coma Scale was introduced in 1977 by William Bryan Jennet, Professor of Neurosurgery, and Graham Michael Teasdale, a neurosurgeon at the Uni­
versity Department of Neurosurgery at the Institute of Neurological Sciences, The Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, UK. Professor Teasdale was later knighted 
and became President of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.3Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
1–3 cm 
Figure 9.3 The intraosseous needle is inserted into the medullary 
cavity of the proximal tibia about 1–3 cm below the tibial tuberosity.
A major spinal cord injury can be present in a child with­
out radiographic abnormalities. After major trauma, a cervi ­
cal spine injury should be assumed and the neck immobilised 
until cross sectional imaging ‘clears’ the spine. Other con ­
siderations include intravenous analgesia and, in the uncon ­
scious or ventilated child or those with major abdominal 
injuries, a nasogastric tube (orogastric if there is suspicion of 
a basal frontal skull fracture) and a urethral catheter (if no 
evidence of a urethral injury).
Secondary survey and emergency 
management 
Chest trauma
Children have elastic ribs that rarely fracture but deformation 
causes lung contusions. A major thoracic injury may exist 
despite a normal chest radiograph. The airway is secured, oxy­
gen is given and hypovolaemia is corrected. A tension pneu ­
mothorax should be suspected clinically before the chest x­ray 
(CXR) is requested and immediate needle thoracocentesis 
(second intercostal space, mid ­clavicular line) performed. A 
chest drain is then placed (fifth intercostal space, mid­axillary 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   122 25/10/2017   07:50Paediatric trauma 123
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
line). Massive haemothorax needs a chest drain. Cardiac tam­
ponade may follow blunt or penetrating injury and requires 
emergency subxyphoid needle pericardio centesis. The role of 
emergency department thoracotomy (EDT) in major chest 
trauma in children remains controversial. Diaphragmatic 
rupture after blunt abdominal trauma is detected by chest 
radio graphy or computed tomography (CT) scan; surgical 
repair is undertaken once the patient is stable (Figure 9.4).
Abdomen
Blunt trauma is more common than penetrating trauma. The 
liver and spleen are more vulnerable in children, being less 
well protected by the rib cage. The abdomen is inspected 
for patterned bruising from seatbelts (Figure 9.5) or tyres. 
Compression will have been against the rigid skeleton. Intra­ 
abdominal or intrathoracic bleeding should be considered 
promptly in the shocked child if external bleeding has not 
been profuse. Plasma amylase levels may be normal despite 
pancreatic injury (Figure 9.6). 
Imaging 
Focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) looks 
for fluid in the perihepatic and hepatorenal space, the peris­
plenic area, the pelvis and the pericardium. It has a role in 
children but it does not detect solid organ injuries or replace 
CT. In the haemodynamically stable child a CT scan with IV 
contrast is required (Figure 9.7). 
Bowel perforation or deep penetrating trauma requires 
a laparoscopy or laparotomy. Isolated blunt splenic and/or 
liver injuries identified on a CT scan can be safely and effec ­
tively managed non ­operatively in the majority of children, 
so avoiding surgery and the long ­term risks of splenectomy 
(infection from encapsulated bacteria Streptococcus pneumo-
niae, Haemophilus influenzae and Neisseria meningitidis).
Summary box 9.4
Successful non-operative management of isolated 
blunt liver or spleen trauma
●● Haemodynamic stability after resuscitation with no more than 
60 mL/kg of fluid
●● A good-quality CT scan
●● No evidence of hollow visceral injury
●● Close monitoring and the immediate availability of surgical 
expertise and facilities
Figure 9.6  Abdominal computed tomographic scan showing a 
transection through the neck of the pancr eas (arrow) from a bicycle 
 handlebar injury.
Figure 9.7  Abdominal computed tomographic scan after intra -
venous contrast in an 11-year-old boy showing a ruptur ed spleen 
(successfully managed non-operatively).
Figure 9.5 Bruises from a lap belt.
Figure 9.4 Traumatic diaphragmatic rupture.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   123 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES124
Ongoing intra ­abdominal bleeding requires a laparotomy, 
though angiography and arterial embolisation can be useful in 
some. Bile leaks are uncommon and can usually be managed 
by an interventional radiological technique. Uncomplicated 
unoperated cases of liver/spleen trauma can be discharged 
after 5–7 days but activity is restricted for 3–6 weeks and con­
tact sports avoided for 2–3 months. Blunt renal trauma can be 
managed conservatively but an acutely non ­functioning kid­
ney following abdominal trauma may need urgent exploration 
with a view to revascularisation.
Patterns of injury
 ● Lap belts: the small intestine or lumbar spine.
 ● Bicycle handlebars: pancreatic, duodenal, mesenteric or 
liver trauma (Figure 9.7).
 ● Straddle injuries: the urethra and pelvis.
 ● Run-over injuries: severe crushing of the chest and/or 
abdomen. 
in boys (1:50), especially if premature, and are more common 
on the right­hand side (2:1) with 15% being bilateral. Rarely, 
bilateral inguinal hernias in a phenotypic girl may be the pre­
sentation of androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular fem­
inisation) and the sac may then contain a testis. 
An inguinal hernia typically causes an intermittent swell­
ing in the groin or scrotum on crying or straining (Figure 
9.9). Unless an inguinal swelling is observed, diagnosis relies 
on the history and the presence of palpable thickening of the 
spermatic cord (or the round ligament in girls). Some ingui ­
nal hernias present as a firm, tender, irreducible lump in the 
groin or scrotum because of incarceration at the external ring. 
The infant may be irritable and may vomit. Most incarcerated 
hernias in children can be successfully reduced by sustained 
gentle compression (‘taxis’) aided by cautious analgesia. 
Repair can be delayed for 24 hours to let the oedema settle. 
If truly irreducible, emergency surgery is required because of 
the risk of vascular compromise to the bowel, ovary or testis.
Inguinal herniotomy is performed via an inguinal skin 
crease incision, opening Scarpa’s fascia and then the exter ­
nal oblique. The cremaster is cut and, through an initially 
small opening, the sac is grasped and gently delivered. The 
vas and vessels are separated from the sac which is then 
divided and proximally ligated. Outside the neonatal period 
inguinal herniotomy is a day ­case procedure. A laparoscopic 
approach is feasible but has a higher recurrence rate. 
Summary box 9.6
Inguinal hernias
●● More common in premature boys (right > left)
●● 15% bilateral
●● Indirect with a patent processus vaginalis
●● Groin lump that appears on straining or crying
●● Incarcerated inguinal hernias can usually be reduced with 
gentle pressure
●● In infants they can transilluminate like a hydrocoele, making 
the test redundant when the distinction is difficult
●● If reduction is impossible emergency surgery is needed
●● In infants: repaired promptly to prevent the risk of 
strangulation
●● The hernial sac is isolated, ligated and divided 
Summary box 9.5
Paediatric trauma
●● Use Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) principles
●● Overextension of the neck will compromise the airway
●● Cervical spine injury can be present without radiographic 
signs
●● Intraosseous vascular access is helpful in small children
●● Lung contusion can occur without rib fractures
●● Patterned skin bruising suggests underlying organ injury
●● In a stable child, abdominal injuries are best assessed by CT
●● Isolated liver or splenic injury can usually be managed non-
operatively
COMMON PAEDIATRIC 
SURGICAL CONDITIONS
Inguinoscrotal disorders
Most genital abnormalities in boys are developmental anoma­
lies. The testis develops from the urogenital ridge on the pos­
terior abdominal wall. Gonadal induction leading to a testis is 
regulated by genes on the Y chromosome. During abdominal 
descent the testis migrates towards the internal ring, guided 
by mesenchymal tissue (gubernaculum). Descent into the 
scrotum is mediated by testosterone from the fetal testis. A 
tongue of peritoneum precedes the migrating testis through 
the inguinal canal and becomes the processus vaginalis. The 
processus normally becomes obliterated after birth, and fail ­
ure leads to the development of an inguinal hernia or hydro­
coele (Figure 9.8).
Inguinal hernias
Inguinal hernias in children are almost always indirect and due 
to a patent processus vaginalis. Inguinal hernias are common 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.8a-bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Bowel
(a) (b)
Thinly patent
track
Figure 9.8 (a) Inguinal hernia and (b) hydrocoele in children are the 
result of incomplete obliteration of the processus vaginalis.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   124 25/10/2017   07:50Common paediatric surgical conditions 125
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Hydrocoeles
A patent processus vaginalis may allow peritoneal fluid (but 
no intestine) to track down to form a hydrocoele. Hydroco eles 
are unilateral or bilateral, asymptomatic, non ­tender scrotal 
swellings. Hydrocoeles may be tense or lax but typically tran­
silluminate (Figure 9.9). The majority resolve spontaneously 
as the processus continues to obliterate but ligation and divi­
sion is recommended in boys over 3  years of age. Rarely, a 
baby can have a tense painful hydrocoele warranting early 
repair. A hydrocoele can occasionally extend back up into 
the canal or abdomen (abdomino­scrotal hydrocoele).
Impalpable undescended testes  are either absent or 
located in the abdomen or inguinal canal. There is no benefit 
from imaging and these are best managed with a laparoscopy 
(Figure 9.10) and usually a staged approach. 
Summary box 9.7
The undescended testis
●● A retractile testis reaches the base of the scrotum but retracts
●● An undescended testis may be palpable or impalpable
●● An ectopic testis lies outside the normal line of descent
●● Palpable undescended testes undergo a single stage 
orchidopexy 
●● Impalpable undescended testes undergo a single stage 
orchidopexy 
●● Orchidopexy before 1 year of age improves fertility and may 
reduce the risk of malignancy
Figure 9.9 A left inguinal swelling. Clinical examination is needed to 
confidently distinguish a hydrocoele from an inguinal hernia.
Figure 9.10 Laparoscopic view of a right-sided intra-abdominal tes-
tis visible at the internal ring. Vas (single arrow) and testicular vessels 
(double arrow).
Undescended testes are palpable or 
impalpable
At birth, 4% of full ­term boys have unilateral or bilateral 
undescended testes, but after 3 months of age the incidence is 
<1% and it changes little thereafter. The incidence is higher 
in preterm infants, attributed to the testis descending through 
the canal in the third trimester . A normal testis reaches the 
base of the scrotum with a good length of cord above it. Testes 
cannot be palpated in the inguinal canal but can be milked 
from there into the superficial pouch (palpable undescended 
testis) or in to the scrotum with a good length of cord (nor ­
mal). A retractile testis can be manipulated into the base of 
the scrotum without tension but is pulled up by the cremaster 
muscle. With time, retractile testes reside permanently in the 
scrotum; however, follow­up is advisable because, rarely, the 
testis ascends back into the inguinal canal. The ascending 
testis needs an orchidopexy. An ectopic testis lies outside its 
normal line of descent, often in the perineum. 
A palpable undescended testis ideally requires a day ­case 
orchidopexy between 6 and 12 months of age. The testis is 
mobilised through an inguinal incision, preserving the vas 
deferens and testicular vessels. The associated patent proces­
sus vaginalis is ligated and divided at the internal ring and the 
testis is placed in a subdartos scrotal pouch. 
The benefits of orchidopexy include:
 ● Fertility. To optimise spermatogenesis the testis needs 
to be in the scrotum below core temperature at a young 
age. Orchidopexy around 6–12 months of age is currently 
recommended. Fertility after orchidopexy for a unilateral 
undescended testis is near normal. Men with a history of 
bilateral intra­abdominal testes are often infertile.
 ● Malignancy. Undescended testes are histologically abnor­
mal and at an increased risk of malignancy. The greatest 
risk is in patients with bilateral intra ­abdominal testes. 
Early orchidopexy for a unilateral undescended testis may 
reduce the risk but this is not proven.
 ● Cosmetic and psychological. In an older boy a prosthetic 
testis can be inserted to replace an absent one.
The acute scrotum
Testicular torsion is most common in adolescents, but may 
occur at any age and is usually inside the tunica vaginalis. 
Perinatal torsion differs and is usually extravaginal. The pain 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   125 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES126
is not always scrotal and may be felt in the groin or lower 
abdomen. Scrotal oedema and erythema can be absent. Some­
times there is a history of previous transient episodes. Torsion 
of the testis must be relieved within 6–8 hours of the onset of 
symptoms for there to be a good chance of testicular salvage. 
At operation, viability of the testis is assessed after derota­
tion. If salvageable, three ­point fixation of both testes with 
non­ absorbable sutures is performed. Expert assessment of 
testicular blood flow by colour Doppler ultrasound may help 
in the differential diagnosis but the scrotum must be explored 
urgently if torsion cannot be excluded.
Torsion of a testicular or epididymal appendage char ­
acteristically affects boys just before puberty (Figure 9.11), 
possibly because of enlargement of the hydatid in response to 
gonadotrophins. A hydatid of Morgagni is an embryological 
remnant found on the upper pole of the testis or epididymis. 
The pain often increases over a day or two. Occasionally, the 
torted hydatid can be felt or seen (blue dot sign). Excision of 
the appendage leads to rapid resolution of symptoms. Viral or 
bacterial epididymo-orchitis may cause an acute scrotum in 
infants and toddlers but this diagnosis is often only made after 
scrotal exploration. Other conditions can rarely cause acute 
scrotal symptoms, and signs include idiopathic scrotal oedema 
(typically painless, erythematous scrotal swelling in a young 
boy extending off the scrotum into the groin and towards the 
anus), an incarcerated inguinal hernia, vasculitis or a scrotal 
haematoma.
The penis
Hypospadias
In hypospadias, seen in 1:300 boys, the urethra opens proxi­
mally and ventrally. Most commonly, the opening is just 
proximal to the glans but it can open on the penile shaft or onto 
the perineum. It is attributed to failure of complete urethral 
tubularisation in the fetus. The foreskin is deficient ventrally 
(Figure 9.12) and there is a variable degree of chordee (a 
ventral curvature of the penis most apparent on erection). 
Glanular hypospadias needs correction for cosmetic reasons 
but more proximal anomalies interfere with micturition and 
erection. In a newborn with severe hypospadias and bilateral 
undescended testes disorders of sexual development (DSDs) 
should be considered. A distal hypospadias is usually repaired 
before 2 years of age in one or two stages. Proximal varieties 
require complex staged procedures. Surgery aims to achieve 
a terminal urethral meatus so that the boy can stand to 
micturate with a normal stream, a straight erection and a penis 
that looks normal. Ritual circumcision is contraindicated in 
infants with hypospadias because the foreskin is often required 
for the reconstruction.
The foreskin and circumcision
At birth, the foreskin is adherent to the glans penis. These 
adhesions separate spontaneously with time, allowing the 
foreskin to become retractile. At 1   year of age, about 50% 
of boys have a non ­retractile foreskin. By 4   years this has 
declined to 10% and by 16 years to just 1%. Ballooning of the 
normal non ­retractile foreskin on micturition brings many 
young boys to doctors, and explanation and reassurance are 
required – but no operation. Gentle retraction of the foreskin 
Summary box 9.8
Diagnosis and treatment of the acute scrotum
●● Torsion of the testis must be assumed until proven otherwise
●● Testicular torsion can present with acute inguinal or 
abdominal pain
●● Urgent surgical exploration is crucial if testicular torsion 
cannot be excluded
●● If torsion is confirmed an orchidopexy should be performed 
on both sides
●● Torsion of a testicular appendage usually occurs just before 
puberty
●● An incarcerated inguinal hernia must be considered in the 
differential diagnosis
Giovanni Batista Morgagni , 1682–1771, Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy for 59 years, regarded as the founder of morbid anatomy.
Epididymitis Hydatid
torsion
Testicular
torsion
50 10 15
Age (years)
Incidence
Figure 9.11 Acute scrotal pathology at different ages.
Figure 9.12 Hypospadias: note the hooded foreskin and the ventral 
meatus.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   126 25/10/2017   07:50Common paediatric surgical conditions 127
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
at bath times helps to maintain hygiene but forcible retrac ­
tion should never be attempted. The presence of preputial 
adhesions, when the foreskin remains partially adherent to 
the glans, is normal and resolves spontaneously. Smegma 
pearls accumulating under the foreskin are commonly mis ­
taken for tumours – reassurance is needed.
Circumcision has been an important tradition in Jewish, 
Muslim and other cultures. Proponents observe that circumci­
sion reduces the incidence of urinary tract infection in infant 
boys; however, circumcision is not without risk of significant 
morbidity. The medical indications for circumcision are:
 ● Phimosis. This term is often wrongly applied to describe a 
normal, non­retractile foreskin. True phimosis is seen as a 
whitish scarring of the foreskin and is rare before 5 years of 
age (Figure 9.13). It is caused by the localised skin disease 
balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO), which also affects the 
glans penis and can cause urethral meatal stenosis.
 ● Recurrent balanoposthitis. A single episode of inflamma­
tion of the foreskin, sometimes with a purulent discharge, 
is not uncommon and usually resolves spontaneously; 
antibiotics are sometimes needed. Recurrent attacks are 
unusual but may be an indication for circumcision.
 ● Recurrent urinary tract infection. Circumcision is occa­
sionally justified in boys with an abnormal upper urinary 
tract anomaly and recurrent urinary infection. It may also 
help boys with spina bifida who need to perform clean 
intermittent urethral catheterisation.
An emerging but controversial indication for circumcision 
is in the prevention of sexually acquired human immunode ­
ficiency virus (HIV) infection in communities where this is 
common; large clinical trials have shown that circumcision 
reduces the risk of HIV transmission.
Circumcision for medical reasons is best performed under 
general anaesthesia. A long­acting local anaesthetic regional 
block can be given to reduce postoperative pain. Circum ­
cision is not a trivial operation; bleeding and infection are 
well­recognised complications and more serious hazards, such 
as injury to the glans, may occur if the procedure is not carried 
out well.
Summary box 9.9
Circumcision
●● Medical indications are BXO and recurrent balanoposthitis, 
paraphimosis, scarring from trauma
●● Circumcision is not indicated for an otherwise healthy non-
retractile foreskin
●● Complications include bleeding, poor cosmesis (too much or 
too little skin removed), and trauma to the glans or urethra 
Figure 9.13 True phimosis from balanitis xerotica obliterans.
Midline hernias
In the embryo, the umbilical ring is a relatively large defect 
in the ventral abdominal wall transmitting several struc ­
tures that connect the fetus to the placenta (Figure 9.14). 
An umbilical hernia is common and caused by incomplete 
closure of the umbilical ring; incarceration is very rare. Most 
umbilical hernias resolve by 4  years of age. Supraumbilical 
hernias occur through defects in the linea alba just above the 
umbilical ring and do not close but are still repaired at around 
4 years of age. Epigastric hernias are defects higher still that 
allow a small amount of preperitoneal fat to prolapse. They 
are repaired if symptomatic.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.14Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Ileum with
Merkel’s diverticulum
Umbilical ring
Umbilical
cord
Umbilical
vein
Allantois (urachus)
Becomes median
umbilical foldBecomes medial
umbilical fold
Umbilical
artery
Bladder
Falciform
ligament
Figure 9.14 Structures at the umbilicus.
Infantile hypertrophic pyloric 
stenosis (IHPS)
Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS) presents with 
non­bilious projectile vomiting between 2 and 8   weeks of 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   127 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES128
age and is only rarely seen after 13 weeks. It is easily distin ­
guished from many other serious causes of vomiting, such as 
infections, because the baby is particularly hungry. IHPS is a 
progressive condition and a detailed history helps distinguish 
it from the more common gastroesophageal reflux (GO R) 
which is commonly seen in infancy. In the UK it affects 1:300 
infants, with a male:female ratio of 4:1. However, if a girl has 
IHPS her offspring have a high chance of developing it, sug ­
gesting a genetic predisposition. 
The non ­bilious nature is stressed here to contrast the 
condition with the bilious vomiting of the potentially 
life­threatening malrotation and volvulus seen occasionally 
in neonates. 
IHPS can be diagnosed clinically. During a test feed there 
is visible gastric peristalsis passing from left to right across the 
upper abdomen and in a relaxed baby the pyloric ‘tumour’ is 
palpable as an ‘olive’ in the right upper quadrant. The diag ­
nosis can be confirmed by an ultrasound, which shows the 
thickened pyloric muscle. IHPS is readily treated by surgery 
but the infant must be adequately rehydrated and the hypo ­
chloraemic hypokalaemic alkalosis corrected; this may take 
48 hours if the chloride is 85 mmol/L or lower. In most babies, 
the dehydration and alkalosis can be corrected by giving 150–
180 mL/kg/day of 0.9% saline with 0.15% KCl in 5% glucose. 
Oral feeding is discontinued and the stomach emptied with 
an 8–10 Fr nasogastric tube; ongoing gastric losses should be 
replaced intravenously. 
Ramstedt’s pyloromyotomy is performed by a laparoscopic 
or open supraumbilical incision. A serosal incision is made 
and the ‘tumour’ spread (Figure 9.15). The end result should 
be an intact bulging submucosa from duodenal fornix to gas ­
tric antrum. Perforation of the duodenal fornix is uncommon 
and not serious provided that it is recognised and repaired 
immediately. 
Postoperatively, intravenous fluids are continued until 
oral feeding is re ­established within 24 hours. Occasion ­
ally the baby has small vomits on the first few feeds but this 
resolves after 72 hours. If it persists then an incomplete myo­
tomy or GOR should be considered. Surgical complications 
include duodenal perforation, haemorrhage, wound infection 
and wound dehiscence – all are uncommon and avoidable. 
Pyloromyotomy has no significant long­term sequelae.
Other common or serious causes of vomiting in infancy 
are shown in Table 9.4. 
Gastro-oesophageal reflux (GOR) is common and tends 
to resolve spontaneously with maturity. Persistent symptoms 
respond to thickened feeds and antireflux medication. Com­
plications, such as failure to thrive or respiratory problems, 
demand further investigation and in some cases laparoscopic 
fundoplication.
Summary box 9.10
Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
●● Most commonly affects boys aged 2–8 weeks
●● Projectile vomiting after feeds
●● Test feed or ultrasound to confirm the diagnosis
●● Gastric peristalsis can be seen and an ‘olive’ felt
●● Hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis must be corrected before 
surgery
●● Pyloromyotomy splits the hypertrophied muscle leaving the 
mucosa intact
Wilhelm Conrad Ramstedt , 1867–1963, surgeon, The Rafaelklinik, Münster, Germany, performed his first pyloromyotomy in 1911.
Figure 9.15 Pyloromyotomy for infantile hypertrophic pyloric steno-
sis.
TABLE 9.4 Vomiting in infancy.
Bile-stained Neonate Intestinal malrotation with 
volvulus 
Duodenal atresia/stenosis (Down 
syndrome, antenatal diagnosis)
Jejunal/ileal atresia (often isolated 
anomalies)
Hirschsprung’s disease
Anorectal malformations
Meconium ileus (cystic fibrosis)
Necrotising enterocolitis (an 
acquired condition in the 
premature) 
Incarcerated inguinal hernia
Older infant Intestinal malrotation with 
volvulus
Intussusception (often non-bilious 
initially)
Incarcerated inguinal hernia
Non-bilious Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
Feeding difficulties (technique/volume)
Non-specific marker of illness, e.g. infection 
(urinary tract infection, meningitis, gastroenteritis, 
respiratory, metabolic disorder, raised intracranial 
pressure, congenital adrenal hyperplasia)
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   128 25/10/2017   07:50Common paediatric surgical conditions 129
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Intussusception
Most intussusceptions (Figure 9.16) in children occur from 
2 months to 2  years of age. They are life ­threatening. Intus­
susception typically causes a strangulating bowel obstruction, 
which can progress to gangrene and perforation. Intussuscep­
tion is classified according to the site of the intussusceptum 
and intussuscipiens. In children, more than 80% are ileocolic, 
beginning several centimetres proximal to the ileocaecal valve 
with their apex found in the ascending or transverse colon.
In the majority, the cause is hyperplasia of Peyer’s patches 
(lymphoid tissue), which may be secondary to a viral infection. 
In 10% of children, there is a pathological lead point, such as a 
Meckel’s diverticulum, enteric duplication cyst or even a small 
bowel lymphoma. Such cases are more likely in children over 
the age of 2 years and in those with recurrent intussusception.
Classically, a previously healthy infant presents with col ­
icky pain and vomiting (milk then bile). Between episodes, 
the child initially appears well. Later, they may pass a ‘redcur­
rant jelly’ stool. Clinical signs include dehydration, abdom ­
inal distension and a palpable sausage ­shaped mass in the 
right upper quadrant. Rectal examination may reveal blood 
or rarely the apex of the intussusceptum.
After resuscitation with intravenous fluids, broad ­spectrum 
antibiotics and nasogastric drainage, non ­operative reduc ­
tion is attempted using an air enema (Figure 9.17). Success­
ful reduction is recognised if air flows into the small bowel, 
together with later resolution of symptoms and signs. An air 
enema is contraindicated if there is peritonitis, perforation 
or shock. More than 70% of intussusceptions can be reduced 
non­operatively. Strangulated bowel and pathological lead 
points are unlikely to reduce. Perforation of the colon during 
pneumatic reduction is a recognised hazard but is rare. Recur­
rent intussusception occurs in up to 5 % of patients after 
non­operative reduction.
Summary box 9.12
Management of intussusception
●● Bowel infarction will result without treatment
●● Most are ileocolic
●● Diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasound scan 
●● Fluid and electrolyte resuscitation is essential
●● Most intussusceptions can be reduced non-operatively using 
an air enema
●● If there are signs of peritonitis or perforation then an 
emergency operation is needed
Summary box 9.11
Presentation of intussusception
●● Bilious vomiting in an infant is a sign of intestinal obstruction 
until proved otherwise
●● Intussusception classically presents with colicky pain and 
vomiting
●● Intussusception should be considered in any infant with 
bloody stools
●● Age range is between 2 and 24 months of age
Figure 9.16 Ileocolic intussusception causing small bowel obstruc-
tion.
A plain radiograph is rarely requested but if done it com ­
monly shows signs of small bowel obstruction and a soft­tissue 
opacity. Diagnosis is confirmed on an abdominal ultrasound. 
Figure 9.17 Air enema reduction of an intussusception (the arr ows 
mark the soft tissue shadow of the intussusceptum).
Operative reduction can be performed open or laparo­
scopically. The intussusception is milked distally by gentle 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   129 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES130
compression from its apex at an open procedure. Both the 
intussusceptum and the intussuscipiens are inspected for areas 
of non­viability. An irreducible intussusception or one com ­
plicated by infarction or a pathological lead point requires 
resection and primary anastomosis. 
Acute abdominal pain in children 
over 3 years of age
Between one­third and one­half of children admitted to hos­
pital with acute abdominal pain have non­specific abdominal 
pain (NSAP). The term mesenteric adenitis is unhelpful and 
should be dropped. Another one ­third have acute appendi ­
citis. Relatively benign conditions, such as constipation and 
urinary tract infections, account for most of the remainder. 
A small proportion of children have more serious pathology .
History and examination
Time and patience are required to evaluate the child with acute 
abdominal pain accurately. The child may be frightened and 
the parents worried. Young children find it difficult accurately 
to describe or localise abdominal pain but can often give a good 
history. The abdomen, genitalia, chest, throat and neck are 
examined. The abdomen may need reassessment after analgesia 
and a number of reviews. A gentle abdominal examination of 
the sleeping toddler, before removing their clothes, may reveal 
tenderness, guarding or a mass. Rectal examination is only per­
formed if a pelvic appendicitis is suspected and by the surgeon 
whose decisions will be altered by the findings. Active obser -
vation acknowledges that a definitive diagnosis is not always 
possible when the patient is first seen. The surgeon reassesses the 
child after a few hours while rehydrating with IV fluids or allow­
ing clear fluids and simple analgesics. This approach reduces the 
need for investigations and can reduce the negative appendicec­
tomy rate to as low as 4%. Ultrasound and CT scans have a role 
in selected children.
movement and rarely accompanied by guarding. The site and 
severity of maximum tenderness often vary during the course 
of repeated examinations. Symptoms are typically self­limiting 
within 48 hours. The aetiology of NSAP in children is obscure 
but viral infections and transient intussusception account for 
some cases. Viral infections can cause reactive lymphade ­
nopathy, fever and diffuse abdominal pain. In some children, 
recurrent acute abdominal pain can be organic or sometimes 
an expression of underlying psychosocial problems or abuse.
Acute appendicitis and its pitfalls
Classically there is anorexia and a few vomits with central 
abdominal pain which settles in the right iliac fossa. In early 
acute appendicitis there is a fever of 37.3–38.4°C and local­
ised tenderness. Finding persistent guarding in the right iliac 
fossa on repeated examination is the key to making the diag ­
nosis and distinguishing it from NSAP , which usually resolves 
over 24–48 hours. NSAP does not have persistent guarding. 
Acute appendicitis was principally always a clinical diagnosis 
but more recently early ultrasound is proving useful. Investi ­
gations may help but cannot replace regular expert clinical 
review. The pitfalls include wrongly making the diagnosis 
of gastroenteritis when there are loose stools or attributing 
pain on micturition and pyuria to a urinary tract infection 
(UTI). Both of these can occur when there is pelvic appen ­
dicitis or a pelvic collection. Referred pain from a right lower 
lobe pneumonia should be considered and it is important to 
remember that if antibiotics have been given the signs may be 
reduced and presentation can be delayed. The diagnosis can 
be difficult in those under 5 years of age. Many under ­fives 
present with a perforated appendix, not because the diag ­
nosis is made late but rather because the omentum is less 
well developed and inflammation is not well contained. The 
treatment starts with resuscitation with intravenous fluids, 
analgesia and broad ­spectrum antibiotics. Appendicectomy 
can be performed laparoscopically or through a muscle ­ 
splitting right iliac fossa incision. An appendix mass in a child 
who is not obstructed may respond to non­operative manage­
ment with antibiotics, and an interval appendicectomy can 
be considered 6 weeks later .
Summary box 9.14
Acute appendicitis
●● Anorexia, vomiting, low-grade fever
●● Tenderness and guarding in the right iliac fossa
●● Exclude referred pain from right lower lobe pneumonia
●● Surgery is the treatment of choice after resuscitation and 
antibiotics
Summary box 9.13
Work-up of children with acute abdominal pain
●● A careful history and examination and active observation are 
paramount
●● Routine tests include full blood count (FBC), C-reactive 
protein (CRP), urine analysis, microscopy and culture
●● Abdominal ultrasound scan (not mandated initially but may be 
useful)
●● Other tests may be helpful after a period of observation: 
abdominal ultrasound scan (can diagnose pelvic and urinary 
tract pathology)
●● Occasionally helpful tests: a plain supine abdominal 
radiograph (particularly in the preschool child with pain and 
vomiting), ultrasound or CT scan in complex cases 
●● Selective specific investigations: blood culture, stool culture, 
plasma amylase, diagnostic laparoscopy
Other causes of acute abdominal pain in 
children
 ● Intestinal obstruction. Consider intussusception, ingui ­
nal hernia, adhesions and Meckel’s diverticulum.
 ● Constipation. Often over ­diagnosed as a cause of acute 
abdominal pain, particularly as the plain x ­ray of a dehy­
drated ill child frequently shows faecal loading. 
Acute non-specific abdominal pain (NSAP)
The clinical features of NSAP are similar to those of acute 
appendicitis but the pain is poorly localised, not aggravated by 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   130 25/10/2017   07:50Common paediatric surgical conditions 131
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
 ● Urinary tract disorders. UTI is an uncommon cause 
of acute abdominal pain. Urinary symptoms, fever and 
vomiting tend to predominate. Urinalysis, microscopy 
and culture are useful but a sterile pyuria may accompany 
acute appendicitis. Children with pelviureteric junction 
obstruction can present with acute or recurrent abdominal 
pain and no urinary symptoms.
 ● Gastroenteritis. May cause colicky abdominal pain. 
Onset of pain before the diarrhoea and the presence of 
lower abdominal tenderness should raise the suspicion of 
appendicitis. 
 ● Tropical diseases. Ascariasis, typhoid and amoebiasis can 
cause acute abdominal pain.
There are numerous rarer causes of acute abdominal pain 
in children including Henoch–Schönlein purpura, sickle cell 
disease, primary peritonitis, acute pancreatitis, biliary colic, 
testicular torsion, gynaecological pathology (e.g. ovarian 
cysts and tumours, pelvic inflammatory disease, haematomet­
rocolpos) and urinary stone disease.
strategies, such as bladder augmentation, may be necessary. 
Some of these children empty their bladder via a non­refluxing 
catheterisable channel fashioned from the appendix, the bowel 
or a redundant ureter interposed between the abdominal wall 
and bladder (Mitrofanoff).
Anorectal problems
CONSTIPATION
The passage of hard or infrequent stools is common in chil ­
dren in the West. Severe constipation may be secondary to an 
anal fissure, Hirschsprung’s disease, an anorectal malforma­
tion or a neuropathic bowel. A detailed history and examina­
tion of the abdomen, anus and spine will identify most causes. 
Rectal examination and plain abdominal radiography may be 
helpful in severe cases. In the absence of specific underlying 
pathology, the child is best managed jointly with a paediatri­
cian, using a combination of diet, extra fluids, reward systems 
and laxatives.
RECTAL PROLAPSE
Mucosal rectal prolapse can occur in toddlers and is exac ­
erbated by straining or squatting on a potty. It is typically 
intermittent and frequently self ­limiting. Rarely, it may be 
secondary to cystic fibrosis or spinal dysraphism. The differ ­
ential diagnosis includes a prolapsing rectal polyp. Underly ­
ing factors, such as constipation, should be treated. Recurrent 
symptomatic prolapse usually responds to injection sclero ­
therapy. Strapping the buttocks is ineffective.
RECTAL BLEEDING
Unlike in adults, malignancy is an exceptionally rare cause of 
rectal bleeding. In newborns, the life ­threatening causes are 
malrotation and necrotising enterocolitis, and in older infants 
and children, intussusception. The quantities of blood loss 
are small but the conditions are serious. Other causes include 
anal fissures, juvenile polyps (Figure 9.18) and certain gastro­
enteritides (e.g. Campylobacter infection). 
The 4­year­old patient who presents with a haemoglobin 
(Hb) of 40 g/L will most likely have bled profusely from an 
ulcer adjacent to a Meckel’s diverticulum containing ectopic 
gastric mucosa (Figure 9.19). A technetium scan may con­
firm the presence of ectopic gastric mucosa (Figure 9.20). 
Summary box 9.15
Rare causes of acute abdominal pain in children
●● Obstruction from intussusception, adhesions, Meckel’s 
diverticulum or an inguinal hernia
●● Constipation
●● Urinary tract disorders
●● Gastroenteritis
●● Ascariasis
●● Typhoid
Eduard Heinrich Henoch , 1820–1910, Professor of Diseases of Children, Berlin, Germany, described this form of purpura in 1868.
Johann Lucas Schönlein , 1793–1864, Professor of Medicine, Berlin, Germany, published his description of this form of purpura in 1837.
Paul Mitrofanoff , b.1934, Professor of Paediatric Surgery, Rouen, France.
Urinary tract infection
UTIs in children may be due to a urinary tract abnormal ­
ity which may carry a risk of developing renal scarring from 
ascending infection. Infection and obstruction are partic ­
ularly hazardous. Older children complain of dysuria and 
frequency, whereas infants present with vomiting, fever and 
poor feeding. Urine specimens from children are easily con ­
taminated during collection and results must be interpreted 
with care. A proven infection is investigated by an ultrasound 
scan. Micturating cystography and radioisotope renography 
are helpful in excluding vesicoureteric reflux and renal scar ­
ring. Treatment aims to relieve symptoms, correct causes and 
preventing renal scarring. Vesicoureteric reflux may resolve 
spontaneously, some may need antibiotic prophylaxis or in 
a very small number of cases an endoscopic treatment or a 
re­implantation of the ureter. 
Children with neuropathic bladders (e.g. spina bifida) are 
at risk of secondary upper renal tract complications. Manage­
ment of these children must take into account their dexterity 
and motivation. An adequate capacity, low ­pressure bladder 
can frequently be managed by clean intermittent catheter ­
isation but a high ­pressure bladder is hazardous and other 
Figure 9.18  Colonic 
juvenile polyp: these are 
typically pedunculated.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   131 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES132
A Meckel’s diverticulum may also be complicated by an 
obstructing band between the diverticulum and the umbi ­
licus, diverticulitis, intussusception, intestinal volvulus or 
perforation. 
Swallowed or inhaled foreign bodies
Coins are the most frequently swallowed foreign bodies in 
children. Once beyond the cardia, they are usually passed in a 
few days. A plain radiograph of the abdomen, chest and neck 
should establish the site of radio ­opaque objects. Oesopha ­
geal objects can be removed endoscopically under general 
anaesthesia. Button batteries must be removed within hours 
because if they remain in the oesophagus they can perforate 
into the trachea or aorta. Batteries in the stomach are either 
removed urgently or followed very closely with repeat x ­rays 
over a couple of days. The need to remove sharp objects 
depends on their size, the age of the child and their position 
in the gut. Ingested magnets can cause entero­enteric fistulae 
when they fix to one another in adjacent loops of bowel. Bat­
tery ingestion in older children and young people may be a 
manifestation of self­harm. 
Inhaled foreign bodies cause sudden ­onset coughing and 
stridor. If there is worsening dyspnoea or signs of hypoxia then 
the infant should be given back blows in a head ­down posi­
tion. Abdominal thrusts (Heimlich manoeuvre) can be used 
in older children. A foreign body is suggested by: a unilateral 
wheeze, decreased transmitted breath sounds and a hyperin ­
flated lung from air trapping on an expiratory CXR (Figure 
9.21). A rigid bronchoscopy with a ventilating bronchoscope 
and appropriate optical forceps is needed to assess and remove 
objects.
Summary box 9.16
Swallowed and inhaled objects
●● Most swallowed objects pass spontaneously
●● Batteries need watching – they must pass quickly if their 
contents are not to leak
●● Objects jammed in the airway or oesophagus need removing 
promptly
Henry J Heimlich , b.1920, thoracic surgeon, Xavier University, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
John Langdon Haydon Down  (sometimes given as Langdon­Down), 1838–1896, physician, The London Hospital, London, UK, published ‘Observations on an 
ethnic classification of idiots’ in 1866.
Figure 9.19 Meckel’s diverticulum containing ectopic gastric mucosa.
Figure 9.20 A positive Meckel’s scan.
CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS
Around 2% of babies are born with one or more major struc­
tural anomalies caused by genetic defects or teratogenic 
insults. Some are diagnosed antenatally and surgeons are 
involved in antenatal counselling. Termination of pregnancy 
or planned delivery in a specialist centre are options for severe 
malformations. Prenatal diagnosis may include checking the 
karyotype (e.g. Down syndrome: trisomy 21) or testing for 
genetic disorders, such as cystic fibrosis.
The incidence of congenital malformations is variable 
(Table 9.5). Some examples relevant to the general surgeon 
are briefly outlined in the following sections.
Figure 9.21 An inspiratory (left) and expiratory (right) chest radio -
graph demonstrating left-sided pulmonary air trapping after inhalation 
of a radiolucent foreign body.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   132 25/10/2017   07:50Congenital malformations 133
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Oesophageal atresia 
A blind proximal pouch with a distal tracheo ­oesophageal 
fistula is the most common type (Figure 9.22). Affected 
infants present soon after birth with drooling and cyanotic 
episodes on attempting to feed. There may have been 
polyhydramnios due to failure to swallow amniotic fluid. The 
diagnosis is confirmed when a nasogastric tube goes no further 
than the upper oesophageal pouch on the CXR and abdominal 
gas signifies the tracheo ­oesophageal fistula (Figure 9.22). 
Associated anomalies are common and include cardiac, 
renal and skele tal defects. Repair is usually via a right ­sided 
extrapleural  thoracotomy within a day or two of birth – 
thoracoscopic repair is challenging but feasible, although the 
magnified view is excellent . The fistula is divided and the 
tracheal side closed. The oesophageal ends are anastomosed. 
The blood supply is poor and the anastomosis is under tension. 
Postoperative complications include anastomotic leak, 
stricture, recurrent fistula formation and gastro ­oesophageal 
reflux. Infants with pure oesophageal atresia and no tracheo ­
oesophageal fistula are usually best managed by a temporary 
gastrostomy and delayed primary repair or an oesophageal 
replacement. Except for very ­low­birth weight babies and 
those with major congenital heart disease, most infants with 
repaired oesophageal atresia have a good prognosis.
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
(CDH)
Typically, there is a left ­sided posterolateral diaphragmatic 
defect allowing herniation of abdominal viscera into the 
chest (Figure 9.23). Many are detected antenatally and the 
prognosis relates to the severity of the associated pulmonary 
hypoplasia. Despite intensive respiratory support or extracor­
poreal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), up to 30% of babies 
with a CDH die from respiratory failure. If the baby can be 
stabilised, the diaphragmatic defect is repaired. Small dia ­
phragmatic hernias may present with respiratory or gastroin­
testinal symptoms in later childhood.
TABLE 9.5 Incidence of selected malformations.
Abnormality Incidence
Thoracic
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
Oesophageal atresia/tracheo-oesophageal fistula
1:3000
1:3500
Cardiac
Congenital heart disease 1:150
Gastrointestinal
Gastroschisis
Hirschsprung’s disease
Anorectal malformations
1:7500
1:5000
1:4–5000
Hepatobiliary
Biliary atresia
Choledochal cyst
1:17 000
1:50 000
Urogenital
Hypospadias
Pelviureteric junction dysfunction
1:300
1:1000
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.22Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 9.22 Oesophageal atresia with a distal tracheo-oesophageal 
fistula.
Figure 9.23 Left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
Intestinal atresias
Duodenal atresia may take the form of a membrane or the 
proximal and distal duodenum may be completely separated. 
Prenatal ultrasound finds a ‘double bubble’ in the fetal abdo ­
men with polyhydramnios. There is an association with Down 
syndrome. Postnatally, there is bilious vomiting if the atresia 
is distal to the ampulla. A plain abdominal x ­ray also shows 
the double­bubble (Figure 9.24). Repair is by open duodeno­
duodenostomy (Figure 9.25). Occasionally, there is a duode­
nal membrane with a modest central perforation, which may 
delay symptoms until later childhood.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   133 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES134
William Edward Ladd , 1880–1967, Professor of Child Surgery, The University of Harvard, Boston, MA, USA.
Figure 9.24 Neonatal abdominal x-ray showing the ‘double bubble’ 
of duodenal atresia.
Figure 9.25 (a, b) Duodenal atresia and the incisions used to repair 
it: a diamond anastomosis is shown.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.25aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 6.25bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
A
D
B
C
Figure 9.26 Small bowel atresia.
single or multiple and are probably secondary to a prenatal 
vascular or mechanical insult causing sterile infarction of a 
segment of gut. They present with intestinal obstruction soon 
after birth. The proximal bowel is often extremely dilated and 
needs to be tapered prior to anastomosis to the distal bowel 
(Figure 9.26).
Meconium ileus is a cause of intestinal obstruction from 
inspissated meconium in the terminal ileum in neonates, 
most of whom have cystic fibrosis. Meconium is a mixture of 
epithelial cells, mucin and bile. Babies with uncomplicated 
meconium ileus (no associated atresia, volvulus or perfora ­
tion) can sometimes be managed with hyperosmolar contrast 
enemas to clear the meconium.
Meconium peritonitis is consequent upon a fetal intesti ­
nal perforation. The baby is born with a firm, distended, disco­
loured abdomen and signs of obstruction. An abdominal x­ray 
shows dilated intestinal loops and areas of calcification. Occa­
sionally, the perforation has resolved spontaneously before 
birth but most neonates with meconium peritonitis will need 
surgery. The peritonitic insult is chemical and not bacterial, 
although in late pregnancy meconium does contain bacteria.
Intestinal malrotation. By the 12th week of gestation, 
the midgut has returned to the fetal abdomen from the extra­ 
embryonic coelom and has begun rotating counterclockwise 
around the superior mesenteric artery axis. In classical intes ­
tinal malrotation, this process fails; the duodenojejunal flex ­
ure lies to the right of the midline and the caecum is central, 
creating a narrow base for the small bowel mesentery, which 
predisposes to midgut volvulus (Figure 9.27). Malrotation 
with volvulus is life ­threatening and typically presents with 
bilious vomiting. Bile­stained vomiting in the infant is a sign 
of intestinal obstruction until proved otherwise.
As the gut strangulates, the baby may pass bloodstained  
stools and becomes progressively sicker. An upper gastrointes­
tinal contrast study confirms the malrotation (Figure 9.27). 
Resuscitation and urgent surgery are needed to untwist the vol­
vulus, widen the base of the small bowel mesentery, straighten 
the duodenum and position the bowel in a non ­ rotated posi­
tion with the small bowel on the right and the colon on the 
left (Ladd’s procedure). The appendix is usually removed to 
avoid leaving it in an abnormal site within the abdomen.
Jejunal/ileal atresias vary from an obstructing membrane 
through to widely separated blind ­ended bowel ends associ ­
ated with a mesenteric defect. Small bowel atresias may be 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   134 25/10/2017   07:50Congenital malformations 135
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Abdominal wall defects 
Gastroschisis is now the commonest anomaly in babies born 
to mothers under 20 years of age. The fetal gut prolapses 
through a defect to the right of the umbilicus. At birth, the 
bowel is non­rotated, foreshortened and covered by a fibrin ­
ous peel (Figure 9.28 ). After reduction of the bowel, which 
may need to be staged using a silo, the defect is closed. A 
silo is a manufactured or hand ­sewn plastic or silastic bag 
attached to the abdominal wall and, containing the herniated 
viscera, it is gently reduced every 12–24 hours. Gastroschisis 
has a good prognosis although gut dysmotility delays recovery. 
Some infants have an intestinal atresia, and some boys have 
undescended testes but other anomalies are rare.
Exomphalos is a distinctly different anomaly in which the 
intestines and sometimes the liver are covered with a mem­
branous amniotic sac from which the umbilical cord arises 
(Figure 9.29). It may be associated with chromosomal or car­
diac anomalies. 
Biliary atresia
In biliary atresia the extrahepatic bile ducts are occluded, 
causing obstructive jaundice (conjugated hyper ­bilirubinae­
mia) and progressive liver fibrosis in early infancy. It should 
be considered if jaundice persists after 2   weeks of age. Fat 
malabsorption can lead to a coagulopathy correctable with 
vitamin K. An abdominal ultrasound scan may show a small 
or absent gallbladder and no visible bile ducts, and a biliary 
radionuclide scan may show no excretion. A liver biopsy 
shows proliferation of small bile ducts. It is treated by a Kasai 
porto­enterostomy in which the occluded extrahepatic bile 
ducts are excised and a jejunal Roux loop anastomosed to the Figure 9.28 A newborn infant with gastroschisis.
Figure 9.29 Exomphalos major.
Morio Kasai , 1922–2008, formerly Professor of Surgery, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Figure 9.27 (a) Contrast showing malro -
tation with a volvulus. (b) The narrow origin 
of the small bowel mesentery predisposes 
to midgut volvulus.
(a) (b)
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   135 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES136
hepatic hilum. Effective drainage is more likely with surgery 
before 8  weeks of age and may obviate the subsequent need 
for liver transplantation.
Alimentary tract duplications
Alimentary tract duplications are rare and are usually single, 
variable in size and spherical or tubular. Most are located on 
the mesenteric border of the intestine. Typically, they are 
lined by alimentary tract mucosa and share a common smooth 
muscle wall and blood supply with the adjacent bowel, with 
which they may communicate. Duplications can contain 
heterotopic gastric mucosa and be associated with spinal 
anomalies. Most duplications present in infancy or early 
childhood with intestinal obstruction, haemorrhage, intus ­
susception or perforation (Figure 9.30). Rarely, they present 
in adults and sometimes with a malignancy, which has been 
reported more often with rectal duplication cysts. Complete 
excision is the treatment of choice.
Hirschsprung’s disease may be familial or associated with 
Down syndrome or other genetic disorders. Gene mutations 
have been identified on chromosome 10 (involving the RET 
proto­oncogene) and on chromosome 13 in some patients. 
Hirschsprung’s disease typically presents in the neonatal period 
with delayed passage of meconium, abdominal distension and 
bilious vomiting but it may not be diagnosed until later in child­
hood or even adult life, when it manifests as severe chronic 
constipation. Enterocolitis is a potentially fatal complication.
The diagnosis requires an adequate rectal biopsy and an 
experienced pathologist. A contrast enema may show the 
narrow aganglionic segment, a cone and the dilated proximal 
bowel (Figure 9.31). Surgery aims to remove the aganglionic 
segment and ‘pull­through’ ganglionic bowel to the anus (e.g. 
Swenson, Duhamel, Soave and transanal procedures), and 
can be done in a single stage or in stages after first establish ­
ing a proximal stoma in normally innervated bowel. Most 
patients achieve good bowel control but a significant minority 
experience residual constipation and/or faecal incontinence 
or further enterocolitis.
Figure 9.30 A duplicated colon; note the two appendices.
Figure 9.31 Barium enema in an infant, showing a ‘transition zone’ 
in the proximal sigmoid colon between the dilated pr oximal normally 
innervated bowel and the contracted aganglionic rectum.
Harald Hirschsprung , 1830–1916, physician, The Queen Louise Hospital for Children, Copenhagen, Denmark, described congenital megacolon in 1887.
Orvar Swenson , b.1909, Professor of Surgery, Northern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
Bernard George Duhamel , 1917–1996, Professor of Surgery, Hopital St. Denis, Paris, France.
F Soave , twentieth­century Italian paediatric surgeon.
Hirschsprung’s disease
Hirschsprung’s disease is characterised by the congenital 
absence of intramural ganglion cells (aganglionosis) and the 
presence of hypertrophic nerves in the distal large bowel. The 
absence of ganglion cells is due to a failure of migration of 
vagal neural crest cells into the developing gut. The affected 
gut is in spasm, causing a functional bowel obstruction. The 
aganglionosis is restricted to the rectum and sigmoid colon 
in 75% of patients (short segment), involves the proximal 
colon in 15% (long segment) and affects the entire colon and 
a portion of terminal ileum in 10% (total colonic agangliono­
sis). A transition zone exists between the dilated, proximal, 
normally innervated bowel and the narrow, distal aganglionic 
segment.
Anorectal malformations
The anus is either imperforate or replaced by a fistula which 
does not pass through the muscle complex and opens away 
from the specialised skin which represents the true anal site. 
The sacrum and genitourinary tract are often abnormal. In 
boys, there may be a rectoperineal fistula but the most common 
anomaly is an imperforate anus with a rectobulbar urethral fis­
tula (Figure 9.32). In girls, the commonest anomalies are a 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   136 25/10/2017   07:50Congenital malformations 137
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
fistula opening in the posterior vestibule behind the vagina or 
on the perineum. Cloacal malformations, in which the rectum 
and genitourinary tract share a common outflow channel, are 
also seen in girls. Where there is a fistula, meconium can be 
passed and the diagnosis can be delayed for months because the 
perineum has not been inspected carefully. Most low malforma­
tions are treated by an anoplasty soon after birth. Higher, more 
complex defects need a temporary colostomy, detailed inves ­
tigation and then reconstructive surgery. Functional outcome 
is related to the type of malformation and the integrity of the 
sacrum and pelvic muscles (low defects are associated with con­
stipation, higher defects with faecal incontinence). For chil ­
dren with residual intractable faecal incontinence, antegrade 
colonic enemas administered via a catheterisable appendicos­
tomy (Figure 9.33) (the Malone procedure) enable the child 
to achieve social continence. 
Summary box 9.17
Congenital causes of intestinal obstruction
●● Intestinal atresia: may be multiple
●● Cystic fibrosis: can present with intestinal obstruction from 
inspissated meconium
●● Intestinal malrotation: predisposes to potentially lethal midgut 
volvulus
●● Alimentary tract duplications: may present with obstruction, 
haemorrhage or intussusception
●● Hirschsprung’s disease: typically presents with delay in 
passing meconium after birth
●● Anorectal malformations
(a)
(b)
B
R
Figure 9.32 (a) An imperforate anus in a neonate associated with 
(b) a rectour ethral fistula, visible on a contrast study performed via 
a sigmoid colostomy. The bladder is filled with contrast via the fistula 
and the radio-opaque dot has been placed on the infant’s perineum 
over the normal site of the anus. B, bladder; R, rectum.
Figure 9.33 Appendicostomy for the delivery of antegrade colonic 
enemas.
Urinary tract malformations
Many of these malformations are now detected by prenatal 
ultrasound scan. Others present in childhood with urinary 
infection, obstruction or an abdominal mass. Urinary tract 
disorders in children are investigated by urine microscopy and 
culture, ultrasound scan, assessment of renal function and a 
combination of radioisotope renography (uptake and excre ­
tion), contrast radiology and endoscopy.
In many infants, prenatally diagnosed mild to moderate 
hydronephrosis resolves spontaneously. Those with more sig­
nificant pelviureteric junction obstruction may be asymptom­
atic or present in later childhood with urinary tract infection 
or loin pain. Pyeloplasty is indicated for symptoms or impaired 
renal function. In boys, partial membranous obstruction in 
the posterior urethra (valves) can cause a severe prenatal 
obstructive uropathy. This condition demands urgent inves ­
tigation and treatment soon after birth to preserve bladder 
Patrick Malone , paediatric urologist, Southampton, UK.
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   137 25/10/2017   07:50CHAPTER 9  Principles of paediatric surgery  
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES138
and kidney function. Renal failure develops in about one ­
third of affected boys despite early endoscopic ablation of 
the obstructing valves. Other congenital urinary tract mal ­
formations include ureteric abnormalities (e.g. duplex, uret­
erocoele, vesicoureteric reflux), multicystic dysplastic kidney 
and bladder exstrophy.
NECROTISING ENTEROCOLITIS 
This is an acquired inflammatory condition of the neona­
tal gut, mostly affecting premature infants. Immaturity, for ­
mula feeds (breast milk is protective), bacterial infection and 
impaired gut blood flow are implicated in the pathogenesis. 
The neonate becomes septic, with abdominal distension, 
bloody stools and bilious aspirates. Patchy or extensive pneu­
matosis intestinalis progresses to necrosis and perforation 
(Figure 9.34). It commonly affects the terminal ileum and 
colon. Small intestinal loss can be sufficient to cause severe 
intestinal failure. Milder cases respond to antibiotics, gut rest 
and parenteral nutrition but severe cases need an urgent lap ­
arotomy. The mortality remains over 30%.
Neuroblastoma is a malignancy of neuroblasts in the adre­
nal medulla or sympathetic ganglia and typically presents as 
an abdominal or paravertebral mass. These cells metastasise 
to lymph nodes, bone and the liver and raise urinary catechol­
amine levels. Small localised tumours are excised. Patients 
with more advanced tumours have surgery after chemother ­
apy. Survival relates to tumour biology and stage (>90% for 
small localised tumours, <50% for advanced tumours).
Wilms’ tumour (nephroblastoma) is a malignant renal 
tumour derived from embryonal cells; it typically affects 
children from 1 to 4  years of age. A mutation in the Wilms’ 
tumour suppressor gene (WT1) is responsible for some cases. 
Wilms’ tumours usually present with an abdominal mass. 
The tumour can extend into the renal vein and vena cava 
and it metastasises to lymph nodes and lungs. Treatment is 
with chemotherapy and surgery. Survival depends on tumour 
spread, completeness of excision and the histological appear­
ance but exceeds 70% even with advanced tumours.
SAFEGUARDING
All staff must be able to recognise abuse and neglect and 
know the law and their local child safeguarding contacts. In 
the UK three children die each week from neglect or abuse 
and half of these deaths are at the hands of the parents. One 
in a hundred emergency department attendances results from 
abuse. Consider abuse if any of the following are present: 
bruises away from bony prominences (face, back, abdomen, 
arms, buttocks, ears and hands); bruises in clusters or in the 
pattern of an implement; multiple injuries at different stages 
of healing; different types of injury (e.g. soft tissue, burns or 
scalds, cuts and bruises); rib fractures; bite marks (adult bites 
are difficult to distinguish from child bites, but adult bites are 
associated with fatal abuse); significant delay between the 
injury and seeking medical advice; an inconsistent or vague 
history; or inappropriate parental behaviour.
SERVICE DELIVERY AND 
SUMMARY 
General Paediatric Surgeons working in District General 
Hospitals in the UK manage the common elective and acute 
problems of childhood that have been briefly outlined in this 
chapter for those older than 1 or 2 years. Specialist Paediatric 
Surgeons and Paediatric Urologists work mainly in regional 
units, providing a similar service up to age 16, but they also 
manage infants and neonates with a wide range of conditions. 
The principles of the speciality arise from the differences that 
are consequent upon age and development. 
FURTHER READING
Carachi R, Grosfeld JL. The surgery of childhood tumors. Berlin: Springer, 
2016.
Holcomb III GW , Murphy PJ, Ostlie DJ. Ashcraft’s pediatric surgery: 
expert consult, 6th edn. London: Elsevier, 2014.
Hutson JM, O’Brien M, Beasley SW , Teague WJ, King SK (eds). Jones’ 
clinical paediatric surgery. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell, 2015.
Max Wilms , 1867–1918, Professor of Surgery, Heidelberg, Germany.
Figure 9.34 Operative appearance of neonatal necrotising enter o-
colitis.
PAEDIATRIC SURGICAL 
ONCOLOGY
Neoplasms, though less common in children than in adults, 
are, with trauma, a leading cause of death in those over 1 year 
of age. In the West, leukaemia, central nervous system (CNS) 
tumours, lymphomas, neuroblastomas and nephroblastomas 
account for most paediatric malignancies. Neuroblastoma and 
nephroblastoma are among the more common solid abdomi ­
nal tumours. The prognoses for these cancers have improved 
after treatments have been refined following numerous mul ­
ticentre trials. 
01_09-B&L27_Pt1_Ch09.indd   138 25/10/2017   07:50Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Principles of oncology
10
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The biological nature of cancer
 • That treatment is only one component in the overall 
management of cancer
 • The principles of cancer prevention and early detection
 • The principles underlying non-surgical treatments for 
cancer
To appreciate:
 • The principles of cancer aetiology and the major known 
causative factors
 • The likely shape of future developments in cancer 
management
 • The multidisciplinary management of cancer
 • The distinction between palliative care and end-of-life 
care
 • The principles of palliative care
WHAT IS CANCER?
History
The name cancer from the Greek word for a crab (καρκινοs), 
and refers to the claw-like blood vessels extending over the 
surface of an advanced breast cancer. 
The study of cancer has always been a part of clinical 
medicine: theories have moved from divine intervention, 
through the humours, and are now firmly based on the cel-
lular origin of cancer. Rudolf Virchow is credited with being 
first to demonstrate that cancer is a disease of cells and that 
the disease progresses as a result of abnormal proliferation, 
encapsulated by his famous dictum ‘omnes cellula e cellula’ 
(every cell from a cell). In 1914, Theodor Boveri pointed out 
the importance of chromosomal abnormalities in cancer cells 
and, in the 1940s, Oswald Avery demonstrated that DNA 
was the genetic material within the chromosomes. In 1953, 
Watson and Crick described the structure of DNA and this 
key discovery paved the way for the study of the molecular 
biology of cancer. We can now investigate, and sometimes 
even understand, the biochemical mechanisms whereby 
cancer cells are formed and which mediate their abnormal 
behaviour. 
The psychopath within
Cancer cells are psychopaths. They have no respect for the 
rights of other cells. They violate the democratic principles 
of normal cellular organisation. Their proliferation is uncon -
trolled; their ability to spread is unbounded. Their inexo -
rable, relentless, progress destroys first the tissue and then the 
 person.
In order to behave in such an unprincipled fashion, to 
become truly malignant, cells have to acquire a number of 
characteristics. No one characteristic is sufficient and not all 
characteristics are necessary. These features, based on arti -
cles by Hanahan and Weinberg, are summarised in Summary 
box 10.1.
Rudolf Ludwig Carl Virchow , 1821–1902, Professor of Pathology, Berlin, Germany.
Theodor Heinrich Boveri , 1862–1913, Professor of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy, Wurzburg, Germany.
Oswald Theodore Avery , 1877–1955, bacteriologist, Rockefeller Institute, New York, NY, USA.
James Dewey Watson , b.1928, American biologist who worked at Cambridge, UK, and later became Director of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York, 
NY, USA.
Francis Harry Compton Crick , 1916–2004, British molecular biologist who worked at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, UK and later at the Salk Institute, 
San Diego, CA, USA. Watson and Crick shared the 1962 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with Maurice Hugh Frederick Wilkins, 1916–2004, of King’s 
College, London.
Douglas Hanahan , b.1951, American biologist and director of the Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), Lausanne, Switzerland.
Robert A Weinberg , b.1942, The Whitehead Institute of Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, The Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  Cambridge, 
MA, USA.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   139 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES140
Establish an autonomous lineage
Cells develop independence from the normal signals that 
control supply and demand. The healing of a wound is a phys-
iological process; the cellular response is exquisitely coor -
dinated so that proliferation occurs when it is needed and 
ceases when it is no longer required. The whole process is 
controlled by a series of signals telling cells when, and when 
not, to divide. Cancer cells escape from this normal system of 
checks and balances: they grow and proliferate in the absence 
of external stimuli; they proliferate and grow regardless of 
signals telling them to desist. Oncogenes, aberrant forms of 
normal cellular genes, are key factors in this process. They 
were originally identified as sequences within the genome of 
viruses that could cause cancer and were thought to be of viral 
origin but, surprisingly, turned out to be parts of the normal 
genome that were hitchhiking between cells, using the virus 
as a vector. Viral oncogenes ( v-onc) had sequence homology 
with normal cellular genes (c-onc) and are now presumed to 
be mutated versions of genes concerned with normal cel -
lular husbandry. The implication of this is that we all carry 
within us the seeds of our own destruction: genetic sequences 
that, through mutation, can turn into active oncogenes and 
thereby cause malignant transformation. 
Obtain immortality
According to the Hayflick hypothesis, normal cells are permit-
ted to undergo only a finite number of divisions. For humans 
this number is between 40 and 60. The limitation is imposed 
by the progressive shortening of the end of the chromosome 
(the telomere) that occurs each time a cell divides. Telomeric 
shortening is like a molecular clock and, when its time is up, 
the lineage will die out. Cancer cells can use the enzyme telo-
merase to rebuild the telomere at each cell division; there is 
no telomeric shortening, and the lineage will never die out. 
The cancer cell has achieved immortality.
Evade apoptosis
Apoptosis is a form of programmed cell death which occurs 
as the direct result of internal cellular events instructing the 
cell to die. Unlike necrosis, apoptosis is an orderly and inter -
nally driven process. The cell dismantles itself neatly for dis -
posal (Figure 10.1). There is minimal inflammatory response. 
Apoptosis is a physiological process. Cells that find them-
selves in the wrong place normally die by apoptosis and this is 
an important self-regulatory mechanism in growth and devel-
opment: cells in the web space of the embryo die by apoptosis, 
as do lymphocytes that could react to self. The process was 
rediscovered in 1972, and named apoptosis from the Greek 
αποπτωσιs, indicating leaf fall. Genes, such as p53, that can 
activate apoptosis function as tumour suppressor genes. Loss 
of function in a tumour suppressor gene will contribute to 
malignant transformation. Cancer cells will be able to evade 
apoptosis, which means that the wrong cells can be in the 
wrong places at the wrong times.
Summary box 10.1
Features of malignant transformation
●● Establish an autonomous lineage
Resist signals that inhibit growth
Sustain proliferative signalling
●● Obtain replicative immortality
●● Evade apoptosis
●● Acquire angiogenic competence
●● Acquire ability to invade
●● Acquire ability to disseminate and implant
●● Evocation of inflammation
●● Evade detection/elimination
●● Jettison excess baggage
●● Subvert communication to and from the cellular environment
●● Develop ability to change energy metabolism
Leonard Hayflick , b.1928, while working at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia in 1962, he noted that normal mammalian cells growing in culture had a limited, 
rather than an indefinite, capacity for self-replication.
Figure 10.1 Electron micrograph of apoptotic bodies engulfed by a 
macrophage.
Acquire angiogenic competence
A mass of tumour cells cannot, in the absence of a blood sup-
ply, grow beyond a diameter of about 1  mm. This places a 
severe restriction on the capabilities of the tumour: it cannot 
grow much larger or spread widely within the body. If, how -
ever, the mass of tumour cells is able to attract or to con-
struct a blood supply then it is able to quit its dormant state 
and behave in a far more aggressive fashion. The ability of a 
tumour to form blood vessels is termed ‘angiogenic compe -
tence’ and is a key feature of malignant transformation.
Acquire ability to invade
Cancer cells have no respect for the structure of normal 
 tissues. They acquire the ability to breach the basement 
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   140 25/10/2017   07:51What is cancer? 141
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
 membrane and gain direct access to blood and lymph vessels. 
Cancer cells use three main mechanisms to facilitate inva -
sion: (1) they cause a rise in the interstitial pressure within 
a tissue; (2) they secrete enzymes that dissolve extracellular 
matrix; and (3) they become mobile. Unrestrained prolifer -
ation and a lack of contact inhibition enable cancer cells to 
exert pressure directly on the surrounding tissue and push 
beyond the normal limits. They secrete collagenases and 
proteases that chemically dissolve any extracellular bound -
aries that would otherwise limit their spread through tissues 
and, by modulating the expression of cell-surface molecules 
called integrins, are able to detach themselves from the 
extracellular matrix. The abnormal integrins associated with 
malignancy can also transmit signals from the environment 
to the cytoplasm and nucleus of the cancer cells (‘outside-in 
signalling’) and these signals can induce increased moti -
lity. These processes are similar to those involved in normal 
development, in the migration of the neural crest or the for -
mation of the heart. Epithelial cells behave as if they were 
mesenchymal cells and the process is termed  ‘epithelial–
mesenchymal transition’ (EMT). EMT is a crucial step in 
malignant transformation and many of the genes and pro-
teins implicated in the formation of cancer control processes 
are involved in EMT, for example Src, Ras, integrins, Wnt 
/b –catenin, Notch.
Acquire ability to disseminate and implant, 
evocation of inflammation
Once cancer cells gain access to vascular and lymphovascu -
lar spaces, they have acquired the potential to use the body’ s 
natural distribution system. This is not, of itself, sufficient to 
cause tumours to develop at distant sites. The cells also need 
to acquire the ability to implant. As Paget pointed out over a 
century ago, there is a crucial relationship here between the 
seed (the tumour cell) and the soil (the distant tissue). Most 
of the cancer cells discharged into the circulation probably 
do not form viable metastases: circulating cancer cells can be 
identified in patients who never develop clinical evidence of 
metastatic disease. Clumping may be important in permitting 
metastases, the outer cells protecting the inner cells from 
immunological attack. These outer protective cells may, on 
occasion, be normal lymphocytes. 
Cancer can spread in this embolic fashion but can also 
spread when individual cells migrate and implant. Whether 
spread occurs in groups or as individual cells there is still the 
problem of crossing the vascular endothelium (and basement 
membrane) to gain access to the tissue itself. Cancer cells 
probably implant themselves in distant tissues by  exploiting, 
and subverting, the normal inflammatory response. By 
expressing inflammatory cytokines the cancer cells can fool 
the endothelium of the host tissue into becoming activated 
and allowing cancer cells access to the extravascular space. 
Activated endothelium expresses receptors that bind to inte-
grins and selectins on the surface of cells, allowing them to 
move across the endothelial barrier. 
Evade detection/elimination
Cancer cells are simultaneously both ‘self’ and ‘not self’. 
Although derived from normal cells (‘self’) they are, in terms 
of their genetic make up, behaviour and characteristics, for -
eign (‘not self’). As such, they ought to provoke an immune 
response and be eliminated, and it is entirely possible that 
malignant transformation is a more frequent event than the 
emergence of clinical cancer. The possible role of the immune 
system in eliminating nascent cancers was proposed by Paul 
Ehrlich in 1909 and revisited by both Sir Frank McFarlane 
Burnet and Lewis Thomas in the late 1950s. Cancer cells, or 
at least those that give rise to clinical disease, appear to gain 
the ability to escape detection by the immune system. This 
may be through suppressing expression of tumour associated 
antigens or it may be through actively co-opting one part of 
the immune system to help the tumour escape detection by 
other parts of the immune surveillance system.
Jettison excess baggage
Cancer cells are geared to excessive and remorseless prolifera-
tion. They do not need to develop or retain those specialised 
functions that make them good cellular citizens. They can 
therefore afford to repress or permanently lose those genes 
that control such functions. They become leaner and meaner. 
This may bring some short-term advantages. The longer-term 
disadvantage is that what is today superfluous may, tomorrow, 
be essential. This can leave cancer cells vulnerable to exter -
nal stressors and may, in part, explain why some cancer treat-
ments work.
Subvert communication to and from the 
environment/milieu
Providing false information is a classic military strategy. 
Degrading the command and control systems of the enemy 
is an essential component of mo dern warfare. Cancer cells 
almost certainly use similar tactics in their battle for control 
over their host. Given the complexity of communication 
between and within cells, this is not an easy statement either 
to disprove or to prove. Nor does it offer any easy targets for 
therapeutic manipulation. 
Stephen Paget , 1855–1926, surgeon, The West London Hospital, London, UK. Paget’s ‘seed and soil’ hypothesis is contained in his paper ‘The distribution of 
secondary growths in cancer of the breast’, in the Lancet, 1889.
Paul Ehrlich , 1854–1915, Professor of Hygiene, The University of Berlin, and later Director of The Institute for Infectious Diseases, Berlin, Germany. In 1908, 
he shared the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with  Elie Metchnikoff , 1845–1916, ‘in recognition of his work on immunity’. Metchnikoff was Professor of 
Zoology at Odessa in Russia, and later worked at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, France. 
Sir Frank McFarlane Burnet , 1899–1985, Australian virologist, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Australia. Burnett shared the 1960 Nobel Prize for 
Physiology or Medicine with Sir Peter Brian Medawar, 1915–1987, Jodrell Professor of Zoology, University College, London, UK, ‘for their discovery of acquired 
immunological tolerance’.
Lewis Thomas , 1913–1993, American pathologist and immunologist, who became President of the Sloan Kettering Memorial Institute, New York, NY, USA.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   141 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES142
Develop ability to change energy 
metabolism
Blood flow in tumours is often sporadic and unreliable. As 
a result, cancer cells may have to spend prolonged periods 
starved of oxygen – in a state of relative hypoxia. Compared 
with the corresponding normal cells, some cancer cells may 
be better able to survive in hypoxic conditions. This ability 
may enable tumours to grow and develop despite an impov -
erished blood supply. Cancer cells can alter their metabolism 
even when oxygen is abundant; they break down glucose but 
do not, as normal cells would do, send the resulting pyruvate 
to the mitochondria for conversion, in an oxygen-dependent 
process, to carbon dioxide. This is the phenomenon of aerobic 
glycolysis, or the Warburg effect, and leads to the production 
of lactate. In an act of symbiosis, lactate-producing cancer 
cells may provide lactate for adjacent cancer cells which are 
then able to use it, via the citric acid cycle, for energy pro -
duction. This cooperation is similar to that which occurs in 
skeletal muscle during exercise.
Malignant transformation
The characteristics of the cancer cell arise as a result of muta-
tion. Only very rarely is a single mutation sufficient to cause 
cancer; multiple mutations are usually required. Colorectal can-
cer provides the classical example of how multiple mutations 
are necessary for the complete transformation from normal cell 
to malignant cell. Vogelstein and his colleagues identified the 
genes required and also postulated not only that it is necessary 
to have mutations in all the relevant genes, but also that these 
mutations must be acquired in a specific sequence. 
Cancer is usually regarded as a clonal disease. Once a cell 
has arisen with all the mutations necessary to make it fully 
malignant, it is capable of giving rise to an infinite number of 
identical cells, each of which is fully malignant. These cells 
divide, invade, metastasise and destroy but, ultimately, each 
is the direct descendant of that original, primordial, trans -
formed cell. There is certainly evidence, mostly from hae -
matological malignancies, to support the view that tumours 
are monoclonal in origin, but recent evidence challenges the 
universality of this assumption. Some cancers may arise from 
more than one clone of cells. Epigenetic modification refers 
to hereditable changes in DNA that are not related to the 
nucleotide sequence of the molecule. Epigenetic modifica-
tion may give rise to distinct cancer cell lineages with dif -
fering biological properties. The interactions between cells 
from each lineage and the tissue within which such cells find 
themselves may determine the overall clinical behaviour of a 
tumour.
T wo mechanisms may help to sustain and accelerate the 
process of malignant transformation: genomic instability and 
tumour-related inflammation.
Genomic instability
A cancer is in a genetic ferment. Cells are dividing without 
proper checks and balances. Mutations are arising all the time 
within tumours and some of these mutations, particularly 
those in tumour suppressor genes, may have the ability to 
encourage the development and persistence of further muta -
tions. This gives rise to the phenomenon of genomic insta -
bility – as it evolves, a cancer contains an increasing variety 
and number of genetic aberrations. The greater the number 
of such abnormalities, the greater the chance of increasingly 
deviant behaviour, and the pace of malignant transformation 
accelerates.
Tumour-related inflammation
If a tumour provokes an inflammatory response then the cyto-
kines and other factors produced as a result of that response 
may act to promote and sustain malignant transformation. 
Growth factors, mutagenic ROS (reactive oxygen species), 
angiogenic factors and antiapoptotic factors may all be pro-
duced as part of an inflammatory process and all may contrib-
ute to the progression of a tumour.
A recurring theme in the molecular biology of cancer is 
that systems and pathways can behave unpredictably – activa-
tion may sometimes promote, and sometimes inhibit, growth 
and transformation. This has important implications for ther-
apy: treatments designed to inhibit the growth and spread of 
cancer may, occasionally, have precisely the opposite effect. 
The most consistent feature of cancer is its lack of consistency.
The growth of a tumour
If it is accepted that a cancer starts from a single transformed 
cell then it is possible, using straightforward arithmetic, to 
describe the progression from a single cell to a mass of cells 
large enough to kill the host. The division of a cell pro -
duces two daughter cells. The relationship 2 n will describe 
the number of cells produced after n generations of division. 
There are between 10 13 and 10 14 cells in a typical human 
being. A tumour 10  mm in diameter will contain about 10 9 
cells. Since 230 = 109 this implies that it would take 30 gen -
erations to reach the threshold of clinical detectability and, 
as 245 = 3 × 1013, it will take fewer than 15 subsequent gen-
erations to produce a tumour that, through sheer bulk alone, 
would be fatal. This is an oversimplification because cell loss 
is a feature of many tumours, and for squamous cancers as 
many as 99% of the cells produced may be lost, mainly by 
exfoliation. It will, in the presence of cell loss, take many 
cellular divisions to produce a clinically evident tumour – 
abundant opportunity for further mutations to occur during 
the preclinical phase of tumour growth. The growth of a 
typical human tumour can be described by an exponential 
relationship, the doubling time of which increases exponen -
tially – so-called Gompertzian growth (Figure 10.2). This 
Otto Warburg , 1883–1970, chemist, Director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Cell Physiology, Berlin-Dahlem. Awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or 
Medicine in 1931 for ‘his discovery of the nature and mode of action of the respiratory enzyme’.
Bert Vogelstein , b.1949, molecular biologist, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Benjamin Gompertz , 1779–1865, an insurance actuary who was interested in calculating annuities. To do this, he needed to describe mathematically the relation-
ship between life-expectancy and age. He was able to do this using the function that bears his name. The Gompertzian function provides an excellent fit to data 
points plotting tumour size against time.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   142 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 143
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Gompertzian pattern has several important implications for 
the diagnosis and treatment of cancer.
Vogelstein claiming that cancer is largely a random process 
(‘bad luck); the contrary view, expressed by Wu, Powers and 
colleagues, is that extrinsic risk factors make a substantial 
contribution to the development of cancer. The likelihood is 
that both sides are correct, but each only partially.
Knowledge about the causes of cancer can be used to 
design appropriate strategies for prevention or earlier diag -
nosis. As we find out more about the genes associated with 
cancer, genetic testing and counselling will play an increas -
ing role in the prevention of cancer. These considerations are 
incorporated into Table 10.1, on the inherited cancer syn -
dromes, and in Table 10.2, on the environmental contribu -
tion to cancer. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF CANCER
Management is more than treatment
The traditional approach to cancer concentrates on diagno -
sis and active treatment. This is a very limited view that, in 
terms of the public health, may not have served society well. 
It implies a fatalistic attitude to the occurrence of cancer and 
an assumption that, once active treatment is complete, there 
is little more to be done. Prevention is forgotten and rehabil-
itation is ignored. 
A more comprehensive view considers the management 
of  cancer as taking place along two axes: one is an axis of 
scale, from the individual to the world population; the other 
is an axis based on the unnatural history of the disease, 
from prevention through to rehabilitation or palliative care 
( Figure 10.3).
0
1
102
104
106
108
1010
Cells
1012
1014
100 200 300
Limit of clinical detection
Time
400 500 600
Figure 10.2  The Gompertzian curve describing the growth of a 
typical tumour. In its early stages, gr owth is exponential but, as the 
tumour grows, the growth rate slows. This decrease in growth rate 
probably arises because of difficulties with nutrition and oxygenation. 
The tumour cells are in competition: not only with the tissues of the 
host, but also with each other.
Summary box 10.2
The implications of Gompertzian growth
●● The majority of the growth of a tumour occurs before it is 
clinically detectable
●● By the time they are detected, tumours have passed the 
period of most rapid growth, that period when they might be 
most sensitive to antiproliferative drugs
●● There has been plenty of time, before diagnosis, for individual 
cells to detach, invade, implant, and form distant metastases. 
In many patients cancer may, at the time of presentation, be a 
systemic disease
●● ‘Early tumours’ are genetically old, yielding many 
opportunities for mutations to occur, mutations that might 
confer spontaneous drug resistance ( a probability greatly 
increased by the existence of cell loss)
●● The rate of regression of a tumour will depend upon its age 
(the Norton–Simon hypothesis extends this: chemotherapy 
results in a rate of regression in tumour volume that is 
proportional to the rate of growth for an unperturbed tumour 
of that size)
THE CAUSES OF CANCER
The interplay between nature and 
nurture
Both inheritance and environment are important determi -
nants of cancer development. Neither influence is totally 
dominant. Using a familiar example, not all smokers develop 
lung cancer; lung cancer can occur in people who have never 
smoked. The debate concerning the relative importance of 
the two factors has recently become polarised, Tomasetti and 
Individual
(primary 
care)
Prevention Staging Treatment Follow-up Rehabilitation (Palliation, terminal care)Screening Diagnosis
Family
(primary 
care)
Community
(local 
hospital)
Region
(tertiary 
centre)
Continent
World
(WHO)
Country
(national
healthcare
system)
Within this space we can
categorise all aspects of
cancer management: from
an individual person’s
decision to give up smoking,
to the World Health
Organization’s decision to
recommend morphine rather
than radiotherapy to treat
cancer-related pain in 
resource-poor countries
Figure 10.3 The management of cancer spans the natural history of 
the disease and all humankind, from the individual to the population 
of the world.
Prevention
The World Cancer Research Fund has published an exten -
sive view of the evidence on the preventable causes of cancer; 
their conclusion is that many cancers could be prevented if 
Larry Norton , b.1947, Valley Stream, New York. Deputy Physician-in-Chief for Breast Cancer Programs, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York.
Richard Macey Simon , b.1943, Director, Biometric Research Program Chief, Computational & Systems Biology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   143 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES144
TABLE 10.1 Inherited syndromes associated with cancer.
Syndrome Gene(s) 
implicated
Inheritance Associated tumours and abnormalities Strategies for prevention/
early diagnosis
Familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP)/
Gardner syndrome
APC gene D Colorectal cancer under the age of 25
Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid
Cancer of the ampulla of Vater
Hepatoblastomas
Primary brain tumours (Turcot syndrome)
Osteomas of the jaw
CHRPE (congenital hypertrophy of the retinal 
pigment epithelium)
Prophylactic 
panproctocolectomy
Hereditary non-polyposis 
colorectal cancer 
(HNPCC) 
HNPCC1
HNPCC2
HNPCC3
DNA mismatch 
repair genes 
(MLH1; MSH2; 
MSH6)
MSH2
MLH1
PMS1
D Colorectal cancer (typically in 40s and 50s) 
 
 
Endometrium, stomach, hepatobiliary 
(Lynch syndrome 1)
Surveillance colonoscopies /
polypectomies
Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome STK11 D Bowel cancer; breast cancer; freckles round 
the mouth
Surveillance colonoscopy; 
mammography
Cowden* syndrome PTEN D Multiple hamartomas of skin, breast and 
mucous membranes
Breast cancer
Neuroendocrine tumours
Endometrial cancer
Thyroid cancer
Active surveillance
Retinoblastoma RB D Retinoblastoma
Pinealoma
Osteosarcoma
Surveillance of uninvolved 
eye
Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN) Type 1
Menin D Parathyroid tumours
Islet cell tumours
Pituitary tumours
Awareness of associations 
and paying attention to 
relevant symptoms
MEN Type 2A RET D Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Phaeochromocytoma
Parathyroid tumours 
Regular screening of 
blood pressure, serum 
calcitonin and urinary 
catecholamines
Prophylactic thyroidectomy
MEN2b RET D Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid; 
phaeochromocytoma; mucosal neuromas; 
ganglioneuromas of the gut
Regular screening of 
blood pressure, serum 
calcitonin and urinary 
catecholamines;
Prophylactic thyroidectomy
Li–Fraumeni P53 D Sarcomas 
Leukaemia
Osteosarcomas
Brain tumours
Adrenocortical carcinomas
Very difficult, since 
pattern of tumours is so 
heterogeneous and varies 
from patient to patient
Familial breast cancer BRCA1; BRCA2 D Breast cancer
Ovarian cancer
Papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum
Prostate cancer
Screening mammography; 
pelvic ultrasound; PSA (in 
males)
Prophylactic mastectomy; 
prophylactic 
oophorectomy
Eldon J Gardner , b.1909, Professor of Zoology, Utah State University, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Abraham Vater , 1684–1751, Professor of Anatomy and Botany, and later of Pathology and Therapeutics, Wittenburg, Germany.
Jacques Turcot , b.1914, surgeon, Hôtel Dieu de Quebec Hospital, Quebec, Canada.
Henry T Lynch , b.1928, oncologist, Chairman of the Department of Preventive Medicine, Creighton School of Medicine, California, USA.
John Law Augustine Peutz , 1886–1968, Chief Specialist for Internal Medicine, St John’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Harold Joseph Jeghers , 1904–1990, Professor of Internal Medicine, The New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, Jersey City, NJ, USA.
Frederick P Li , b.1940, Professor of Medicine, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Joseph F Fraumeni , b.1933, Director of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, The National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Continued
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   144 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 145
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
TABLE 10.1 Inherited syndromes associated with cancer – continued.
Syndrome Gene(s) 
implicated
Inheritance Associated tumours and abnormalities Strategies for prevention/
early diagnosis
Familial cutaneous 
malignant melanoma
CDNK2A; CDK4 D Cutaneous malignant melanoma Avoid exposure to sunlight, 
careful surveillance
Basal cell naevus 
syndrome (Gorlin)
PTCH D Basal cell carcinomas
Medulloblastoma
Bifid ribs
Careful surveillance, 
awareness of diagnosis 
(look for bifid ribs on x-ray)
Von Hippel–Lindau VHL D Renal cancer
Phaeochromocytoma
Haemangiomas of the cerebellum and retina
Urinary catecholamines
Neurofibromatosis type 1 NF1 D Astrocytomas
Primitive neuroectodermal tumours
Optic gliomas
Multiple neurofibromas
A difficult problem; maintain 
a high index of suspicion 
concerning any rapid 
changes in growth or 
character of any noduleNeurofibromatosis type 2 NF2 D Acoustic neuromas
Spinal tumours
Meningiomas
Multiple neurofibromas
Xeroderma pigmentosum Deficient 
nucleotide 
excision repair 
(XPA,B,C)
R Skin sensitive to sunlight. Early onset 
of cutaneous squamous or basal cell 
carcinomas 
Avoidance of sun exposure
Active surveillance and early 
treatment
Retinoids for 
chemoprevention
Ataxia–telagiectasia AT R Progressive cerebellar ataxia
Leukaemia
Lymphoma
Breast cancer
Melanoma
Upper gastrointestinal tumours
Active surveillance
Bloom syndrome BLM helicase R Sensitivity to ultraviolet light
Leukaemia
Lymphoma
Active surveillance
D, dominant; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; R, recessive.
* One of the few clinical syndromes named for the patient rather than the clinician. Rachel Cowden was, in 1963, the first patient described 
with the syndrome. She died from breast cancer at the age of 20.
TABLE 10.2 Environmental causes of cancer (and suggested measures for reducing their impact).
Environmental/behavioural factor Associated tumours Strategy for prevention/early 
diagnosis
Tobacco Lung cancer
Head and neck cancer
Ban tobacco
Ban smoking in public places
Punitive taxes on tobacco
Alcohol Head and neck cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Hepatoma
Avoid excess alcohol
Surveillance of high-risk individuals
Ultraviolet exposure Melanoma
Non-melanoma skin cancer
Avoid excessive sun exposure, 
avoid sunbeds
Ionising radiation Leukaemia
Breast cancer
Lymphoma
Thyroid cancer
Limit medical exposures to absolute 
minimum; safety precautions at 
nuclear facilities; monitor radiation 
workers
Robert Gorlin , 1923–2006, Professor of Dentistry, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Eugen von Hippel , 1867–1939, Professor of Ophthalmology, Göttingen, Germany.
Arvid Lindau , 1892–1958, Professor of Pathology, Lund, Sweden.
David Bloom , b.1892, dermatologist at the Skin and Cancer Clinic, New York University, New York, NY, USA, described the syndrome in 1954.
Continued
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   145 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES146
 symptoms, is an insufficient criterion for the success of a 
screening programme. This is because of inherent biases in 
screening (lead time bias, selection bias and length bias) 
which make screen-detected disease appear to be associated 
with better outcomes than symptomatic disease. 
Lead time bias describes the phenomenon whereby early 
detection of a disease will always prolong survival from the 
time of diagnosis when compared to disease picked up at a 
later stage in its development whether or not the screening 
process has altered the progression of the tumour (Figure 
10.4). Selection bias describes the finding that individu -
als who accept an invitation for screening are, in general, 
healthier than those who do not. It follows that individuals 
with screen-detected disease will tend to live longer, inde -
pendently of the condition for which screening is being 
TABLE 10.2 Environmental causes of cancer (and suggested measures for reducing their impact) – continued.
Environmental/behavioural factor Associated tumours Strategy for prevention/early 
diagnosis
Viral infections Human papillomavirus (HPV) Cervical cancer
Penile tumours
Avoid unprotected sex
Vaccination
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Kaposi’s sarcoma
Lymphomas
Germ cell tumours
Anal cancer
Avoid unprotected sex
Antiretroviral therapy
Hepatitis B Hepatoma Avoid contaminated injections/
infusions
Vaccination
Other infections Bilharzia Bladder cancer Treatment of infection
Cystoscopic surveillance
Helicobacter pylori Stomach cancer Eradication therapy
Inhaled particles Asbestos Mesothelioma Protect workers from inhaled dusts 
and fibres
Wood dust Paranasal sinus cancers
Chemicals Environmental pollutants/chemicals used 
in industry
Angiosarcoma (vinyl chloride)
Bladder cancer (aniline dyes, 
vulcanisation of rubber)
Lung, nasal cavity (nickel)
Skin (arsenic)
Lung (beryllium, cadmium, 
chromium)
All sites (dioxins)
Protection of exposed workers; 
avoid chemical discharge and 
spillages
Medical Alkylating agents used in 
cytotoxic chemotherapy
Leukaemia
Lymphoma
Lung cancer
Avoid over-treatment; only combine 
drugs with ionising radiation when 
absolutely necessary
Immunosuppressive 
treatment
Kaposi’s sarcoma As low a dose as possible, for as 
short a period as possible
Stilboestrol Adenocarcinoma of vagina in 
daughters of treated mothers
Use of stilboestrol curtailed
Tamoxifen Endometrial cancer Biopsy if patient on tamoxifen 
develops uterine bleeding
Fungal and plant 
toxins
Aflatoxins Hepatoma Appropriate food storage, screen for 
fungal contamination of foodstuffs
Obesity/lack of physical exercise Breast
Endometrium
Kidney
Colon
Oesophagus
Maintain ideal body weight, regular 
exercise
people ate sensibly and exercised more. This advice supple -
ments the preventative measures outlined in Table 10.2.
Screening
Screening involves the detection of disease in an asymptom -
atic population in order to improve outcomes by early diag -
nosis. It follows that a successful screening programme must 
achieve early diagnosis and that the disease in question has 
a better outcome when treated at an early stage. The crite -
ria which must be fulfilled for the disease, screening test and 
the screening programme itself are given in Summary box 
10.3. Merely to prove that screening picks up disease at an 
early stage, and that the outcome is better for patients with 
screen-detected disease than for those who present with 
Moritz Kaposi  (originally Kohn), 1837–1902, Professor of Dermatology, Vienna, Austria, described pigmented sarcoma of the skin in 1872.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   146 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 147
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Diagnosis and classification
Accurate diagnosis is the key to the successful management 
of cancer. Precise diagnosis is crucial to the choice of cor -
rect therapy; the wrong operation, no matter how superbly 
performed, is useless. An unequivocal diagnosis is the key to 
an accurate prognosis. Only rarely can a diagnosis of cancer 
be confidently made in the absence of tissue for pathologi -
cal or cytological examination. Cancer is a disease of cells 
and, for accurate diagnosis, the abnormal cells need to be 
seen. Different tumours are classified in different ways: most 
squamous epithelial tumours are simply classed as well (G1), 
moderate (G2) or poorly (G3) differentiated. Adenocarcino-
mas are also often classified as G1, 2 or 3 but prostate cancer 
is an exception, with widespread use of the Gleason system. 
The Gleason system grades prostate cancer according to the 
degree of differentiation of the two most prevalent architec -
tural patterns. The final score is the sum of the two grades 
and can vary from 2 (1+1) to 10 (5+5) with the higher scores 
indicating poorer prognosis. 
The management of malignant lymphomas is based firmly 
upon histopathological classification: the first distinction is 
between Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL) and the non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphomas (NHL). Each of these main types of lymphoma is 
then subclassified according to a different scheme. The World 
Health Organization/Revised European–American Lym-
phoma (WHO/REAL) system classifies Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
into classical HL (nodular sclerosis HL; mixed-cellularity HL; 
lymphocyte depletion HL; lymphocyte-rich classical HL) and 
nodular lymphocyte-predominant HL. The WHO/REAL 
classification of NHL is considerably more complex and rec -
ognises 27 distinct pathological subtypes. It is perhaps no 
coincidence that the non-surgical treatment of lymphomas 
is, by and large, more successful than the non-surgical treat-
ment of solid tumours. This suggests that precise and accurate 
subtyping of tumours enables appropriate selection of treat-
ment and, in turn, this is associated with better outcome. The 
development, over the next decade, of molecular classifiers 
will profoundly alter our approach. Diseases such as breast 
cancer and colorectal cancer will become subdivided into a 
plethora of molecularly distinct entities.
Summary Box 10.3
Criteria for screening 
The disease:
●● Recognisable early stage
●● Treatment at early stage more effective than at later stage
●● Sufficiently common to warrant screening
The test:
●● Sensitive and specific
●● Acceptable to the screened population
●● Safe
●● Inexpensive
The programme:
●● Adequate diagnostic facilities for those with a positive test
●● High quality treatment for screen-detected disease to 
minimise morbidity and mortality
●● Screening repeated at intervals if disease of insidious onset
●● Benefit must outweigh physical and psychological harm
 performed. Length bias occurs because slow-growing tumours 
are likely to be picked up by screening whereas fast-growing 
tumours are likely to arise and produce symptoms in between 
screening rounds. Screen-detected tumours will therefore 
tend to be less aggressive than symptomatic tumours. Because 
of these biases it is essential to carry out population-based ran-
domised controlled trials and to compare the mortality rate in 
a whole population offered screening (including those who 
refuse to be screened and those who develop cancer after a 
negative test) with the mortality rate in a population which 
has not been offered screening. This research design has been 
applied to both breast cancer and colorectal cancer: in both 
cases there was reduction in disease-specific mortality.
A
C
0 1 2 3 4 5
x y
6 7
Time (y)
8 9 10
Tumour a
Tumour size
Tumour b
B
Detected by screening
Clinically detectable
Fatal
Figure 10.4  An illustration of lead-time and length bias. Tumour 
a is a steadily growing tumour, its progress is uninfluenced by any 
treatment. The arrows indicate the timing of tests in a screening 
programme. The horizontal lines indicate three thresholds: detect -
ability by screening; clinical detectability; and death due to tumour 
progression. Point A indicates the time at which the tumour would 
be diagnosed in a screening programme, and point B indicates the 
time at which the tumour would be diagnosed clinically, that is, in 
the absence of any screening programme. If the date of diagnosis is 
used as the start time for measuring survival, then it is clear that, in 
the absence of any effect from treatment, the screening programme 
will, artefactually, add to the survival time. The amount of ‘increased’ 
survival is equal to y – x years, in this example just over 2 years. This 
artefactual inflation of survival time is referred to as lead-time bias.
 Tumour b is a rapidly growing tumour, again its progress is unin-
fluenced by treatment. It grows so rapidly that, in the interval between 
two screening tests, it can cross both the threshold for detectability 
by screening and that of clinical detectability. It will continue to prog-
ress rapidly after diagnosis and the measured survival time will be 
short. This phenomenon, whereby those tumours that are ‘missed’ by 
the screening programme are associated with decreased survival, is 
called length time bias.
Donald F Gleason , b.1920, pathologist, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, curator of the Museum and demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described lymphadenoma in 1832.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   147 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES148
Investigation and staging
It is not sufficient simply to know what a cancer is; its site and 
extent must also be known. If it is localised, then locoregional 
treatments such as surgery and radiation therapy may be cura-
tive. If the disease is widespread then, although such local 
interventions may contribute to cure, they will be insufficient 
and systemic treatment, for example with drugs or hormones, 
will also be required. 
Staging is the process whereby the extent of disease is 
mapped out. Staging used to be a fairly crude process based 
on clinical examination, chest x-ray and the occasional ultra-
sound; nowadays it is a highly sophisticated process, heavily 
reliant on the technology of modern imaging. These techno -
logical advances bring with them the implication that patients 
staged as having localised disease in 2017 are not comparable 
to patients described in 1985 as having localised disease. Many 
of these latter patients would, had they been imaged using the 
technology of 2017, have had occult metastatic disease detected. 
This leads to the paradox of stage shift, also named, by Alvan 
Feinstein, the Will Rogers phenomenon. A change in staging 
system, or in the techniques used to provide baseline informa-
tion concerning staging, can produce ‘benefits’ to patients in 
all stages of the disease. These benefits are, however, entirely 
artefactual and depend simply upon patients in each stage being 
enriched by patients with improved prognosis. The important 
cross-check to protect against being misled by stage shift is that 
the prognosis for the entire group (i.e. all stages pooled) has not 
been changed. Table 10.3 shows a worked example of stage shift.
The UICC (International Union against Cancer) is 
responsible for the TNM (tumour, nodes, metastases) staging 
system for cancer. This system is compatible with, and relates 
to, the American Cancer Society (AJCC) system for stage 
grouping of cancer. Examples of clinicopathological staging 
systems for colon cancer are shown in Tables 10.4 and 10.5.
Therapeutic decision making and 
the multidisciplinary team
As the management of cancer becomes more complex, it 
becomes impossible for any individual clinician to have 
the intellectual and technical competence that is necessary 
to manage all patients presenting with a particular type of 
tumour. The formation of multidisciplinary teams represents 
an attempt to make certain that each and every patient with 
a particular type of cancer is managed appropriately. Teams 
should not only be multidisciplinary, they should be multi -
professional. The advantages and disadvantages of multidisci-
plinary teams are summarised in Table 10.6.
Alvan Feinstein , 1926–2001, American clinician and epidemiologist.
Will Rogers  (properly William Penn Adair Rogers), 1879–1935, American actor, humorist and wit.
 There is much confusion about the use of the terms ‘multidisciplinary’ and ‘multiprofessional’: we use ‘multidisciplinary’ to imply the presence of various medi-
cally qualified specialists (pathologists, radiologists, etc.) and ‘multiprofessional’ implies the presence of specialists from non-medical backgrounds (nurses, social 
workers, radiographers).
TABLE 10.3 Stage shift: the cure rate improves in both Stage I and Stage IV, and there is no change in cure rates for Stage 
II and Stage III, after the introduction of a new staging investigation. The overall cure rate is, however, unchanged.
Before new staging test After new staging test
Stage Distribution Cure rate Number 
cured 
Stage Distribution Cure rate Number 
cured
% ‘improvement’ 
in cure rate
I  70% 90% 63 I  50% 94% 47  4%
II  10% 80%  8 II  10% 80%  8  0%
III  10% 80%  8 III  10% 80%  8  0%
IV  10% 50%  5 IV  30% 70% 21 20%
All 100% 84 All 100% 84  0%
Summary box 10.4
The composition of the multidisciplinary team
●● Site-specialist surgeon
●● Surgical oncologist
●● Plastic and reconstructive surgeon
●● Clinical oncologist/radiotherapist
●● Medical oncologist
●● Diagnostic radiologist
●● Palliative care physician
●● Pathologist
●● Speech therapist
●● Physiotherapist
●● Prosthetist
●● Clinical nurse specialist (rehabilitation, supportive care)
●● Macmillan nurse (symptom control, palliative care)
●● Social worker/counsellor
●● Medical secretary/administrator
●● Audit and information coordinator
Principles of cancer surgery
For most solid tumours, surgery remains the definitive treat -
ment and the only realistic hope of cure. However, surgery has 
several roles in cancer treatment including diagnosis, removal 
of primary disease, removal of metastatic disease, palliation, 
prevention and reconstruction.
Diagnosis and staging
In most cases the diagnosis of cancer has been made before 
definitive surgery is carried out but occasionally a surgical 
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   148 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 149
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Vernon B Astler , surgeon, The Medical School of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Frederick A Coller , pathologist, The Medical School of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Cuthbert Esquire Dukes , 1890–1977, pathologist, St Mark’s Hospital, London, UK.
TABLE 10.4 Staging of colorectal cancer.
TNM
TX, Primary tumour cannot be assessed
T0, No evidence of primary tumour
Tis, Intraepithelial or intramucosal carcinoma
T1, Tumour invades submucosa
T2, Tumour invades muscularis propria
T3, Tumour invades through the muscularis propria into the 
subserosa or into retroperitoneal (pericolic or perirectal) tissues
a, Minimal invasion: <1 mm beyond muscularis
b, Slight invasion: 1–5 mm beyond muscularis
c, Moderate invasion: >5–15 mm beyond muscularis
d, Extensive invasion: >15 mm beyond muscularis
T4, Tumour directly invades beyond bowel a, Direct invasion into other organs or structures
b, Perforates visceral peritoneum
NX, Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0, No metastases in regional nodes
N1, Metastases in 1–3 regional lymph nodes
N2, Metastases in ≥4 regional lymph nodes
MX, Not possible to assess the presence of distant metastases
M0, No distant metastases
M1, Distant metastases present
TABLE 10.5 Relationships between staging systems for 
colorectal cancer.
TNM AJCC Dukes Modified Astler–Coller
TisN0M0 0 – –
T1N0M0 I A A
T2N0M0 I A B1
T3N0M0 IIA B B2
T4N0M0 IIB B B3
T1 or T2 N1M0 IIIA C C1
T3 or T4 N1M0 IIIB C C2, C3
Any T N2M0 IIIC C C1, C2, C3
Any T Any N M1 IV D –
procedure is required to make the diagnosis. This is particu-
larly true of patients with malignant ascites where laparoscopy 
has an important role in obtaining tissue for diagnosis. Lapa-
roscopy is also widely used for the staging of intra-abdominal 
malignancy, particularly oesophageal and gastric cancer. By 
this means it is often possible to diagnose widespread perito -
neal disease and small liver metastases that may have been 
missed on cross-sectional imaging. Laparoscopic ultrasound is 
a particularly useful adjunct for the diagnosis of intrahepatic 
metastases. Other examples where surgery is central to the 
diagnosis of cancer include orchidectomy where a patient sus-
pected of testicular cancer and lymph node biopsy in a patient 
with lymphoma. Recently, sentinel node biopsy in melanoma 
and breast cancer has attracted a great deal of interest. Here 
a radiolabelled colloid is injected into or around the primary 
TABLE 10.6 The advantages and disadvantages of the multidisciplinary team.
Advantages Disadvantages
Open debate concerning management An opportunity for rampant egotism and showing-off
Patient has advantage of many simultaneous 
opinions from many different specialities
Less confident and less articulate members of the team may not be able to express their 
views, even though their views may be extremely important
Decision-making is open, transparent and 
explicit
May degenerate into a rubber-stamping exercise in which the class solutions implied by 
guidelines are unthinkingly applied to disparate individuals
Team members educate each other Decisions are made in the absence of patients and their carers: the commodification of the 
person
A useful educational experience for trainees 
and students
Clinicians are able to avoid having to take responsibility for their decisions and their actions: 
the fig-leaf of ‘corporate responsibility’
Performance can be monitored by managers Time-consuming and resource-intensive: takes busy clinicians away from clinical practice 
for hours at a time
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   149 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES150
tumour and the regional lymph nodes are then scanned with 
a gamma camera which will pinpoint the lymph no de near-
est to the tumour. This lymph node can then be removed 
for histological diagnosis. Staging laparotomy used to be an 
important aspect of the staging of lymphomas but with more 
accurate cross-sectional imaging and the more widespread use 
of chemotherapy this practice is now largely redundant.
Removal of primary disease
Radical surgery for cancer involves removal of the primary 
tumour and as much of the surrounding tissue and lymph 
node drainage as possible in order not only to ensure local 
control but also to prevent spread of tumour through the 
lymphatics. Although the principle of local control is still 
extremely important, it is now recognised that ultra-radical 
surgery probably has little effect on the development of meta-
static disease, as evidenced by the randomised trials of radical 
versus simple mastectomy for breast cancer. It is important, 
however, to appreciate that high quality, meticulous surgery 
taking care not to disrupt the primary tumour at the time of 
excision is of the utmost importance in obtaining a cure in 
localised disease and in preventing local recurrence. 
Removal of metastatic disease
Under certain circumstances surgery for metastatic disease may 
be appropriate. This is particularly true for liver metastases  
arising from colorectal cancer where successful resection of all 
detectable disease can lead to long-term survival in about one-
third of patients. With multiple liver metastases, it may still 
be possible to take a surgical approach by using in situ ablation 
with cryotherapy or radiofrequency energy. Another situation 
in which surgery may be of value is pulmonary resection for 
isolated lung metastases, particularly from renal cell carcinoma.
Palliation
In many cases surgery is not appropriate for cure but may be 
extremely valuable for palliation. A goo d example of this is 
the patient with a symptomatic primary tumour who also has 
distant metastases. In this case, removal of the primary will 
increase the patient’s quality of life but will have little effect 
on the ultimate outcome. Other situations where surgical 
palliation is appropriate include bypass procedures such as an 
ileo-transverse anastomosis to alleviate symptoms of obstruction 
caused by an inoperable caecal cancer or bypassing an unresect-
able carcinoma at the head of the pancreas by cholecysto- or 
choledocho-jejunostomy to alleviate jaundice.
Principles underlying the non-
surgical treatment of cancer
The relationship between dose and response 
and the principle of selective toxicity
Non-surgical treatments, in common with surgery, have the 
potential to cause harm as well as benefit. Surgery is difficult 
to quantify: it is hard to describe a mastectomy in units of 
measure. Both drugs and radiation can be expressed in repro-
ducible units: milligrams, in the case of drugs; Grays (Gy), in 
the case of radiation. Thus, in contrast to surgery , it is pos -
sible to construct dose–response relationships for both the 
benefits (such as tumour cure rate) and the harms (such as 
tissue damage that is both severe and permanent) associated 
with non-surgical interventions. These curves (see Figure 
10.5) have the same general shape: they are sigmoidal. The 
practical consequence of this is that, over a relatively narrow 
dose range, we move from failure to success, from tolerabil -
ity to disaster. It is theoretically possible to use dose–response 
curves to calculate an optimal dose for treating each tumour: 
the dose is that which is associated with the maximal proba -
bility of an uncomplicated cure. Lying behind the concept of 
the probability of an uncomplicated cure is the principle of 
selective toxicity: the treatment should be selectively toxic 
to the tumour and, as far as possible, should spare the normal 
tissues from damage. It is this simple principle that under -
pins both the selection of agents used to treat cancer and the 
schedules used to deliver them. Although the graphical rep-
resentations of the relationships between, dose, response and 
the probability of uncomplicated cure are conceptually simple 
and intuitively appealing they are, in clinical practice, com-
pletely impractical. The construction of full dose–response 
curves for all possible combinations of tumours and normal 
tissues is neither feasible nor ethical. We have to rely, when it 
comes to defining optimal doses and schedules, upon incom -
plete clinical data and a knowledge of the general shape of the 
relationship between dose and response. 
Personalised (precision) medicine
Advances in molecular biology and pharmacogenomics are 
providing insights into the ways in which tumours and nor -
mal tissues might behave in response to treatment. Employ -
ing this knowledge, at the level of the individual patient, has 
become known as personalised medicine, or precision med-
icine. Table 10.7 summarises how a personalised approach, 
based on knowledge of the relative sensitivities of tumour and 
normal tissues, might modify therapeutic decisions.
TABLE 10.7 Personalised dose adjustment.
Normal tissue Tumour Dose
N N Usual dose
N S Lower dose
N R Use different Rx
S N Use different Rx
S S Lower dose
S R Use different Rx
R N Use higher dose
R S Usual dose
R R Use different Rx
N, normal sensitivity; R, resistant to treatment; Rx, treatment; 
S, increased sensitivity.
in situ  is Latin for ‘in the place’.
Louis Harold Gray , 1905–1965, Director, The British Empire Cancer Campaign Research Unit in Radiobiology, Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, Middlesex, 
UK. A Gray (Gy) is the SI unit for the absorbed dose of ionising radiation.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   150 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 151
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
General strategies in the non-surgical 
management of cancer
Curative surgery for cancer is guided by one simple principle: 
the physical removal of all identifiable disease. The principles 
underlying the non-surgical management of cancer are more 
complex. First, the spatial distribution of treatment must be 
considered: surgery and radiotherapy are local or, at best, 
locoregional treatments; drugs offer systemic therapy ( Figure 
10.6 and Table 10.8). 
Second, there is the question of the intent underlying 
the treatment. Radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or the combi-
nation of the two, may be used with curative intent. More 
usually, chemotherapy or radiotherapy is used to lower 
the risk of recurrence after primary treatment with surgery, 
so-called adjuvant therapy. Implicit within the concept of 
adjuvant therapy is the realisation that much of what is done 
100
80
Tumour control
Serious toxicity
Tumour control
Serious toxicity
Dose
0 15 30 45 60 75 90
Dose
0 15 30 45 60 75 90
60
Probability40
20
0
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
02 04 06 08 0 100
100
50
40
30
20
10
0
80
60Probability
Probability of
uncomplicated control
Probability of
uncomplicated control
40
20
0
01 02 03 04 05 0
Dose Dose
60 70 80
Figure 10.5 A schematic illustration of the relationship between dose, response and the probability of uncomplicated cure. The upper figures 
show ideal circumstances, with steep dose–response relationships for both normal tissue damage and tumour control. The lower figures show 
something more like the real world. The dose–response relationship for tumour control is flatter, because tumours are heterogeneous and, con-
sequently, the probability of uncomplicated cure is lower – even for the optimal dose (40% in the lower figure compared with 70% in the upper 
figure).
Tumour
Nodes Chemotherapy
Metastases
Surgery
Radiotherapy
Figure 10.6 Schematic diagram to show the spatial scope of can -
cer treatments. Chemotherapy is systemic, surgery is mainly a local 
treatment. Radiotherapy is usually local or locoregional, but can, as in 
radioiodine therapy for thyroid cancer, be systemic.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   151 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES152
is  unnecessary, or futile, or both. The need for adjuvant ther-
apy, to treat the risk that residual disease might be present 
after apparently curative surgery , is an acknowledgement of 
the current inability to detect or predict, with sufficient preci-
sion, the presence of residual disease. It also explains why the 
incremental benefits from adjuvant treatments are so small, 
and why the existence of these benefits can only be proven 
using randomised controlled trials including many thou -
sands of patients. As illustrated in Figures 10.7 and 10.8 ,  
TABLE 10.8 Examples of malignancies that may be cured 
without the need for surgical excision.
Malignancy Potentially curative treatment
Leukaemia Chemotherapy (+/− Radiotherapy)
Lymphoma Chemotherapy (+/− Radiotherapy)
Small cell lung cancer Chemotherapy (+/− Radiotherapy)
Tumours of childhood 
(rhabdomyosarcoma, Wilm’s 
tumour)
Chemotherapy (+/− Radiotherapy)
Early laryngeal cancer Radiotherapy 
Advanced head and neck 
cancer
Chemo-radiation (synchronous 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy)
Oesophageal cancer Chemo-radiation (synchronous 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy)
Squamous cell cancer of the 
anus
Chemo-radiation (synchronous 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy)
Advanced cancer of the 
cervix
Radiotherapy (+/− chemotherapy)
Medulloblastoma Radiotherapy (+/− chemotherapy)
Skin tumours (BCC, SCC) Radiotherapy
BCC, basal cell carcinoma; SCC, squamous cell carcinoma.
70 with no
residual cancer
5 relapse (inadequate
therapy, toxicity, etc.)
despite adjuvant
therapy
30 with
residual cancer
15 resistant to
adjuvant therapy
15 relapse despite
adjuvant therapy
15 sensitive to
adjuvant therapy
10 patients whose
residual disease was
eradicated by
adjuvant therapy
Net bene/f_its
Futile therapy 20% 90% tr eated
inappropriately
10% treated
appropriately
70%
10%
0%
Unnecessary therapy
Bene/f_icial therapy
No therapy
100 patients operated
upon for cure
Figure 10.7 The concept of adjuvant chemotherapy.
60 with no
residual cancer,
none are
treated
5 relapse (inadequate
therapy, toxicity, etc.)
despite adjuvant
therapy
40 with
‘residual cancer’,
all are treated
10 with no
residual disease
15 relapse despite
adjuvant therapy
15 resistant to
adjuvant therapy
15 sensitive to
adjuvant therapy
10 patients whose
residual disease was
eradicated by
adjuvant therapy
100 patients operated
upon for cure
Imperfect but clinically adequate test for residual disease
Net bene/f_its
Futile therapy 20% 30% tr eated
inappropriately
70% treated
appropriately
10%
10%
60%
Unnecessary therapy
Bene/f_icial therapy
No therapy Figure 10.8  The concept of adjuvant chemo -
therapy and testing for minimal residual disease.
Max Wilms , 1867–1918, Professor of Surgery, Heidelberg, Germany.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   152 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 153
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
the  current approach to the selection of patients for postsurgi-
cal adjuvant treatment is both intellectually impoverished and 
inefficient. Patients might have been far better off if, rather 
than so much time and effort being invested in attempting to 
discover new ‘cures’ for cancer, equivalent resources had been 
devoted to devising clinically useful tests to detect residual 
cancer cells persisting after apparently successful initial ther -
apy. Had this been the case, we might now be better able to 
distinguish between those patients with systemic disease at 
presentation and those with truly localised disease.
Radiotherapy
Within a month of their discovery in 1895, x-rays were being 
used to treat cancer. Despite over 100 years of use, and despite 
some outstanding clinical achievements, it is still not known 
how best to use radiation to treat cancer. In part this arises 
because it is not known precisely how radiation treatment 
affects tumours and normal tissues. Until about 30 years ago 
it was assumed that the biological effects of radiation resulted 
from radiation-induced damage to the DNA of dividing 
cells. Nowadays it is known that, although this undoubtedly 
explains some of the biological effects of radiation, it does 
not provide a full explanation. Radiation can, both directly 
and indirectly, influence gene expression: over 100 radiation- 
inducible effects on gene expression have now been described. 
These changes in gene expression are responsible for a 
considerable proportion of the biological effects of radiation 
upon tumours and normal tissues. In this sense, radiotherapy 
is a precisely targeted form of gene therapy for cancer.
The practicalities of radiation therapy are reasonably 
straightforward: define the target to treat; design the opti-
mal technical set up to provide uniform irradiation of that 
target; and choose that schedule of treatment that delivers 
radiation to that target so as to maximise the therapeutic 
ratio (Figure 10.9). Modern radiotherapy uses sophisticated 
computer programmes and algorithms to sculpt the shape 
of the treatment volume. A decade ago it was possible only 
to treat simple ge o metric forms, nowadays, with techniques 
such as intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMR T) and 
image-guided radiation therapy (IGRT), it is possible safely to 
deliver high doses to irregularly shaped target volumes. The 
ability to give high fractional doses in this way has lead to the 
development of stereotactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) in 
which a small number of fractions can be used to treat primary 
tumours, or isolated metastases, to curative dose levels.
Target de/f_inition
• Knowledge of
 • Anatomy
 • Patterns and probability of spread of disease
• Cross-sectional imaging
 • CT, MRI
• Functional imaging
 • Positron emission tomography (PET)
 • Functional MRI
Radiotherapy dose prescription
• Optimise the therapeutic ratio
 • Choose that combination of total
  dose, number of treatments
  (fractions) and overall treatment
  time so that the damage to normal
  tissues is minimised and the effects
  on tumour are maximised
Technical set-up
• Optimal use of radiation beams
 • Simulate the ‘beam’s-eye view’ of the target
  • Diagnostic quality screening and /f_ilms
  • Images digitally reconstructed from CT
           planning images
 • Three-dimensional planning
 • Careful shaping of beams (‘conformal therapy’)
 • Alter energy pro/f_ile across the beam to sculpt the 
    dose distribution to complex shapes (‘intensity 
    modulated radiation therapy’ – IMRT)
• Optimal delivery of treatment
 • Ensure day-to-day reproducibility of set up
 • Online veri/f_ication (portal imaging)
 • Reference tattoos
 • Immobilisation of patient (moulds, shells)
 • Ensure that only the target is treated
 • Eliminate effect of physiological movement
    (breathing, peristalsis): ‘image-guided
    radiation therapy’ – IGRT
 • Quality control and cross-checking procedures
    throughout the whole process from target de/f_inition
    to follow-up
Figure 10.9 The processes involved in clinical radiotherapy. CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   153 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES154
One of the main problems with assessing a therapeutic ratio 
for a given schedule of radiation is that there is a dissociation 
between the acute effects on normal tissues and the late damage. 
The acute reaction is not a reliable guide to the adverse conse-
quences of treatment in the longer term. Since the late effects 
following irradiation can take over 20 years to develop, this 
poses an obvious difficulty: if a radiation schedule is changed 
it will be known within two or three years whether or not the 
new schedule has improved tumour control; it may, however, 
be two decades before it is known, with any degree of certainty, 
whether or not the new technique is safe. Fractionated radio-
therapy selectively spares late, as opposed to immediate, effects. 
For any given total dose, the smaller the dose per treatment (the 
larger the number of fractions), the less severe the late effects 
will be. The problem is that the greater the number of fractions 
of daily treatment, the longer the overall treatment time, and 
the greater the opportunity for the tumour to proliferate during 
treatment. All fractionation is a compromise. Thirty years 
ago,  Withers defined the 4 Rs of radiotherapy; subsequently, a 
fifth ‘R’ (intrinsic radiosensitivity) has been added. The clin-
ical practice of radiation oncology operates within the limits 
defined by these 5 Rs.
Chemotherapy and biological 
therapies
Selective toxicity is the fundamental principle underlying the 
use of chemotherapy in clinical practice. The importance of 
the principle is further emphasised by the fact that, by itself, 
chemotherapy is rarely sufficient to cure cancer. Chemother-
apy is often (in effect, if not in intent) a palliative rather than 
a curative intervention. As such, its use should be influenced 
by the cardinal principle of palliative treatment: treatment 
aimed at relieving symptoms should not, itself, produce 
unacceptable symptoms. The cure of a disease should not be 
more grievous than its endurance. There are now over 120 
different drugs licensed by the US Food and Drug Adminis -
tration (FDA) for the treatment of cancer; 30 of them were 
approved between 2013 and 2015. The majority are cytotoxic 
drugs, hormonal therapies account for around 10%, and an 
increasing number have been designed to interact with spe-
cific molecular targets – so-called targeted therapies. There 
are now many more options than there were 20 years ago and, 
perhaps more importantly, lessons have been learned about 
how better to deploy resources. The classes of chemothera -
peutic drugs, their modes of action and clinical indications 
are summarized in Table 10.9.
The newer, ‘targeted’ therapies ( Tables 10.9 and 10.10) 
now available for treating cancer present particular dilem -
mas. They offer modest prolongation of survival, often with 
minimal toxicity, but at considerable financial cost. When 
compared with conventional therapies, these drugs typically 
cost over £50  000 ($94  000) per quality adjusted life-year 
gained and, when overall resources are limited, may be con -
sidered unaffordable. Table 10.11 puts into context the cost-  
effectiveness of various clinical interventions. The current 
cost of targeted therapies should not obscure their impor -
tance: they represent the first attempts to translate advances 
in molecular biology into clinical practice. The discoveries of 
the mid-twentieth century are finally bearing fruit. One fea-
ture that is emerging is the exquisite selectivity of these treat-
ments – they will only target specific subsets of tumours. The 
kinase inhibitor vemurafenib will only be effective in patients 
with melanoma whose tumours have the V600E BRAF muta-
tion; cetuximab is only effective in patients with colorectal 
cancer who have wild-type (non-mutated) ras; imatinib is 
particularly effective in patients with gastrointestinal stromal 
tumours (GIST) who have mutations in exon 11 of the Kit 
gene, patients with mutations in exon 9 may still respond to 
imatinib but will require higher doses, and patients without 
mutations in Kit are far less likely to respond to imatinib.
The next decade will see a major shift in the medical 
management of cancer – from cell killing to cellular repro -
gramming. Sophisticated manipulations of the immune 
system will also become increasingly important. As a result, 
cancer therapies are likely to become less acutely toxic, but 
the longer-term consequences of such sophisticated manipu -
lations will be both uncertain and unpredictable. 
Hubert Rodney (‘Rod’) Withers , Professor of Radiation Oncology at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Summary box 10.5
The five Rs of radiotherapy
●● Repair. If given sufficient time between fractional doses of 
radiation, cells will repair the radiation-induced damage. 
Repair half-times are typically 3–6 hours. Fractionation offers 
a means whereby we may be able to exploit any differentials 
in repair capacity between tumour cells and normal cells.
●● Reoxygenation. Hypoxic cells are, compared with well-
oxygenated cells, relatively radioresistant. Normal tissues are 
well oxygenated, tumours are often hypoxic. This is an obvious 
therapeutic disadvantage. The problem may be mitigated if a 
sequence of daily treatments is used. Cells dying as a result 
of radiation treatment will not use oxygen; this means that 
more oxygen is available to the, previously hypoxic, surviving 
cells. These cells become oxygenated and are therefore more 
susceptible to the next dose of radiation treatment.
●● Repopulation. As radiotherapy kills cancer cells within a 
tumour it may provide a stimulus to rapid proliferation of 
tumour cells. Thus, during protracted treatment, production 
of cells by the tumour may equal, or even exceed, radiation-
induced cell loss. This provides an argument for keeping the 
overall treatment time as short as possible.
●● Redistribution. The sensitivity of cells to radiation varies 
according to their position within the cell cycle. This may lead 
to a degree of synchronisation of cellular division within the 
tumour: ideally, fractions of radiotherapy would be timed to 
coincide with vulnerable phases of the cell cycle (late G2 and 
M) in a partially synchronised population of tumour cells.
●● Radiosensitivity. Experiments using low dose-rate irradiation 
demonstrate that, for reasons distinct from those summarised 
above, cells derived from tumours differ in their intrinsic 
sensitivity to radiation. There may be cells so intrinsically 
resistant to treatment that no clinically viable schedule of 
radiation therapy would be able to eliminate them. Conversely, 
some cells may be so sensitive that virtually any schedule 
would be successful – the majority of cells will lie somewhere 
between these extremes.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   154 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 155
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
TABLE 10.9 A summary of chemotherapeutic and biological agents currently used in cancer treatment.
Class Examples Putative mode of action Tumour types that may be  
sensitive to drug
Drugs which 
interfere with 
mitosis
Vincristine, 
Vinblastine
Interfere with formation of microtubules: ‘spindle 
poisons’
Lymphomas
Leukaemias
Brain tumours
Sarcomas
Taxanes: Taxol, 
Paclitaxel
Stabilise microtubules Breast cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer
Ovarian cancer
Prostate cancer
Head and neck cancer
Drugs which 
interfere with 
DNA synthesis 
(antimetabolites)
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) Inhibition of thymidylate synthase, false substrate 
for both DNA and RNA synthesis
Breast cancer
GI cancer
Capecitabine Orally active prodrug which is metabolised to 5-FU. 
Inhibition of thymidylate synthase, false substrate 
for both DNA and RNA synthesis
Breast cancer
GI cancer
Methotrexate Inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase Breast cancer
Bladder cancer
Lymphomas
Cervical cancer
6-Mercaptopurine Inhibits de novo purine synthesis Leukaemias
6-Thioguanine Inhibits de novo purine synthesis Leukaemias
Cytosine arabinoside False substrate in DNA synthesis Leukaemias
Lymphomas
Gemcitabine Inhibits ribonucleotide reductase Non-small lung cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Drugs which directly 
damage DNA or 
interfere with its 
function
Mitomycin C DNA cross-linking, preferentially active at sites of 
low oxygen tension (a bioreductive drug)
Anal cancer
Bladder cancer
Gastric cancer
Head and neck cancer
Rectal cancer
Cis-platinum Forms adducts between DNA strands and interferes 
with replication
Germ cell tumours
Ovarian cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer
Head and neck cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Carboplatin Forms adducts between DNA strands and interferes 
with replication
Germ cell tumours
Ovarian cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer
Head and neck cancer
Oxaliplatin Forms adducts between DNA strands and interferes 
with replication
Colorectal cancer
Doxorubicin Intercalates between DNA strands and interferes 
with replication
Breast cancer
Lymphomas
Sarcomas
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Cyclophosphamide A prodrug converted via hepatic cytochrome p450 
to phosphoramide mustard. Causes DNA cross links
Breast cancer
Lymphomas
Sarcomas
Ifosfamide Related to cyclophosphamide, causes DNA cross 
links
Small-cell lung cancer
Sarcomas
Bleomycin DNA strand breakage via formation of metal 
complex
Germ cell tumours
Lymphomas
Irinotecan Inhibits topoisomerase 1 and thereby prevents the 
DNA from unwinding and repairing during replication
Colorectal cancer
Etoposide Inhibits topoisomerase 2, prevents DNA from 
unwinding and repairing during replication
Small-cell lung cancer
Germ cell tumours
Lymphomas
Continued
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   155 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES156
TABLE 10.9 A summary of chemotherapeutic and biological agents currently used in cancer treatment – continued.
Class Examples Putative mode of action Tumour types that may be  
sensitive to drug
Drugs which directly 
damage DNA or 
interfere with its 
function – continued
Dacarbazine A nitrosourea which requires activation by hepatic 
cytochrome p450. Methylates guanine residues in 
DNA
Brain tumours
Sarcoma
Melanoma
Temozolomide A nitrosourea but, unlike dacarbazine, does not 
require activation by hepatic cytochrome p450. 
Methylates guanine residues in DNA
Glioblastoma multiforme
Melanoma
Actinomycin D Intercalation between DNA strands, DNA strand 
breaks
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Wilm’s tumour
Hormones Tamoxifen Blocks oestrogen receptors Breast cancer
Anastrazole An aromatase inhibitor than blocks post-
menopausal (non-ovarian) oestrogen production
Breast cancer
Exemestane An aromatase inhibitor than blocks post-
menopausal (non-ovarian) oestrogen production
Breast cancer
Letrozole An aromatase inhibitor than blocks post-
menopausal (non-ovarian) oestrogen production
Breast cancer
Leuprolide Analogue of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone, 
continued use produces downregulation of the 
anterior pituitary with consequent fall in testosterone 
levels
Prostate cancer
Goserelin Analogue of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone, 
continued use produces downregulation of the 
anterior pituitary with consequent fall in testosterone 
levels
Prostate cancer
Buserelin Analogue of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone, 
continued use produces downregulation of the 
anterior pituitary with consequent fall in testosterone 
levels
Prostate cancer
Cabergoline Blocks prolactin release, a long-acting dopamine 
agonist
Prolactin-secreting pituitary tumours
Bromocriptine Dopamine agonist, blocks stimulation of anterior 
pituitary
Pituitary tumours
Cyproterone acetate Blocks the effect of androgens Prostate cancer
Flutamide Blocks the effect of androgens Prostate cancer
Nilutamide Blocks the effect of androgens Prostate cancer
Bicalutamide Blocks the effect of androgens Prostate cancer
Inhibitors of 
receptor tyrosine 
kinases
Gefitinib Inhibits EGFR tyrosine kinase Non-small cell lung lancer
Imatinib Blocks ability of mutant BCR–ABL fusion protein to 
bind ATP
Chronic myeloid meukaemia
Inhibition of mutant c-KIT Gastrointestinal stromal tumours 
(GIST)
Erlotinib Inhibits EGFR tyrosine kinase Non-small cell lung cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Sunitinib, Sorafenib, 
Regorafenib, 
Lenvatinib
Promiscuous tyrosine kinase inhibitors (PDGFR, 
VEGFR, KIT, FLT)
Renal cancer
GIST refractory to Imatinib, 
colorectal cancer, thyroid cancer
Lapatinib Inhibits tyrosine kinases associated with EGFR and 
HER2
Breast cancer
Axitinib Inhibits tyrosine kinase associated with VEGF 
receptor
Renal cancer
Protease inhibitors Bortezomib Interferes with proteasomal degradation of 
regulatory proteins, in particular prevents NF kappa 
B from preventing apoptosis
Multiple myeloma
Differentiating 
agents
All trans-retinoic acid Induces terminal differentiation Acute promyelocytic leukaemia
Continued
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   156 25/10/2017   07:51The management of cancer 157
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
TABLE 10.9 A summary of chemotherapeutic and biological agents currently used in cancer treatment – continued.
Class Examples Putative mode of action Tumour types that may be  
sensitive to drug
Farnesyl transferase 
inhibitors
Lonafarnib Inhibition of farnesyl transferase and consequent 
inactivation of ras-dependent signal transduction
Leukaemia
Tipifarnib Inhibition of farnesyl transferase and consequent 
inactivation of ras-dependent signal transduction
Acute leukaemia
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Antibodies directed 
to cell surface 
antigens
Trastuzumab Antibody directed against HER2 receptor Breast cancer
Cetuximab Antibody directed against EGFR receptor Colorectal cancer
Head and neck cancer
Bevacizumab Antibody directed against VEGFR Colorectal cancer
Rituximab Antibody against CD20 antigen Lymphomas
Alemtuzumab Antibody against CD52 antigen Lymphomas
Inducers of 
apoptosis
Arsenic trioxide Induces apoptosis by caspase inhibition 
Inhibition of nitric oxide
Acute promyelocytic leukaemia
Immunological 
mediators
Ipilumumab Blocks cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated
protein 4 (CTLA-4) and thus releases the brakes on 
the activation of T cells
Melanoma
Pembrolizumab
Nivolumab
Block the PD-1 receptor on T lymphocytes and 
thereby prevents the inhibition of T cell activation Melanoma
MEDI6383 OX40 agonist: enhances T cell survival and 
production of cytokines
In phase I trials
Interferon alpha-2b Activates macrophages, increases the cytotoxicity 
of T lymphocytes, inhibits cell division (and viral 
replication)
Renal carcinoma
Melanoma
Hairy-cell leukaemia
Thalidomide Anti-inflammatory, stimulates T cells, anti-
angiogenic
Myeloma
HDAC inhibitors Panobinostat
Vorinostat
Acetylation of histones is associated with increased 
transcription of genes; inhibiting deacetylation can 
decrease expression of mutated or dysregulated 
genes
Cutaneous T cell lymphoma
Entinostat Melanoma
PI3K inhibitors Idelalisib Inhibit signalling via the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway 
and thereby switch off stimulus to cellular 
proliferation
B cell lymphomas
mTOR inhibitors Temsirolimus Inhibit the mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) 
a key component in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway
Renal cancer
Neuroendocrine Tumours
Everolimus Gastric cancer
MEK inhibitors Trametinib
Selumetinib
Inhibit the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway 
(MAPK)
Melanoma
RAF inhibitors Dabrafenib Inhibit the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway 
(MAPK) 
Melanoma
Vemurafenib Melanoma
CML, chronic myeloid leukaemia; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FLT3, FMS-like tyrosine kinase; GI, Gastrointestinal; HDAC, Histone deacetylase; 
mTOR , mammalian target of rapamycin; NF , nuclear factor; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; TKI, tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
Principles of combined treatment
Cytotoxic drugs are rarely used as single agents; radiotherapy 
and chemotherapy are often given together. The rationale 
behind combination, as opposed to single-agent, drug therapy 
is straightforward and is somewhat analogous to that used for 
combined antibiotic therapy: it is a strategy designed to com-
bat drug resistance. By the time of diagnosis many tumours 
will contain cancer cells that, through spontaneous mutation, 
have acquired resistance to cytotoxic drugs. Unlike antibi -
otic resistance, there is no need for previous exposure to the 
drug. Spontaneous mutation rates are high enough to allow 
the play of chance to permit the occurrence, and subsequent 
expansion, of clones of cells resistant to drugs to which they 
have never been exposed. If drugs were used as single agents 
then the further expansion of these de novo resistant subclones 
would limit cure. The problem can be mitigated by, from the 
outset of treatment, combining drugs.
There are three main principles upon which the choice of 
drugs for combination therapy is based: (1) use drugs active 
against the diseases in question; (2) use drugs with distinct 
modes of action; (3) use drugs with non-overlapping tox -
icities. By using drugs with different biological effects, for 
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   157 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES158
TABLE 10.10 Targeted treatments mapped to the 
hallmarks of cancer. It is noteworthy that those agents that 
specifically target the hallmarks of cancer are not widely 
used in clinical practice. This may simply reflect the novelty 
of these agents, but could also suggest that an approach 
based on hallmarks is of more relevance to cancer 
biologists than to oncologists.
Hallmark Drug classes Specific drugs
Resist signals that 
inhibit growth
Cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitors
Dinaciclib
Palbociclib
Ronaciclib
Seliciclib
Sustaining proliferative 
signalling
EGFR inhibitors Trastuzumab
Cetuximab
Avoid immune 
detection/destruction
Immune activators: 
antagonists of 
CTLA4, PD1, PD-L1
OX40 agonists
Ipilumumab
Pembrolizumab
Nivolumab
MEDI6383
Obtain replicative 
immortality
Telomerase inhibitors Imetelstat
Evoke inflammation Anti-inflammatory 
drugs
Aspirin
Acquire ability to invade Inhibition of Wnt/β-
catenin
Resveratrol
Acquire ability to 
disseminate and implant
IGF-1 inhibitors Linsitinib
Acquire angiogenic 
competence
Inhibitors of VEGF Ramucirumab
Bevacizumab
Aflibercept
Genomic instability PARP inhibitors Olaparib
Niraparib
Rucaparib
Veliparib
Evade apoptosis BH3 mimetics Navitoclax
Venetoclax
Deregulate cellular 
energy supply & transfer
Aerobic glycolysis 
inhibitors
Metformin
BH3, B cell lymphoma gene 2 homology region 3; CTLA4, cytotoxic T 
lymphocyte associated protein 4; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; 
IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; OX40, also known as CD134, is expressed 
on activated T cells and is a tumour necrosis factor receptor; PARP , poly ADP 
ribose polymerase; PD1, programmed death-1 receptor; PD-L1, ligand for 
programmed death-1 receptor; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor.
TABLE 10.11 Comparison of various estimates of cost-
effectiveness for selected clinical interventions. Currently, 
in the United Kingdom, interventions costing less than 
$60 000 US (2002) are considered ‘affordable’, that is, they 
fall below the WTP (‘willingness to pay’) threshold.
Intervention Cost (in 2002 US dollars) 
per quality-adjusted life-
year (QALY)
Annual CT chest screening for 
lung cancer in a 60-year-old male 
ex-smoker versus no screening
2.4 million
Laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair 
versus expectant management in 
adults with inguinal hernia
610
Stroke unit care versus usual care in 
survivors of acute stroke
1600
Lifetime vitamin D + calcium 
supplements versus no supplements 
to prevent/treat osteoporosis in 
70-year-old women
8500
Letrazole versus tamoxifen in the first-
line management of postmenopausal 
women with advanced breast cancer
120 000
Erlotinib versus usual care in the 
treatment of relapsed non-small cell 
lung cancer
104 000
Data from CEA (Tufts-New England Medical Center) register (accessed via 
http://www.tufts-nemc.org/cearegistry/ on 15 November 2006) and the UK 
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (accessed via http://www.
nice.org.uk/page.aspx?c=153 on 15 November 2006).
example by combining an antimetabolite with an agent that 
actively damages DNA, it may be possible to obtain a truly 
synergistic effect. It is inadvisable to combine drugs with sim-
ilar adverse effects: combining two highly myelosuppressive 
drugs may produce an unacceptably high risk of neutropenic 
sepsis. Where possible, combinations should be based upon a 
consideration of the toxicity profiles of the drugs concerned.
In considering the combination of radiotherapy and che -
motherapy, radiation could be considered as just another drug. 
There is, in addition to synergy and toxicity, another factor to 
consider in the combination of drugs and radiation – the con-
cept of spatial cooperation. Chemotherapy is a systemic treat-
ment, radiotherapy is not. Radiotherapy is, however, able to 
reach sites, such as the central nervous system and testis, that 
Summary box 10.6
Principles of combined treatment
●● Use effective agents
●● Use agents with different modes of action (synergy)
●● Use agents with non-overlapping toxicities
●● Consider spatial cooperation
drugs may not reach effectively. This is why , for example in 
patients treated primarily with chemotherapy for leukaemias, 
lymphomas, and small-cell lung cancer, prophylactic cranial 
irradiation may be part of the treatment protocol. 
 A synergistic effect is one in which the damage caused by giving the agents together is greater than the damage caused when the drugs are given separately.
Palliative therapy
The distinction between palliative and curative treatment is 
not always clear cut and will become increasingly blurred as 
professional and public attitudes to towards the management 
of cancer change. T wenty years ago cancer was perceived as 
a disease that was either cured or it was not; patients either 
lived or died. There was little appreciation that, for many 
patients, cancer might be a chronic disease. Nowadays, it is 
appreciated that many of the so-called curative treatments are 
simply elegant exercises in growth delay. Five-year survival is 
not necessarily tantamount to cure. With the development 
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   158 25/10/2017   07:51Further reading 159
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
of targeted therapies which regulate, rather than eradicate, 
cancer this state of affairs is likely to continue. The aim of 
treatment will be growth control rather than the extirpation 
of every last cancer cell. Patients will live with their cancers, 
perhaps for years. They will die with cancer, but not nec-
essarily of cancer. Against this background, the distinction 
between curative and palliative therapy seems somewhat 
arbitrary; nevertheless, the control and relief of symptoms is 
crucial to the successful management of patients with cancer. 
Much of the fear associated with cancer is due to past failures 
to control patients’ symptoms.
Patients fear the symptoms, distress and disruption asso -
ciated with cancer almost as much as they fear the disease 
itself. Palliative treatment has as its goal the relief of symp -
toms. Sometimes this will involve treating the underlying 
problem, as with palliative radiotherapy for bone metastases, 
sometimes it will not. Sometimes it may be inappropriate to 
treat the cancer itself, but that does not imply that there is 
nothing more to be done, it simply means that there may be 
better ways to assuage the distress and discomfort caused by 
the tumour. Palliative medicine in the twenty-first century is 
about far more than optimal control of pain: its scope is wide, 
its impact immense (Table 10.12). The most important factor 
in the successful palliative management of a patient with can-
cer is early referral. Transition between curative and palliative 
modes of management should be seamless. 
End-of-life care
End-of-life care is distinct from palliative care. Patients 
treated palliatively may survive for many years; end-of-life 
care concerns the last few months of a patient’s life. Many 
issues, such as symptom control, are common to both palli -
ative care and to end-of-life care but there are also problems 
which are specific to the sense of approaching death. These 
include a heightened sense of spiritual need, profound fear 
and the specific needs of those who are facing bereavement. 
The concept of the ‘good death’ has been embedded in many 
cultures over many centuries. Healthcare professionals deal 
with many deaths and sometimes forget that the patient who 
hopes for a good death has only one chance to get it right. 
This is why end-of-life care is worth considering in its own 
right and not as a mere appendage to palliative care. 
Summary box 10.7
Issues at the end of life
●● Appropriateness of active intervention
●● Euthanasia
●● Physician-assisted suicide
●● Living wills
●● Bereavement
●● Spirituality
●● Support to allow death at home
●● The problem of the medicalisation of death
TABLE 10.12 An outline of the domains and interventions 
included within palliative and supportive care.
Symptom 
assessment
Pain, anorexia, fatigue, dyspnoea, etc.
Treatment-related toxicity
Quality of life 
assessment
Symptom relief Drugs
Surgery
Radiotherapy
Complementary 
therapies:
Acupuncture
Homeopathy
Aromatherapy etc.
Psychosocial 
interventions
Psychological support
Relaxation techniques
Cognitive behavioural therapy
Counselling
Group therapy
Music therapy
Emotional support
Physical and 
practical support
Physiotherapy
Occupational therapy
Speech therapy
Information and 
knowledge
Cancer backup
Maggie’s centres
Nutritional support Dietary advice
Nutritional supplements
Social support Patients
Relatives and carers
Financial support Ensure uptake of entitlements
Grants from charities e.g. Cancer Relief, 
Macmillan
Spiritual support
FURTHER READING
Allison JP . Immune checkpoint blockade in cancer therapy: the 2015 
Lasker-DeBakey Clinical Medical Research Award. JAMA 2015; 
314(11): 1113–4.
Atun R, Jaffray DA, Barton MB et al. Expanding global access to radio-
therapy. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16(10): 1153–86.
Bailar JC 3rd, Gornik HL. Cancer undefeated. N Engl J Med 1997; 
336(19): 1569–74.
Doll R. The Pierre Denoix Memorial Lecture: nature and nurture in the 
control of cancer. Eur J Cancer 1999; 35(1): 16–23.
Hanahan, D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 2000; 100(1): 
57–70.
Hanahan, D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. 
Cell 2011; 144(5): 646–74.
Meara JG, Leather AJM, Hagander L et al. Global Surgery 2030: evi -
dence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic 
development. Lancet 2015; 386(9993): 569–624.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   159 25/10/2017   07:51CHAPTER 10  Principles of oncology
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES160
Solda F , Lodge M, Ashley S, Whitington A, Goldstraw P , Brada M. 
 Stereotactic radiotherapy (SABR) for the treatment of primary 
non-small cell lung cancer; systematic review and comparison with 
a surgical cohort. Radiother Oncol 2013; 109(1): 1–7.
Tomasetti C, V ogelstein B. Cancer etiology. Variation in cancer risk 
among tissues can be explained by the number of stem cell divisions. 
Science 2015; 347(6217): 78–81.
Tree AC, Khoo VS, Eeles RA et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for 
oligometastases. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14(1): e28–e37.
Weinberg RA. The biology of cancer , 2nd edn. New York, London: Gar -
land Science, 2013.
Wu S, Powers S, Zhu W , Hannun YA. Substantial contribution of extrin-
sic risk factors to cancer development. Nature 2016; 529(7584): 
43–7.
01_10-B&L27_Pt1_Ch10.indd   160 25/10/2017   07:51Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Surgical audit and research
11
Learning objectives
To understand:
• The planning and conduct of audit and research
• How to write up a project
• How to review a journal article and determine 
its value
INTRODUCTION
It is essential for a surgeon to understand the educational and 
legal framework in which he or she works. The agenda for 
medical education and both clinical and research governance 
requires surgeons to expand their skills to encompass audit 
and clinical research capabilities as useful tools for continued 
outcome measurement, service improvement and innova -
tions for the benefit of patient care. 
The aim of this chapter is to enable improvements in 
patient experience as a result of a successful audit cycle or 
by recognising the need for clinical research to determine a 
new and innovative way of treatment. It will also show how 
to keep track of personal clinical results. In addition, much 
clinical work is tedious and repetitive. Rigorous evaluation 
of even the most simple techniques and conditions can help 
to keep a surgeon stimulated throughout a long career and 
ensure good outcomes for patients, with cost benefits to the 
provider and a benefit to society as a whole.
Large numbers of clinical papers appear in the surgical lit-
erature every year. Many are flawed, and it is important that a 
surgeon has the skills to examine publications critically. The 
best way to develop a critical understanding of the research 
and audit undertaken by others is to perform studies of one’s 
own. The hardest part of audit and research is writing it up, 
and the hardest article to write is the first. This chapter con -
tains the information required to write a surgical paper and to 
evaluate the publications of others.
AUDIT OR RESEARCH?
Health professionals are expected to undertake audit and 
service evaluation as part of quality assurance. These usu-
ally involve minimal additional risk, burden or intrusion for 
participants. It is important to determine at an early stage 
whether a project is audit or research, and sometimes that 
is not as easy as it seems. The decision will determine the 
framework in which the study is undertaken. In the UK the 
Health  Research Authority (HRA) has developed a deci -
sion tool to help decide whether your project is classified 
as  research ( http://www.hra-decisiontools.org.uk/research/). 
The HRA leaflet ‘Differentiating clinical audit, service eva -
luation, research and usual practice/surveillance work in 
public health’ is also helpful (Table 11.1).
AUDIT AND SERVICE 
EVALUATION
Clinical audit is a process used by clinicians who seek to 
improve patient care. The process involves comparing aspects 
of care (structure, process and outcome) against explicit cri -
teria and defined standards. Keeping track of personal out-
come data and contributing to a clinical database ensures that 
a surgeon’s own performance is monitored continuously and 
can be compared with a national data set to ensure compli -
ance with agreed standards. It is also an essential component 
of revalidation for the individual surgeon in the UK. If the 
care falls short of the criteria chosen, some change in the way 
that care is organised should be proposed. This change may 
be required at one of many levels. It might be an individual 
who needs training or surgical equipment that needs replac-
ing. At times, the change may need to take place at the team 
level. Sometimes, the only appropriate action is change at 
an institutional level (e.g. a new antibiotic policy), regional 
level (provision of a tertiary referral centre) or, indeed, 
national level (screening programmes and health education 
 campaigns).
Essentially, two types of audit may be encountered: 
national audits (e.g. in the UK, NHS England) and local/hos-
pital audits. Both are designed to improve the quality of care. 
In an ideal world, national audits should be driven by needs 
identified in local and hospital-based audits that are closest to 
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   161 25/10/2017   07:52CHAPTER 11  Surgical audit and r esearch
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES162
TABLE 11.1 Research, audit or service evaluation? (Based on information by the National Research Ethics Service.)
Research Clinical audit Service evaluation
The attempt to derive generalisable new 
knowledge including studies that aim to 
generate hypotheses as well as studies that 
aim to test them
Designed and conducted to produce 
information to inform the delivery of best 
care
Designed and conducted solely to define or 
judge current care
Quantitative research – designed to test a 
hypothesis
Designed to answer the question: ‘Does this 
service reach a predetermined standard?’
Designed to answer the question: ‘What 
standard does this service achieve?’
Qualitative research – identifies/explores 
themes following established methodology;
Addresses clearly defined questions, aims 
and objectives
Measures against a standard Measures current service without reference 
to a standard
Quantitative research – may involve 
evaluating or comparing interventions, 
particularly new ones
Involves an intervention in use ONLY . (The 
choice of treatment is that of the clinician and 
patient according to guidance, professional 
standards and/or patient preference)
Involves an intervention in use ONLY . (The 
choice of treatment is that of the clinician and 
patient according to guidance, professional 
standards and/or patient preference)
Qualitative research – usually involves 
studying how interventions and relationships 
are experienced
Usually involves collecting data that are 
additional to those for routine care but 
may include data collected routinely. May 
involve treatments, samples or investigations 
additional to routine care
Usually involves analysis of existing data 
but may include administration of simple 
interviews or questionnaires
Usually involves analysis of existing data 
but may include administration of simple 
interviews or questionnaires
Quantitative research – study design may 
involve allocating patients to intervention 
groups
No allocation to interventions: the health 
professional and patient have chosen 
intervention before clinical audit
No allocation to intervention: the health 
professional and patient have chosen 
intervention before service evaluation
Qualitative research uses a clearly defined 
sampling framework underpinned by 
conceptual or theoretical justifications
May involve randomisation No randomisation No randomisation
Although any of the above may raise ethical issues, under current guidance, research requires ethics committee review, whereas audit and service evaluation do 
not. Advice (in the UK) from National Research Ethics Service (http://www.nres.npsa.nhs.uk/).
the patient. For example, hospital topics are often identified 
at the departmental morbidity and mortality meetings, where 
issues related to patient care are discussed. The reporting pro-
cess might identify a possible national issue, and a national 
audit could be designed to be completed by the local audit 
department and surgical teams. The Vascular Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland is working continually with  all its mem -
bers in an evaluation of process and outcomes for major vas -
cular operations. This is driven through the Vascular Society 
Quality Improvement Programme (VSQIP), where recently, 
individual surgeon outcomes for elective aortic aneurysm and 
carotid surgery are recorded (www.vsqip.org.uk). Audits are 
formal processes that require a structure. The following steps 
are essential to establish an audit cycle:
1 define the audit question in a multidisciplinary team;
2 identify the body of evidence and current standards;
3 design the audit to measure performance against agreed 
standards based on strong evidence. Seek appropriate 
advice (local audit department in UK) and ensure institu -
tions have agreed to undertake the audit;
4 measure over an agreed interval;
5 analyse results and compare performance against agreed 
standards;
6 undertake gap analysis:
a. if all standards are reached, reaudit after an agreed interval;
b. if there is a need for improvement, identify possible 
interventions such as training, and agree with the in -
volved parties;
7 reaudit.
Research study
During the design of the audit project, it might become appar-
ent that there is a limited body of evidence available. In this 
case, the study should be structured as a research proposal. 
Research is designed to generate new knowledge and might 
involve testing a new treatment or regimen.
IDENTIFYING A RESEARCH 
TOPIC
Once an idea has been formed, or a question asked, it needs 
to be transformed into a hypothesis. It is helpful to approach 
surgeons who regularly publish articles and who have a special 
interest in the surgical area being considered. As ideas are sug-
gested, it is important to consider whether the question posed 
really matters, and to spend some time refining the question 
(hypothesis) as this is probably the most important part of the 
process. Choosing the wrong topic at this stage can lead to 
many wasted hours. Once a topic has been identified, it is also 
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   162 25/10/2017   07:52Project design 163
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
important not rush into the study. The worst possible outcome 
is to find at the end of a long arduous study that the research 
has already been done or that the chosen methodology did not 
support investigation of the primary/secondary outcomes.
The first port of call for information is the internet (with 
assistance as needed from a  medical librarian). Current arti-
cles about the proposed research should be retrieved; review 
articles and meta-analyses can be particularly helpful. At this 
stage, most clinicians go to an electronic library and perform 
a database search. It is very important to learn how to do an 
accurate and efficient search as early as possible. Details are 
beyond the scope of this chapter, but most librarians will be of 
assistance. Current techniques involve searching on Medline 
or other collected databases such as Google Scholar, but as 
electronic information advances and the world wide web 
(www) becomes more user friendly, new search strategies may 
emerge. Collections of reviews are becoming available – the 
Cochrane Collaboration brings together evidence-based medi-
cal information and is available in most libraries (Table 11.2).
Once information on the subject has been obtained and 
the relevent literature identified, it is important that these 
are carefully perused. It is not sufficient to read the abstract 
on Medline! If the proposed project is still looking good after 
some thorough reading, it is worth further discussion with 
colleagues who have written a paper on a similar subject. All 
scientists are flattered by interest in their work. It is important 
to ensure the cooperation of any other specialties or clinicians 
who will be involved in the study and to agree on the sharing 
of responsibility for the trial. This will help to prevent disa -
greement about who takes the credit once a study is ready for 
presentation and publication. 
It is also helpful to seek support from specific networks 
set up to support health research. In the UK, the National 
Institute for Health Research Collaboration for Leadership in 
Applied Health Research and Care (NIHR CLAHRC) works 
with partner organisations, including the NHS, local autho-
rities and universities, to conduct applied health research and 
implement research evidence, to improve health and health-
care. There are also a number of training courses in research 
methodology and application.
Once the forgoing has been completed, it should be poss -
ible to start to plan the research project.
PROJECT DESIGN
During the first phase, it is important to keep in the mind 
some important questions (Summary box 11.1).
TABLE 11.2 Electronic information sites.
Database Producer Coverage Availability
Pubmed 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed 
US National Library of Medicine (NLM) PubMed comprises more than 25 million 
citations for biomedical literature from 
MEDLINE, life science journals, and online 
books. 
Citations may include links to full-text content 
from PubMed Central and publisher web sites
Internet
Pubmed Central 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/
U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) free 
digital archive
Full-text archive of biomedical and life 
sciences journal literature at the U.S. National 
Institutes of Health’s National Library of 
Medicine
Internet
EMBASE 
http://embase.com/
EMBASE Providing extensive  coverage of peer-
reviewed biomedical literature, along 
with indexing, searching and information 
management tools,
Subscription
CINAHL
http://www.ebscohost.com/
cinahl/ 
CINAHL is owned and operated by EBSCO 
Publishing 
Cumulated index to nursing and allied health 
literature 
Subscription
Cochrane Collaboration and 
Library 
http://uk.cochrane.org/
Global independent network of 
researchers, professionals, patients, carers 
and people interested in health to produce 
credible, accessible health information that 
is free from commercial sponsorship and 
other conflicts of interest  
Preparing, updating and promoting the 
accessibility of Cochrane Reviews published 
online in The Cochrane Library
Internet 
Summary box 11.1
Questions to answer before undertaking research
●● Why do the study?
●● Will it answer a useful question?
●● Is it practical?
●● Can it be accomplished in the available time and with the 
available resources?
●● Will the project benefit from collaboration to increase numbers 
or make best use of high tech equipment?
●● What findings are expected?
●● What are the research governance requirments?
●● What are the ethical issues?
●● What impact could it have?
 The Cochrane Collaboration was formed in 1993 and named after Archibald Leman Cochrane, 1909–1988, Director of the Medical Research Council Epidemi-
ology Unit, Cardiff, and later the first President of the Faculty of Community Medicine (now the Faculty of Public Health) of the Royal College of Physicians of 
London, UK.
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   163 25/10/2017   07:52CHAPTER 11  Surgical audit and r esearch
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES164
Time spent carefully designing a potential project is never 
wasted. There are many different types of scientific study. The 
design used  depends on the study. A randomised controlled 
trial (RCT) is  regarded as one of the best methods of scienti-
fic research; however, much surgical practice has been advan-
ced through other different types of study such as those listed 
in Table 11.3. For example, testing a new type of operation 
often requires a pilot study to assess feasibility, which is then 
followed by a formal RCT. The introduction of innovative 
surgical techniques may require novel handling, and reco -
mendations have been made by the IDEAL collaborators (see 
Further reading).
Research can be qualitative or quantitative. Quantitative 
research allows hard facts to speak for themselves. A medi -
cal condition is analysed systematically using hard, objective 
endpoints such as death or major complications, which 
should be clearly defined. For example, surgical complications 
are now classified using the Dindo–Clavien system. In quali-
tative research, data often come from patient narratives, and 
the psychosocial impact of the disease and its treatment are 
analysed; for example, narratives from patients with breast 
cancer. These kinds of data are often collected using quality-  
of-life measurements. A variety of different quality-of-life 
questionnaires exist to suit several different clinical situations. 
Much of the best research is both quantitative and qualita -
tive. Recently, the importance of outomes from the patient’s 
perspective has been emphasised; Patient Reported Outcome 
Measures (PROMs) are now an important component of the 
evaluation of surgical procedures.
Research should be focused according to institutional, 
national and international strategies. As finances for health 
care are always limited, it is important to consider including a 
cost–benefit analysis in any major area of research so that the 
value of the proposed intervention or change in treatment 
can be assessed. The National Institute for Health Research 
(NIHR) provides the framework through which the Depart -
ment of Health maintains and manages the research, research 
staff and research infrastructure of the NHS in England. 
Sample size
Calculating the number of patients required to perform a 
satisfactory investigation is an  important prerequisite to any 
study. An incorrect sample size is probably the most frequent 
reason for research being invalid. Often, surgical trials are 
marred by the possibility of error caused by the inadequate 
number of patients investigated.
 ● Type I error . Benefit is perceived when really there is 
none (false positive).
 ● Type II error. Benefit is missed when it was there to be 
found (false negative).
Calculating the number of patients required in the study 
can overcome this bias. Unfortunately, it often reveals that a 
larger number of patients is needed for the study than can pos-
sibly be obtained from available resources. This often means 
expanding enrolment by using a multicentre study. There is 
no point in embarking on a trial if it will never be possible to 
recruit an adequate population to answer the research ques -
tion. More patients will need to be randomised than the final 
sample size to take into account patients who die, drop out or 
are lost to follow-up.
The following is an example calculation for a study to 
recruit patients into two groups. In order to calculate a sam-
ple size, it is common practice to set the level of power for the 
study at 80% with a 5% significance level. This means that, 
if there is a difference between study groups, there is an 80% 
chance of detecting it. Based on previous studies, realistic 
expectations of differences between groups should be used to 
calculate the sample size. The formula below uses the figures 
of a reduction in event rate from 30% to 10% (e.g. a new 
treatment expected to reduce the complication rate such as 
wound infection from 30% = r to 10% = s).
8 × [r(100 − r) + s(100 − s)]
(r − s)2
e.g. 8 × [30(100 − 30) + 10(100 − 10)]
(30 − 10)2
= 60 needed in each group
Eliminating bias
It is important to imagine how a study could be invalidated by 
thinking of things that could go wrong. One way to eliminate 
any bias inherent in the data collection is to have observers 
or recorders who do not know which treatment has been used 
(blinded observer). It might also be possible to ensure that the 
patient is unaware of the treatment allocation (single blind). 
In the best randomised studies, neither patient nor researcher 
is aware of which therapy has been used until after the study 
TABLE 11.3 Types of study.
Type of study Definition
Observational Evaluation of condition or treatment in a 
defined population
Retrospective: analysing past events
Prospective: collecting data 
contemporaneously
Case–control Series of patients with a particular disease 
or condition compared with matched control 
patients
Cross-sectional Measurements made on a single occasion, not 
looking at the whole population but selecting a 
small similar group and expanding results
Longitudinal Measurements are taken over a period of 
time, not looking at the whole population but 
selecting a small similar group and expanding 
results
Experimental Two or more treatments are compared. 
Allocation to treatment groups is under the 
control of the researcher
Randomised Two randomly allocated treatments
Randomised 
controlled
Includes a control group with standard 
treatment
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   164 25/10/2017   07:52Project design 165
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
has finished (double blind). Randomised trials are essential 
for testing new drugs. In practice, however, in some surgical 
trials, randomisation may not be possible or ethical.
Study protocol
Now that the question to pose has been decided, and it has 
been checked that sufficient patients should be available to 
enrol into the study, it is time to prepare the detail of the 
trial. At this stage, a study protocol should be constructed to 
define the research strategy. It should contain a paragraph on 
the background of the proposed study, the aims and objec -
tives, a clear methodology, definitions of population and sam-
ple sizes and methods of proposed analysis. It should include 
the patient numbers, inclusion and exclusion criteria and the 
timescale for the work. It is useful to construct a flow dia -
gram giving a clear summary of the research protocol and its 
requirements (Figure 11.1). It is helpful to imagine the paper 
that will be written about the study, before it is performed. 
This may prevent errors in data collection.
When a study is planned, sufficient time should be reser -
ved at the beginning for fund-raising and obtaining ethical, 
regulatory and or other  approvals (e.g. HRA). Time for data 
analysis and preparation of publication needs to be included 
in funding applications. The cost of any non-routine investi -
gations and extra treatments should be identified and cove-
red by the research grant in line with national guidance (in 
the UK, the Attributing the costs of health and social care 
Research and Development (AcoRD) guidance). It is essen -
tial to discuss this with institutional leads well in advance of 
the grant submission date to ensure appropriate authorisation 
from institutions.
A data collection form should be designed or a computer 
collection package developed. If data are collected on com -
puter, appropriate safeguards for privacy, confidentiality and 
data quality will be necessary to comply with legislation. At 
this stage it is important to consider any validation requi -
rements and needs for open access either in a recognised 
archive (e.g. the UK Data Archive) or an institutional repo -
sitory. Any form of data collection needs to be quality assured. 
The quality assurance process will include training, Standard 
Operating Procedures as well as monitoring and checking a 
certain sample of the data. At the end of data collection and 
analysis, a final data base with all data should be locked and 
kept for future reference in a safe location.  A data archiving 
policy with a nominated data custodian should be in place.  
Research is no longer confined by institutional or even 
geographical boundaries. Communication by the internet can 
be a valid way to co-ordinate internalional research. The Glo-
bal Surgical Outcomes Collaboration (www.globalsurg.org) is 
a group of young surgeons performing collaborative research 
with internet data collection. 
Some publishers require registration of a study at the time 
of study set up on a publically available database (e.g. ISR -
CTN). It is becoming increasingly popular to consider publi -
cation of a protocol paper. 
Regulatory framework
In the UK, the implementation of the research governance 
framework by the Department of Health, or its planned suc -
cessor UK Policy Framework for Health and Social Care, 
provides a framwork that enhances the integrity of the study 
and includes requirements for sponsorship by an institution to 
ensure the following: peer review, independent ethics review, 
compliance with data protection principles, financial probity, 
dissemination and management of intellectual property.  
Sponsorship is defined by the HRA as the individual, 
company, institution or organisation that takes on ultimate 
responsibility for the initiation, management (or arranging the 
initiation and management) of and/or financing (or arranging 
the financing) for that research. The sponsor takes primary 
responsibility for ensuring that the design of the study meets 
appropriate standards and that arrangements are in place to 
ensure appropriate conduct and reporting. http://www.hra.
nhs.uk/resources/before-you-apply/roles-and-  responsibilties/
sponsor/ 
Peer review
Once the  protocol is finalised, formal peer review is needed. 
In the UK, evidence of peer review will be needed before sub-
mitting an application to a research ethics committee and for 
HRA  approval. 
 ● If the research is part of a university course, the university 
(usually the student supervisor) should undertake this review.
 ● Surgeons working for the NHS can arrange their own peer 
review by experts who are not connected with the study. 
ESCHAR trial
Pure venous ulcers (ABPI > 0.85)
4 weeks' duration, current or within last 6 months
Colour venous duplex
Super/f_icial venous disease
Consent
Quality-of-life score
Photoplethysmography
Randomisation
Group A Group B
Mixed deep and
super/f_icial disease
Consent
Quality-of-life score
Photoplethysmography
Randomisation
Group A Group B
Group A: compression bandaging
Group B: compression bandaging + surgery
Outcomes
   Ulcer healing and recurrence rates
   Venous function tests
   Quality of life and cost–bene/f_it
Figure 11.1 ESCHAR trial: completed in Gloucestershire, UK (Gohel 
MS et al. British Journal of Surgery 2005; 92: 291–7. my self  British 
Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Permission is granted by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd on behalf of the BJSS Ltd.) ABPI, ankle–brachial pressure 
index.
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   165 25/10/2017   07:52CHAPTER 11  Surgical audit and r esearch
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES166
Alternatively, most Research and Development Support  
Units (NHS) will give guidance through the review process.
 ● Many funders of research will undertake their own inde -
pendent peer review. There is usually feedback from this 
process that can provide valuable advice about the study.
Ethics
In the first instance, common sense is the best guide to 
whether or not a study is ethical. It is still important to seek 
advice from an independent research ethics committee when-
ever research is contemplated.  
In the UK the requirement is that a NHS Research Ethics 
Committee (NHS REC) provides an independent ethi-
cal review of all health and social care research if it invol -
ves patients and/or carers. The Government arrangment for 
Research Ethics Commitees (GafREC) provide detailed gui-
dance about NHS REC review requirements. The application 
for NHS REC review should be made using the Integrated 
Research Administraion System (IRAS). IRAS is a single 
system for applying for the permissions and approvals for 
health and social care/community care research in the UK. It 
enables entry of information about the project once instead of 
duplicating information in separate application forms. IRAS 
captures the information needed for the relevant approvals 
from the following review bodies:
 ● Administration of Radioactive Substances Advisory 
Committee (ARSAC);
 ● Confidentiality Advisory Group (CAG);
 ● Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC);
 ● Health Research Authority (HRA) for projects seeking 
HRA approval;
 ● Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency 
(MHRA);
 ● NHS/HSC R&D offices;
 ● NHS/HSC Research Ethics Committees;
 ● National Offender Management Service (NOMS);
 ● Social Care Research Ethics Committee.
Once all the relevant forms and associated study docu -
mentation have been completed, guidance provided by the 
HRA and the Research Ethics Service should be followed 
for submission of the request for ethical review and HRA 
approval. If the study does not require review by an NHS 
REC, the need for an independent ethical review should still 
be considered. Universities have developed their own ethi-
cal review infrastructure and this will be institute specific 
and location specific. For collaborative research, local ethical 
review should be obtained where possible, and developing a 
local ethics infrastructure should be considered if it does not 
already exist. Duplicaton of ethical review should be avoided.  
Ethics committees prefer to see fully developed trial pro -
tocols but it is often possible to get some preliminary advice 
from the NHS REC Manager. Ethics committee forms may 
seem long and detailed, but it is important that these are filled 
in correctly and it helps to prepare the investigators for all 
practical aspects of the project. All dealings with ethics com-
mittees should be intelligent and courteous. It is important 
to attend the meeting at which the study will be discussed, 
if invited, as it provides a forum for direct communication in 
relation to the study. It can save time as possible concerns of 
the ethics committee can be addressed at the time, avoiding 
lengthy correspondence.
Regulatory approvals
In the case of interventional clinical or device trials, the 
European Union Clinical Trial Directives apply , which are 
regulated by the Medicines and Health Care products Regu -
latory Agency (MHRA) in the UK. A clinical trial should be 
registered with the European Clinical Trials Database before 
applying to the MHRA for a Clinical Trial Authorisation 
via the common European submission portal. This can be a 
complicated and trying process, and  support should be sought 
from the investigators’ employing institution. Editors of the 
major surgical journals now agree that all clinical trials should 
have been registered before an article relating to a trial can 
be published. 
All studies undertaken with NHS patients and/or carers 
will need HRA approval and confrmation of capacity and 
capability from NHS sites. Studies involving animals require 
approval from statutory licensing authorities. Reporting on 
animal research should employ ARRIVE guidelines (Animal 
Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments).
Research integrity
The principles and responsibilities set out in the Singapore 
Statement on Research Integrity in 2010 was the first interna-
tional effort to encourage the development of unified policies, 
guidelines and codes of conduct, with the long-term goal of 
fostering greater integrity in research worldwide. The Euro -
pean Co de of Conduct followed and in 2012 Universities 
UK, in collaboration with major funders of research, devel-
oped ‘the Concordat to support research integrity’, which sets 
out key commitments to ensure a high standard in research. 
All highlight the principles and professional responsibilities 
of researchers and research instituions that are fundamental 
to the integrity of research wherever it is undertaken. These 
centre around:
 ● honesty in all aspects of research;
 ● accountability and transparentcy in the conduct of 
research;
 ● professional courtesy and fairness in working with others;
 ● good stewardship of research. 
A study should not under any circumstances commence 
until the correct approval has been granted and compliance 
with the principles of research integrity is ensured. Any chal-
lenge to the integrity of research can be time-consuming and 
career-limiting.  
STATISTICAL ANAL YSIS 
Both audit and research commonly require statistical analy -
sis. Many surgeons find the statistical analysis of a project the 
most difficult part. It is also the most commonly criticised part 
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   166 25/10/2017   07:52Analysing a scientific article 167
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
of papers written by clinicians. There are many useful books 
about statistics that can be consulted (see Further reading); if 
in any doubt, a statistician will be pleased to give assistance. 
Statisticians like to be consulted before research or audit has 
been conducted rather than being presented with the data at 
the end; they often give helpful advice over study design and 
can be an important part of the project team.
The following terms are frequently used when summari-
sing statistical data:
 ● Mean: the result of dividing the total by the number of 
observations (the average);
 ● Median: the middle value with equal numbers of obser -
vations above and below – used for numerical or ranked 
data;
 ● Mode: the value with the highest frequency observed – 
used for nominal data collection;
 ● Range: the largest to the smallest value.
The most important decision for analysis is whether the 
distribution of the data is normal (i.e. parametric or non-  
parametric). Normally, distributed data have a symmetrical, 
bell-shaped curve, and the mean, median and mo de all lie at 
the same value. The type of data collected determines which 
statistical test should be used.
1 Numerical and normally distributed (e.g. blood pressure) – 
use unpaired t-test to compare two groups or paired t-test 
to assess whether a variable has changed between two time 
points.
2 Numerical but not normally distributed (e.g. tumour size) 
– use Mann–Whitney U-test to compare two groups or a 
Wilcoxon signed rank test to assess whether a variable has 
increased/stayed the same/decreased between two time 
points.
3 Categorical (e.g. admitted or not admitted to an inten-
sive care unit) – can use chi-squared test to compare two 
groups.
(Note: the use of these and any other statistical tests may 
benefit from professional advice.)
Confidence intervals are the best guide to the possible 
range in which the true differences are likely to lie. A con -
fidence interval that includes zero usually implies a lack of 
statistical significance.
Scientists usually employ probability (P-values) to 
describe statistical chance. A P-value <0.05 is commonly 
taken to imply a true difference. It is important not to forget 
that P = 0.05 simply means there is only a 1:20 chance that 
the differences between the variables would have happened 
by chance when in fact there is  no real difference. If enough 
variables are examined in any study, significant differences 
will occur simply by chance. Trials with multiple endpoints 
or variables require more sophisticated analysis to determine 
the significance of individual risk factors. Univariable or 
multivariable logistic regression analysis techniques may be 
appropriate.
Statistics simply deal with the chance that observations 
between populations are different and should be treated with 
caution. Clinical results should show clear differences. If sta -
tistics are required to demonstrate differences between results, 
it is possible that they are unlikely to have major clinical 
significance.
Computer software packages 
available
Statistical computer packages offer a quick way of analysing 
descriptive statistics such as mean, median and range, as well 
as the most commonly used statistical tests such as the chi-
squared test. Various packages are available commercially and 
are useful tools in data analysis.
ANAL YSING A SCIENTIFIC 
ARTICLE
The simplest way to analyse an article from a scientific jour -
nal is to look at the checklist of requirements for good scien -
tific research. A group of scientists and editors developed the 
CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) 
statement to improve the quality of reporting of RCTs. Look-
ing in detail at the study design is often the best way of decid-
ing whether a trial is any good. The CONSORT document 
includes a checklist for the conduct of good randomised tri -
als (Table 11.4). Often clinicians overlook biases that others 
TABLE 11.4 Checklist for authors.
Heading Sub-heading Descriptor
Title Identify as randomised trial
Abstract Structured format
Introduction Prospectively defined 
hypotheses, clinical objective
Methods Protocol Study population
Intervention, timing
Primary and secondary 
outcome
Statistical rationale
Stopping rules
Assignment Unit of randomisation
Method: allocation schedule
Masking (blinding)
Results Participant flow 
and follow-up
Trial profile, flow diagram
Analysis Estimated effect of 
intervention
Summary data with 
appropriate inferential 
statistics
Protocol deviation
Comment Specific interpretation of study
Sources of bias
External validity
General interpretation
From the CONSORT statement: Journal of the American Medical Association 
1996; 276: 637–639.
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   167 25/10/2017   07:52CHAPTER 11  Surgical audit and r esearch
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES168
find obvious to detect, which can have a profound influence 
on the outcome of any study. Even the randomised design 
does not always guarantee quality , and a core component of 
systematic review is the grading of trial quality; several scor -
ing systems have been developed (e.g. Jadad Score). Recent 
guidelines have been published formalising the methods of 
systematic review and meta-analysis (PRISMA guidelines), 
and also many other types of  article. These can be found in 
the instructions to authors of most surgical journals, which 
will now only accept articles that follow the rules.
PRESENTING AND PUBLISHING 
AN ARTICLE
There is no point in conducting a research or audit project 
and then leaving the results unreported. Even when results 
are negative, they are worth distributing; no project if prop -
erly conducted is worthless. Under-reporting of negative out-
comes causes a systematic bias in the literature in favour of 
positive trials. Most studies do not provide dramatic results, 
and few surgeons publish seminal articles.
The key to both presentation and publication is to decide 
on the message and then aim for an appropriate forum. Big 
important randomised studies or national audits merit pre -
sentation at national meetings and publication in interna -
tional journals. Small observational studies and audits are 
more often accepted for presentation at regional or hospital 
meetings and for publication in smaller specialist journals. 
Help and advice from clinicians familiar with presentation 
and publication are invaluable at this stage. The most impor-
tant piece of advice is to follow accurately the instructions for 
journal submission. Most international meetings will accept 
presentations eagerly (especially by poster) as this increases 
the attendance at a conference.
Most surgeons publish research in peer-reviewed jour -
nals. The work that is submitted is checked anonymously by 
other surgeons before publication. If in doubt about whether 
to submit to a journal, many editors will give advice about 
the suitability of an article for submission to their journal. It 
is usually free to publish in surgical journals, since the cost 
of refereeing and editing is born by the journal subscriber. 
A second model of publication is becoming more prevalent: 
open access, author pays. This ensures all research is visible to 
anyone, by pushing the costs of the editorial process onto the 
study budget. It may well become standard in future.
Convention dictates that articles are submitted in 
IMRAD form – introduction, methods, results and discus -
sion. Increasingly, electronic publication and the Internet 
may change the face of scientific publication and, in the next 
decade, these restrictions on style may disappear. For now, the 
IMRAD format remains inviolable. The length of an article is 
important: a paper should be as long as the size of the message. 
Readers of big randomised multicentre trials wish to know as 
much detail about the study as possible; reports on small nega-
tive trials should be brief.
 ● Introduction. This should always be short. A brief back-
ground of the study should be presented and then the aims 
of the trial or audit outlined.
 ● Methods. The methodology and study design should be 
given in detail. It is important to own up to any biases. 
Any new techniques or investigations should be detailed 
in full; if they are common practice or have been described 
elsewhere, this should be referenced instead of described.
 ● Results. Results are almost always best shown diagram -
matically using tables and figures if possible. Results shown 
in the form of a diagram need not then be duplicated in 
the text.
 ● Discussion. It is important not to repeat the introduction 
or reiterate the results in this section. The study should 
be interpreted intelligently and any suggestions for future 
studies or changes in management should be made. It is 
important not to indulge in flights of fantasy or wild imag-
ination about future possibilities; most journal editors will 
delete these. Recently, a standard format for the discussion 
section has been promoted, and journals such as the British 
Medical Journal are keen that authors use it.
 ● References. This section should include all relevant 
papers recording previous studies on the subject in ques-
tion. The number should reflect the size of the message 
and the importance of the work. The reference section 
does not usually have to be exhaustive, but should include 
up-to-date articles. Remember to present the references in 
the style of the journal of submission.
EVIDENCE-BASED SURGERY
Surgical practice has been considered an art: ask 50 surgeons 
how to manage a patient and you will probably get 50 dif -
ferent answers. There is so much clinical information avail-
able that no surgeon can know it all. Evidence-based surgery 
is a move to find the best ways of managing patients using 
clinical evidence from collected studies. It was estimated that 
sufficient evidence to justify routine myocardial thrombolysis 
for heart attacks was available years before the randomised 
clinical studies that finally made it clinically acceptable. No 
one had gathered all the available information together. Cen-
tres such as the Cochrane Collaboration have been collecting 
randomised trials and reviews to provide up-to-date informa -
tion for clinicians. The Cochrane Library presently includes 
a database of systematic reviews, reviews of surgical effective-
ness and a register of controlled trials. The BJS has been col-
lecting surgical randomised trials on its website archive for 
10 years (www.bjs.co.uk). There are now almost 1500 anno-
tated references that can be a valuable resource for scientific 
authors. As evidence accumulates, it is expected that this 
will gradually smooth out the differences between clinicians 
as the best way of managing patients becomes more obvi-
ous. Collecting published evidence together and analysing 
it often requires reviews of multiple randomised trials. These 
meta-analyses involve complex statistical analyses designed 
to interpret multiple findings and synthesise the results of 
multiple studies. 
FURTHER READING
Altman DG. Statistics with confidence. London: BMJ Publishing Group, 
2002.
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   168 25/10/2017   07:52On-line resour ces 169
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Brown RA, Swanson Beck J. Medical statistics on personal computers. 
Plymouth: BMJ Publishing Group, 1994.
Dindo D, Demartines N, Clavien P-A. Classification of surgical compli-
cations: a new proposal with evaluation of a cohort of 6336 patients 
and the results of a survey. Ann Surg 2004; 240: 205–213.
Greenhalgh T. How to read a paper: the basics of evidence-based medicine. 
London; BMJ Publishing Group, 2010.
Institute of Medicine. Guidelines for clinical practice: from development to 
use. Washington DC; National Academic Press, 1992.
Kelson M. Promoting patient involvement in clinical audit. London; London 
College of Health and the Clinical Outcomes Group, 1998.
Kilkenny C, Browne WJ, Cuthill IC et al. (2010) Improving bioscience 
research reporting: the ARRIVE guidelines for reporting animal re -
search. PloS Biol 2010; 8(6): e1000412.
Kirkwood BR Essentials of medical statistics , 2nd edn. Oxford; Blackwell 
Publishing, 2003.
Lyratzopoulos G, Patrick H, Campbell WB. Registers needed for new 
interventional procedures. Lancet 2008; 371:1734–1736.
McCulloch P , Altman DG, Campbell WB et al. No surgical innovation 
without evaluation: the IDEAL recommendations. Lancet 2009; 
374(9695): 1105–1112.
Moher D, Cooke DJ, Eastwood S et al. Improving the quality of reports of 
meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials: the QUORUM state-
ment. Lancet 2009; 354: 1896–900.
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J et al., The PRISMA Group.   (2009) 
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: 
the PRISMA Statement. Open Med 2009;  3: 123–130.
Morrell C, Harvey G. The clinical audit handbook. London; Baillière Tin-
dall, 1999.
Schein M, Farndon JR, Fingerhut A. A Surgeon’s Guide to Writing and 
Publishing. Kemberton; TFM Publishing, 2001.
Smith R. The trouble with medical journals. London; RSM Press Ltd, 2006.
Swinscow TDV . Statistics at square one, 9th edn. London; BMJ Publishing 
Group, 1996.
Walshe K. Adverse events in health care: issues in measurement. Qual 
Health Care 2000; 9: 47–52.
Whitman B, Ginham R, Perkins M et al. The Human Tissue Act 2004. 
Reflections on recent changes of regulatory affairs in the United 
Kingdom. J Res Admin 2008; 2: 91–99.
ON-LINE RESOURCES
AcoRD: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-on-
attributing-the-costs-of-health-and-social-care-research UK
CLAHRC: http://www.clahrcpp.co.uk/#!clahrcs/cjg9
Clinical Evidence: www.clinicalevidence.com 
Cochrane Library: www.cochrane.org/index.htm 
Concordat to support research integrity: http://www.
universitiesuk.ac.uk/highereducation/Documents/2012/
TheConcordatToSupportResearchIntegrity.pdf
Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials: http://www.consort-
statement.org/consort-statement/
Data Archive: http://www.data-archive.ac.uk/
Eudract database: https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/
European Code of Conduct: http://www.esf.org/fileadmin/Public_
documents/Publications/Code_Conduct_ResearchIntegrity.pdf 
GafREC: http://www.hra.nhs.uk/resources/research-legislation-
and-governance/governance-arrangements-for-research-ethics-
committees/ 
Health Research Authority http://www.hra.nhs.uk/ 
Integrated Research Administration System: https://www.
myresearchproject.org.uk/SignIn.aspx 
ISRCTN: http://www.isrctn.com/ 
MHRA: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/medicines-and-
healthcare-products-regulatory-agency/services-information 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): www.nice.
org.uk
NHS England audits: https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/qual-clin-
lead/clinaudit/ 
Nice audit information: https://www.nice.org.uk/about/what-we-do/
into-practice/audit-and-service-improvement
Research Ethics Service: http://www.hra.nhs.uk/about-the-hra/our-
committees/res/
Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network (SIGN): www.sign.ac.uk
Singapore Statment: http://www.singaporestatement.org/index.html
Vascular Society: http://www.vascularsociety.org.uk/
01_11-B&L27_Pt1_Ch11.indd   169 25/10/2017   07:52Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The importance of autonomy in good surgical practice
 • The moral and legal boundaries and practical difficulties 
of informed consent
 • Good practice in making decisions about the withdrawal 
of life-sustaining treatment
 • The importance and boundaries of confidentiality in 
surgical practice
 • The importance of appropriate regulation in surgical 
research
 • The importance of rigorous training and maintenance of 
good practice standards
Surgical ethics and law
12
INTRODUCTION
This chapter incorporates references to English common and 
statute law. Nevertheless, these legal and ethical principles 
have much in common with many other jurisdictions across 
the world.
Surgery, ethics and law go hand in hand. In any other 
arena of public or private life, if someone deliberately cuts 
another person, draws blood, causes pain, leaves scars and dis-
rupts everyday activity, then the likely result will be a crimi -
nal charge. If the person dies as a result, the charge could be 
manslaughter or even murder. Self evidently, the difference 
between the criminal and the surgeon is that their intentions 
differ. While a criminal intentionally (or recklessly) inflicts 
harm, the surgeon’s intention is limited to the treatment of 
illness. Any harm that ensues is either unintentional, or is 
necessary (such as an incision), to facilitate treatment.
Patients submit to surgery because they trust their surge -
ons. What should consent entail in practice and what should 
surgeons do when patients need help but are unable or unwil-
ling to agree to it? When patients do consent to treatment, 
surgeons are provided with a wide discretion. The end result 
may be cure, but disfigurement, disability and death may also 
result. How should such surgical ‘power’ be regulated to rein-
force the trust of patients and to ensure that surgeons practise 
to an acceptable professional standard? Are there circumstan-
ces, in the public interest, in which it is acceptable to sacrifice 
the trust of individual patients through revealing information 
that was communicated in what patients believed to be con -
ditions of strict privacy?
These questions about what constitutes good professional 
practice concern medical ethics and law relating to consent, 
confidentiality and the underlying concept of personal auto-
nomy.
In addition, these principles need to be applied to surgical 
activities, including professional matters relating to gover -
nance, regulation and the process of revalidation, in its dif -
ferent guises around the world. Surgical training is starting to 
embrace the ‘basic science’ of surgical law, to offer surgeons 
assistance in the resolution of such ethical dilemmas. This 
chapter is evidence of that process.
RESPECT FOR AUTONOMY
Surgeons have a duty of care towards their human patients 
that goes beyond just protecting their life and health. Their 
additional duty of care is to respect the autonomy of their 
patients and their ability to make choices about their treat -
ments, and to evaluate potential outcomes in light of other 
life plans. Such respect is particularly important for surgeons 
because, without it, the trust between them and their patients 
may be compromised, along with the success of the surgical 
care provided. We are careful enough in everyday life about 
whom we allow to touch us and to see us unclothed. It is 
hardly surprising that many people feel strongly about exer -
cising the same control over a potentially hazardous activity, 
such as surgery.
For all these reasons, there is a wide moral and legal con -
sensus that patients have the right to exercise choice over 
their surgical care. In this context, a right should be inter -
preted as a claim that can be made on the surgeon. The sur -
geon, therefore, accepts the strict duty to respect the patient’s 
choice, regardless of personal preferences. Thus, to the degree 
that patients have a right to make choices about proposed 
surgical treatment, it then follows that they should be allowed 
to refuse treatments that they do not want, even when surge-
ons think that they are wrong. The right to make an unwise 
01_12-B&L27_Pt1_Ch12.indd   170 25/10/2017   07:53Informed consent 171
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
decision was exemplified in a recent case 1, where a woman 
with capacity refused renal replacement therapy. The court 
reminded doctors that notwithstanding the fact that other 
citizens might consider her decision unreasonable, illogical 
or even immoral, none of these criticisms of the decision by 
themselves provide evidence of a lack of capacity. Patients 
can refuse surgical treatment that will save their lives, either 
at present or in the future, the latter through the formulation 
of advance decisions or lasting powers of attorney specifying 
the types of life-saving treatments that they do not wish to 
have, notwithstanding that they may later become incompe -
tent to refuse them.
INFORMED CONSENT
In surgical practice, respect for autonomy translates into the 
clinical duty to obtain informed consent before the com-
mencement of treatment. 
It is easy to underestimate the gap in understanding 
between a surgeon and his or her patient.2 How many patients 
would recognise that unilateral eye surgery might lead to con-
tralateral blindness? The risks and side effects of many opera-
tions are not intuitive, and the surgeon is not in the position 
to guess how the patient’s plans for employment, leisure and 
family life may be inadvertently affected by a forseeable com-
plication. A budding Olympic gymnast might choose to forgo 
surgery on a quiescent posterior triangle lesion if he or she 
knew the potentially consequences of division of the acces -
sory nerve. That is why patients need to be informed, before-
hand, so they can choose whether to take the risk.
To establish valid consent to treatment, patients need to 
be given appropriate and accurate information. In England 
and Wales, the Department of Health’s Reference Guide to 
Consent should be consulted.
Such information, disclosed during a formal and tangible 
discussion, must include:
 ● the condition and the reasons why it warrants surgery;
 ● the type of surgery proposed and how it might correct the 
condition;
 ● the anticipated prognosis and expected side effects of the 
proposed surgery;
 ● the unexpected hazards of the proposed surgery;
 ● any alternative and potentially successful treatments 
other than the proposed surgery;
 ● the consequences of no treatment at all.
With such information, patients can link their clinical 
prospects with the management of other aspects of their life 
and the lives of others for whom they may be morally and/
or professionally responsible. Goo d professional practice 
dictates that obtaining informed consent should occur in 
circumstances that are designed to maximise the chances of 
patients understanding what is said about their condition and 
proposed treatment, as well as giving them an opportunity to 
ask questions and express anxieties.
Where possible:
 ● a quiet venue for discussion should be found;
 ● written material in the patient’s preferred language 
should be provided to supplement verbal communication, 
together with diagrams where appropriate;
 ● patients should be given time and help to come to their 
own decision;
 ● the person obtaining the consent should ideally be the 
surgeon who will carry out the treatment. It should not 
be – as is sometimes the case – a junior member of staff 
who has never conducted such a procedure and thus may 
not have enough understanding to counsel the patient 
properly.
Good communication skills go hand in hand with prop -
erly obtaining informed consent for surgery. It is not good 
enough just to go through the motions of providing patients 
with the information required for considered choice. Atten -
tion must be paid to:
 ● whether or not the patient has understood what has been 
stated;
 ● avoiding overly technical language in descriptions and 
explanations;
 ● the provision of translators for patients whose first lan -
guage is not English;
 ● asking patients if they have further questions.
When there is any doubt about their understanding, 
patients should be asked questions by their surgeon about 
what has supposedly been communicated to see if they can 
explain the information in question for themselves.
Surgeons have a legal as well as a moral obligation to 
obtain consent for treatment based on appropriate disclosure. 
Failure to do so could result in one of two civil proceedings, 
assuming the absence of criminal intent. First, in law, inten -
tionally to touch another person without their consent is a 
battery, remembering that we are usually touched by stran -
gers as a consequence of accidental contact. Surgeons have 
an obligation to give the conscious and competent patient 
sufficient information ‘in broad terms’ about the surgical 
 treatment being proposed and why. If the patient agrees to 
proceed, no other treatment should ordinarily be adminis -
tered without further explicit consent.
The second legal action that might be brought against a 
surgeon for not obtaining appropriate consent to treatment 
is in the tort (civil wrong) of negligence. Patients may have 
been given enough information about what is surgically pro-
posed to agree to be touched in the ways suggested. However, 
surgeons may still be in breach of their professional duty if 
they do not provide sufficient information about the risks that 
patients will encounter through such treatment. Although 
standards of how much information should be provided about 
risks vary between nations, as a matter of good practice, surge-
ons should inform patients of the hazards that any reasonable 
person in the position of the patient would wish to know. 
In UK law, this level and style of disclosure has been most 
recently reviewed in the case of Montgomery v Lanarkshire 
Health Board.2
Finally, surgeons now understand that, when they obtain 
consent to proceed with treatment, patients are expected to 
sign a consent form of some kind. The detail of such forms can 
differ, but they often contain very little of the information 
01_12-B&L27_Pt1_Ch12.indd   171 25/10/2017   07:53CHAPTER 12  Surgical ethics and l aw
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES172
supposedly communicated to the patient who signed it. Partly 
for this reason, the process of formally obtaining consent can 
become overly focused on obtaining the signature of patients 
rather than ensuring that appropriate types and amounts of 
information have been provided and have been understood.
Both professionally and legally, it is important for surgeons 
to understand that a signed consent form is not proof that 
valid consent has been properly obtained. It is simply a piece 
of evidence that consent may have been attempted. Even 
when they have provided their signature, patients can and do 
deny that appropriate information has been communicated or 
that the communication was effective. Surgeons are therefore 
well advised to make brief notes of what they have said to 
patients about their proposed treatments, especially informa -
tion about significant risks. These notes should be placed in 
the patient’s clinical record, perhaps by referring to the disclo-
sure in the letter to the family doctor, copied to the patient. 
In addition, information sheets describing the generic risks, 
benefits and complications associated with the proposed pro-
cedure can be provided.
PRACTICAL APPLICATION
Thus far we have examined the moral and legal reasons why 
the duty of surgeons to respect the autonomy of patients 
translates into the specific responsibility to obtain informed 
consent to treatment. For consent to be valid, adult patients 
must:
 ● have capacity to give it – be able to understand, remember 
and deliberate about whatever information is provided to 
them about treatment choices, and to communicate those 
choices;
 ● not be coerced into decisions that reflect the preferences 
of others rather than themselves;
 ● be given sufficient information for these choices to be 
based on an accurate understanding of reasons for and 
against proceeding with specific treatments.
Surgical care would grind to a halt if it were always neces-
sary to obtain explicit informed consent every time a patient 
is touched in the context of their care. Fortunately, it is an 
elementary step merely to ask the patient whether they mind 
being examined – the usual response will be acceptance. This 
simple transaction illustrates that the legal and ethical ‘rules’ 
that govern a surgeon are often no more than an expression of 
good clinical practice; in this case, politeness. 
Some patients will not be able to give consent because 
of temporary incapacity. This may result from their presen -
ting illness or intoxication, or an unanticipated situation may 
be encountered midway through a general anaesthetic. The 
moral and legal rules that govern such situations are clear. 
The doctrine of medical necessity enables the surgeon, in 
an emergency, to save life and prevent permanent disability, 
op erating without consent. This is employed daily, where 
unconsious emergency patients undergo surgery to save ‘life 
and limb’. No consent has been provided and none is requi-
red, providing the treatment is in the patient’s best interests.
However, if the patient has made a legally valid advance 
decision refusing treatment of the specific kind required, their 
decision must be honoured, providing it is applicable to the 
current clinical situation. Where possible, surgery on patients 
who are temporarily incapacitated should be postponed until 
their capacity is restored and they are able to give informed 
consent or refusal for themselves.
Surgeons must take care to respect the distinction between 
procedures that are necessary to prevent death or irremediable 
harm, and those that are done merely out of convenience. If 
the patient consents only to a dilatation and currettage, do 
not consider performing an additional  hysterectomy ‘in her 
best interests’, simply because she is anaesthetised.
Consent may be made impossible by incompetence of 
other kinds. In the case of children, parents or someone with 
parental responsibility are ordinarily required to provide con-
sent on their behalf. This said, surgeons should:
 ● take care to explain to children what is being surgically 
proposed, and why;
 ● always consult with children about their response;
 ● where possible, take the child’s views into account and 
note that even young children can be competent to con -
sent to treatment provided that they too can understand, 
remember, deliberate about and believe information rele-
vant to their clinical condition. Plainly, it is almost always 
appropriate in addition to discuss the treatment with their 
parents.
When such Gillick  competence is present, under English 
law, children can provide their own consent to surgical care, 
although they cannot unconditionally refuse it until they 
are 18 years old. These provisions illustrate the importance 
of respecting as much autonomy as is present among child 
patients and remembering that, for the purposes of consent to 
medical treatment, they may be just as autonomous as adults.
If capacity in adults is erased by psychiatric illness or 
mental handicap, other moral and legal provisions hold. If 
patients lack the autonomy to choose how to protect them -
selves as regards the consequences of their illness, then others 
charged with protecting them must assume the responsibility. 
However, care must be taken not to abuse this duty. Even 
when such patients have been legally detained for compul-
sory psychiatric care, it does not follow that such patients are 
unable to provide consent for surgical care. Their capacity 
should be assumed and consent should be sought. Only if it 
is established with the help of their carers that such patients 
also lack capacity to provide consent for surgery, and that 
they are at risk of death or serious and permanent disability, 
can therapy then proceed in their best interests. However, if 
treatment can be postponed, then this should be done until, 
as a result of their psychiatric care, patients become able 
either to consent or to refuse. If this recovery is not predicted, 
then legal steps may be taken to make elective surgery lawful. 
As with children, respect should always be shown for as much 
autonomy as is present.
Absence of capacity in adults does not vitiate the requi -
rement, where possible, to take into account their sentiments 
during clinical decision making. In a recent case, a judge 
declared that an elderly man with a septic leg, although 
incapacitated by his mental illness, had feelings, beliefs and 
values that weighed so heavily in the consideration of his best 
01_12-B&L27_Pt1_Ch12.indd   172 25/10/2017   07:53Matters of life and death 173
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
interests that they outweighed the clinical desire to save his 
life by amputation. 3 Although an unusual judgement in this 
context, it reflects the growing determination to give incapa-
citated adults an opportunity to influence their fate, as best 
they can.
In adult patients who are permanently incapacitated, and 
thus unable to provide consent for surgery, as noted above, 
the doctrine of necessity obtains and surgery can proceed in 
an emergency to save life, to prevent serious and permanent 
injury. Elective treatment for less grave complaints can also 
be provided, and in England and Wales is done so under the 
auspices of the Mental Capacity Act 2005. The associated 
Code of Practice guides the surgeon in matters of capacity and 
disclosure, and in dealing with those who have taken steps 
to influence their treatment, anticipating the time that they 
will have lost their capacity. These arrangements may mani -
fest either in documentary form, as Advance Decisions, or in 
person, in the form of persons appointed with a Lasting Power 
of Attorney.
It is not possible for relatives of incapacitated adult patients 
to sign consent forms for surgery on their behalf. Indeed, to 
make such requests can be a disservice to rela  tives, who may 
feel an unjustified sense of responsibility if the surgery fails. 
This said, relatives play a vital role in providing background 
information about the patient, allowing the clinician to assess 
and  then determine what treatment is in the best interests of 
the patient.
MATTERS OF LIFE AND DEATH
It has been noted that the right of an adult with capacity to 
consent to and refuse lawful treatment is unlimited, including 
the refusal of life-sustaining treatment. Probably the example 
of this most familiar to surgeons is Jehovah’s Witnesses, who 
may refuse blood transfusions at the risk of their own lives.
There will be some circumstances in which sustaining 
the life and health of incapacitated adult patients is judged 
to be inappropriate. They are no longer able to be consulted 
and may not have expressed a view about what their wishes 
would be in such circumstances. Here, if possible after discus-
sion and consensus with the next of kin, a decision may be 
made to withhold or to withdraw life-sustaining treatment on 
behalf of the incapacitated patient. The fact that such deci -
sions can be seen as omissions to act does not excuse surge-
ons from morally and legally having to reconcile them with 
their ordinary duty of care. Ultimately, this can only be done 
through arguing that such omissions to sustain life are in the 
patient’s best interests.
The determination of best interests in these circumstan-
ces will rely on one of three objective criteria, over and above 
the subjective perception by the surgeon that the quality of 
life of the patient is poor. There is no obligation to provide or 
to continue life-sustaining treatment:
 ● if doing so is futile, when clinical consensus dictates that 
it will not achieve the goal of extending life. Thought of 
in this way, judgements about futility exclude considering 
patient’s quality of life, and thus can be difficult to justify 
as long as treatment might stand even a very small chance 
of success;
 ● if a patient is imminently and irreversibly close to death – 
in such circumstances, it would not be in the patient’s best 
interests to prolong life slightly (e.g. through the appli -
cation of intensive care) when, again, there is no hope 
of any sustained success. Declining needlessly to interfere 
with the process of a dignified death can be just as caring 
as the provision of curative therapy;
 ● if patients are so permanently and seriously brain damaged 
that, lacking awareness of themselves or others, they will 
never be able to engage in any form of self-directed activ-
ity. The argument here is backed up by moral and legal 
reasoning: that further treatment other than effective pal-
liation cannot be in the best interests of patients as it will 
provide them with no benefit.
When any of these principles are employed to justify an 
omission to provide or to continue life-sustaining treatment, 
the circumstances should be carefully recorded in the patient’s 
medical record, along with a note of another senior clinician’s 
agreement.
Furthermore, the decision to discontinue life-sustaining 
tretament may go hand in hand with a decision not to attempt 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, in the event of cardiorespi -
ratory arrest. In England, it is settled law that before finally 
making this decision, doctors must discuss it with patients 
or their relatives. 4 The reason for this insistence is that the 
patient may have personal circumstances, unbeknown to the 
surgeon, which might yet influence this final (and for the 
patient, portentous) decision. The only exclusion to this legal 
rule is where discussion of this matter with the patient may 
cause them not merely distress, but harm.
Finally, surgeons will sometimes find themselves in charge 
of the palliative care of patients whose pain is increasingly 
difficult to control. There may come a point in the manage -
ment of such pain when effective palliation is possible at the 
risk of shortening a patient’ s life because of the respiratory 
effects of the palliative drugs. In such circumstances, surge -
ons can with legal justification administer a dose that might 
be dangerous, although experts in palliative care are scepti -
cal that this is ever necessary with appropriate training. In 
any case, the argument employed to justify such action refers 
to its ‘double effect’: that both the relief of pain and death 
might follow from such an action. Intentional killing (active 
euthanasia) is rejected as unlawful malpractice throughout 
most of the world. A foreseeably lethal analgesic dose is thus 
regarded as appropriate only when it is solely motivated by 
palliative intent, and this motivation can be documented. 
Recent authority from criminal law indicates that if an anal -
gesic injection is ‘virtually certain’ also to kill the patient, a 
court might deduce that the person giving the injection had 
an intention to kill. The key to the defence of double effect is 
the absolute absence of such an intention.
 A Jehovah’s Witness is a member of a millenarian fundamentalist Christian sect founded in America in 1884. They have their own translation of the Bible, which 
they interpret literally.
01_12-B&L27_Pt1_Ch12.indd   173 25/10/2017   07:53CHAPTER 12  Surgical ethics and l aw
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES174
TRANSPLANTATION
The law and ethics of organ transplantation require more space 
than this chapter allows. In common with other nations, the 
UK has a statutory framework for transplantation, but even 
amongst this small group of nations, there is no unanimity 
of legislation, thus rules for deceased and live donor trans -
plants differ. In general, the rules for defining a dead donor , 
for compensating a living donor and for legitimising a market 
in organs differ widely. It is strongly recommended that you 
refer to the rules within your own jurisdiction.
CONFIDENTIALITY
Respect for autonomy does not entail only the right of capac-
itous patients to consent to treatment. Their autonomous 
right extends to control over their confidential information, 
and surgeons must to respect their privacy, not communicate 
information revealed in the course of treatment to anyone 
else without consent. Generally speaking, such respect means 
that surgeons must not discuss clinical matters with relatives, 
friends, employers and others unless the patient explicitly 
agrees. To do otherwise is regarded by all the regulatory bod-
ies of medicine and surgery as a grave offence, incurring harsh 
penalties. For breaches of confidentiality are not only abuses 
of human dignity, they again undermine the trust between 
surgeon and patient on which successful surgery and the pro-
fessional reputations of surgeons depend.
Important as respect for confidentiality is, however, it is 
not absolute. Surgeons are allowed to communicate private 
information to other professionals who are part of the health-
care team, provided that the information has a direct bearing 
on treatment. Here, it is argued that patients have given their 
implied consent to such communication when they explicitly 
consent to a treatment plan. Whether implied consent can 
ever be valid is a matter for public debate, as government 
attempts to apply the doctrine to tissue donation and access 
to electronic health records. Such examples of implied ‘con -
sent’ are better viewed as mere aquiescence of patients, igno-
rant of and not objecting to decisions made about them.
Patients cannot expect strict adherence to the principle 
of confidentiality if it poses a serious threat to the health and 
safety of others. There will be some circumstances in which 
confidentiality either must or may be breached in the public 
interest. For example, it must be breached as a result of court 
orders or in relation to the requirements of public health legi-
slation. Confidentiality may be waived in the interests of pre-
venting serious crime or to protect the safety of other known 
individuals who are at risk of serious harm.
RESEARCH
As part of their duty to protect life and health to an accept-
able professional standard, surgeons have a subsidiary respon-
sibility to strive to improve operative techniques through 
research, to assure themselves and their patients that the care 
proposed is the best that is currently possible. Yet there is 
moral tension between the duty to act in the best interests of 
individual patients and the duty to improve surgical standards 
through exposing patients to the unknown risks that any form 
of research inevitably entails.
The willingness to expose patients to such risks may be 
further increased by the professional and academic pressures 
on many surgeons to maintain a high research profile in their 
work. For this reason, surgeons (and physicians, who face the 
same dilemmas) now accept that their research must be exter-
nally regulated to ensure that patients give their informed 
consent, that any known risks to patients are far outweighed 
by the potential benefits, and that other forms of protection 
for the patient are in place (e.g. proper indemnity) in case 
they are unexpectedly harmed. The administration of such 
regulation is through research ethics committees, and sur -
geons should not participate in research that has not been 
approved by such bodies. Equally, special provisions will apply 
to research involving incompetent patients who cannot pro-
vide consent to participate, and research ethics committees 
will evaluate specific proposals with great care.
In practice, it is not always clear as to what constitutes 
‘research’ that should be subjected to regulation, as compared 
with a minor innovation dictated by the contingencies of a 
particular clinical situation. Surgeons must always ask them -
selves in such circumstances whether or not the innovation 
in question falls within the boundaries of standard procedures 
in which they are trained. If so, what may be a new techni -
que for them will count not as research but as an incremental 
improvement in personal practice. Nevertheless, major inno-
vations in operative procedure are scrutinised by national 
regulatory authorities; in the UK by the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence. This process of scrutiny has 
been  designed to ensure that the innovation is safe, efficacous 
and cost effective. It is regarded (by the NHS) as a mandatory 
step when introducing a new interventional procedure.
Equally, surgeons know that exigencies of operative sur -
gery sometimes demand a novel and hitherto undecsribed 
manoeuvre to get the surgeon (and the patient) out of trou -
ble. Providing your solution is necessary, proportionate to the 
circumstances, performed in good faith and would pass the 
scrutiny of your peers as reasonable, it is unlikely that any 
subsequent criticism of your actions could be sustained.
If a proposed innovation passes the criteria for research, it 
should be approved by a research ethics committee. Such sur-
gical research should also be subject to a clinical trial designed 
to ensure that findings about outcomes are systematically 
compared with the best available treatment and that favou -
rable results are not the result of arbitrary factors (e.g. unusual 
surgical skill among researchers) that cannot be replicated.
MAINTAINING STANDARDS OF 
EXCELLENCE
To optimise success in protecting life and health to an accept-
able standard, surgeons must only offer specialised treatment 
in which they have been properly trained. To do so will entail 
sustained further education throughout a surgeon’s career in 
the wake of new surgical procedures. While training, surgery 
should be practised only under appropriate supervision by 
someone who has appropriate levels of skill. Such skill can 
01_12-B&L27_Pt1_Ch12.indd   174 25/10/2017   07:53Further reading 175
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
be demonstrated only through appropriate clinical audit, to 
which all surgeons should regularly submit their results. When 
these reveal unacceptable levels of success, no further surgical 
work of that kind should continue unless further training is 
undergone under the supervision of someone whose success 
rates are satisfactory. To do otherwise would be to place the 
interest of the surgeon above that of their patient, an imbal -
ance that is never morally or professionally appropriate.
Surgeons also have a duty to monitor the performance of 
their colleagues. To know that a fellow surgeon is exposing 
patients to unacceptable levels of potential harm and to do 
nothing about it is to incur some responsibility for such harm 
when it occurs. Surgical teams and the institutions in which 
they function should have clear protocols for exposing unac -
ceptable professional performance and helping colleagues to 
understand the danger to which they may expose patients. If 
necessary, offending surgeons must be stopped from practising 
until they can undergo further appropriate training and coun-
selling. Too often, such danger has had to be reported by indi-
viduals whose anxieties have not been properly heeded and 
who have then been professionally pilloried rather than ack-
nowleged for their contribution to patient safety. Those who 
participate in closing ranks, and ostracism,  share the moral 
responsibility for any resulting harm to patients. If something 
goes wrong with surgical treatment, the UK health regulators 
unanimously insist that the patient should be told what has 
happened; in many senses, a similar disclosure to that which 
occurred during the consent process, but now with the benefit 
of hindsight. Again, this candid disclosure is designed to put 
the patient in the same position as the surgeon, with respect 
to information about their health.5
CONCLUSION
Surgeons have combined duties to their patients; to protect 
life and health and to respect autonomy, both to an accept -
able professional standard. The specific duties of surgeons are 
shown to follow from these: reasonable practice concerning 
informed consent; confidentiality; decisions not to provide, 
or to omit, life-sustaining care; surgical research; and the 
maintenance of good professional standards. The final duty 
of surgical care is to exercise all these general and specific 
responsibilities with fairness and justice, and without arbi -
trary prejudice. Now, at least partly either enshrined  in stat -
ute or echoed in the English common law, these duties closely 
reflect the guidance of the General Medical Council.
The conduct of ethical surgery illustrates good citizenship: 
protecting the vulnerable and respecting human dignity; and 
equality. To the extent that the practice of individual surgeons 
is a reflection of such sustained conduct, they deserve the civil 
respect that they often receive. To the extent that it is not, 
they should not practise the honourable profession of surgery.
REFERENCES
1 Kings College Hospital v C & V [2015] EWCOP 80
2 Montgomery (Appellant) v Lanarkshire Health Board 
(Respondent)(Scotland) [2015] UKSC 11
3 Wheeler RA. Tangible Sentiments. Bulletin RCSE, 2016 
January 98 44
4 Regina (Tracey) v Cambridge University Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust and another [2014] EWCA Civ 822
5 http://www.uhs.nhs.uk/HealthProfessionals/Clinical-law-  
updates/Clinicallawupdates.aspx
FURTHER READING
Beauchamp T, Childress J. Principles of biomedical ethics. London; Oxford 
University Press, 2001.
British Medical Association. Medical ethics today, 2nd edn. London; BMJ 
Books, 2004.
Department of Constitutional Affairs. Mental Capacity Act 2005 Code of 
Practice. London; The Stationery Office, 2007.
Department of Health. Reference guide to consent for examination or treat-
ment, 2nd edn. London; Department of Health, 2009.
Department of Health. Confidentiality: NHS Code of Practice. Supple -
mentary guidance: public interest disclosures. London; Department of 
Health, 2010.
General Medical Council. Seeking patients’ consent: the ethical consider -
ations. London; General Medical Council, 1998.
General Medical Council. Withholding and withdrawing life prolonging 
treatments: good practice in decision making. London; General Medical 
Council, 2002.
General Medical Council. Confidentiality: protecting and providing infor -
mation. Available from  http://gmc-uk.org/guidance/current/library/
confidentiality.asp
General Medical Council. Good medical practice. London; General Med-
ical Council, 2006.
General Medical Council. 0–18 years: guidance for all doctors . London; 
General Medical Council, 2007.
General Medical Council. Confidentiality. London; General Medical 
Council, 2009.
Mason JK, Laurie GT. Mason and McCall Smith’s law and medical ethics , 
8th edn, Oxford; Oxford University Press, 2011.
McCullough LB, Jones JW , Brody BA (eds). Surgical ethics. New York; 
Oxford University Press, 1998.
Nair, R, Holroyd DJ (eds). Oxford handbook of surgical consent. Oxford; 
Oxford University Press, 2012.
Royal College of Surgeons. Good surgical practice. London; Royal College 
of Surgeons, 2002.
Senate of Surgery of Great Britain and Ireland. The surgeon’s duty of care: 
guidance for surgeons on ethical and legal issues. London; Royal College 
of Surgeons, 1997.
Wheeler RA. Gillick or Fraser? A plea for consistency over competence 
in children. Br Med J 2006; 332: 807.
Wheeler RA. Presumed or implied; it’s not consent. Clin Risk 2010; 16: 
1–2
Woodcock T. Surgical research in the United Kingdom. Ann R Coll Surg 
Engl 2009; 91: 188–191.
Woodcock T. Law and medical ethics in organ transplantation surgery. 
Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2010; 92: 282–285.
01_12-B&L27_Pt1_Ch12.indd   175 25/10/2017   07:53Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To learn:
 • The reasons why contemporary healthcare, despite all 
its advances, is often less than satisfactory
 • The importance of understanding human behaviour if 
patient care is to improve 
 • ‘Human factors’, what they are, and their importance 
in understanding and rectifying error and working 
together as teams
 • The importance of patient safety and the scale of the 
problem
 • Medical error and its definitions including adverse 
events and near misses
 • Patient safety strategies and solutions
 • Applying the science of patient safety into clinical 
practice
 • Patient safety as it relates to the surgeon
 • Quality improvement as an overarching activity 
designed to address gaps in the quality of healthcare 
delivery
 • The different kinds of quality measures
 • The patient’s surgical journey and its potential for 
inefficiency and waste
 • Some of the methodologies, tools and skills needed for 
quality improvement
 • The need for system thinking and leadership
 • The importance of quality improvement, its place in 
education and as a strategy to address significant 
healthcare challenges 
Human factors, patient safety and 
quality improvement
13
INTRODUCTION
During the last century improving public health is cred -
ited with adding 25 years to the average life expectancy 
of populations in resource-rich countries. Contributing 
achievements include immunisation, motor vehicle safety , 
workplace safety,  control of infectious disease, declines in 
deaths from heart disease and stroke , safer and healthier 
foods, healthier mothers and babies, family planning and 
the recognition of tobacco as a health hazard. At the same 
time the array of surgical, medical, diagnostic and remedial 
possibilities that can be offered to patients is well illustrated 
in the chapters of this book with many of the newer inno -
vations developed, not just in the last century, but in the 
last 20–30 years. This has, in turn, led to greater specialisa -
tion. A combination of these three factors presents today’s 
healthcare with two big challenges: greater demand due to 
greater volumes of patients who are older and have more 
chronic diseases often requiring multidisciplinary care; and 
an increasing volume of treatment options often of increas -
ing complexity and cost.
However, the acquisition of newly learnt abilities to man-
age and treat all these patients and conditions does not mean 
that these tasks are performed well. Added to this, financial 
outlay on healthcare is struggling to meet the supply of health-
care providers and this leaves the long-term implications for 
the quality of patient care uncertain. According to the Insti -
tute of Medicine (IoM), patients do not always receive the 
most suitable care, at the best time or in the best place. Its 
influential report, ‘Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health 
System for the 21st Century’, emphasised the need to redesign 
healthcare processes and systems in response to this qual -
ity gap. It called on providers to ensure more efficient, safe, 
timely, effective, patient-centred and equitable care. 
HUMAN FACTORS
Healthcare largely depends on direct human interventions. It 
has many goals, which span from preserving life and relieving 
distress to a wide range of more mundane services all of which 
society demands must be performed safely and efficiently and 
achieve broad-based user satisfaction. It is arguably more 
complex than any other broadly equivalent industry, and 
because it is extremely resource sensitive, it critically requires 
a strong evidence base. Even then the return on investment 
is often difficult to measure. As patient safety and quality 
improvement are dependent on human behaviour, as well as 
the systems and processes designed by health care workers, 
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   176 25/10/2017   07:54177
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & LovePatient safety
any discussion on these issues is helped by first addressing 
those ‘human factors’.
Human factors (HF) is the study of the interrelationship 
between humans, the tools they work with and the environ -
ment in which they work. A greater understanding of these 
relationships in healthcare should enhance performance 
through a better understanding of the effects of teamwork, 
tasks, equipment, workspace, culture and organisation on 
human behaviour in clinical settings The SHELL model was 
designed to help understand these relationships (Figure 13.1).
The SHELL concept is named after the initial letters of 
its components – Software, Hardware, Environment and two 
Livewares. In the centre of the model is the human operator, 
or the first Liveware, represented by ‘L’. This may be any indi-
vidual whose job is relevant to patient care. It is the most flex-
ible component in the system but may be unpredictable due 
to individual factors such as personality, motivation, stress 
tolerance, skills, knowledge and attitudes. To overcome these 
intrinsic limitations the interface with the other components 
of the SHELL model must be adapted and matched to the 
Liveware component for optimum performance. 
The first interface, Liveware–Hardware, has much to do 
with the ergonomic design of the tools and medical devices 
that are used and designed in such a way that they should, 
for example, make it difficult for the user to make a mistake. 
The Liveware–Software interface encompasses the 
non-physical aspects of the system such as manuals, check -
lists and computer programs. An adequate Liveware–Soft-
ware interface should produce a situation where procedural 
omissions are difficult to make. 
The Liveware–Environment interface may include stress-
ors in the physical environment that have to be coped with 
such as noise, poor acoustics and overcrowding. 
The second Liveware–Liveware interface is the interface 
of interpersonal communication. It embraces concepts such 
as team coordination, conflict resolution and the continuity 
of information flow in the care of patients.
In the SHELL model diagram the edges of the blocks are 
uneven. This is to illustrate the fact that the interdependent 
components are constantly changing and will never match 
perfectly. HF are concerned with minimising the mismatch 
between the different components.
HF was conceived in the 1940s in the aviation indus -
try and is where its principles have been most successfully 
applied. HF training in healthcare enhances clinical per -
formance through an understanding of the effects of team -
work, tasks, equipment, workspace, culture and organisation 
on human behaviour in clinical settings. An HF approach 
to patient safety differs from traditional safety training in 
that the focus is less with the technical knowledge and skills 
required to perform specific tasks, but rather with the cogni -
tive and interpersonal skills needed to effectively manage a 
team-based, high-risk activity.
Crew Resource Management (CRM) training is another 
term used  to describe HF training. In the CRM context, 
cognitive skills are the mental processes used for gaining and 
maintaining situational awareness, for solving problems and 
making decisions. Interpersonal skills are the communica -
tions and behavioural activities associated with teamwork. 
CRM training develops effective communication skills and 
a cohesive environment among team members, and builds an 
atmosphere in which all personnel feel empowered to speak 
up when they suspect a problem. Team members are trained to 
cross-check each other’s actions, offer assistance when needed 
and address errors in a non-judgmental fashion. Debriefing 
and providing feedback are also components of CRM train -
ing. It also emphasises the role of fatigue, perceptual errors 
(such as misreading monitors or mishearing instructions) and 
the impact of management styles and organisational cultures. 
It is now widely recognised that HF training, specialist HF 
groups and the integration of HF into systems, processes and 
incident investigation is extremely important for achieving 
the highest standards of patient safety. However, safety is just 
one aspect of a wider HF systems approach to equipment, 
task, environment and organisational design. HF training can 
also significantly contribute to the quality, accessibility and 
cost of healthcare services.
Summary box 13.1
Acknowledging the gap between medical progress 
and the delivery of quality patient care
●● The need to recognise the things that are wrong
●● Understanding that HF among care givers often provides both 
the causes and the potential solutions
●● The different factors that impact on human behaviour can be 
identified
●● Team working is a prerequisite of contemporary healthcare
●● The place of CRM trainingH
LS E
L
Figure 13.1 SHELL model.
PATIENT SAFETY
Medicine will never be a risk-free enterprise. From the 
beginning of training, doctors are taught that errors are 
unacceptable and that the philosophy of primum non nocere 
(first, do no harm) should permeate all aspects of treatment. 
Yet, worldwide, despite all the improvements in treatment 
and investment in technologies, training and services, there 
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   177 25/10/2017   07:54CHAPTER 13  Human factors, patient safety and quality impr ovement
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES178
remains the challenge of dealing with unsafe practices, 
incompetent healthcare professionals, poor governance of 
healthcare service delivery, errors in diagnosis and treatment 
and non-compliance with accepted standards. 
When errors do occur there continue to be inadequate sys-
tems in place to ensure that all those affected are informed and 
cared for, and that there is a process of analysis and learning 
to uncover the cause and prevent recurrence of such events. 
Patient safety has become an established healthcare discipline 
in its own right thus formalising approaches to these inadequa-
cies, directing research and offering solutions for the future.
THE PREVALENCE OF ADVERSE 
HEAL THCARE EVENTS
The aviation and nuclear industries have a much better safety 
record than healthcare. This became abundantly clear when, 
in 1999, the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy 
of Sciences released a report, ‘ To Err is Human: Building a 
Safer Health System’,  that drew widespread attention to the 
alarming statistics that there were between 44,000 and 98,000 
preventable deaths annually due to medical error in Ameri-
can hospitals with some 7,000 preventable deaths related to 
medication errors alone. This experience has been found to 
be similar in other resource-rich countries and was empha-
sised by the Bristol Royal Infirmary Inquiry of 2001 into a 
series of unacceptable paediatric cardiac surgical deaths. The 
World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that, even 
in advanced hospital settings, one in ten patients receiving 
health care will suffer preventable harm. 
The financial burden of unsafe care globally is also com-
pelling, resulting as it does in prolonged hospitalisation, loss 
of income, disability and litigation costing many billions of 
dollars every year. 
In the years since the Institute of Medicine report there 
have been many initiatives to improve patient safety. Some 
interventions have been shown to reduce errors but many 
have still not been rigorously evaluated. Overall, it remains 
doubtful whether efforts to reduce errors at national, regional 
and local levels have yet translated into significant improve -
ments in the safe care of patients. The Francis report (2013) 
of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public 
Inquiry identified multiple problems relating to that institu -
tions safety culture.
It has also been stated recently that if medical error was 
a disease it would rank as the third leading cause of death in  
the United States after heart disease and cancer, although this 
information is not currently captured or coded on death cer -
tificates. This has led to a call for human and system errors to 
become part of disease coding systems, such as the ICD system – 
the International Classification of Diseases coding system – that 
is used by 117 countries for patient administrative purposes.
COMMON CAUSES OF ADVERSE 
HEAL THCARE EVENTS 
Most medical care entails some level of risk to the patient 
either from their underlying condition or its treatment which, 
of itself, may lead to recognised complications or side effects. 
These episodes are different from patient safety incidents, 
which have been described as preventable events or circum -
stances that could have, or did, result in unnecessary harm to 
the patient. This might be an adverse event, a near miss or a 
no-harm event (Table 13.1).
The most frequent contributing factors that lead to patient 
safety incidents are listed in Table 13.2. Of these, inadequate 
communication between healthcare staff, or between medical 
staff and their patients or family members, ranks highest in 
frequency. 
TABLE 13.1 Patient safety incidents.
Definitions
An adverse event An incident that results in harm to the patient
A near miss An incident that could have resulted in 
unwanted consequences but did not, either 
by chance or through a timely intervention 
preventing the event from reaching the 
patient
A no-harm event An incident that occurs and reaches the 
patient but results in no injury to the patient. 
Harm is avoided by chance or due to 
mitigating circumstances
TABLE 13.2 Factors that contribute to patient safety 
incidents.
Human 
factors
Inadequate patient assessment; delays or errors 
in diagnosis
Failure to use or interpret appropriate tests
Error in performance of an operation, treatment 
or test
Inadequate monitoring or follow-up of treatment
Deficiencies in training or experience
Fatigue, overwork, time pressures
Personal or psychological factors (e.g. 
depression or drug abuse) 
Patient or working environment variation
Lack of recognition of the dangers of medical 
errors
System 
failures
Poor communication between healthcare 
providers
Inadequate staffing levels 
Disconnected reporting systems or over-reliance 
on automated systems
Lack of coordination at handovers
Drug similarities
Environment design, infrastructure 
Equipment failure due to lack of parts or skilled 
operators
Cost-cutting measures by hospitals
Inadequate systems to report and review patient 
safety incidents
Medical 
complexity
Advanced  and new technologies
Potent drugs, their side effects and interactions
Working environments – intensive care, operating 
theatres
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   178 25/10/2017   07:54Understanding patient safety incidents 179
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
UNDERSTANDING PATIENT 
SAFETY INCIDENTS
Understanding the concepts underlying patient safety inci -
dents is useful because it helps to anticipate situations that 
are likely to lead to errors and highlights areas where pre -
ventative action can be taken. The problem of error can be 
viewed in two ways – from a person approach or from a sys -
tem approach.
The person approach
Human performance principles tell us that humans are fallible 
and that errors can occur through doing the wrong thing – 
errors of commission; failure to act – errors of omission; or 
errors of execution – doing the right thing incorrectly. These 
principles also tell us that, by understanding the reasons why 
adverse events and near misses occur and by applying the les-
sons learnt from past events, future errors can be prevented. 
However, for most errors the person approach on its own 
tends to blame the individual and restricts learning.
The system approach
Health systems add complex organisational structures to 
human fallibility thus substantially increasing the potential 
for errors. A systems approach to error recognises that adverse 
events rarely have a single isolated cause and that they are 
best addressed by examining why the system failed rather 
than who made the mistake. James Reason, former Professor 
of Psychology at Manchester University, has stated that, “We 
cannot change the human condition but we can change the 
conditions under which people work so as to make error less 
provoking.”
Heinrich’s safety pyramid
Developed in 1931, Heinrich’s safety pyramid (Figure 13.2) 
theorised that unsafe acts or near misses lead to minor injuries 
and, over time, to a major injury. The accident pyramid 
proposes that for every 300 near misses there are 29 minor 
injuries and one major injury. Risk assessment, which is a step 
in risk management that calculates the value of risk related 
to a situation or hazard, has shown us that what prevents 
patients from being hurt is not only by reducing the number 
of mistakes but rather by increasing the number of defences 
set up against the consequences of mistakes. The key message 
is that near misses provide the best data about the reliability 
of safety systems. It is, therefore, most important to report 
near misses as well as adverse events to ensure that defences 
against adverse events are built and sustained. 
Swiss cheese model
Reason’s theory of accident causation, often referred to as the 
Swiss Cheese Mo del (Figure 13.3), is as well known in the 
aviation and nuclear power industries as it is in healthcare. 
His model takes Heinrich’s concept forward and proposes the 
notion of active failures – acts that are committed by those at 
the coal face such as slip-ups, lapses or mistakes – and latent 
conditions – created by decisions taken at a higher level 
within the organisation leading, for example, to staff short -
ages or time pressures 
Reason hypothesised that all organisations operating in 
potentially harmful environments tend to build up defences 
against potential damage and that these defences can be bro-
ken down by active failures or latent conditions. Although 
latent conditions are not harmful in themselves, they lie dor-
mant within the system before combining with active failures 
to bypass the defences.
The defences in this model are represented as slices of 
Swiss cheese. This is because, instead of being intact, they are, 
in reality, full of holes or defects that represent either active 
failures or latent conditions. In addition, these gaps in the 
defences may not be static but can open and close and change 
position over time. Danger arises when a set of holes line up 
for a brief window, allowing a potential hazard to become a 
fully blown accident. Each slice of cheese or defence is an 
opportunity to prevent an accident and the more slices there 
are and the fewer holes the less likely it is that an accident 
will occur or harm be done to a patient. 
While healthcare workers are often at the sharp end of 
an error they are also often error catchers. It is the clinician’s 
responsibility to observe, discuss and highlight latent condi -
tions before adverse events occur and ensure the appropriate 
defences are in place.
300 near misses
29 minor injuries  
majorinjury
1
Figure 13.2 Heinrich’s pyramid. Figure 13.3 Reason’s Swiss cheese model.
Latent conditions…   or…   active failures
Near missDefences
Error
pathways
Adverse
event
Herbert William Heinrich , 1886–1962, Assistant Superintendent, Engineering and Inspection Division of Travellers Insurance Co., Hartford, Connecticut, USA. 
He was a pioneer in industrial safety and developed his pyramid in 1931 when he published the book Industrial Accident Prevention: A Scientific Approach.
James T Reason , contemporary, Professor of Psychology, University of Manchester, proposed in 1990 ‘The Swiss Cheese Model of Accident Causation’.
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   179 25/10/2017   07:54CHAPTER 13  Human factors, patient safety and quality impr ovement
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES180
that are different and require different strategies. The prob -
ability of a patient being harmed in hospital is higher with, 
for example, the risk of healthcare-associated infection being 
as much as 20 times higher than in richer countries. At least 
50% of medical equipment in resource-poor countries is unus-
able or only partly usable and often the equipment is not used 
due to lack of parts or necessary skills. In some countries, the 
proportion of injections given with syringes or needles reused 
without sterilisation is as high as 70%. Each year, unsafe 
injections cause 1.3 million deaths, primarily due to transmis-
sion of hepatitis viruses and human immuno deficiency virus. 
Clearly these issues need to be met with a specific range of 
initiatives.
Institutional or hospital
Team working and training
In order to decrease errors and increase patient safety many 
medical team training programmes have now been developed 
internationally, often based on CRM or HF programmes. 
Some of these programmes are domain-specific (such as in 
anaesthesia), others are multidisciplinary (emergency depart-
ment or operating room based), some rely on state-of-the-art 
simulators (critical care) and others rely primarily on class-
room instruction. 
Motivated and well prepared healthcare workers who are 
educated and trained to work together can reduce risks to 
patients, themselves and their colleagues, especially if they 
manage incidents positively and make the most of opportu -
nities to learn from adverse events and near misses. Increas -
ingly, healthcare institutions will have to provide this kind of 
educational support for their workforce. 
Teams can work as clinical microsystems, which are qual-
ity improvement units that can be defined as a small group of 
people who work together, usually on a regular basis, to pro -
vide care. The individuals who receive that care can also be 
recognised as members of a discrete subpopulation of patients. 
Clinical microsystems have clinical and business aims, linked 
processes, a shared information environment and produce 
services and care that can be measured as performance out -
comes. These systems evolve over time and are aimed to 
become embedded into the larger macrosystems or organisa -
tions. As with any living adaptive system, the microsystem 
must carry out the work, meet the staff needs and maintain 
its coherence as a clinical unit. Clinical microsystems can be 
assessed on their evidence base, leadership, patient and staff 
focus and information systems. In the delivery of healthcare, 
clinical microsystems invariably come into contact with 
other microsystems and interactions at their boundaries are 
common and should be understood and accommodated.
Using information technology
A major barrier to providing quality care to patients is the 
way health information is collected and stored in paper-
based records, often in locations remote from where care is 
provided. Paper-based record systems are more susceptible to 
errors and permit fewer checks than electronic systems. There 
is now good evidence that the routine use of information and 
Summary box 13.2
Understanding patient safety incidents 
●● Errors can be viewed from a person-centred or a system 
approach 
●● The majority of near misses or adverse events are due to 
system factors
●● Understanding why these errors occur and applying the 
lessons learnt will prevent future injuries to patients 
●● It is important to report all near misses or adverse events so 
that we can constantly learn from mistakes
●● Error models can help us understand the factors that cause 
near misses and adverse events and also direct us to where 
our defences against harm need to be improved
STRATEGIES FOR PATIENT 
SAFETY
International
Safety is everybody’ s business. Since the Institute of Medi -
cine report the WHO has adopted a strong leadership role 
with many initiatives aimed at addressing safety challenges, 
notably ‘WHO SAVE LIVES: Clean Your Hands campaign’  
to ensure sustainable hand hygiene and which has now been 
adopted by almost 18,000 health facilities in 179 countries, 
and, ‘WHO Guidelines for Safe Surgery 2009’  which includes 
the Surgical Safety Checklist aimed at decreasing the inci -
dence of operative complications.  
In low- and middle-income countries the WHO has also 
identified priority areas for patient safety such as the Pulse 
Oximetry Project  set up to improve surgical safety  and the 
Global Initiative for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care, 
a collaboration to reduce death and disability from injuries, 
pregnancy-related complications, congenital anomalies, 
disasters and other surgical conditions. 
Resource-rich countries
Many governments and national organisations in such coun-
tries have developed important strategies aimed at delivering 
safety and quality in healthcare. These include:
 ● regulating and licensing of physicians and healthcare 
institutions;
 ● developing and adopting policies for patient safety and 
quality improvement;
 ● providing patient safety education programmes;
 ● instituting national clinical audits;
 ● reporting (and learning from) adverse events;
 ● setting up agencies to resolve concerns about the practice 
of doctors by providing case and incident management 
services.
Resource-poor countries
Resource-poor countries share many of the aspirations and 
challenges of richer countries. However, they also face issues 
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   180 25/10/2017   07:54Patient safety at the coal face 181
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
communication technology (ICT) will contribute greatly 
to the use of real time data to support clinical decisions, 
thereby supporting healthcare workers and patients to more 
easily access reliable health information and reduce medi -
cal errors. Good examples include electronic patient records 
and physician order entry systems for medication prescribing. 
However, there are drawbacks to the introduction of these 
systems including the high capital costs, underestimation of 
the change management and redesign of clinical processes 
required, and concern that systems will become obsolete.
Summary box 13.3
Strategies for patient safety 
●● The WHO has established a number of international initiatives 
for patient safety 
●● Various national approaches are being undertaken by 
countries 
●● In resource-poor countries patient safety issues are more 
acute, due to a lack of resource, and face different challenges 
●● Hospitals or institutions that will offer the greatest patient 
safety systems in the future will include those that foster team 
working, maximise the use of information technology and are 
prepared to realign their systems and processes
PATIENT SAFETY AT THE COAL 
FACE
Communicating openly with 
patients and their carers and 
obtaining consent
A patient-centred approach by medical staff, with involve -
ment of patients and their carers as partners, is now rec-
ognised as being of fundamental importance. There are better 
treatment outcomes and fewer errors when there is good com-
munication while poor communication is a common reason 
for patients taking legal actions. 
Involving patients in and respecting their right to make 
decisions about their care and treatment is crucial. Explaining 
risk is a difficult but important part of good communication. It 
requires skill to explain the potential for harm of a procedure 
so that it is fully understood because patients vary in their 
perception and understanding and it is often difficult to assess 
the trade-offs between harm and benefit. 
Obtaining consent for surgery requires that surgeons 
provide information to help patients to understand the 
positives and negatives of their various treatment options 
(Table 13.3). If only for the purposes of defending claims, 
hospitals invariably make signed consent mandatory. How-
ever, patients should be allowed to make these informed 
decisions without coercion or manipulation. Consent should 
be obtained by someone who is capable of performing the 
surgery and this should be taken when the patient is fully 
aware, especially in the non-urgent situation, well before 
the surgical procedure (see also Chapter 12, Surgical ethics 
and law).
TABLE 13.3 Information to be provided when seeking 
consent for surgery.
Details and uncertainties of the diagnosis
The purpose and details of the proposed surgery
Known possible side effects and potential complications
The likely prognosis
Other options for treatment, including the option not to treat
Explanation of the likely benefits and probabilities of success for 
each option
The name of the doctor who will have overall responsibility
A reminder that the patient can change his or her mind at any time
Communicating honestly with patients after an adverse 
event, or open disclosure, includes a full explanation of what 
happened, the potential consequences and what will be done 
to fix the problem. Safe care also involves taking care of the 
patient after the event, ensuring that the problem does not 
happen again and sincerely offering regret or an apology, as 
appropriate. As a consequence of the Francis Report there is 
now a statutory duty of candour on all healthcare providers 
who work within the National Health Service.
Professional behaviour and 
maintaining fitness to practice
Professionalism is an important component of patient safety. 
This embraces those attitudes and behaviours that serve 
the patient’s best interests above and beyond other consid -
erations. Organisations responsible for maintaining ethical 
standards include professionalism as one of those standards by 
which healthcare workers are judged. 
Fitness to work or practice – competence – refers not just 
to knowledge and skills but also to the attitudes required to 
be able to carry out one’s duties. Monitoring their own fitness 
for work is a responsibility of each individual and also their 
employers and professional organisations. Healthcare workers 
are now required to have transparent systems in place to iden-
tify, monitor and assist them to maintain their competence. 
Credentialing is one way that is used to ensure that clinicians 
are adequately prepared to safely treat patients with particular 
problems or to undertake defined procedures. 
Reporting adverse events and near 
misses
Adverse events and near misses go unreported for many 
reasons including a fear of blame and the potential for 
litigation. Clinical risk management is a specific task, based on 
risk identification, analysis and control of events, carried out 
within a ‘blame-free’ environment. Data collected from these 
episodes should be collated and learnt both institutionally 
and by uploading to a national database. Doctors should 
be familiar with the systems that operate within their own 
working environment. 
Complaints from a patient or carer often highlight a prob-
lem that, when analysed, provides opportunities for reduc -
ing adverse events and near misses. Poor communication is 
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   181 25/10/2017   07:54CHAPTER 13  Human factors, patient safety and quality impr ovement
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES182
often the cause and knowing how to manage complaints is 
an important part of providing better health care. There is 
wide acceptance for the need for complaints to be made easily 
and effectively, such that now, more and more patient advo-
cacy units provide a range of options for resolving complaints 
including the provision of information, mediation and the 
setting up of conciliation meetings between the parties.
Staff communication, understanding 
the work environment and working 
well within it
Nowhere is team working more important than in managing 
the flow of information within healthcare. Poor communica-
tion can lead to misinformation to patients and staff, delays 
in diagnosis, treatment and discharge as well as in failures to 
follow up on test results. On the other hand, good team work, 
good communication and continuity of care reduce errors and 
improve patient care and staff satisfaction within a team.
Stress, tiredness and mental fatigue in the workplace are 
significant occupational health and safety risks in healthcare. 
There is good evidence linking tiredness with medical errors. 
Fatigue can also affect wellbeing by causing depression, anx -
iety and confusion, all of which negatively impact on clini -
cian performance. Organisations and individuals each bear 
the responsibility for managing working environments and 
practices so as to reduce fatigue and stress. This is reflected in 
the legal restriction of working hours that is now adopted in 
many countries.
Prescribing safely
Prescribing medication is common to almost all strands of 
medical practice and patients are vulnerable to mistakes being 
made in any one of the many steps involved in the order -
ing, dispensing and administration of medications. Accuracy 
requires that all steps are correctly executed. Unfortunately, 
medication errors are common and their many causes include: 
 ● poor assessment or inadequate knowledge of patients and 
their clinical conditions;
 ● inadequate knowledge of the medications;
 ● dosage calculation errors;
 ● illegible hand writing;
 ● confusion regarding the name or the mixing up medica -
tions.
PATIENT SAFETY AND THE 
SURGEON
Surgery is one of the most intrusive healthcare interventions 
that can be visited on patients. More than 100 million people 
worldwide require surgical treatment every year for different 
reasons. Problems associated with surgical safety in resource-
rich countries account for half of the avoidable adverse events 
that result in death or disability.
The ‘more than one cause’ theory of accident causation can 
be aptly applied to many aspects of surgical patient care during 
the perioperative period. Cuschieri and others have described 
coal-face errors as those that can potentially be committed by 
surgeons during the care of their patients and include:
 ● diagnostic and management errors;
 ● resuscitation errors,
 ● prophylaxis errors;
 ● prescription/parenteral administration errors;
 ● situation awareness, identification and teamwork errors;
 ● technical and operative errors.  
Situation awareness – identifying 
teamwork errors
Operating rooms have been described as “among the most 
complex political, social and cultural structures that exist, full 
of ritual, drama, hierarchy and too often conflict”. In such an 
environment, systems should seek to prevent error by improv-
ing workplace preparedness and by incorporating defences so 
as to reduce human error or minimise its consequence. Well 
recognised and potential errors include:
 ● the wrong patient in the operating room; 
 ● surgery performed on the wrong side or site;
 ● the wrong procedure performed; 
 ● failure to communicate changes in the patient’s condition;
 ● disagreements about proceeding;
 ● retained instruments or swabs (Figure 13.4).
All these events are catastrophic for the patient and 
almost invariably occur through a lack of communication (see 
Never events below). This means that all theatre staff should 
follow protocols and be familiar with the underlying princi -
ples supporting a uniform approach to caring for patients.
Checklists
Checklists in the operating theatre environment are now 
accepted as standard safety protocols since the ‘Safe Surgery 
Saves Lives’ Study Group at the WHO published their results. 
The use of a perioperative surgical safety checklist in eight 
hospitals around the world was associated with a reduction in 
perioperative mortality from 1.5% to 0.7% and major inpa -
tient complications from 11.0% before, to 7.0% after , the 
introduction of the checklist. A more recent study from two 
hospitals in Norway (2015) showed a decrease in complica -
tions from 19.9% to 11.5%, a fall in mean length of stay of 
2 days and a significant fall in hospital mortality from 1.9% to 
0.2% in one hospital. 
Summary box 13.4
Patient safety at the coal face 
●● Communicating well with patients and their carers 
●● Professionalism, as another essential component of patient 
safety 
●● Clinical risk management and patient advocacy and their roles 
in adverse events and patient complaints 
●● Team working and information flow as well as managing the 
work environment 
●● Recognising the pitfalls to safe prescribing
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   182 25/10/2017   07:54Patient safety and the surgeon 183
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
The surgical safety checklist identifies specific checks to 
be carried out at three obligatory time points (Figure 13.5). 
The checklist items are not intended to be comprehensive 
and additions and modifications are encouraged.
The benefits of standardisation of surgical processes need 
not be limited to the operating room. Several studies have 
shown that the majority of surgical errors (53–70%) occur 
outside the operating room, before or after surgery, and that 
a more substantial improvement in safety can be achieved by 
targeting the entire surgical pathway.
There is no question that checklists are tools that improve 
outcomes provided they are correctly implemented. How-
ever, there are some important considerations. Checklists are 
suited to solving specific kinds of problems, but not others. 
(a) (b)
Figure 13.4 Axial (a) and coronal (b) magnetic resonance images demonstrating a well-defined abdominal mass with whorled stripes in a fluid 
filled central cavity (arrows). This 60-year-old lady had had an abdominal hysterectomy 10 years previously and presented with pyrexia and flank 
pain. The cause was due to the late presentation of a retained surgical swab.
Before induction of anaesthesia Before skin incision Before patient leaves operating room
SIGN IN
Patient has confirmed
• Identity
• Site
• Procedure
• Consent
Site marked/not applicable
Anaesthesia safety check completed
Pulse oximeter on patient and fuctioning
Does patient have a:
Known allergy?
No
Yes
Difficult airway/aspiration risk?
No
Yes, and equipment/assistance available
Risk of >500 mL blood loss
(7 mL/kg in children)?
No
Yes, and adequate intravenous access 
and /f_luids planned Has antibiotic prophylaxis been given
within the last 60 minutes?
Yes
Not applicable
Is essential imaging displayed?
Yes
Not applicable
TIME OUT
Confirm all team members have 
introduced themselves by name 
and role
Anticipated critical events
Surgeon reviews: what are the
critical or unexpected steps,
operative duration, anticipated
blood loss?
Anaesthesia team reviews: are there
any patient-speci/f_ic concerns?
Nursing team reviews: has sterility
(including indicator results) been
con/f_irmed? are there equipment
issues or any concerns?
Surgeon, anaesthesia professional 
and nurse verbally confirm
• Patient
• Site
• Procedure
SIGN OUT
Nurse verbally confirms with the team:
The name of the procedure recorded
That instrument, sponge and needle
counts are correct (or not applicable)
Whether there are any equipment
problems to be addressed
Surgeon, anaesthesia professional 
and nurse review the key concerns 
for recovery and management 
of this patient
How the specimen is labelled 
(including patient name)
Figure 13.5 World Health Organisation Surgical Safety Checklist (First Edition).
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   183 25/10/2017   07:54CHAPTER 13  Human factors, patient safety and quality impr ovement
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES184
Even in comparison to aviation, managing patients involves 
an enormous amount of coordinated, time-pressured decision 
making and potential delays. Checklists are simple remind-
ers of what to do, and unless they are coupled with attitude 
change and efforts to remove barriers to actually using them, 
they will have limited impact. Finally, if one begins to believe 
that safety is simple and that all it requires is a checklist, there 
is a danger of abandoning other important efforts to achieve 
safer, higher quality care. 
Technical and operative errors
In surgery, the person rather than systems approach emphasises 
the accountability of the surgeon who, unlike colleagues in 
other medical disciplines, when operating, is an instrument of 
the treatment. During a surgical procedure, for example, there 
may be a specific action that, of itself, may be the error, such 
as the inadvertent cutting of the common bile duct during a 
cholecystectomy (Figure 13.6). The practical value of this 
kind of interpretation is that, provided latent conditions are 
excluded, it gives a sense of responsibility to the surgeon and 
it may also help to point to the most effective pathway for 
remediation, by counselling or retraining, as against reassess -
ing the system and putting in place further safeguards.
not carry negative connotations for trainee surgeons who 
might be at the conscious processing stage but still perform 
a perfectly good operation, although it might take longer 
and be more tiring.
Failures in operative technique include:
 ● cognitive errors of judgment, such as failure or late con -
version of a difficult laparoscopic procedure into an open 
one;
 ● procedural, when the steps of an operation are not fol -
lowed or omitted; 
 ● executional, when, for example, too much force is used 
which may result in damage that may or may not have 
consequences;
 ● misinterpretation, which is unique to minimal access sur -
gery and is a function of the misreading of a two dimen -
sional image;
 ● misuse of instrumentation, such as with energised dissec-
tion modalities (e.g. diathermy);
 ● missed iatrogenic injury either at the time of surgery or 
diagnosed late. 
Never events 
Many national health services and institutions now require 
that all incidents are managed, reported and investigated. 
Incidents can be defined as events that could have or did 
result in unintended and/or unnecessary serious harm. 
One subset of serious incidents is a Never or Serious 
Reportable Event. These events are wholly preventable; for 
example, a retained abdominal swab or instrument, where 
guidance providing strong systemic protective barriers should 
have been implemented, namely checklists. Each Never 
Event type has the potential to cause serious patient harm 
or death. However, serious harm or death is not required to 
have occurred for that incident to be categorised as a Never 
or Serious Reportable Event.
Newer concepts of approaches to 
safety
Safety I is the approach to patient safety that has been 
described so far. It is predicated on identifying errors after 
the event and aims to prevent them from occurring or recur -
ring in the future. Because healthcare is much more complex 
than such a linear model suggests, it is felt that that there is 
a need to switch our efforts to enable getting things to go 
right more often –  a concept called Safety II. This acknowl-
edges that healthcare work is resilient and that everyday 
performance succeeds much more often than it fails. This is 
because clinicians constantly adjust what they do to match 
the conditions. Working flexibly, and actively trying to 
increase their capacity to deliver more care more effectively, 
is key to this new approach. At its heart, proactive safety 
management focuses on how everyday performance usually 
succeeds rather than why it occasionally fails, and actively 
strives to improve the former rather than simply preventing 
the latter.
Figure 13.6 Radiograph showing an iatrogenic bile duct injury.
Central to operative performance is proficiency, which 
is an acquired state, honed by sound teaching, practice and 
repetition, by which a surgeon consistently performs oper -
ations with goo d outcomes. In cognitive psychology, high 
surgical proficiency is a state of automatic unconscious pro-
cessing, with the execution being effortless, intuitive and 
untiring, as opposed to non-proficient execution which is 
characterised by conscious control processing requiring con-
stant attention and resulting in slow, deliberate execution 
and inducing fatigue. The transition from one state to the 
other is better known as the ‘learning curve’. This should 
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   184 25/10/2017   07:54Clinical outcomes and audit 185
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
Quality improvement (QI) comes into play when we need to 
design or redesign healthcare processes and systems in response 
to a quality gap in order to ensure more efficient, safe, timely, 
effective, patient-centred and equitable care. Although safety 
is just a single aspect, it is self-apparent that improving any 
one of these components will likely have a beneficial effect 
on the other. Cost is also an important adjunct to quality 
improvement. The concept of value – the quotient of what 
is delivered divided by the cost – is an increasingly important 
metric in healthcare. 
The scope for QI is enormous and can range from rede -
signing how teams deliver care in clinical microsystems that 
make up healthcare organisations to large-scale reconfigur -
ations of specialist services such as stroke care and cancer 
care. It may even extend to redesigning training, budgeting 
processes and information systems and it requires leadership 
and cultures that both understand and value quality improve-
ment. Improvements come from the intentional actions of 
staff equipped with the skills and data needed to bring about 
changes in patient care either directly or indirectly, and they 
require substantial and sustained commitment of time and 
resource. 
QUALITY MEASURES
Quality measures are tools that help us  measure or quantify 
healthcare processes, outcomes, patient perceptions and 
 organisational structures or systems that are associated with 
the ability to provide high-quality  health care and/or that 
relate to one or more quality goals for healthcare. Measure -
ment is important to determine whether changes that are 
believed to lead to improvements in quality do in fact result 
in improvements. Improvement efforts require different 
methods from those used in research, being concerned more 
with testing of how to introduce best practice rather than 
determining what that developing best practice should be.
Process measures reflect the procedures and practices 
implemented by staff in the planning prescribing, delivery 
and evaluation of care – these may be specific to a clinical 
process, a service or administrative process. An example of a 
clinical process might be the starting times of operating lists. 
Process improvement measures should be associated with 
 better outcomes of care and, ideally, should be important from 
a patient’s perspective – reducing delays in starting times in 
the example cited.  
The patient’s surgical journey is a composite of multiple 
processes. Measurement for improvement less commonly 
involves comparisons among sites and against thresholds but 
more commonly involves tracking processes and outcomes in 
the same site over time. 
Outcome indicators are specific, observable and measur -
able changes that represent the achievement of an outcome of 
a quality improvement measure. Clinical outcome measures 
refer specifically to outcomes of healthcare interventions 
whether they are to do with diagnosis, treatment or that care 
received by service users. Ideally, they should be outcomes 
that are important to patients rather than to the health pro-
vider, and there should be evidence that they reflect the qual-
ity of the interventions and their effect. Outcome measures 
are what are commonly used in clinical audit when compared 
with evidenced-based standards of clinical care.
Patient perception and the principles of patient centred-  
care should be an important part of QI particularly in those 
areas that directly affect their care, such as:
 ● the speed of their access to reliable health advice;
 ● the effectiveness of their treatment delivered by trusted 
professionals;
 ● the continuity of their care and its smooth transitions;
 ● the involvement of, and support for, their family and 
 carers;
 ● the availability of clear, comprehensible information and 
support for self-care;
 ● their involvement in decisions and the respect for their 
preferences;
 ● the emotional support, empathy and respect provided;
 ● the attention paid to their physical and environmental 
needs.
Organisational structure and systems refers to the avail-
ability of resources required to deliver care. These include the 
care environment and facilities, the available equipment and 
the organisation’s documented policies, procedures, protocols 
and guidelines.
The consistent consensus view is that good-quality 
improvement or clinical audit has to have at least four essen-
tial stages of activity to be considered high quality: 
 ● preparation and planning, 
 ● measuring performance;
 ● implementing change;
 ● sustaining improvement (including reaudit).
The collection and interpretation of reliable data is of funda-
mental importance to any QI exercise (Table 13.4).
CLINICAL OUTCOMES AND 
AUDIT
Put simply, clinical audit is that part of clinical governance 
that finds out if healthcare is being provided in line with 
standards and it allows care providers and patients know how 
Summary box 13.5
Patient safety and the surgeon and newer concepts on 
safety
●● Errors that can be made by surgeons in their overall 
management of patients 
●● Errors that occur in the operating theatre and how they can be 
mitigated 
●● The role of checklists in patient safety 
●● Performance proficiency and understanding technical and 
operative failures 
●● Getting things right more often may be a better approach than 
identifying errors after the event
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   185 25/10/2017   07:54CHAPTER 13  Human factors, patient safety and quality impr ovement
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES186
their service is doing and where there could be improvements. 
The aim is to allow quality improvement to take place where 
it will be most helpful and will improve outcomes for patients. 
Clinical audits can look at care nationwide or locally within 
hospitals and their departments, in GP practices or anywhere 
healthcare is provided.
Measuring clinical outcomes as part of the quality 
improvement cycle aims to: 
 ● improve the quality of clinical care with shorter hospital 
stays, better outcomes and fewer complications, reduced 
readmissions and greater patient satisfaction;
 ● inform the development of national clinical audits, includ-
ing driving participation, data completeness and accuracy; 
 ● support shared decision making and empowerment of 
patients, including their treatment options and choice of 
provider;
 ● improve the oversight and management of clinicians, their 
teams and practises and thus reassuring patients that their 
clinical care is being actively monitored and improved;
 ● help medical specialty associations to become increasingly 
transparent and patient focused;
 ● support team and individual quality improvement includ-
ing providing information for appraisal and revalidation; 
 ● learn from, spread and celebrate best practice. 
‘Best practice’ dictates that surgeons should not just be 
aware of their clinical activity and outcomes but also endeavour 
to benchmark their activity against national and international 
norms. (Surgical audit is further addressed in Chapter 11.)
There is limited evidence that audit as presently defined 
and used is meeting health policy makers’ aspirations. The 
alternative, systems-based QI methods, discussed below, 
although they have produced many successful  improvements 
within healthcare services, have still not yet been scientifi -
cally proven to be more impactful. 
THE PROCESS OF SURGICAL 
CARE
The process of QI can perhaps be best illustrated by under -
standing and optimising the efficiency of the patient journey 
at each step across the healthcare domains from the patient’s 
home and primary care through the hospital system and then 
back out into the community. For example, while many ill-
nesses and injuries require hospitalisation, a QI exercise might 
be the introduction of an admission avoidance policy for 
selected, appropriate patients attending Emergency Depart -
ments who could be better managed at home or in the com -
munity, thus providing an overall benefit to those patients in 
terms of safety, economy and choice.
Patients attend surgeons in many different settings 
depending on whether they present electively or urgently 
(scheduled or unscheduled). An elective journey is usually 
predictable and starts out as a referral from primary care and 
commonly requires an outpatient visit and investigations. 
If a surgical procedure is required, then we recognise that it 
is best that the patient is fully assessed from a surgical and 
anaesthetic perspective prior to admission within a pre- 
admission assessment clinic. Once assessed, the patient 
should be admitted as a day case, wherever possible, or on the 
day of surgery or as short a time as possible before surgery as 
an inpatient. Preoperative checking is followed by the theatre 
journey, which includes reception, anaesthesia, the surgery 
itself and recovery – each, in their own way, a series of complex 
interventions. Returning to the ward and recovery demands 
another set of skills, procedures and processes followed by a 
final ‘discharge from hospital’ process. 
The urgent or unscheduled journey is different because it 
is unpredictable for any single individual, although patterns of 
presentation do emerge when managing large numbers. The 
patient commonly presents at the Emergency Department of 
a hospital either as a self-referral, primary care referral or by 
ambulance. The journey begins with triage by a team who 
assess the severity of the illness (using, for example, the Man-
chester scoring system) and then directing the patient to the 
appropriate area, which might include, for example, a resus-
citation unit, a rapid assessment and treatment unit, an acute 
surgical assessment unit (or medical assessment for medical 
patients), a minor injuries unit or an ambulatory care unit. 
The objective is to be seen as soon as possible by a senior deci-
sion maker, so that the patient can be treated or discharged 
as expeditiously as possible or, if admission and surgery is 
required, then this too can be expedited. Thereafter the jour-
ney follows a similar course to that of an elective admission.
This simple outline of surgical patients’ journeys serves to 
illustrate the very many individual steps or processes in that 
journey. The scope for errors, delays and inefficiencies from a 
patient’s perspective is almost limitless. Instituting QI aims at 
their mitigation. 
TABLE 13.4 Three pioneers of quality improvement and their quotes on data.
William Edwards Denning (1900–1993) American engineer, statistician, professor, 
author, lecturer and management consultant. 
Pioneered the PDSA (Plan, Do, Study, Act) 
cycle
“In God we trust, all others bring data.”
Peter Ferdinand Drucker (1909–2005) Austrian-born American management 
consultant and educator
“What gets measured gets improved.”
Donald Berwick (Born 1946) American paediatrician. Former President 
and Chief Executive Officer of the Institute of 
Health Care Improvement
Sequence of reactions that challenge data:
“The data are wrong.”
“The data are right but it’s not a problem.”
“The data are right; it is a problem but not 
my problem.”
“I accept the burden of improvement.”
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   186 25/10/2017   07:54The quality impr ovement pathway 187
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES
Good surgical practice has, for many years, dictated that 
surgeons should be aware of their clinical outcomes including 
their complications, re-admission rates and standardised mor-
tality rates. It is now also incumbent on surgeons and their 
teams to measure the performance of their surgical processes 
against best practice. These include the average length of stay 
of their patients, their day case and day of admission rates, 
bed occupancy and, as activity-based funding becomes more 
prevalent, their consumption of institutional costs. 
THE QUALITY IMPROVEMENT 
PATHWAY 
QI can be applied to almost any step, process or activity. The 
Scottish Improvement Hub recommends seven stages that 
might be undertaken in a QI exercise:
 ● discovering – is about defining the aims and vision; for 
example, what the problem is and what data is available;
 ● exploring – is about defining the present state and visual-
ising the future state;
 ● designing – is about defining how to move from the pres -
ent state to the future state and identifying the priorities;
 ● refining – is about testing change, learning from the data 
and identifying the benefits;
 ● introducing – is about managing communications and 
building the will and culture to change;
 ● spreading – is about showing the improvements, telling 
the story and disseminating the message;
 ● closing – is about capturing and sustaining the learning.
Each step can then be accompanied by any number of 
established organisational and graphical tools and methodol-
ogies appropriate to the design and planning of each step and 
suitable for the QI improvement exercise being undertaken 
(Table 13.5).
Emergency departments, wards and operating theatres are 
fertile grounds for process and performance improvement. 
Bundled educational programmes, such as the Productive 
Series (for wards and theatres, for example) introduced by the 
former NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement, sup-
ports teams to redesign and streamline the way they manage 
and work within specific areas.
care. ‘Kaizen’ is the Japanese for improvement. At Toyota, 
production line personnel are expected to stop the production 
line when an abnormality is noticed and, along with their 
supervisor, initiate kaizen. A single cycle of kaizen activity is 
defined as ‘plan, do, study and act’, also known as the PDSA 
cycle. The same application can be used in healthcare, with 
many sequential cycles growing to ‘continuous improvement’.
Lean manufacturing is a management philosophy that 
is also derived mostly from the  Toyota Production Sys-
tem. Defining Lean is difficult; it is in essence the elimination 
of waste through continuous improvement. Identifying waste 
leads inevitably to the need to define customer value and 
reducing waste requires elimination of error. This approach 
has found widespread application in industry. In medical set-
tings, there is extensive evidence of its benefits in improving 
efficiency, reducing costs and improving patient satisfaction.
Operating theatres provide a good example of how lean 
principles can be applied in healthcare. Lean states that, in 
manufacturing, there are broadly seven types of waste that 
need eliminating in order to improve productivity: the same 
could be applied to perioperative care. For example:
 ● Overproduction. Such as: ordering unnecessary preop -
erative tests. Solution: optimising evidence-based pre-  
assessment. 
 ● Inventory. Such as: purchasing of excessive drug stock 
before it is required. Solution: alphabetically ordered drug 
cupboards with only 1–2 boxes of commonly used drugs.
 ● Waiting. Such as: surgeons waiting for a patient to come 
down to theatre and sitting in the coffee room doing 
nothing. Solution: improve communications and, maybe, 
engage more porters. 
 ● Waste of transportation. Such as: wasting time transferring 
patients from the admitting ward to the theatre or vice 
versa. Solutions: better design of the theatre complex to 
optimise patient flow, simplifying mode of transport and 
better communications and handover.
 ● Waste of overprocessing.  Such as: giving patients a nerve 
block, a spinal and a general anaesthetic for a joint 
replacement. Solution: general anaesthetic and local infil-
tration may be equivalent and quicker.
 ● Defect.  Such as: patients arrive in theatre with incomplete 
or inappropriate preoperative paperwork. Solution: more 
robust checking systems before patients come to theatre.
 ● Motion. Such as: constant repetitive movement around 
theatre and the anaesthetic room to get drugs, equip -
ment and disposal of waste. Solution: a ‘motion efficient’ 
theatre where everything is easily available with minimal 
movement, and similar layouts in multitheatre complexes.
Six sigma
Six sigma is another scientific business performance meth -
odology that has been adopted for use in healthcare. The 
fundamental objective of the Six Sigma metho dology is the 
implementation of a measurement-based strategy that focuses 
on process improvement and variation reduction. One of its 
sub-methodologies is DMAIC (Define, Measure, Analyse, 
Improve, Control), which is an improvement system for 
TABLE 13.5 Examples of tools used in quality 
improvement.
Organisational Graphical
Root cause analysis
Benefits realisation planning
Demand and capacity planning
Process mapping
Value stream mapping
Kanban and 5 ‘S’
Driver diagrams
Fishbone cause and effect 
diagrams
Spaghetti diagrams
Box, frequency and scatter 
plots
Pareto and run charts
Lean
Arguably, the most successful example of system redesign in 
an industrial setting has been the Toyota Production System 
from which much of the thinking can be applied to health -
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   187 25/10/2017   07:54CHAPTER 13  Human factors, patient safety and quality impr ovement
PART 1 | BASIC PRINCIPLES188
existing processes falling below specification and requiring 
incremental improvement.
Systems thinking and leadership 
In a system as fraught with complexity as healthcare, ‘sys -
tems’ thinking allows the whole system to be viewed and the 
relationships of the parts rather than just the isolated parts. 
Healthcare is a shared resource with many interdependencies; 
for surgery these include anaesthesia and critical care and all 
those specialties we require to work with to manage comorbid 
patients. 
If quality problems exist primarily because of system prob-
lems, solutions are more likely in those systems where rela-
tionships and integration are considered important, where 
emphasis is placed on communication, team building, conflict 
management, behavioural and skill competencies, process 
management, and education; many of the features discussed 
under HF . Systems frameworks should never be punitive. 
They should have leaders who are systems thinkers and foster 
a culture of continuous QI. Those leaders should be visible 
at the front line and be champions of a supportive practice 
environment.
Improvement in the quality of care does not occur by 
chance. Nor will a programme team, armed with just organi -
sational and graphical tools succeed in producing sustainable 
change. The underlying, central and agreed principles must 
include the creation of value for the patient, a constancy of 
purpose and systems thinking. These should be enabled by 
the intentional actions of trained staff supported by humble 
leadership and respect for individuals. Such a culture adjust -
ment also requires integrated and coherent strategies and a 
sustained commitment of time, patience and resources.
INVESTING IN QI AND ITS 
EDUCATION
Healthcare as a sector has been late in recognising the 
important contribution that the theory and practice of QI are 
able to make in delivering better value care. The experience 
of a relatively small number of healthcare organisations that 
have successfully done so, such as the Virginia Mason Medical 
Centre in Seattle, is a challenge to others to invest in acquir-
ing the necessary skills and capabilities.
FURTHER READING
Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. Quality improvement – training for 
better outcomes. Key Findings, 2016. http://www.aomrc.org.uk/publi-
cations/reports-a-guidance
Ham C, Berwick D, Dixon J. Improving quality in the English NHS – a 
strategy for action. The Kings Fund, 2016. http://www.kingsfund.org.
uk/publications/quality-improvement
Haugen AS, Softeland E, Almeland SK et al. Effect of the World Health 
Organization checklist on patient outcomes. Ann Surg, 2015; 261: 
821–8.
Institute of Medicine. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for 
the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2001.
Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS (eds). To err is human – building 
a safer health system . Washington, DC:  National Academies Press, 
2000: 312. 
Langley GL, Moen R, Nolan KM, et al. The improvement guide: a practical 
approach to enhancing organizational performance, 2nd edn. San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 2009.
Makary MA, Daniel M. Medical error – the third leading cause of death 
in the US. BMJ 2016; 353: i2139.
Neily J, Mills PD, Young-Xu Y, et al. Association between implemen-
tation of a medical team training program and surgical mortality 
JAMA, 2010; 304(15): 1693–1700.
NHS Scotland. Quality improvement hub. http://www.qihub.scot.nhs.uk/
default.aspx
Timmons S, Baxendale B, Buttery A, et al. Implementing human factors 
in clinical practice. Emerg Med J Online First, 2014; 32: 368–72.
Summary box 13.6
Understanding QI and its application in healthcare
●● The definition of QI and its relationship to clinical audit
●● The different kinds of quality measures
●● The patient surgical journey and its potential for improvement
●● Examples of QI pathways, organisational methodologies and 
tools
●● What system thinking is and its importance alongside 
leadership
●● The requirement for more education and training in QI 
A recent report of the Academy of the Medical Royal 
Colleges of UK and Ireland (2016) has argued that QI should 
be at the heart of medical training and that there is a pressing 
need to develop QI learning across the continuum of medical 
education. Their report sets out to enable education bodies 
to embed QI education into their curricula while asserting 
that it is as important as learning anatomy, biochemistry and 
physiology and a skill as important as CPR. 
01_13-B&L27_Pt1_Ch13.indd   188 25/10/2017   07:54PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
14 Diagnostic imaging .................................................................................. 190
15 Gastrointestinal endoscopy .................................................................. 216
16 Tissue and molecular diagnosis .......................................................... 234
Investigation and 
diagnosis
2
02-14A-B&L27_Pt2.indd   189 25/10/2017   07:55Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The advantages of good working relationships  and 
close collaboration with the imaging  department in 
planning appropriate investigations
 • The basic principles of radiation pr otection and know 
the law in r elation to the use of ionising  radiation
 • The principles of different imaging techniques and their 
advantages and disadvantages in  different clinical 
scenarios
 • The role of imaging in directing treatment in various 
surgical scenarios
Diagnostic imaging
14
INTRODUCTION
Appropriate surgical management of the patient relies on cor-
rect diagnosis. While clinical symptoms and signs may provide 
a firm diagnosis in some cases, other conditions will require 
the use  of supplementary investigations including imaging 
techniques. The number and scope of imaging techniques 
available to the  surgeon have dramatically increased within 
a generation, from a time when radiographs alone were the 
mainstay of investigation. The development of ultrasound 
and colour Doppler, computed  tomography (CT) and mag -
netic resonance imaging (MRI) has enabled the surgeon 
to make increasingly confident diagnoses  and has reduced 
the need for diagnostic surgical techniques such as explorative 
laparotomy. Faced with such a plethora of imaging to choose 
from, it is important that the patient is not sent on a jour -
ney through multiple unnecessary examinations.
As a basic principle, the simplest, cheapest test should be 
chosen that it is hoped will answer the clinical question. This 
necessitates knowledge of the potential complications and 
diagnostic limitations of the various methods. For example, in 
a patient presenting with the clinical features of biliary colic, 
an ultrasound examination alone may give enough informa -
tion to enable appropriate surgical management. In more com-
plex cases, it may be more efficient to opt for a single, more 
expensive investigation, such as CT , rather than embarking 
on multiple simpler and cheaper investigations that may not 
yield the answer. The choice of technique is often dictated by 
equipment availability, expertise and cost, as well as the clin-
ical presentation. However, it must be emphasised that, not  
infrequently, the most valuable investigation is prior imaging; 
this not only reduces the cost  and the amount of radiation a 
patient receives but very often improves patient care.
HOW TO REQUEST IMAGING
Best practice depends on close collaboration between the 
radiologist and the referrer and must take into account local 
expertise and access to facilities. When requesting imaging, 
consider what it is that you want to know from the inves -
tigation. Give  a provisional diagnosis or state the clinical 
problem. If there is  uncertainty over the best method to 
answer the clinical problem, then discussion with a radiolo -
gist is always worthwhile, informally or within the context 
of a clinicoradiological meeting or a multidisciplinary team 
(MDT) meeting.
As well as the basic demographic information stored on 
the radiology information system (RIS), it is important to 
provide relevant past medical history, e.g. diabetes, epilepsy, 
renal failure, allergies and anticoagulation, all of which can 
affect which contrast agent can be given safely, and the date 
of the last menses in women of childbearing potential.
INTERPRETING IMAGES
While the role of the Imaging department is to provide 
radiological reports for imaging examinations performed, it 
is  nevertheless good clinical practice to be able to evaluate 
your patients’ examinations, and a systematic approach is 
 encouraged.
The systematic approach to examining a radiograph 
varies according to the part of the bo dy being imaged. For 
instance, for  a radiograph of an extremity, the alignment, 
the cortices and the  medullary cavity of the individual 
bones, the joints and the soft  tissues all need to be assessed 
on each view. 
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   190 25/10/2017   07:57Current legisl ation 191
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
HAZARDS OF IMAGING
Contrast media
There has been a dramatic increase in the use of contrast 
agents in recent years, mainly related to the increasing use of 
CT. Potential problems include allergic reaction and nephro-
toxicity. Reactions are rare: serious reactions occur in about 
1:2500 cases and life- threatening reactions in about 1:25 000 
cases. The risk of sudden death, however, has not changed 
with the new agents. Local policies for dealing with patients 
at increased risk vary between departments and, indeed, 
between countries. Advice from the Royal College of Radiol-
ogists (RCR) in the UK does not recommend routine steroid 
prophylaxis for patients at increased risk of allergic reaction, 
but rather the use of low osmolality contrast media(LOCM) 
or iso-osmolar media, and observation of the patient for 30 
minutes after injection with the intravenous cannula still in 
situ, since most serious reactions occur shortly after injec-
tion. Guidelines from the European Society of Uroradiology 
(ESUR), however, continue to advocate the use of steroids.
In patients with diabetes or renal impairment, a recent  
creatinine level should be available. The radiologist should 
be informed of any history of renal impairment, as all con -
trast media are nephrotoxic in patients with impaired renal 
function. The risks and benefits of contrast administration 
need to be carefully assessed in these patients and, if con-
trast is given, the  patient should be well hydrated and the 
lowest dose of a LOCM  should be given. The British RCR 
does not recommend the  routine use of N-acetylcysteine for 
renal protection.
Concerns about lactic acidosis in patients on metformin  
receiving contrast led to various recommendations for stop -
ping the metformin. The latest RCR recommendations are 
that it can be continued in patients with normal renal func-
tion. If there is a raised creatinine or reduced estimated glo -
merular filtration rate (eGFR) below 60 then any decision 
to stop metformin should be made with the radiologist and 
the physician managing the patient’ s diabetes. Gadolinium- 
containing contrast agents are used in MRI examinations. 
Allergic reactions to these agents are very rare. However, they 
can be nephrotoxic in patients with renal failure. In addi -
tion, they are associated with a risk of nephrogenic systemic 
fibrosis (NSF), an extremely rare but serious life-threatening 
condition whereby connective tissue forms in the skin caus -
ing it to become coarse and hard.  NSF may also affect other 
organs, including joints, muscle, liver and heart. High-risk 
gadolinium-containing contrast agents are contraindicated 
in severe renal failure, in neonates and in the  perioperative 
period of liver transplantation, and are not recommended in 
pregnancy. However, lower-risk gadolinium preparations are 
available that may be used with caution.
Liver-specific contrast agents for MRI, selectively taken 
up by hepatocytes, are increasingly used to characterise liver 
lesions and in cancer staging.
HAZARDS OF IONISING 
RADIATION
The majority of ionising radiation comes from natural sources 
on the earth and cosmic rays, and this makes up the back -
ground radiation. However, medical exposure accounts for  
around 15% of the total received by humans. The effects of 
ionising radiation can be broadly divided into two groups. 
The first group comprises predictable, dose-dependent tissue 
effects and includes, for example, the development of cataracts 
in the lens of the eye. These effects are important for those  
chronically exposed to radiation, including those using image 
intensifiers regularly. The second group comprises the all-or -
nothing effects such as the development of cancer (termed 
stochastic). These effects are not dose dependent, but increase 
in likelihood with increased radiation dose.
The risk of radiation-induced cancer for plain films 
of the  chest or extremities is very small, of the order of 
1:1 000 000. However , that risk rises considerably for high-
dose examinations  such as CT of the abdomen or pelvis, 
where the estimated lifetime excess risk of cancer increases 
to the order of 1:1000. Use of  CT has increased dramatically 
in the last 20 years, with a 12-fold increase in the UK, and 
it has been estimated that up to 30% of these examinations 
may be unnecessary. Obviously, the  risk of such examina -
tions has to be balanced against the benefit to the patient 
in terms of increased diagnostic yield, and must  also be 
viewed in the context that the lifetime risk of cancer for  
people generally is about 1:3. Nevertheless, the increased 
risk is important since it is iatrogenic and applied to a large 
population. Therefore, techniques that do not use ionising 
radiation, such as ultrasound and MRI, should be carefully 
considered as alternatives, particularly in children and young 
people.
CURRENT LEGISLATION
In the UK, the Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regu-
lations (IRMER) introduced in 2000, and amended in 2006, 
impose on the radiologist the duty to the patient to make sure 
that all studies  involving radiation (plain radiographs, CT 
and nuclear medicine) are performed appropriately and to the 
highest standards. Inappropriate use of radiation is a crimi -
nal offence, so investigations involving radiation need careful 
consideration in order to prevent wasteful use of radiology.
Summary box 14.1
A simple system for checking radiographs
Label Name of patient
Site Date of examination
Side (check marker)
 What part is the film centered on?
 Does the film cover the whole area required?
 Is there more than one view?
Quality Is the penetration appropriate?
Compare How have the appearances changed from previous 
images?
Conclude Is the diagnosis clear?
 Is further imaging needed?
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   191 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS192
Summary box 14.3  gives a summary of the responsibili -
ties of both the radiologist and the referrer .
The RCR produces an evidence-based guidance tool, 
called iRefer, which is widely available on line. Table 14.1, 
showing the radiation doses for common procedures, is taken 
from this publication, now in its seventh edition.
Summary box 14.2
Wasteful use of radiology
Results unlikely to affect patient 
management
Positive finding unlikely
Do I need it? Anticipated finding pr obably 
irrelevant for management
Investigating too often
Before disease could be expected 
to have progressed or resolved Do I need it now? 
Repeating investigations done  
previously
Other hospital (?)
GP (?) Has it been done already?
Failing to provide adequate 
information
Therefore wrong test performed or 
essential view omitted
Have I explained the 
problem?
Requesting wrong investigation
Discuss with radiologist Is this the best test?
Over-investigating Are too many investigations 
being performed?
After: IRefer gudelines, Making the best use of radiology, 7th edition. 
Royal College of Radiologists, 2012.
Summary box 14.3
Responsibilities
●● Radiologists have a legal responsibility to keep imaging as 
safe as possible
●● The referrer has a duty to balance risk against benefit
●● The referrer must provide adequate clinical details to allow 
justification of the examination
●● Avoid using portable (mobile) x-ray machines whenever 
practical
●● Take all precautions when using an image intensifier
●● The gonads, eyes and thyroid are especially vulnerable to 
radiation and should be protected
There are special considerations for portable and fluo-
roscopy units. The longer an operator keeps the fluoroscopy 
unit running, the higher the dose of radiation to all in the 
vicinity. Portable x-ray machines and fluoroscopic imaging 
equipment use much more radiation to achieve the same 
result. The staff,  and patients in the next bed, are at risk 
TABLE 14.1 Typical effective doses from diagnostic medical exposure in the 2000s.
Diagnostic procedure Typical effective 
dose (mSv)
Equivalent no. of 
chest radiographs
Approximately equivalent period 
of natural background radiationa
Radiographic examinations
Limbs and joints (except hip) <0.01 <0.5 <1.5 days
Chest (single posteroanterior film) 0.02 1 3 days
Skull 0.07 3.5 11 days
Thoracic spine 0.7 35 4 months
Lumbar spine 1.3 65 7 months
Hip 0.3 15 7 weeks
Pelvis 0.7 35 4 months
Abdomen 1.0 50 6 months
Intravenous urography (IVU) 2.5 125 14 months
Barium swallow 1.5 75 8 months
Barium meal 3 150 16 months
Barium follow-through 3 150 16 months
Barium enema 7 350 3.2 years
CT head 2.3 115 1 year
CT chest 8 400 3.6 years
CT abdomen or pelvis 10 500 4.5 years
Radionuclide studies
Lung ventilation (133Xe) 0.3 15 7 weeks
Lung perfusion (99mTc) 1 50 6 months
Kidney (99mTc) 1 50 6 months
Thyroid (99mTc) 1 50 6 months
Bone (99mTc) 4 200 1.8 years
Dynamic cardiac (99mTc) 6 300 2.7 years
PET head (18F-FDG) 5 250 2.3 years
aUK average background radiation = 2.2 mSv per year; regional averages range from 1.5 to 7.5 mSv.
18F-FDG, 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose; CT, computed tomography; 99mTc, 99mtechnetium; PET, positron emission tomography. From Making the Best Use of a 
Department of Clinical Radiology, 7th edn. Royal College of Radiologists, 2012. By kind permission.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   192 25/10/2017   07:57Diagnostic imaging 193
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
when portable equipment is used. The result is also of lower 
quality, so portable x-ray machines should not be used unless 
absolutely necessary.
When using the image intensifier, lead aprons, thy -
roid shields, lead glasses and radiation badges should always 
be worn. Pregnancy in the female patient or staff must be 
excluded.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Basic principles of imaging  
methods
Conventional radiography
Although it is over 120 years since the discovery of x-rays by 
Roentgen in 1895, conventional radiography  continues to 
play a central role in the diagnostic pathway of  many acute 
surgical problems and particularly in chest disease,  trauma 
and orthopaedics.
X-rays emitted from an x-ray source are absorbed to vary-
ing degrees by different materials and tissues and therefore 
cause different degrees of blackening of radiographic film, 
resulting in a radiographic image. This differential absorp -
tion is dependent partly on the density and the atomic 
number of different substances. In general, higher-density 
tissues result in a greater  reduction in the number of x-ray 
photons and reduce the  amount of blackening caused by 
those photons. In terms of conventional radiographs, a large 
difference in tissue structure and  density is required before an 
appreciable difference is manifested radiographically. The dif-
ferent densities visible consist of air, fat, soft tissue, bone and 
mineralisation, and metal. Different soft  tissues cannot be 
reliably distinguished as, in broad terms, they  possess similar 
quantities of water (Figure 14.1). Manipulation of x-ray sys-
tems and x-ray energies, as used in circumstances such as mam-
mography, may allow better differentiation between some  
soft-tissue structures.
Despite this inherent lack of soft-tissue contrast, conven-
tional radiography has many advantages. It is cheap, uni-
versally available, easily reproducible and comparable with 
prior examinations and, in many instances, has a relatively 
low dose  of ionising radiation in contrast to more complex 
examinations. However, injudicious repeat radiography, par-
ticularly of the  abdomen, pelvis and spine, can easily result 
in doses similar to  CT.
The lack of soft-tissue contrast allows little assessment of 
the internal architecture of many abdominal organs. To obvi-
ate this problem, techniques employing the administration of 
contrast material combined with radiography have long been 
used. These techniques include intravenous urography and 
barium examinations (Figure 14.2). Intravenous urography 
involves a series of radiographs taken before and after contrast 
injection, but has been largely superseded by CT urography, 
which is more accurate in detecting and defining pathology 
(Figure 14.3).
Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen , 1845–1923, Professor of Physics, Wurtzburg (1888–1900), and then at Munich, Germany. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics 
in 1901 for his work on x-rays.
Figure 14.1 Supine abdominal radiograph of a patient with small 
bowel obstruction demonstrates multiple dilated small bowel loops 
(arrows). The different densities visible are air (within the bowel), bones, 
soft tissues and fat. The different soft tissues, subcutaneous and intra- 
abdominal, cannot be differentiated.
Figure 14.2 Barium swallow examination showing a malignant stric-
ture (arrow) due to an oesophageal carcinoma.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   193 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS194
with a frequency of 3–7 MHz, while higher-  frequency trans-
ducers are used for superficial structures, such as musculoskel-
etal and breast ultrasound. Dedicated transducers  have also 
been developed for endocavitary ultrasound, such as  trans-
vaginal scanning and transrectal ultrasound of the prostate,  
allowing high-frequency scanning of organs by reducing the 
distance between the probe and the organ of interest (Figure 
14.4). A further application of dedicated probes has been in 
the field of endoscopic ultrasound, allowing exquisite imaging 
of the wall of a hollow viscus and the adjacent organs such as 
the biliary tree and pancreas.
Reflection of an ultrasound wave from moving objects 
such as red blood cells causes a change in the frequency of 
the ultrasound wave. By measuring this frequency change, it 
is possible to calculate the speed and direction of the move -
ment. This principle forms the basis of Doppler ultrasound, 
whereby velocities  within major vessels, as well as smaller 
vessels in organs such as  the liver and the kidneys, can be 
measured. Doppler imaging is  widely used in the assessment 
of arterial and venous disease, in which stenotic lesions cause 
an alteration in the normal velocity. Furthermore, diffuse 
parenchymal diseases, such as cirrhosis, may cause an alter -
ation in the normal Doppler signal of the  blood vessels of 
the affected organ.
Figure 14.3  Coronal computed tomography intravenous ur ogram 
shows a transitional cell car cinoma in the bladder (long arrow) and 
right hydronephrosis (short arrow).
Figure 14.4 Longitudinal transvaginal ultrasound scan of the uterus 
demonstrates thickening of the endometrium in a patient during the 
secretory phase of the menstrual cycle.
A further modification of conventional x-rays uses fluo -
rescent screens to allow real-time monitoring of organs and  
structures as opposed to the ‘snapshot’ images obtained 
with radiographs. This is used to follow the passage of bar -
ium through the bowel, obtaining dedicated images at spe -
cific points of interest only. Motility of the bowel can also be 
assessed in this way. Fluoroscopy is used extensively in inter -
ventional radiology, allowing the operator to guide catheters 
and wires into the patient while monitoring their position in 
real time. 
Naturally, with the  more sustained use of ionising radi -
ation, the cumulative doses  tend to be greater than when 
obtaining a conventional radiograph.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is the second most common method of imag-
ing. It  relies on high-frequency sound waves generated by 
a transducer  containing piezoelectric material. The gener -
ated sound waves  are reflected by tissue interfaces and, by 
ascertaining the time  taken for a pulse to return and the 
direction of a pulse, it is  possible to form an image. Medical 
ultrasound uses frequencies  in the range 3–20 MHz. The 
higher the frequency of the ultrasound wave, the greater 
the resolution of the image, but the less  depth of view from 
the skin. Consequently, abdominal imaging uses transducers 
The advantages of ultrasound are that it is cheap and 
easily available. It is the first-line investigation of choice for 
assessment of the liver, the biliary tree and the renal tract 
(Figures 14.5 and 14.6 ). Ultrasound is also the imaging 
method of choice in obstetric assessment and gynaecological 
disease. High-frequency transducers have made ultrasound 
the best imaging technique for the evaluation of thyroid 
and testic ular disorders, in terms of both diffuse disease and 
focal mass lesions. It is also an invaluable tool for guiding 
 needle placement in interventional procedures such as biopsies 
and drainages, allowing direct real-time visualisation of the 
needle during the procedure.
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   194 25/10/2017   07:57Diagnostic imaging 195
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Ligament, tendon and muscle injuries are also probably 
best imaged in the first instance by ultrasound (Figure 14.7). 
The ability to stress ligaments and to allow tendons to move 
during the investigation gives an extra dimension, which 
greatly improves its diagnostic value. The use of ‘panoramic’ 
or ‘extended field of view’ ultrasound (Figure 14.8) provides 
images that are more easily interpreted by an observer not 
performing the examination, and are of particular assistance 
to surgeons planning a procedure. Ultrasound will demon -
strate most foreign bodies in soft tissues, including those that 
are not radio-opaque.
The disadvantages of ultrasound are that it is highly oper-
ator dependent, and most of the information is gained during 
the actual process of scanning as opposed to reviewing the 
static images. Another drawback is that the ultrasound wave 
is highly attenuated by air and bone and, thus, little informa-
tion is gained with regard to tissues beyond bony or air-filled 
structures; alternative techniques may be required to image 
these areas.
Figure 14.5 Transverse ultrasound image of the liver in a patient with 
colorectal cancer shows a solitary liver metastasis.
Figure 14.7 Ultrasound of the dorsal surface of the wrist shows the 
normal fibrillar pattern of the extensor tendons. Ther e is increased 
fluid (arrow) within the tendon sheath in this patient with extensor 
tenosynovitis.
Figure 14.8 Panoramic ultrasound of the calf. The normal muscle 
fibres and the fascia can be identified over an area measuring approx-
imately 12 cm.
Figure 14.6 Sagittal ultrasound image of the liver (a) in a patient 
with cirrhosis demonstrates nodularity of the liver surface and exten -
sive ascites. Doppler ultrasound (b) illustrates portal vein flow with a 
normal direction.
(a)
(b)
Computed tomography
There has been a great deal of development in CT technol-
ogy over the last 30 years from the initial conventional CT 
scanners through to helical or spiral scanners and the cur -
rent multidetector machines. CT scanners consist of a gan-
try containing  the x-ray tube, filters and detectors, which 
revolve around the patient, acquiring information at different 
angles and projections. This information is then mathemat -
ically reconstructed to produce a two-dimensional grey-scale 
image of a slice through the body. This technique overcomes 
the problem of superimposition of different structures, which 
is inherent in conventional radiography. Improvements in 
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   195 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS196
gantry design, advances in detector technology using more 
sensitive detectors and an  increase in the number of detec-
tors have resulted in an increase in spatial resolution, as well 
as the speed at which the images are acquired. In early CT 
scanners, the table on which the patient  was positioned 
moved in between the gantry revolution to allow  imaging 
of an adjacent slice. Modern scanners allow for continuous 
movement of the table and the patient during the gantry  
revolution, thus greatly reducing the scan time. With mod-
ern equipment, it is now not only possible to obtain images 
of the  chest, abdomen and pelvis in under 20 seconds, but 
these axial images can be reformatted in multiple planes with 
practically no degradation in image quality.
In addition, CT has a far higher contrast resolution than  
plain radiographs, allowing the assessment of tissues with sim-
ilar attenuation characteristics. As with radiographs, the 
natural contrast of tissues is further augmented by the use of 
intravenous contrast medium. Rapid scanning of a volume 
of tissue also  allows the scans to be performed at different 
phases of enhancement, which is advantageous in identifying 
different diseases. For  instance, very early scanning during 
the arterial phase is ideally  suited to the examination of the 
arterial tree and hypervascular  liver lesions, whereas scan -
ning performed after a delay may be better suited to the 
identification of other solid organ pathology  such as renal 
masses. Furthermore, it is possible to obtain scans during sev-
eral phases including the arterial and venous phases  in the 
same patient, which may aid in the identification and  
characterisation of lesions.
CT is widely used in thoracic, abdominal (Figure 14.9), 
neurological (Figure 14.10), musculoskeletal (Figure 
14.11) and trauma imaging. The thinner collimation and 
improved spatial resolution have also resulted in the devel -
opment of newer techniques such as CT angiography, virtual 
colonoscopy and virtual bronchoscopy. Furthermore, three-  
dimensional images can be reconstructed from the raw data 
to aid in surgical planning. The disadvantage of CT compared 
with ultrasound and conventional radiography lies largely in 
the increased costs and the far higher doses of ionising radi -
ation. For instance, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis 
has a radiation dose equivalent to approximately 500 chest 
 radiographs.
Figure 14.9 Axial computed tomography scan thr ough the pelvis 
with oral contrast administration illustrates loops of distal ileum with 
mural thickening in a patient with Crohn’s disease (arrow).
Summary box 14.4
Ultrasound
Strengths
●● No radiation
●● Inexpensive
●● Allows interaction with patients
●● Superb soft-tissue resolution in the near field
●● Dynamic studies can be performed
●● First-line investigation for hepatic, biliary and renal disease
●● Endocavitary ultrasound for gynaecological and prostate 
disorders
●● Excellent resolution for breast, thyroid and testis imaging
●● Good for soft tissue, including tendons and ligaments
●● Excellent for cysts and foreign bodies
●● Doppler studies allow assessment of blood flow
●● Good real-time imaging to guide interventional biopsies and 
drainages
Weaknesses
●● Interpretation only possible during the examination
●● Long learning curve for some areas of expertise
●● Resolution dependent on the machine available
●● Images cannot be reliably reviewed away from the patient
Summary box 14.5
Computed tomography
Strengths
●● High spatial and contrast resolution
●● Contrast resolution enhanced by ability to image in multiple 
phases, including arterial, venous and delayed
●● Rapid acquisition of images in one breath-hold
●● Imaging of choice for the detection of pulmonary masses
●● Allows global assessment of the abdomen and pelvis
●● Excellent for liver, pancreatic, renal and bowel pathology
●● Three-dimensional reconstruction allows complex fracture  
imaging
●● Multiplanar reconstruction and three-dimensional imaging,
●● e.g. CT angiography and colonoscopy
●● Ability to guide intervention such as percutaneous biopsy and 
drainage
Weaknesses
●● High radiation dose
●● Poor soft-tissue resolution of the peripheries and superficial 
structures
●● Patient needs to be able to lie flat and still
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   196 25/10/2017   07:57Diagnostic imaging 197
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Magnetic resonance imaging
Over the last 20 years, MRI has become an integral part 
of the imaging arsenal with ever-expanding indications. MRI 
relies on the fact that nuclei containing an odd number 
of protons  have a characteristic motion in a magnetic field  
(precession) and produce a magnetic moment as a result of 
this motion. In a strong uniform magnetic field such as an 
MRI scanner, these nuclei align themselves with the main 
magnetic field  and result in a net magnetic moment. A 
brief radiofrequency pulse is then applied to alter the motion 
of the nuclei. Once the radiofrequency pulse is removed, 
the nuclei realign themselves  with the main magnetic field 
(relaxation) and in the process  emit a radiofrequency signal 
that can be recorded, spatially encoded and used to construct 
a grey-scale image. The specific  tissue characteristics define 
the manner and rate at which the  nuclei relax. This relax-
ation is measured in two ways, referred to  as the T1 and T2 
relaxation times. The relaxation times and the  proton den-
sity determine the signal from a specific tissue.
There are a large number of imaging sequences that can be 
used by applying radiofrequency pulses of different strengths 
and durations. The image characteristic and signal intensity 
from different tissues are governed by the pulse sequence 
employed and whether it is T1 weighted or T2 weighted. For 
instance, fat, methaemoglobin and mucinous fluid are bright 
on T1-weighted images, whereas water and thus most patho-
logical processes, which tend to increase tissue water content, 
are bright on  T2-weighted images. Cortical bone, air, hae -
mosiderin and ferromagnetic materials are of very low signal 
on all pulse sequences.  In general, T1-weighted images are 
superior in the delineation of  anatomy, while T2-weighted 
images tend to highlight pathology  better. For added tissue 
contrast, intravenous gadolinium may be administered. Other 
more specific contrast media are also available for liver, bowel 
and lymph node imaging.
MRI’s exquisite contrast resolution, coupled with a lack 
of ionising radiation, is very attractive in imaging, particu -
larly of tissues that have relatively little natural contrast. 
MRI also has the advantage of multiplanar imaging, as images 
can be acquired in any plane prescribed. It has traditionally 
been used extensively in the assessment of intracranial,  spinal 
and musculoskeletal disorders (Figures 14.12, 14.13 and 
14.14), allowing a global assessment of bony and soft-tissue 
structures. More recent developments have resulted in new 
indications and applications. Today, MRI is commonly used 
in oncological imaging, such as staging of rectal carcinoma 
and gynaecological malignancies, identification and charac-
terisation of hepatic masses and assessment of the biliary tree 
(magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) 
(Figure 14.15)). MRI has become increasingly important in 
imaging of the small bowel, for example in Crohn’s disease, 
where repeated imaging with ionising radiation can incur a 
significant radiation dose over time.
MR angiographic techniques allow non-invasive angio -
graphic assessment of the cranial and peripheral circulation 
(Figure 14.16), and cardiac imaging. 
Figure 14.10 Axial computed tomography scan of the head follow -
ing intravenous contrast demonstrates a large mass lesion in the left 
frontal region (arrow) in a patient with a large left frontal meningioma.
Figure 14.11 Coronal computed tomography (a) and axial refor -
mats (b) of the foot in a patient involved in a road traffic accident 
demonstrates Lisfranc fracture dislocation with a comminuted frac-
ture of the base of the second metatarsal (arrows).
(a)
(b)
Jacques Lisfranc de St. Martin , 1790–1847, Professor of Surgery and Operative Medicine, Paris, France.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   197 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS198
Diffusion weighted imaging is a relatively new type of 
MRI sequence that exploits the different rates of Brownian 
motion between different tissues. Tissues with greater cellu -
lar density have lower rates of diffusion of water molecules, 
and this difference can be exploited to distinguish benign and 
malignant lesions in a variety of organs as malignant lesions 
tend to have greater density of cells.
However, the availability of MRI is still relatively limited in 
comparison with other imaging techniques, and it is time-con-
suming with respect to image acquisition and interpretation. 
Images are easily degraded by motion, including respiratory and 
cardiac motion. The use of respiratory and cardiac  gating can 
minimise this, although bowel peristalsis can still be a problem. 
The long acquisition times require a cooperative patient who 
can lie very still, which can be difficult especially in claustro-
phobic individuals or those in pain. Furthermore, because of 
the use of high-strength magnetic fields, patients with some 
metallic implants, such as some aneurysm clips and prosthetic 
heart valves, and those with implanted electronic devices, 
such as pacemakers and defibrillators, cannot be examined. 
Some newer implants may, however, be MRI compatible, and 
patients with joint replacements can be studied safely.
Figure 14.12 T2-weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging scan 
of the head in a patient with a large left-sided oligodendr oglioma 
(arrow).
Figure 14.15  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancr eatography 
demonstrates dilated central intrahepatic bile ducts and a stricture 
of the common bile duct (arrow) in a patient with obstructive jaundice 
and cholangio-carcinoma.
Figure 14.13  Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging 
scan of the lumbar spine demonstrates disc herniation (arr ow) in a 
patient with acute back pain.
Figure 14.14 Coronal magnetic resonance imaging scan of the knee 
demonstrates extensive serpiginous areas of alter ed signal intensity 
in the distal femur and proximal tibia (arrows) in a patient with bone 
infarcts secondary to oral corticosteroids.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   198 25/10/2017   07:57Diagnostic imaging 199
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Nuclear medicine
In other imaging techniques using ionising radiation such as 
CT and conventional radiography, the individual is exposed 
to ionising radiation from an external source and the radiation 
transmitted through the patient is recorded. In nuclear med-
icine, however, a radioactive element or radionuclide such as 
technetium, gallium, thallium or iodine is administered to the 
patient as part of a radiopharmaceutical agent, and a detector 
such as a gamma camera is then used to record and localise the 
emission from the patient, thus forming the image. The radio-
nuclide is chosen and coupled with other compounds such 
that it is distributed and taken up in the tissues of interest. 
Therefore, a variety of radionuclides are required for imaging 
of different tissues. Nuclear medicine also differs from other 
means of imaging, which are largely anatomically based, as it 
also provides functional information.
Radionuclide imaging is widely used in bone imaging 
with very high sensitivity for assessing metastatic disease, 
metabolic bone disease, established arthropathies and occult 
infection and traumatic injuries (Figure 14.17), although 
many of these applications are being replaced by MRI. In 
Summary box 14.6
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
Strengths
●● No ionising radiation
●● Excellent soft-tissue contrast
●● Best imaging technique for
Intracranial lesions
Spine
Bone marrow and joint lesions
Evolving use
●● Staging
●● MRCP
●● MR angiography
●● Breast malignancy
●● Pelvic malignancy
●● Cardiac imaging
●● MR enterography
●● Diffusion-weighted imaging
Weaknesses
●● Absolute contraindications
Ocular metallic foreign bodies
Pacemakers
Cochlear implants  Cranial aneurysm clips
●● Relative contraindications
First trimester of pregnancy
Claustrophobia
●● Long scan times so patients may not be able to keep still, 
especially if in pain
●● Limited availability
●● Expensive
Figure 14.16 Maximum intensity projection image fr om a magnetic 
resonance angiogram demonstrates the abdominal aorta, common 
and external iliac arteries as well as parts of the pulmonary, mesen -
teric and renal vasculature.
Figure 14.17 Bone scintigraphy in a patient with car cinoma of the 
breast illustrates bony metastatic deposits involving multiple verte -
brae, the skull, pelvis and ribs.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   199 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS200
genitourinary disease, dynamic imaging can be performed 
to assess renal perfusion and function including obstruction, 
investigate renovascular hyper- tension and evaluate renal 
transplants. Radionuclide imaging is also commonly used 
in thyroid and parathyroid disorders, ischaemic cardiac dis -
ease, detection of pulmonary emboli and assessment of occult 
infection and inflammatory bowel disease.
Positron emission tomography (PET) is an extension of 
nuclear medicine, in which a positron-emitting substance 
such as 18F is tagged and used to assess tissue metabolic char-
acteristics. The most commonly used radiolabelled tracer 
is 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG), although other 
tracers can also be used in order to assess metabolic func-
tions such as oxygen and glucose consumption and blood 
flow. Radioisotope decay causes the emission of a positron, 
which subsequently, within a few millimetres, collides with 
and annihilates an electron to produce a pair of annihilation 
photons. The drawbacks have been high cost, very limited 
availability and relatively low spatial resolution. The last 
of these has been addressed by PET/CT systems combining 
simultaneous PET imaging and CT, allowing the two sets of 
images to be registered so that the anatomical location of the 
abnormality can be localised more precisely.
to reducing the ionising radiation burden to the patient, 
using ultrasound  and MRI as primary investigations when -
ever appropriate.
Summary box 14.7
Radionuclide imaging
Strengths
●● Allows functional imaging
●● Allows imaging of the whole body
●● Bone scan has a high sensitivity for metastatic bone disease, 
fractures and infection
●● PET scanning is valuable in the detection of metastatic cancer
Weaknesses
●● Specific agents are required for specific indications
●● Often non-specific and an abnormal result may require further 
imaging
●● Generally poor spatial resolution
Summary box 14.8
Types of imaging
●● Radiographs are the best first-line test for bone lesions and 
fractures
●● MRI is good for diagnosing bone marrow disease, occult 
fractures and tendon and soft-tissue disorders
●● CT enables visualisation of the fine detail of bony structures
●● CT gives the best three-dimensional information on fractures
●● Ultrasound has better resolution in accessible soft tissues and 
can be used dynamically
●● Ultrasound is the best method of distinguishing solid from 
cystic lesions
●● Ultrasound is the only method for locating non-metallic foreign 
bodies
●● Ultrasound is the best method for detecting muscle hernias
IMAGING IN ORTHOPAEDIC 
SURGERY
Introduction
Imaging is an intricate part of musculoskeletal diagnosis, 
and image-guided, minimally invasive techniques also play 
a major role in treatment. In broad terms, radiographs are 
the best method of looking for bony lesions or injuries, MRI 
shows bone marrow disease, muscle tendon and soft-tissue 
disorders and ultrasound has better resolution than MRI 
for small structures,  with the added advantage of showing 
dynamic changes. CT enables visualisation of the fine detail 
of bony structures, clarifying abnormalities seen on plain 
radiographs.
There are occasions when a combination of techniques 
will be important, and due consideration should be given 
Skeletal trauma
Musculoskeletal trauma is best imaged by an initial plain 
radiograph. All skeletal radiographs should be taken from 
two different angles, usually at right angles to each other. 
This is important in trauma because a fracture or disloca -
tion may not  be visible on a single view (Figure 14.18). 
Occasionally, and in specific locations such as the scaphoid, 
more than two views are routinely performed. If this fails to 
make a clear diagnosis, or if there is suspicion of soft-tissue 
injuries, then cross-sectional  studies are indicated.
Increasingly in the assessment of spinal trauma, CT is 
replacing radiographs as the first-line investigation for two 
main reasons: the first is that the sensitivity of CT is superior, 
the second is that it is quicker, enabling treatment to commence 
sooner).
Figure 14.18 Anteroposterior radiograph of the wrist (a) in a patient 
following a fall does not show an acute bony injury. It is only on the 
second view (b) that a fracture of the dorsal cortex of the distal radius 
is visualised (arrow).
(a) (b)
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   200 25/10/2017   07:57Imaging in orthopaedic surgery 201
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Axial CT images alone may fail to diagnose some frac -
tures, so three-dimensional reformatting is important to pre-
vent errors. Sections should be thin, but care must be taken 
not to cover too wide an area, as the radiation burden may be 
excessive, particularly with multislice CT.
Degenerative disease
Synovitis
Radiographs are usually the first-line imaging investigation 
performed for the examination of joints. Typical changes 
of a degenerative or an erosive arthropathy are well known 
and understood. However, early arthropathy will be missed 
on radiographs and, with the advent of disease-modifying 
drugs, it is important to detect early synovitis before it is even 
apparent on clinical examination. Gadolinium diethyl tri -
amine penta-acetic (DTPA)-enhanced MRI is the most sen -
sitive method for detecting synovial thickening of numerous 
joints, but ultrasound is also sensitive, albeit more laborious 
to perform. Ultrasound shows effusions and synovial thick-
ening clearly, and shows the increased blood flow around the 
affected joints without the use of contrast agents (Figures 
14.19 and 14.20).
Articular cartilage damage
Articular surface disease is difficult to detect using non- invasive 
techniques. MRI is probably the best method, although it is not 
sensitive to early chondral changes (Figure 14.21). Higher field 
strength magnets (3 Tesla and above) with dedicated surface coils 
provide more precise assessment; however, MR   arthrography 
Summary box 14.9
Trauma imaging
●● Initial imaging is either radiography or CT
●● At least two views are needed for radiographs
●● Use CT for spine, intra-articular or occult fractures
Nikola Tesla , 1856–1943, American physicist and electrical engineer who worked for the Westinghouse Company. A Tesla is the SI unit of magnetic flux density.
Figure 14.19 Axial T2-weighted fat-suppressed image of the wrist in 
a patient with rheumatoid arthritis demonstrates synovitis manifested 
as increased signal dorsal to the carpal bones (arrow).
Figure 14.20 Ultrasound of the wrist (a) shows thickening of tis-
sues on the dorsal aspect of the radiocarpal joint (arrow). (b) There is 
increased flow on power Doppler ultrasound in this patient with wrist 
synovitis and rheumatoid arthritis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.21  Coronal magnetic r esonance imaging of the knee 
demonstrates a focal osteochondral abnormality of the medial fem-
oral condyle, with full-thickness loss of the articular cartilage and 
abnormality of the subchondral bone (arrow).
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   201 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS202
is currently the imaging ‘gold standard’. Saline mixed with a 
dilute quantity of gadolinium DTPA is introduced into the joint 
by needle puncture, which is followed by an MRI examination. 
Using this technique, more subtle changes in the articular sur-
face can be seen, including thinning, fissuring and ulceration. 
However, early softening of articular cartilage will not be visi-
ble. MR arthrography is also useful for detecting labral tears in 
the shoulder or hip, and in the assessment of patients who have 
undergone a previous meniscectomy. The triangular fibrocarti-
lage of the wrist is also difficult to assess fully without MR or CT 
arthrography (Figure 14.22).
Summary box 14.10
Imaging techniques for joint disease
●● Radiographs are good for assessing established articular 
disease
●● Synovitis can be detected using ultrasound or contrast-
enhanced MRI
●● Early damage to articular cartilage is difficult to image by 
conventional methods
●● Rotator cuff lesions are best studied using ultrasound or MRI
●● Destructive lesions are best studied first on plain radiographs
●● MRI is best for staging tumours
●● Biopsy can be guided by fluoroscopy, CT or ultrasound
Figure 14.23  Ultrasound of the supraspinatus tendon identifies 
a partial tear of the tendon (arrow), which is pr edominantly articular 
sided but with a component that is nearly full thickness.
Figure 14.22 Coronal CT arthrogram of the wrist showing a central 
perforation of the triangular fibrocartilage with contrast extending into 
the distal radioulnar joint and radiocarpal articulation (arrow).
In the shoulder, rotator cuff trauma and degenerative 
changes can be studied using ultrasound or MRI. In experi -
enced hands, ultrasound has a higher accuracy rate, because 
image resolution is better and because the mechanical integ -
rity of the cuff can be tested by dynamically stressing it (Fig-
ure 14.23). MRI has the advantage of being able to show 
abnormalities in the subcortical bone.
In the majority of arthropathies and degenerative dis-
orders, serial imaging is useful. Changes in films taken weeks 
or months  apart are far easier to see and interpret than a 
single snap-shot study.
Radiographs are also vital in the assessment of soft-  tissue 
calcification in tumours of muscle, tendon and subcuta -
neous fat. When a lesion is detected, there needs to be an 
early decision as to whether this is benign or malignant. If 
there is a suspicion of malignancy on the radiograph, or any 
uncertainty, then local staging is indicated. This is best per -
formed by MRI for both bone and soft-tissue lesions (Figure 
14.25). At this stage, it is  likely that a biopsy will be indi -
cated, and preferably under image guidance. Soft-tissue and 
bone biopsy needles may be guided by CT, ultrasound or 
interventional MRI systems. The route of puncture should 
avoid vital structures and must be agreed with the surgeon, 
who will perform local excision if the lesion proves to be 
malignant. Care should be taken to avoid contaminating 
other compartments. In all circumstances, samples are best 
sent for both histopathological and microbiological exam-
ination. It may be difficult to tell on imaging whether or 
not a lesion is infected, and histology often provides a clear 
diagnosis in inflammatory conditions. Bone scintigraphy is 
useful in detecting whether a lesion is solitary or multiple, 
although whole-body MRI is becoming available.
Aggressive bone disease
The radiograph is the first imaging technique for destructive 
lesions in bones. There is considerable experience required 
in the interpretation of these films, especially with regard as 
to whether the lesion is benign or malignant (Figure 14.24).
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   202 25/10/2017   07:57Imaging in orthopaedic surgery 203
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
offered. If the ultrasound examination is normal, this effec -
tively excludes soft-tissue neoplasia. A reasonable protocol 
is to perform ultrasound on all palpable ‘lesions’ to exclude 
cysts, and on patients without any identifiable mass, and to 
proceed to MRI only when there is a solid or partly solid 
element to an unidentifiable lesion. Tumour vascularity is 
best assessed by Doppler ultrasound. It can be studied by intra-
venous gadolinium DTPA-enhanced MRI; however, this is a 
more expensive and invasive technique, providing no more 
information than Doppler ultrasound.
Figure 14.24 Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) radio-
graphs of the left knee in a young patient with knee 
pain. There is a mixed lucent and sclerotic lesion of 
the distal femur with breach of the cortex medially and 
soft-tissue extension seen anteriorly and posteriorly 
(arrows). The location and appearances are consistent 
with osteosarcoma.
Figure 14.25  Coronal T1- 
(a) and axial T2-weighted 
fat-suppressed (b) images 
through the distal femur of 
the patient in Figure 14.24 
illustrates the bony area 
involved, the soft-tissue 
extent of the tumour and the 
relationship of the neurovas-
cular structures to the mass 
(arrows).
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Summary box 14.11
Imaging of aggressive lesions in bone
●● Plain radiographs are important as a first investigation
●● MRI is best for local staging
●● Bone scintigraphy or whole-body MRI for solitary or multiple 
lesion determination
●● CT detects lung metastases
●● Fluoroscopy, CT, MRI or ultrasound can be used to guide the 
biopsy
Summary box 14.12
Imaging of soft-tissue lesions
●● Ultrasound is the best for screening; it is often the only imaging 
required
●● MRI is best for local staging and follow-up
●● Doppler ultrasound can assess vascularity cheaply and 
effectively
●● Ultrasound is useful for biopsy
Mass lesions
Mass lesions in muscle and soft tissue are examined by 
ultrasound, which can be diagnostic in the majority of 
cases, thereby avoiding the need for further imaging. This 
is most often the  case when a lesion is purely cystic and, as 
most soft-tissue masses are cysts, ultrasound is a very effective 
screening test. There are occasions when no mass lesion is 
found at the site of concern,  and then reassurance can be 
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   203 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS204
Infection
In the early stages of joint infection, the plain films may be 
normal, but they should still be performed to exclude bony 
erosions, in case a painful joint is the first sign of an arthropa-
thy. Ultrasound examination is the easiest and most accurate 
method of assessing joint effusions, although, when an effu-
sion is identified, it is not possible to discriminate between 
blood and pus. Aspiration guided by ultrasound is the best 
method of making this distinction. MRI may be required to 
assess early articular cartilage and bone involvement.
Radiographs should also be used to examine patients with 
suspected osteomyelitis. Although they may not detect early  
infection, they will demonstrate or exclude bony destruction, 
calcification and sequestrum formation. CT may be needed 
to give a cross-sectional view, in order to assess the extent of 
bony sequestrum.
MRI is perhaps the most sensitive method for detect -
ing early  disease and is the preferred technique to define 
the activity  and extent of infection, as it shows not only 
the bony involvement but also the extent of oedema and 
soft-tissue involvement  (Figure 14.26 ). Abscesses may be 
detected or excluded, and  subperiosteal oedema is readily 
visible. MRI can be used as a staging procedure to plan 
treatment, including surgical intervention. Serial exam -
inations can be used to follow the response to  intravenous 
antibiotics and are very useful in the management  of com-
plex osteomyelitis. In cases of negative or equivocal MRI, 
nuclear medicine techniques such as bone scintigraphy can 
be very sensitive, and specialised studies using tracers such 
as gallium citrate or indium-  labelled white cells increase 
specificity.
(a)
(d)
(b) (c)
Figure 14.26 (a) The plain films of this 13-year-old ar e close to normal. On 
close inspection, there is a fine periosteal reaction on the fibula. (b) The coronal 
T1-weighted magnetic resonance image shows little more, but (c) the coronal fast 
STIR (short tau inversion recovery) images and (d) axial T2 fast spin echo with fat 
suppression show the oedema in bone as white and the extensive periosteal fluid 
with soft-tissue inflammation. The diagnosis is acute osteomyelitis.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   204 25/10/2017   07:57Imaging in major trauma 205
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Metabolic bone disease
Plain radiographs should be the first images of patients with 
metabolic bone disease. They may detect the subperiosteal 
erosions in hyperparathyroidism or, more commonly , the 
osteopenia in osteoporosis, but they cannot be used to quan -
tify osteoporosis.  The apparent density of the bone on the 
film is linked to the  penetration of the rays, among other 
variables, as well as to the  bone density. If a quantitative 
method is needed, however, bone mineral density using dual 
x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) is the most accurate and prac-
tical. However, fractures will cause erroneously high read -
ings, and they tend to occur in the vertebrae  used for DEXA 
measurements. Quantitative CT is an alternative  technique, 
although this is less readily available. Ultrasound  transmis-
sion measurement in the extremities has its advocates,  as it 
arguably measures factors that better represent the strength of 
bone rather than its density. Its limitations are that it cannot 
be used to study the vertebrae or hip, and these are the sites  
where osteoporotic fractures occur most frequently. MRI may 
be useful in detecting fractures and is an essential prerequisite 
to percutaneous vertebroplasty.
IMAGING IN MAJOR TRAUMA
Introduction
Trauma remains a major cause of mortality and morbidity in  
all age groups. Presented with a multiply injured patient, rapid 
and effective investigation and treatment are required to max-
imise the chances of survival and to reduce morbidity. Imaging 
plays a major role in this assessment and in guiding treat -
ment. As with the clinical assessment, imaging is carried out 
according to the principles of primary and secondary surveys, 
identifying major life-threatening injuries of the airway, respi-
ratory system and circulation before a more detailed and typi-
cally time-consuming assessment of other injures. At no point 
should imaging delay the treatment of immediately life-threat-
ening injuries. As in  other settings, the quickest and least 
invasive examinations should be performed first. A radiologist 
present in the trauma room at the time of patient assessment 
is able to evaluate the radiographs rapidly, relay this informa-
tion back to the team and  guide further imaging, which may 
include further plain films, CT, ultrasound and MRI.
Plain radiographs
Conventional radiography allows rapid assessment of the 
major injuries and can be carried out in the trauma room 
while the  patient is clinically assessed and treated. Despite 
the time constraints, the number of staff involved and the 
restricted mobility of the patient, high-quality images can 
be routinely obtained  with due care and attention.
There is no routine set of radiographs to be obtained, 
and the decision is based on the mechanism of injury, the 
stability of the patient’s condition and whether the patient 
is intubated.  The most commonly performed initial radio -
graphs are a chest  radiograph, a single anteroposterior view 
of the pelvis and a cervical spine series.
The supine chest radiograph should encompass an area 
from the lung apices to the costophrenic recesses and include 
the ribs laterally. Chest radiographs give valuable information 
in both blunt and penetrating trauma. Evaluation of the radio-
graph should be undertaken in a systematic manner to min -
imise the chances of missing an injury. In the first instance, 
the position of  line and tubes, including the endotracheal 
tube, should be assessed followed by assessment of the cen-
tral airways. Following this, the  lungs should be evaluated 
for abnormal focal areas of opacification, which may repre -
sent aspiration, haemorrhage, haematoma or oedema, as well 
as more diffuse opacification reflecting a pleural collection.  
Alternatively, relative focal or unilateral lucency may reflect 
a pneumothorax in the supine position. Evaluation  of the 
mediastinum should include its position, which may be altered 
by tension pneumothoraces or large collections, as well  as its 
contour, an alteration of which may reflect a mediastinal hae-
matoma due to aortic or spinal injury. Finally, the skeleton and 
the soft tissue should be carefully examined for rib, vertebral, 
scapular and limb fractures, as well as evidence of surgical 
emphysema and paraspinal haematomas (Figure 14.27).
Summary box 14.13
Imaging of potentially infected bone and joint
●● Plain radiographs may be needed to exclude bone erosion
●● Ultrasound is sensitive for an effusion, periosteal collections 
and superficial abscesses and can be used for guided 
aspiration
●● CT is useful in established infection to look for sequestrum
●● MRI is useful to define the activity of osteomyelitis, early 
infection and soft-tissue collections
●● Bone scans are sensitive but of low specificity
●● Complex nuclear medicine studies are useful in negative MR 
examinations or equivocal cases
Figure 14.27 Supine chest radiograph of a patient involved in a road 
traffic accident. The patient is intubated. There are multiple left-sided 
rib fractures (arrows) and extensive surgical emphysema. Depression 
of the left hemidiaphragm and mediastinal shift to the right suggest 
that there is a tension pneumothorax present.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   205 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS206
FAST ultrasound is a limited examination directed to look 
for intraperitoneal fluid or pericardial injury as a marker of 
underlying injury. This avoids the invasiveness of diagnostic 
peritoneal lavage. In the presence of free intraperitoneal fluid 
and an unstable patient, the ultrasound allows the trauma 
surgeon to explore the abdomen as a cause of blood loss. In the 
presence of fluid and  a haemodynamically stable individual, 
further assessment by way of CT can be performed. However, 
it is important to realise that  ultrasound has limitations in 
the identification of free fluid. This  includes obscuration of 
fluid by bowel gas or extensive surgical  emphysema. More 
Figure 14.28 Retrograde urethrogram in a patient who sustained 
extensive pelvic fractures following a fall. The pelvic injuries have been 
stabilised using an external fixation device. The urethrogram identifies 
extensive injury to the urethra with extravasation of contrast (arrow).
Figure 14.29 Lateral view of the cervical spine (a) fails to demon-
strate the cervicothoracic junction. In addition, there appears to be a 
break in the posterior arch of C1 (arrow). Computed tomography of 
the cervical spine (b) demonstrates a fracture of the anterior arch as 
well as the posterior arch of C1 (arrow).
Pelvic radiographs are also commonly performed to screen 
for, and assess, fractures of the bony pelvis. The image should 
include the iliac crests in their totality and extend inferiorly 
to below the lesser trochanters. When assessing the film, the 
alignment of the sacroiliac joints and the symphysis pubis 
should be carefully examined, as some fractures, especially 
those of the sacral arcades, can be very subtle on the pelvic 
radiograph. The presence of pubic fractures raises the possi -
bility of urethral injury and should alert clinicians to exercise 
caution with bladder catheterisation (Figure 14.28).
The utility of cervical spine x-rays depends on the con -
sciousness level of the patient and the presence of distract -
ing injuries. In fully conscious patients with an isolated neck 
injury, clinical assessment can be used to guide the need for 
x-rays. In patients with distracting injuries and/or altered 
consciousness, including intubated patients, CT is preferred 
(Figure 14.29).
Further radiographs of the thoracic and lumbar spine and 
the peripheral skeleton may be required, depending on the 
clinical setting. As with all skeletal radiographs, two perpen -
dicular views are required for adequate assessment. However, 
with the increasing use of CT in assessment of the torso the 
need for plain films is diminishing.
Radiographs of the skull or facial bones have no role in the 
immediate assessment of the multitrauma individual, except 
for immediate localisation of a penetrating object.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound has an evolving role in the assessment of 
acutely traumatised patients. The main current roles of 
ultrasound include the assessment of intraperitoneal fluid 
and haemo-pericardium (focused assessment with sonogra -
phy for trauma, FAST), the evaluation of pneumothoraces in 
supine patients and in guiding intervention.
(a)
(b)
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   206 25/10/2017   07:57Imaging in major trauma 207
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
 organised haematoma may be more difficult  to visualise. It 
must also be emphasised that the principal role of ultra-
sound is not to identify the primary solid organ injury, 
although this may be visualised. Occasionally, a second 
ultrasound scan may show free fluid in the presence of an 
initially negative FAST scan.
The detection of a pneumothorax on a supine radiograph 
can be very difficult. Ultrasound examination may be used 
to identify a radiographically occult pneumothorax. With a 
high-resolution linear probe, the pleura can be visualised as 
an echogenic stripe, and its motion with respiration can 
also be assessed. In the  presence of a pneumothorax, the 
sliding motion of the pleura is lost. Ultrasound may also be 
used to detect a haemothorax or haemopericardium.
Finally, ultrasound may be of value in guiding the place-
ment of an intravascular line by direct visualisation of the ves-
sels. This can be especially advantageous in shocked patients.
Computed tomography
CT is the main imaging method for the investigation of intra-
cranial and intra-abdominal injuries and vertebral fractures. 
With current multidetector scanners a comprehensive exam-
ination of the head, spine, chest, abdomen and pelvis can be 
completed in less than 5 minutes. However, much more time 
is taken up in transferring the patient and the associated mon-
itoring equipment onto the scanner. Therefore, the total time 
can be in excess of 30 minutes, and CT should be reserved for 
individuals whose condition is stable.
CT examination of the head is accurate in identifying 
treatable intracranial injuries (Figures 14.30 and 14.31) and 
should not be delayed by radiography of peripheral injuries, as 
there is declining success in cases of intracranial collection 
when treated after the initial 3–4 hours. In comparison, iden-
tification of more widespread injuries, such as diffuse axonal 
injury, is relatively poor. Examination of facial injuries and 
cervical spine fractures can also be carried out at the same 
time as this only adds seconds to the examination. There is 
evidence that CT of the abdomen and pelvis is of benefit in 
multiple trauma when there is a head injury, as it often shows 
unexpected abnormalities, and this may affect the immediate 
management, especially if the patient deteriorates.
Chest CT with intravenous contrast agent is valuable in 
identifying vascular and lung injuries and is the most accurate 
way of demonstrating haemothorax and pneumothorax. The 
position of chest drains can be identified, allowing adjustment 
of position if necessary. Abdominal and pelvic CT is usually 
undertaken as an extension to the chest CT. If an abdomi -
nal examination is performed, the pelvis should be included 
to avoid missing pelvic injuries and free pelvic fluid. CT is 
an excellent means of identifying hepatic, splenic (Figure 
14.32) and renal injuries. Delayed examination after the 
administration of intravenous contrast agents allows assess -
ment of the pelvicalyceal system in cases of renal trauma. 
Pancreatic and duodenal injuries may also be identified, but 
detection of these injuries may be more problematic. Using 
CT, the accuracy of detection of bowel or mesenteric injuries 
is less than it is for solid organ injury, and these injuries should 
be suspected when there is free intraperitoneal fluid without 
an identifiable cause (Figure 14.33).
The image data may be reconstructed into thinner slices 
for the diagnosis of injuries to the thoracic and lumbar 
spine and  for the better delineation of pelvic and acetabular 
fractures. Complex intra-articular  fractures of the peripheral 
skeleton, such as calcaneal and tibial  plateau fractures, may 
be usefully examined by dedicated thin-section studies pro -
vided this does not delay the treatment of  other more 
serious injuries (Figure 14.34). CT angiography may be used 
to demonstrate vascular injuries in the limbs in those  with 
penetrating injuries or complex displaced fractures.
Figure 14.30 Computed tomography of the head in a patient with 
head injury shows bilateral large frontal extradural collections (arrow).
Figure 14.31  Computed tomography of the head following head 
trauma shows a skull fracture with a lar ge depressed component 
(arrow).
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   207 25/10/2017   07:57CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS208
Figure 14.32  Coronal computed tomography image of the body 
shows a grade V splenic injury (‘shattered spleen’ , arrow) with 
vascular injury at the hilum and free fluid around the spleen and liver 
(arrowhead).
Figure 14.33  Coronal computed tomography demonstrating fr ee 
fluid around the liver. The upper pole of the right kidney and left kidney 
demonstrate no contrast uptake in keeping with acute vascular injury 
(arrows). In addition there is a distraction injury with lateral dislocation 
of the T11–T12 intervertebral junction (curved arrow).
Figure 14.34 Sagittal reformats of computed tomography of the calcaneus in 
a patient following a fall illustrate a comminuted calcaneal fractur e with intra-  
articular extension into the posterior facet of the subtalar joint (arrow).
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   208 25/10/2017   07:58Imaging in common surgical clinical scenarios 209
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Magnetic resonance imaging
The value of immediate MRI in trauma is relatively lim-
ited and is largely confined to the imaging of spinal injuries 
( Figure 14.35).
Access to urgent MRI is not widely available, and there are 
major practical problems in imaging patients who require 
ventilation or monitoring. MRI is therefore only practical 
in stable patients.  All monitoring equipment must be MRI 
compatible, and ventilation support should be undertaken 
by staff skilled and experienced in these  techniques as 
applied to the MRI environment.  MRI may be used to 
diagnose injuries of the spinal cord and  associated peri -
spinal haematomas in patients with neurological signs or 
symptoms. MRI can supplement CT in spinal injuries by  
imaging soft-tissue injuries to the longitudinal and interspi -
nous ligaments. MRI is mandatory in patients in whom there 
is facetal dislocation if surgical reduction is being considered, 
to minimise the risk of displacing soft-tissue or disc material 
into the spinal canal during reduction procedures. Subtle 
fractures may be difficult to identify, particularly if they are 
old, but an acute injury is normally identified by the sur -
rounding oedema. Bony abnormalities should be reviewed 
using CT, as fracture lines are hard  to identify with MRI 
and unstable injuries may be overlooked. In the less acute 
setting, MRI may also be used to assess diffuse  axonal inju -
ries, with an accuracy exceeding CT.
Vascular interventional radiology 
With the development and refinement of CT angiography 
techniques, the diagnostic role of formal angiography has 
become limited. CT angiography is the first-line investigation 
for aortic trauma and for penetrating and non-penetrating 
peripheral vascular trauma.
Endovascular techniques play an important role in the 
treatment of acute solid organ injuries, and the interventional  
radiologist should be consulted early in the decision-  
making process. Using coaxial catheter systems and a variety 
of available embolic agents such as soluble gelatine sponge 
and microcoils, selective embolisation and reduction of blood 
flow to the injured segment can be achieved without causing 
infarction. Selective embolisation techniques are also suit -
able for the treatment of patients with pelvic fractures with 
ongoing blood loss and volume issues. With penetrating and 
non-penetrating extremity trauma, balloon occlusion and 
embolisation may be employed to control haemorrhage, while 
the application of stent grafts can aid in re-establishing the 
circulation to the affected extremity.
IMAGING IN ABDOMINAL 
SURGERY
The acute abdomen
The term ‘acute abdomen’ encompasses many diverse enti -
ties.
IMAGING IN COMMON 
SURGICAL CLINICAL 
SCENARIOS
In this section the roles of different radiological mo dali-
ties in common surgical scenarios are discussed, with a brief 
rationale behind their use and typical appearances of various 
pathological processes.
Figure 14.35 Sagittal T1-weighted (a) and T2-weighted (b) mag-
netic resonance imaging of the spine demonstrate a burst fractur e of 
L2 causing neural compression (arrows).
(a)
(b)
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   209 25/10/2017   07:58CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS210
Bowel obstruction
The plain abdominal radiograph is a useful tool in diagnosing 
bowel obstruction. Small bowel obstruction can generally be 
distinguished from large bowel obstruction by virtue of the 
following: small bowel lies centrally in the abdomen while 
large bowel lies peripherally; the valvulae conniventes (folds) 
of the small bowel traverse the entire width of the lumen 
while the haustra of the large bowel do not; and the calibre 
of the small bowel is typically less than the large, even when 
obstructed (typical measurements in obstruction: small bowel 
3.5–5 cm, large bowel 5–8 cm).
However, it must be stressed that a normal plain radio -
graph does not exclude an obstruction and if there is persistent 
concern, further imaging is indicated; CT is the modality of 
choice having largely superseded the contrast follow-through 
or enema, particularly in the acute setting. The key to diagnosis 
of a mechanical obstruction of either small or large bowel on 
CT, and differentiation from paralytic ileus, is identification of 
a transition zone from dilated proximal bowel to collapsed dis-
tal bowel. In small bowel obstruction if no obvious cause such 
as a mass, volvulus or intussusception is identified, then the 
most likely aetiology is adhesional. There is no need to give 
oral contrast for a suspected bowel obstruction CT as fluid in 
the lumen is a natural contrast agent and, in any case, oral con-
trast may well not reach the point of obstruction by the time 
of the scan. CT is also invaluable to diagnose complications of 
bowel obstruction such as perforation and ischaemia.
Closed loop obstruction, where the bowel is obstructed at 
two points, often in close proximity to each other and fre -
quently related to an internal hernia or adhesional band, is 
a particular type of small bowel obstruction prone to devel -
oping ischemia, and should be suspected at CT if the bowel 
is dilated distal to a transition point with a further transition 
point more distally (Figure 14.36).
Perforation
The erect chest x-ray (CXR) is the ideal first test for hollow 
organ perforation and as little as 10–20 mL of free air can 
be detected under the diaphragm, with the following caveats 
(Figures 14.37 and 14.38): about 10 minutes should be left 
between sitting the patient upright to allow air time to rise; 
the free air must be sought under the right hemidiaphragm 
to prevent misinterpretation of the gastric air bubble; and 
the reviewer must be able to recognise Chilaiditi’s syndrome, 
the harmless and asymptomatic interposition of large bowel 
between the liver and diaphragm. Caution must also be exer-
cised in interpreting any free air in the context of recent 
abdominal surgery, as air can persist for up to 5–7 days in the 
peritoneal cavity.
If the erect CXR is equivocal or a possible walled-off per -
foration is suspected, a CT is the optimal modality, which 
may show tiny quantities of free air but may also show 
the cause, e.g. peptic ulcer, diverticulitis or a neoplastic 
lesion. As with  suspected obstruction, oral or rectal con -
trast is unnecessary if perforation is suspected as making the 
diagnosis should prompt appropriate management even if the 
precise site of perforation is not identified. Also, it cannot be 
Figure 14.37 Erect chest radiograph showing marked bilateral eleva-
tion of the hemidiaphragms with a large volume of subdiaphragmatic 
free gas.
overstressed that if there is any possibility of a leak from the 
gastrointestinal tract (including an  anastomotic leak after 
surgery), then the use of barium is absolutely contraindicated 
as it can induce a serious and potentially  fatal peritonitis.
Figure 14.36 Coronal computed tomography showing a failed renal 
transplant in the right iliac fossa and second transplant in the left iliac 
fossa. There has also been a right hemicolectomy . There is proximal 
small bowel obstruction with dilated fluid filled small bowel loops. 
Distal to the first point of obstruction (large arrow) there are dilated 
thick walled fluid filled loops in the pelvis with some adjacent free 
fluid, which could be followed to a second point of obstruction (small 
arrow). The patient was taken to surgery, which confirmed a closed 
loop obstruction secondary to an adhesive band with ischaemia in the 
segment of small bowel between the points of obstruction.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   210 25/10/2017   07:58Imaging in common surgical clinical scenarios 211
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Leo George Rigler , 1896–1979, American radiologist, described the double wall sign in pneumoperitoneum.
Ischaemia/infarction
The most useful test when bowel ischaemia or infarction is 
suspected is a CT scan. Intravenous contrast administration 
is essential to look for thrombus/embolus in the mesenteric 
vessels, though ischaemia due to low flow states can still occur 
in their absence. Ischaemia can be a difficult diagnosis to 
make radiologically but is suspected, in the appropriate clin -
ical context, by bowel wall thickening, submucosal oedema 
and free  fluid between the folds of the mesentery (particularly 
if haemorrhagic). Ischaemia must be strongly suspected if 
these findings  are seen in association with a closed loop 
obstruction or strangulated hernia. Ischaemic colitis typically 
affects the ‘watershed area’, which is the junction of the areas 
supplied by the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries, typ-
ically in the region of the  splenic flexure.
When bowel wall ischaemia proceeds to transmural 
infarction, the diagnosis is usually more straightforward with 
evidence of pneumatosis (air in the bowel wall) typically 
identified. The  air in the bowel wall can then track into 
mesenteric veins and  thence to the portal vein, a CT sign of 
grave prognostic significance in an adult as it implies wide -
spread and relatively long-standing bowel infarction.
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
The aetiology of acute gastrointestinal haemorrhage varies 
between the upper gastrointestinal tract (GIT) (common 
causes including peptic ulcer disease, varices and Mallory 
Weiss tears) and the lower GIT (common causes including 
angiodysplasia, diverticular haemorrhage and neoplastic 
lesions). While endoscopy is a useful first-line investigation 
for both, in refractory or occult gastrointestinal (GI) haem -
orrhage radiology can also contribute to diagnosis and man-
agement. Nuclear medicine scans using radioisotope-labelled 
red blood cells are useful when bleeding is intermittent, but 
for patients suspected of active bleeding the best investigation 
is a CT mesenteric angiogram. Non-contrast scans to look 
for bright blood in the bowel lumen should be supplemented 
with scans in the arterial phase to assess for a blush due to 
active extravasation, and portal venous phase to optimise 
detection of wall thickening and masses and to look for sites 
of venous bleeding. If non-invasive imaging is effective, cath-
eter angiography can be used to embolise a bleeding point.
Inflammatory processes
Appendicitis
Historically, a straightforward clinical diagnosis of appendici-
tis obviated any need for imaging, but with the proven accu -
racy of available modalities imaging has become increasingly 
popular to reduce negative appendicectomy rates and to make 
alternative diagnoses. While a plain radiograph may demon -
strate a calcified appendicolith in the right iliac fossa, it is 
insufficiently sensitive or specific to be reliable. In children 
ultrasound is the best test, to reduce radiation exposure and 
due to typically favourable body habitus. This also applies to 
females of childbearing age, again to reduce radiation expo-
sure, but also as the symptoms may be mimicked by gynaeco -
logical pathology, such as ectopic pregnancy, haemorrhagic 
ovarian cyst and tubo-ovarian abscess, all diagnoses best made 
with ultrasound. The definitive exclusion of appendicitis, 
however, hinges on the identification of a normal appendix, 
measuring less than 6  mm diameter . Retrocaecal appendi -
citis can readily escape detection with ultrasound, and thus 
CT is the next modality of choice and indeed frequently the 
first requested in most adults (Figure 14.39). The diagnosis 
of appendicitis on CT requires the identification of a thick -
ened appendix (>7 mm), with periappendiceal inflammatory 
change as evidenced by stranding in the surrounding fat. 
Other signs that may be sought include free fluid, thickening 
of the caecal pole, possible localised small bowel ileus and 
right iliac fossa lymphadenopathy. Both CT and ultrasound 
can also identify collections if an inflamed appendix ruptures, 
and can be used to guide percutaneous drainage as a bridge to 
definitive surgery.
Diverticulitis
Inflammation of an obstructed diverticulum typically presents 
with left iliac fossa pain and pyrexia (Figure 14.40). While 
some authors have promoted the use of focused ultrasound 
Figure 14.38  Plain abdominal radiograph showing an abnormal 
appearance to the gastric wall, which is very clearly visualised due to 
the presence of  gas both inside the lumen and also outside the lumen 
(arrow). This is Rigler’s sign of hollow organ perforation, in this case 
due to a duodenal ulcer.  
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   211 25/10/2017   07:58CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS212
identify these, and as with appendicitis can be used to guide 
percutaneous abscess drainage as a bridge to definitive surgery.
Inflammatory bowel disease
The diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease is made histo -
logically, though a barium study of the small bowel, either a 
follow-through (where barium is ingested orally) or entero-
clysis (where dilute barium is infused via a nasojejunal (NJ) 
tube) is often used as a screening tool if symptoms are vague. 
If the diagnosis of Crohn’s disease is established, barium stud-
ies are useful to demonstrate  the extent of disease, partic-
ularly to demonstrate the length and number of strictures 
if surgery is planned, although increasingly  this role is being 
superseded by MRI enterography, which entails  an abdom-
inopelvic MRI scan after ingestion of an agent such as 
lactulose or mannitol to distend the small bowel. The other  
obvious advantage of MRI is the lack of radiation, partic -
ularly relevant in young patients with Crohn’s disease who 
often undergo multiple imaging studies over their lifetime, 
and for this reason it is gaining in popularity for inflammatory 
bowel disease follow-up.
An acute flare up may also require imaging, and an ultra-
sound is usually a good first test to look for dilated bowel 
loops and any abscess, though CT may ultimately be required 
as gas-filled  bowel loops can obscure visualisation of an 
abscess on ultrasound. MRI is the imaging modality of choice 
to assess perianal fistulae and abscesses.
Acute pancreatitis
As with acute appendicitis, when the diagnosis is straight -
forward clinically there may be no need for imaging, though 
increasingly it is used to confirm the diagnosis, to assess the 
severity of the process and to look for complications. While 
ultrasound may show gallstones and can demonstrate an 
enlarged pancreas with peripancreatic fluid and inflammatory 
changes, the optimal modality is CT. CT performed too early 
in the course of the attack, e.g. in the first 12 hours, can be 
equivocal and the optimal timing of imaging is 48–72 hours.
In mild acute pancreatitis, CT may be normal or may show 
an enlarged oedematous gland, but in more severe attacks 
other findings which should be sought include peripancre -
atic fluid collections, vascular complications such as arterial 
pseudo- aneurysm formation or venous thrombosis and necro-
sis either of the gland itself or of the surrounding fat. Necrosis 
typically develops 48–72 hours after the onset of symptoms, 
and is manifest on CT as lack of enhancement of the necrotic 
areas. CT with intravenous contrast is therefore essential to 
look for necrosis, which is potentially catastrophic particu-
larly if it becomes infected. While CT is not always reliable to 
diagnose infected necrosis, it is suggested by bubbles of air in 
the necrotic segment. As with other intra-abdominal inflam-
matory processes, either ultrasound or more usually CT can 
be used to guide percutaneous drainage of inflammatory fluid 
collections.
Acute cholecystitis/biliary colic/jaundice
While acute cholecystitis is usually due to mechanical 
obstruction of the cystic duct or gallbladder neck by a gall -
stone, acute  acalculous cholecystitis can occur in critically 
Figure 14.39  Acute appendicitis. Contrast enhanced CT scan 
reconstructed in the coronal plane demonstrates a thickened appen -
dix in the right iliac fossa (arrow) with inflammatory changes in the 
surrounding fat and reactive thickening of the caecal pole.
Figure 14.40 Computed tomography scan showing a segment of 
thickened sigmoid colon with a paracolic abscess (arrow) in a patient 
with diverticulitis.
for this indication, in general it is best diagnosed with a CT 
scan. The typical CT appearance is of pericolic inflammatory 
change around a diverticulum, most commonly in the sig-
moid colon. Complications of diverticulitis include perfora -
tion, abscess formation, fistulation to adjacent structures and 
strictures in the bowel; CT is also the modality of choice to 
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   212 25/10/2017   07:58Imaging in oncology 213
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
ill patients from  a number of causes. In any case ultrasound 
is the modality of  choice should this diagnosis be suspected, 
and the classic diagnostic features are of gallbladder disten-
sion with wall thickening (>3 mm). A gallstone obstructing 
the gallbladder neck or cystic duct may be visualised; alterna-
tively, in acalculous cholecystitis sludge may be seen layering 
in the gallbladder lumen. Associated signs include perichole-
cystic fluid and hyperaemia on Doppler examination. Ultra-
sonographic Murphy’s sign refers to tenderness over the 
gallbladder when pressure is applied while scanning and is 
a supportive finding in making the diagnosis. As a second-  
line investigation CT is also accurate for this condition,  
demonstrating similar signs of gallbladder distension and 
wall thickening with surrounding inflammatory changes. CT 
is also  useful to diagnose complications such as gangrenous 
cholecystitis, gallbladder perforation and emphysematous 
cholecystitis, which may necessitate emergency cholecys -
tectomy. If cross-sectional studies are equivocal, hepatobi -
liary scintigraphy can  be useful, with the diagnosis of acute 
cholecystitis suggested by non-visualisation of the gallblad -
der 3 hours after radioisotope  administration.
A frequent limitation of ultrasound is failure to visualise 
the common bile duct throughout its length due to overly-
ing bowel gas, and elective cholecystectomy was typically 
accompanied by bile duct exploration to look for duct calculi. 
Increasingly, however, MRCP has been shown to be highly 
accurate in excluding bile duct calculi before surgery.
Ultrasound is also a useful first-line investigation for jaun-
dice of unknown cause as it can demonstrate duct dilatation 
and gallstones. If a definitive cause is not shown with ultra -
sound, or a mass is identified but its precise nature and extent 
is uncertain, CT is indicated to look for common causes 
including stones, cholangiocarcinoma and pancreatic carci -
noma. CT can not only identify malignant lesions but can 
also demonstrate the extent of local infiltration and the pres-
ence of metastases to determine potential resectability. If the 
ducts are of normal calibre in a jaundiced patient, liver biopsy 
should be considered.
Renal colic
The historical methods of imaging for renal colic all have 
their limitations. Plain film radiography may not demonstrate 
all calculi, will not show renal tract obstruction and is unreli-
able for alternative diagnoses. Intravenous urography (IVU) 
necessitates the administration of intravenous contrast and, if 
a level of obstruction is sought, delayed films up to 8 hours after 
injection may be required; it also will not provide alternative 
diagnoses. Ultrasound will demonstrate hydronephrosis and 
hydroureter, and calculi in the kidneys and either the prox -
imal or distal ureters can usually be identified as echogenic 
foci with posterior acoustic shadowing; however, the ureter 
from just below the kidneys to the pelvis is usually obscured 
by bowel gas, which significantly impairs stone detection.
For these reasons the optimal investigation is now CT 
KUB, a non-contrast, low dose (2–3 MSv if a low mA scan is 
performed, equivalent to the dose from a limited IVU series) 
scan from the upper poles of the kidneys to the pubic symphi-
sis. Contrast administration, either orally or intravenously, is 
not employed as it does not aid stone detection and may even 
impair it. Stones are readily identified as high attenuation 
(typically calcific) foci, and the secondary signs of acute ure -
teric obstruction may also be seen, including hydronephro -
sis and hydroureter, renal enlargement and perinephric fat 
stranding. The most common sites for stones to be seen are 
at the areas of ureteric narrowing, namely the pelvi-ureteric 
junction, the pelvic brim and vesico-ureteric junction. CT 
also offers unrivalled capability for making alternative diag -
noses when compared with other modalities.
Abdominal aortic aneurym
If a pulsatile mass is felt in the abdomen and the diagnosis of 
a possible abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is suspected, 
ultrasound is a useful modality and provided the aorta is not 
obscured by bowel gas an aneurysm can usually reliably be 
excluded. If, however, ultrasound visualisation is suboptimal 
and the diagnosis is as a result equivocal, or if an aneurysm 
is identified and information regarding the extent and exact 
size is required, for example for surgical or endovascular 
repair planning, CT  angiography is indicated, with the aorta 
typically scanned from the arch to the pubic symphisis in the 
arterial phase after intravenous contrast. MR angiography is 
a useful alternative if iodinated contrast is contraindicated.
In the case of suspected aneurysm rupture, provided the  
patient is sufficiently haemo dynamically stable to undergo 
CT, CT angiography should be urgently performed; a sup -
plementary non-enhanced initial scan is useful to look for 
retroperitoneal haematoma, which is typically of relatively  
high attenuation compared to the blood in the lumen on a 
non-contrast scan.
IMAGING IN ONCOLOGY
Modern surgical treatment of cancer requires an understand -
ing of tumour staging systems, as in many instances the tumour 
stage will define appropriate management. The development  
of stage-dependent treatment protocols involving neoadju -
vant chemotherapy and preoperative radiotherapy relies on 
the ability of imaging to determine stage accurately before sur-
gical and pathological staging. Once a diagnosis of cancer has 
been established, often by percutaneous or endoscopic biopsy, 
new imaging techniques can considerably improve the ability 
to define the extent of tumour, although the pathological spec-
imen remains the ‘gold standard’. Many staging systems are  
based on the tumour–node–metastasis (TNM) classification.
Tumour
In most published studies, cross-sectional imaging techniques 
(CT, ultrasound, MRI) are more accurate in staging advanced 
(T3, T4) than early (T1, T2) diseases, and the staging of early 
disease remains a challenge. In gut tumours, endoscopic ultra-
sound is more accurate than CT or MRI in the local staging 
of early disease (T1 and T2) by virtue of its ability to demon-
strate the layered structure of the bowel wall and the depth 
of tumour penetration (Figure 14.41). Developments in MRI 
may also improve the staging accuracy of early disease. MRI is 
extremely valuable in bone and soft-tissue tumour staging and 
in intracranial and spinal disease.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   213 25/10/2017   07:58CHAPTER 14  Diagnostic imaging
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS214
(a) (b)
Figure 14.41 (a) Echo endoscopy in gastric cancer. The hypoechoic tumour (arrows) is destroying the layered structure of the gastric wall and 
extending out beyond the serosa. (b) Computed tomography scan demonstrates thickening and enhancement of the gastric wall in the same 
area (arrows). The stomach is distended with water to provide low-density contrast.
Nodes
Accurate assessment of nodal involvement remains a chal-
lenge for imaging. Most imaging techniques rely purely on 
size criteria to demonstrate lymph node involvement, with 
no possibility of identifying micrometastases in normal-sized 
nodes. A size criterion of 8–10  mm is often adopted, but it 
is not usually possible to distinguish benign reactive nodes 
from infiltrated nodes. This is a particular problem in 
patients with intrathoracic neoplasms, in whom enlarged 
benign reactive mediastinal nodes are common. The echo 
characteristics of nodes at endoscopic ultrasound have been 
used in many centres to increase the accuracy of nodal 
staging, and nodal sampling is possible via either medias-
tinoscopy or transoesophageal biopsy under endoscopic 
ultrasound control. PET-CT is of increasing use in detect -
ing nodal metastases from a wide range of malignancies, 
with the capacity to coregister the area of increased FDG 
uptake with a precise anatomical location. Novel MRI con -
trast agents may help in the identification of non-enlarged 
tumour-infiltrated nodes.
Metastases
The demonstration of metastatic disease will usually signifi -
cantly affect surgical management. Mo dern cross-sectional 
imaging has greatly improved the detection of metastases, 
but occult lesions  will be overlooked in between 10% and 
30% of patients. CT  is the most sensitive technique for the 
detection of lung deposits, although the decision to perform 
CT will depend on the site of  the primary tumour, its likeli-
hood of intrapulmonary spread and the effect on staging and 
subsequent therapy of the demonstration of intrapulmonary 
deposits.
Ultrasound and CT are most frequently used to detect 
liver metastases. Contrast-enhanced CT can detect most 
lesions greater than 1 cm, although accuracy rates vary with 
the technique used and range from 70% to 90%. Recent 
studies suggest that MRI may be more accurate than CT in 
demonstrating metastatic disease. Preoperative identification 
of the segment of the liver involved can be determined by 
translation of the segmental surgical anatomy, as defined by 
Couinaud, to the cross-sectional CT images (Figure 14.42).
The technique of PET/CT with FDG, an analogue of 
glucose, is becoming a powerful tool in oncological imaging. 
This functional and anatomical imaging technique reflects 
tumour metabolism and allows the detection of otherwise 
occult metastases. The most common indications for PET/
CT have been staging of lymphoma, lung cancer, particularly 
non-small cell lung cancer, and preoperative assessment of 
potentially resectable liver metastases, such as colorectal car-
cinoma metastases (Figure 14.43).
Intraoperative ultrasound is an additional method of 
staging that provides superb high-resolution imaging of sub-
centimetre liver no dules that may not be palpable at sur -
gery. This is often used immediately prior to resection of liver 
metastases.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   214 25/10/2017   07:58Further reading 215
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Figure 14.42 (a) Surgical lobes of the liver (after Couinaud). IVC, inferior vena cava; LHV, left hepatic vein; LT, ligamentum teres; MHV, middle 
hepatic vein; RHV, right hepatic vein. (b) Segmental anatomy on computed tomography scan at the level of the hepatic veins. (c) Segmental 
anatomy at the level of the portal veins. (d) Segmental anatomy below the level of the portal veins.
IVC
LHVRHV
VII
VIII
MHV
VI
V
IV
II
III
L T
L T
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 14.43  Positron emission tomography shows fluor odeoxy-
glucose uptake in a carcinoma of the lung (short arrow) and mediasti-
nal lymph nodes (long arrow).
IVb
IVa
III
IIVIII
VII
V
VI
I
I
FURTHER READING
Adam A, Dixon AK (eds). Grainger and Allison’s diagnostic radiology: a 
textbook of medical imaging, 6th edn. London: Elsevier, 2014.
iRefer Guidelines. Making the best use of clinical radiology, 8th edition. 
London: Royal College of Radiologists, 2017.
Krishnam MS, Curtis J (eds). Emergency radiology. New York: Cambridge 
Medicine, 2010.
Pope T, Bloem HL, Beltran J et al. Musculoskeletal imaging, 2nd edn. 
 Oxford: Saunders, 2015.
Rockall AG, Hatrick A, Armstrong P , Wastie M. Diagnostic imaging, 7th 
edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
02_14B-B&L27_Pt2_Ch14.indd   215 25/10/2017   07:58Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To gain an understanding of:
 • The role of endoscopy as a diagnostic and therapeutic 
tool 
 • The basic organisation of an endoscopy unit and its 
equipment
 • Consent and safe sedation
 • Special situations: the key points in managing 
endoscopy in at-risk patients
 • The indications for diagnostic and therapeutic 
endoscopic procedures including endoscopic 
ultrasound
 • The recognition and management of complications
 • Novel techniques for endoscoping the small bowel
 • Advances in diagnostic ability
Gastrointestinal endoscopy
15
INTRODUCTION
The gastrointestinal tract has a myriad of functions, such as 
digestion, absorption and excretion, as well as the synthesis of 
an array of hormones, growth factors and cytokines. In addi -
tion, a complex enteric nervous system has evolved to control 
its function and communicate with the central and peripheral 
nervous systems. Finally, as the gastrointestinal tract contains 
the largest sources of foreign antigens to which the bo dy is 
exposed, it houses well-developed arms of both the innate 
and acquired immune system. Therefore, it is not surprising 
that malfunction or infection of this complex organ results 
in a wide spectrum of pathology. However, its importance in 
disease pathogenesis is matched only by its inaccessibility to 
traditional examination.
Few discoveries in medicine have contributed more to 
the practice of gastroenterology than the development of 
diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopy. Although spectacular 
advances in radiology have occurred recently with the intro -
duction of multislice spiral computed tomography (CT) and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the ability to take tar -
geted mucosal biopsies remains a unique strength of endos -
copy. Historically, radiological techniques were required to 
image areas of jejunum and ileum inaccessible to the stan -
dard endoscope; however, the introduction of both capsule 
endoscopy and single/double-balloon enteroscopy allows 
both diagnostic and therapeutic access to the entire gastro -
intestinal tract. Image enhancement with techniques such as 
chromoendoscopy, magnification endoscopy and narrow band 
imaging allows increased resolution at the mucosal level and 
increases diagnostic yield. Endoscopic ultrasound can exam -
ine all layers of the intestinal wall as well as extraintestinal 
structures. Finally, experimental techniques such as confo-
cal laser endomicroscopy give resolution at a level compat-
ible with standard histology. The advances in the diagnostic 
accuracy of endoscopy lend themselves to disease surveillance 
for specific patient groups as well as population screening for 
gastrointestinal malignancy. Likewise, there has been a rapid 
expansion in the therapeutic capability of endoscopy with 
both luminal and extraintestinal surgery being performed via 
endoscopic access.
As in all areas of interventional practice, competent 
endoscopists must match a thorough grounding in anatomy 
and physiology with a clear understanding of the capabilities 
and limitations of the rapidly advancing techniques available. 
Perhaps most importantly they must appreciate all aspects of 
patient care including preprocedural management, commu-
nication before and during the procedure and the manage -
ment of endoscopic complications. This chapter aims to guide 
the reader through these areas in addition to providing an 
introduction to the breadth of procedures that are currently 
 performed.
HISTORY OF ENDOSCOPY
Over the last 50 years, endoscopy has become a  powerful 
diagnostic and therapeutic tool. However , its development 
required two obvious but formidable barriers to be overcome. 
First, the gastrointestinal tract is rather long and tortuous 
and, second, no natural light shines through the available 
 orifices! Therefore, successful visualisation of anything 
beyond the  distal extremities requires a flexible instrument 
with an intrinsic light source that can transmit images to 
the operator. The illumination issue was solved in 1879 by 
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   216 25/10/2017   08:00The modern endoscopy unit 217
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Thomas Edison, but 25 years elapsed before a light source 
was incorporated into the primitive rigid endoscopes avail -
able at that time. The first approach to gastrointestinal tor -
tuosity was an instrument with articulated lenses and prisms, 
proposed by Hoffmann in 1911. Again, approximately two 
decades elapsed before this concept was incorporated into 
a semiflexible gastroscope by Wolf, a fabricator of medical 
instruments, and Schindler, a physician.
The real breakthrough was the discovery that images 
could be transmitted using flexible quartz fibres. Although 
this was first described in the late 1920s, it was not until 1954 
that Hopkins built a model of a flexible fibre imaging device. 
The availability of highly transparent optical quality glass 
led to the development in 1958 of the first flexible fibreoptic 
gastroscope by Larry Curtiss, a graduate student in physics, 
and Basil Hirschowitz, a trainee in gastroenterology. Over 
the next 30 years, the fibrescope evolved to allow examina -
tion of the upper gastrointestinal tract, the biliary system and 
the colon. In parallel with advances in diagnostic ability, a 
range of therapeutic procedures was developed (Table 15.1). 
Although the fibreoptic endoscope has been the workhorse of 
many endoscopy units over the last three decades, its obsoles-
cence was guaranteed by the invention of the charge coupled 
device (CCD) in the 1960s, which allowed the creation of a 
digital electronic image, permitting endoscopic images to be 
processed by a computer and transmitted to television screens. 
Thus, the modern endoscope was born (Figure 15.1).
History does not sit still, and endoscopic evolution will 
continue with the replacement of much diagnostic endos -
copy with capsule endoscopy and virtual imaging. Enhanced 
resolution using chromoendoscopy and even histological 
grade images have increased the diagnostic yield of surveil-
lance procedures. Endoscopic ultrasound allows diagnosis and 
 therapy to extend beyond the mucosal surface of the  intestine. 
 Traditional endoscopy will therefore become increasingly 
thera peutic and historical divisions between medicine, 
radiology and surgery will become progressively blurred. As 
the complexity of the procedures increase, the distinction 
between specialist and general endoscopists will become more 
definite. This reinforces the need for all endoscopic practi-
tioners to have a detailed understanding of the units in which 
they work and the instruments that they use.
THE MODERN ENDOSCOPY UNIT
Organisation
A well-designed endoscopy unit staffed by trained endoscopy 
nurses and dedicated administrative staff is essential to sup-
port good endoscopic practice and training. Clinical gover -
nance with regular appraisal and assessment of performance 
should be a routine process embedded within the unit phi-
losophy. Endoscopist training demands particular attention, 
with a transparent process of skills- and theory-based educa -
tion centred on practical experience and dedicated training 
courses. Experienced supervision of all trainee endoscopists is 
essential until competency has been obtained and assessed by 
an appropriately validated technique, such as direct observa -
tion of practical skills (DOPS) and review of procedure log -
books. However, all endoscopists should keep an on-going log 
to record diagnostic and therapeutic procedure numbers and 
markers of competency such as colonoscopy completion rates, 
polyp detection rates, mean sedation use and complication 
rates. Central to this is an efficient data management system 
that provides outcome analysis for all aspects of endoscopy 
including adherence to guidelines, near misses, patient sat-
isfaction, decontamination processes and scope tracking, as 
well as the more obvious completion and complication rates.
In the UK the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) provide guid-
ance for endoscopist competence assessment and operate a 
Figure 15.1 Photograph of standard gastroscope and colonoscope.
Thomas Alva Edison , 1847–1931, American physicist and inventor of Menlo Park, New Jersey, NJ, USA, produced the first carbon filament electric light bulb 
in 1879.
Harold Horace Hopkins , 1918–1994, Professor of Applied Optics, The University of Reading, Reading, UK.
Basil I. Hirschowitz , Professor of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
TABLE 15.1 Historical landmarks of gastrointestinal 
endoscopy.
1958 Development of fibreoptic gastroscope
1968 Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography
1969 Colonoscopic polypectomy
1970 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography
1974 Endoscopic sphincterotomy (with bile duct stone 
extraction)
1979 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
1980 Endoscopic injection sclerotherapy
1980 Endoscopic ultrasonography
1983 Electronic (charge coupled device) endoscope
1985 Endoscopic control of upper gastrointestinal bleeding
1990 Endoscopic variceal ligation
1996 Introduction of self-expanding metal stents
2008 Endomicroscopy delivers histological mucosal definition
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   217 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS218
Summary box 15.1
Disinfection of endoscopes
●● All channels must be brushed and irrigated throughout the 
disinfection process
●● All instruments and accessories should be traceable to each 
use, patient and cleaning cycle
●● All staff should be trained and protected (particularly if 
glutaraldehyde is used in view of its immune-sensitising 
properties)
●● Regular monitoring of disinfectant power and microbiological 
contamination should be performed
Summary box 15.2
The risks of endoscopy
●● Sedation-related cardiorespiratory complications
●● Damage to dentition
●● Aspiration
●● Perforation or haemorrhage after endoscopic dilatation/
therapeutic endoscopic ultrasound
●● Perforation, infection and aspiration after percutaneous 
endoscopic gastrostomy insertion
●● Perforation or haemorrhage after flexible sigmoidoscopy/
colonoscopy with polypectomy
●● Pancreatitis, cholangitis, perforation or bleeding after 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
certification system of individual endoscopic competencies, 
based on procedure numbers, key performance indicators (e.g. 
caecal intubation rate, adenoma detection, sedation levels, 
complications), course attendance and peer assessment.
Equipment
A full description of all available endoscopic equipment is 
beyond the scope of this chapter. However, each unit should 
have a sufficient range of endoscopes, processors and acces-
sories as dictated by the local case mix and sufficient endo -
scope numbers to ensure smooth service provision. These 
should include both forward- and lateral-viewing gastroscopes, 
an enteroscope for proximal small bowel visualisation and a 
range of adult and paediatric colonoscopes to aid examina -
tion of both redundant and fixed colons. Dedicated small 
bowel centres require capsule endoscopy and a single/double- 
balloon enteroscope for ileojejunal visualisation and therapeu-
tics. Larger centres will require linear and radial endoscopic 
ultrasound, particularly if they specialise in gastrointestinal 
and hepatobiliary malignancy. An electrosurgical unit is the 
cornerstone of many therapeutic procedures and this may be 
supplemented by an argon plasma coagulation (APC) unit and 
laser units for advanced therapeutics in specialised  centres.
Instrument decontamination
Endoscopes will not withstand steam-based autoclaving and 
therefore require high-level disinfection between cases to  
prevent transmission of infection. Although accessories may 
be autoclaved, best practice requires the use of disposable 
single-use items whenever possible. All equipment should 
be decontaminated to an identical standard whether for use 
on immunocompromised/infected patients or not. This pro -
cess involves two equally important stages: first, removal of 
physical debris from the internal and external surfaces of the 
instrument and, second, chemical neutralisation of all micro-
biological agents. A variety of agents are available and endos-
copists should familiarise themselves with the agent in use in 
their department. In 2014 the British Society of Gastroenterol-
ogy has updated guidelines for decontamination of endoscopes 
(http://www.bsg.org.uk/images/stories/docs/clinical/guidelines/
endoscopy/decontamination_2014_v2.pdf). Particular care 
should be applied to the decontamination of duodenoscopes 
due to reports of transmission of multiresistant bacteria. 
Key points in endoscope decontamination are shown in 
Summary box 15.1.
due to receipt of pooled plasma concentrates is no longer 
deemed to confer a high risk of endoscope contamination. 
A single quality assured decontamination cycle is considered 
sufficient, but the endoscope should be decontaminated sepa-
rately from others with a single-use disinfectant. There is no 
longer a requirement to quarantine the endoscope provided 
that routine traceability data can be demonstrated. 
CONSENT IN ENDOSCOPY
Approximately 1% of medical negligence claims in the USA 
relate to the practice of endoscopy. Many of these could 
have been avoided by a careful explanation of the proce-
dure, including an honest discussion of the risks and benefits. 
Therefore, obtaining informed consent is a cornerstone of 
good endoscopic practice. It preserves a patient’s autonomy, 
facilitates communication and acts as a shield against future 
complaints and claims of malpractice.
The most important aspect of the consent procedure is 
that a patient understands the nature, purpose and risk of a 
particular procedure. Current guidelines would suggest that 
a patient should be informed of minor adverse events with a 
risk of more than 10% and serious events with an incidence of 
more than 0.5%. The key risks of endoscopy are summarised 
in Summary box 15.2. The 2008 British Society of Gastroen -
terology Guidelines for consent can be found using the link 
http://www.bsg.org.uk/images/stories/docs/clinical/guidelines/
endoscopy/consent08.pdf.
There are currently no reliable means of decontaminating 
scopes from contact with prion-associated conditions such 
as variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD), although risk 
of transmission of this is considered very low. If an ‘invasive’ 
procedure (where gut mucosa is breached and an unsheathed 
accessory withdrawn through the endoscope working chan -
nel) is conducted in a patient with known or possible vCJD, 
the endoscope needs to be quarantined after use. The perfor-
mance of an invasive procedure in a patient at risk of vCJD 
Hans Gerhard Creutzfeldt , 1885–1964, neurologist, Kiel, Germany.
Alfons Marie Jakob , 1884–1931, neurologist, Hamburg, Germany.
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   218 25/10/2017   08:00Antibiotic prophyl axis 219
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
SAFE SEDATION
If performed competently the majority of diagnostic endos-
copy and colonoscopy can be performed without sedation 
or with pharyngeal anaesthesia alone. However, therapeutic 
procedures may cause pain and patients are often anxious; 
thus, in most countries sedation and analgesia are offered 
to achieve a state of conscious sedation (not anaesthesia). 
Medication-induced respiratory depression in elderly patients 
or those with comorbidities is the greatest cause of endosco -
py-related mortality and, therefore, safe sedation practices 
are essential. The involvement of anaesthetists to advise on 
appropriate protocols is recommended. Endoscopy in cer -
tain situations (particularly paediatric endoscopy) requires 
a general anaesthetic – this should only be undertaken by 
appropriately trained staff with adequate equipment available.
oral hypoglycaemic medication undergoing upper gastrointes-
tinal endoscopy. All patients should bring their own medi -
cation to the unit and should be advised not to drive in case 
there is an alteration in their glycaemic control. The majority 
of patients can be managed using clear protocols on an out -
patient basis; however, elderly patients and those with brit -
tle control should be admitted. In general, diabetic patients 
should be endoscoped first on the morning list. In complex 
cases the diabetic team should be involved.
ANTIBIOTIC PROPHYLAXIS
The majority of endoscopy can be performed safely without 
the need for routine antibiotic prophylaxis. However, given 
that certain endoscopic procedures are associated with a sig -
nificant bacteraemia (Table 15.2), there are several specific 
situations where antibiotic cover is required to prevent either 
bacterial endocarditis, infection of surgical prostheses or sys-
temic sepsis. In general, the risk of infection relates to the 
level of bacteraemia and the risk of the underlying medical 
condition. Traditionally, patients with a previous history of 
endocarditis or a metallic heart valve received antibiotic 
prophylaxis for all endoscopic procedures, and some national 
guidelines still reflect this. However, in 2009 UK guidelines 
changed in response to the low reported incidence of infec-
tive endocaritis in this patient group undergoing endoscopy 
(http://www.bsg.org.uk/images/stories/docs/clinical/guide -
lines/endoscopy/prophylaxis_09.pdf). Patients with severe 
neutropenia may also require antibiotic prophylaxis for 
Summary box 15.3
Sedation in endoscopy
●● Pharyngeal anaesthesia may increase the risk of aspiration in 
more heavily sedated patients
●● Comorbidities must be identified so that sedation can be 
individualised
●● All sedated patients require secure intravenous access
●● Benzodiazepines reach their maximum effect 15–20 min after 
administration – doses should be titrated carefully, particularly 
in the elderly or those with comorbidities
●● Coadministration of opiates and benzodiazepines has a 
synergistic effect – opiates should be given first and doses 
need to be reduced
●● The use of supplementary oxygen is essential in all sedated 
patients
●● Sedated patients require pulse oximetry to monitor oxygen 
saturation; high-risk patients or those undergoing high-risk 
procedures also require blood pressure and electrocardiogram 
monitoring
●● A trained assistant should be responsible for patient 
monitoring throughout the procedure
●● Resuscitation equipment and sedation reversal agents must 
be readily available
●● The use of anaesthetic agents such as propofol for complex 
procedures requires specialist training
●● The halflife of benzodiazepines is 4–24 hours – appropriate 
recovery and monitoring is essential. Postprocedural 
consultations may not be remembered, and patients must be 
advised not to drink alcohol or drive for 24 hours
ENDOSCOPY IN DIABETIC 
PATIENTS
As approximately 2% of the population is diabetic, managing 
glycaemic control before and after endoscopy is an essential 
aspect of endoscopic practice. Each unit should develop a pol-
icy for managing diabetic control during endoscopy. Factors 
influencing management include the type of diabetes, the 
procedure that is planned, the preparation/recovery time, and 
the history of diabetic control in the individual patient. Thus, 
a poorly controlled insulin-dependent diabetic undergoing 
colonoscopy will require more input than a type 2 diabetic on 
TABLE 15.2 Approximate incidence of bacteraemia in 
immunocompetent individuals following various procedures 
involving the gastrointestinal tract.
Procedure Incidence of 
bacteraemia (%)a
Rectal digital examination  4
Proctoscopy  5
Barium enema 11
Tooth brushing 25
Dental extraction 30–60
Colonoscopy  2–4
Diagnostic upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy
 4
Sigmoidoscopy  6–9
ERCP (no duct occlusion)  6
ERCP (duct occluded) 11
Oesophageal varices band ligation  6
Oesophageal varices sclerotherapy 10–50b
Oesophageal dilatation/prosthesis 34–54
Oesophageal laser therapy 35
EUS +/− fine needle aspirate  0–6
a Summary of published data.
b Higher after emergency than after elective management. ERCP , 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS, endoscopic 
ultrasound.
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   219 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS220
endoscopy. The anti biotic regime used will depend on local 
guidelines. Procedures such as endoscopic percutaneous gas -
trostomy are associated with a significant incidence of wound 
or stoma infection, particularly if inserted for malignancy. 
There is excellent evidence that antibiotic prophylaxis 
reduces this complication and a single intravenous injection 
of coamoxiclav should be administered before the procedure. 
Ciprofloxacin is routinely used during endoscopic manipula -
tion of an obstructed biliary tree in which it is unlikely that 
complete drainage will be achieved or there is significant 
comorbidity. When cystic cavities are aspirated at endoscopic 
ultrasound, a one-off dose of broad spectrum antibiotic (e.g. 
co-amoxiclav) is recommended to prevent cyst infection. 
Patients with chronic liver disease and ascites undergoing 
variceal sclerotherapy should receive antibiotic prophylaxis 
to prevent bacterial peritonitis.
ANTICOAGULATION IN 
PATIENTS UNDERGOING 
ENDOSCOPY
Many patients undergoing endoscopy may be taking medica -
tion that interferes with normal haemostasis, such as warfa -
rin, heparin, direct oral anticoagulants, clopidogrel or aspirin. 
The key points to remember when managing anticoagulants 
in patients undergoing endoscopy are given in Summary 
box 15.4.
If rapid resumption of anticoagulation is required, intrave -
nous heparin should be used.
Elective endoscopy in patients on 
anticoagulants and antiplatelet 
agents
Endoscopic procedures vary in their potential to produce 
significant or uncontrolled bleeding. Diagnostic oesoph -
agogastroduodenoscopy (OGD), colonoscopy, enteroscopy, 
diagnostic endoscopic ultrasound and endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) without sphincterotomy 
are considered low risk, as is mucosal biopsy. High-risk pro -
cedures include colonoscopic polypectomy (1–2.5%), gastric 
polypectomy (4%), laser ablation of tumour (6%), endo -
scopic sphincterotomy (2.5–5%), EMR and ESD, stent place-
ment and procedures with the potential to produce bleeding 
that is inaccessible or uncontrollable by endoscopic means, 
such as dilatation of benign or malignant strictures, percu-
taneous gastrostomy insertion and endoscopic ultrasound 
(EUS)-guided fine-needle aspiration. Likewise, the proba -
bility of a thromboembolic complication during temporary 
cessation of anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy depends on 
the underlying medical condition (Table 15.3).
Summary box 15.4
Managing anticoagulants in patients undergoing 
endoscopy
It is important to recognise and understand:
●● The risk of complications related to the underlying 
gastrointestinal disease from anticoagulant therapy
●● The risk of haemorrhage related to an endoscopic procedure 
in the setting of anticoagulant therapy
●● The risk of a thromboembolic/ischaemic event related to 
interruptions of anticoagulant therapy
Urgent endoscopy for 
gastrointestinal bleeding in the 
anticoagulated patient
The risk of clinically significant gastrointestinal bleeding in 
patients on warfarin is increased, particularly in patients with 
a past history of similar events, if the international normalised 
ratio (INR) is above the therapeutic range or if they are tak-
ing concomitant aspirin/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs). In these situations the risk of reversing the 
anticoagulation must be weighed against the risk of on-going 
haemorrhage. If complete reversal is not appropriate, correc -
tion of the INR to approximately 1.5 is usually sufficient to 
allow endoscopic diagnosis and therapy. Anticoagulation can 
often be resumed 24 hours after successful endoscopic  therapy. 
TABLE 15.3 The risk of a thromboembolic event varies 
according to the underlying medical condition.
Condition Risk
Atrial fibrillation with valvular heart disease High
Mechanical mitral valve High
Mechanical valve and previous thromboembolic event High
Deep vein thrombosis Low
Uncomplicated atrial fibrillation Low
Bioprosthetic valve Low
Mechanical aortic valve Low
Summary box 15.5
Recommendations concerning P2Y12 antiplatelet 
drugs (clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagrelor)
Low-risk procedures
●● Continue therapy
High-risk procedures, low-risk indication for antiplatelet 
therapy
●● Stop 5 days before procedure (continue aspirin if taken)
High-risk procedures, high-risk indication for antiplatelet 
therapy (e.g. coronary artery stent)
●● Liaise with cardiologist (consider stopping for 5 days if drug-
eluting stent older than 12 months or bare metal stent older 
than 1 month)
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   220 25/10/2017   08:00Upper gastroint estinal endoscopy 221
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Aspirin
Aspirin and NSAIDs inhibit platelet cyclo-oxygenase result -
ing in suppression of thromboxane A2-induced platelet aggre-
gation. Limited published data do not suggest an increased 
bleeding risk in patients taking standard doses and, therefore, 
there is no need to discontinue therapy before endoscopic 
procedures. 
UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL 
ENDOSCOPY
OGD is the most commonly performed endoscopic proce -
dure. Excellent visualisation of the oesophagus, gastrooesoph-
ageal junction, stomach, duodenal bulb and second part of 
the duodenum can be obtained (Figure 15.2). Retroversion 
of the gastroscope in the stomach is essential to obtain com-
plete views of the gastric cardia and fundus (Figure 15.2). 
Traditional forward-viewing endoscopes do not adequately 
visualise the ampulla, and a side-viewing scope should be 
used if this is essential. Likewise, although it is possible to 
reach the third part of the duodenum with a standard 120 cm 
instrument, a longer enteroscope is required if views beyond 
the ligament of Treitz are required. In addition to clear muco-
sal views, diagnostic endoscopy allows mucosal biopsies to be 
taken, which may either undergo processing for histological 
examination or be used for near-patient detection of Helico-
bacter pylori infection using a commercial urease-based kit. In 
addition, brushings may be taken for cytology and aspirates 
for microbiological culture.
Indications for 
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy
A full assessment of the role of OGD is outside the scope of this 
chapter. It will vary with local circumstances and the avail -
ability of alternative diagnostic techniques. OGD is usually 
appropriate when a patient’s symptoms are persistent despite 
appropriate empirical therapy or are associated with warning 
signs such as intractable vomiting, anaemia, weight loss, dys -
phagia or bleeding. It is also part of the diagnostic work-up 
for patients with anaemia, symptoms of malabsorption and 
chronic diarrhoea. However, increasing ease of access to OGD 
with the availability of ‘open access’ endoscopy has resulted 
in a significant number of unnecessary procedures being per -
formed in young patients with dyspepsia or gastro-oesophageal 
reflux disease (GORD). This has led to a number of interna -
tional gastroenterology societies proposing guidelines for the 
management of dyspepsia and GORD, including the empirical 
use of acid suppression and non-invasive H. pylori tests, such 
as urease breath tests and stool antigen assay (e.g. the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines on  
dyspepsia: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg184/chapter/  
1-recommendations). In addition to the role of OGD in diag-
nosis, it is also commonly used in the surveillance of neopla -
sia development in high-risk patient groups. Whereas there is 
consensus about its role in genetic conditions such as familial 
adenomatous polyposis and Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, con-
troversy remains about the role and frequency of endoscopic 
surveillance in premalignant conditions such as Barrett’s 
oesophagus and gastric intestinal metaplasia (although ongo-
ing studies will hopefully answer some of these uncertainties).
Therapeutic 
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy
Increasing technological advances have revolutionised the 
therapeutic applications of upper gastrointestinal endos -
Summary box 15.5 – contd
Recommendations concerning warfarin anticoagulant 
management
Low-risk procedures
●● No adjustment to anticoagulation required 
●● Check INR within the week before procedure
●● Avoid elective procedures when anticoagulation is above the 
therapeutic range
High-risk procedure in a patient with a low-risk condition
●● Discontinue warfarin 5 days before the procedure
●● Check INR on day of procedure to ensure <1.5
●● Restart warfarin on evening after procedure if uncomplicated 
and recheck INR in 1 week
High-risk procedure in a patient with a high-risk condition
●● Discontinue warfarin 5 days before the procedure
●● Start low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) 2 days after 
stopping warfarin
●● Check INR on day of procedure to ensure <1.5
●● Omit LMWH on day of procedure
●● Warfarin may be resumed the night of the procedure
●● LMWH should be continued until INR adequate 
●● The decision to administer intravenous heparin should be 
individualised
Recommendations concerning direct oral 
anticoagulants (e.g. dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
apixaban)
Low-risk procedures
●● Omit on the morning of procedure
High-risk procedures
●● Take last dose ≥48 h before procedure (for dabigatran ≥72 h 
before if estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 30–50 mL/
min)
Wenzel Treitz , 1819–1872, Professor of Pathology, Prague, The Czech Republic.
John Law Augustine Peutz , 1886–1968, Chief Specialist for Internal Medicine, St. John’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Harold Joseph Jeghers , 1904–1990, Professor of Internal Medicine, New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, Jersey City, NJ, USA.
Norman Rupert Barrett , 1903–1979, surgeon, St. Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK.
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   221 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS222
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 15.2 A normal upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showing the gastro-oesophageal junction (a), the gastric fundus in the ‘J’ position (b), 
the gastric antrum (c) and the second part of the duodenum (d).
copy. However, appropriate patient selection and monitoring 
is essential to minimise complications. The most common 
thera peutic endoscopic procedure performed as an emergency 
is the control of upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage of any 
aetiology. Band ligation has replaced sclerotherapy in the 
management of oesophageal varices (Figure 15.3), whereas 
sclerotherapy using thrombin-based glues can be used to con-
trol blood loss from gastric and duodenal varices. Injection 
sclerotherapy with adrenaline coupled with a second haemo -
static technique such as heater probe vessel obliteration or 
haemoclip application, remains the technique of choice for a 
peptic ulcer with an active arterial spurt or high-risk stigmata 
(a) (b)
Figure 15.3 Grade 2 oesophageal varices (a), which can be treated by the application of bands to ligate the vessel and reduce blood flow (b).
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   222 25/10/2017   08:00Upper gastroint estinal endoscopy 223
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
of haemorrhage (Figure 15.4). Such high-risk bleeds should 
be followed by 72 hours of intravenous proton pump inhibi-
tion in all cases. Chronic blood loss from angioectasia is most 
safely treated with APC because of the controlled depth of 
burn compared with alternative thermal techniques (Figure 
15.5).
Benign oesophageal and pyloric strictures may be dilated 
under direct vision with ‘through-the-scope’ (TTS) balloon 
dilators or the more traditional guidewire-based systems such 
as Savary–Guillard bougie dilators (Figure 15.6). On occa-
sion, more difficult benign strictures can be treated by the 
insertion of a fully-covered removable stent, or with a bio -
degradeable stent. Likewise, the non-relaxing lower oesoph-
ageal sphincter associated with achalasia can be treated by 
pneumatic balloon dilatation with a 30–40  mm balloon. 
Endoscopic dissection techniques (see below) are now being 
employed to treat achalasia by natural orifice myotomy (per-
oral endoscopic myotomy, POEM) with good early follow-up 
results. An alternative in patients unfit to suffer endoscopic 
complication is the injection of botulinum toxin into the 
lower oesophageal sphincter, although this has a limited (3–6 
month) duration of benefit.
There are a limited number of endoscopic techniques 
available to reduce gastro-oesophageal reflux, which rely 
on tightening the loose gastro-oesophageal junction by pli -
cation or by the application of radial thermal energy. These 
techniques may have a role in some patients, but are yet to 
demonstrate benefit over surgical fundoplication. Likewise, 
Figure 15.4  A gastric ulcer 
with active bleeding (a) is ini-
tially treated with adr enaline 
injection to achieve haemo-
stasis (b). Two haemoclips 
are then applied to prevent 
rebleeding (c and d).
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 15.5 The classic appearance of gastric antral vascular ecta -
sia (GAVE), which is often treated with argon plasma coagulation.
endoscopic techniques to tackle obesity, such as gastric bal -
loon insertion, have not been associated with evidence of 
long-lasting benefit. In contrast, there is clear evidence 
that the insertion of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy 
(PEG) tube enhances nutritional and functional outcome 
in patients unable to maintain oral nutritional intake (Fig-
ure 15.7). PEG insertion is often a prelude to treatment of 
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   223 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS224
Figure 15.6  A pyloric stric -
ture (a) can be dilated using 
a ‘through-the-scope’ balloon 
under direct vision to minimise 
complications (b).
(a)
(b)
(d)
(b)
Figure 15.7  A schematic 
diagram of percutaneous 
endoscopic gastrostomy 
insertion. A standard endos-
copy is performed to ensure 
that there are no contrain-
dications to gastrostomy 
insertion. The stomach is 
insufflated with air and a 
direct percutaneous needle 
puncture made at a point 
where the stomach abuts 
the abdominal wall. Ligno-
caine is infused on with-
drawal (a). A trochar is 
inserted and a wire passed 
into the stomach, which can 
be caught with a snare (b). 
The scope is withdrawn, 
pulling the wire out through 
the mouth, at which point it 
is attached to the gastros -
tomy tube (c). The gas-
trostomy is pulled through 
into the stomach and out 
through the track created by 
the trochar insertion (d).
(a)
(c)
 complex orofacial malignancy, and may be used to support 
nutrition in patients with alternative malignant, degenera -
tive or inflammatory diseases.
The deployment of self-expanding metal stents with or 
without a covering sheath inserted over a stiff guidewire leads 
to a significant improvement in symptomatic dysphagia and 
quality of life in patients with malignant oesophageal and 
gastric outlet obstruction (Figure 15.8). Covered stents are 
the mainstay of treatment for benign or malignant tracheo-  
oesophageal fistulae. 
Perhaps the area of greatest progress over recent years has 
been in the endoscopic management of early oesophageal and 
gastric neoplasia with endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) or 
endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). These techniques 
require specialist training, but have allowed endoscopic man-
agement of mucosal lesions that were previously subject to 
surgical intervention (Figure 15.9). A prime example has 
been improved endoscopic treatment of Barrett’s high-grade 
dysplasia and early oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Destruc-
tion of residual Barrett’s epithelium in cases of low- or high-
grade dysplasia is possible with endoscopic ablation, and has 
been shown to reduce risk of progression to cancer. The most 
commonly used technique for this purpose is radiofrequency 
ablation, where 360° ablation can be achieved with a balloon 
catheter, or more focused ablation with smaller probes. Cryo-
therapy and APC can also be used for ablation, but photody -
namic therapy is now used much less often.
Complications of 
diagnostic and therapeutic 
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy
Diagnostic upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is a safe proce -
dure with minimal morbidity as long as appropriate patient 
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   224 25/10/2017   08:00Endoscopic assessment of the small bowel 225
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Summary box 15.6
Symptoms of endoscopic oesophageal perforation
●● Neck/chest pain
●● Dysphagia/drooling saliva
●● Abdominal pain
●● Increasing tachycardia
●● Hypotension
●● Surgical emphysema
Figure 15.8  A self-expanding metal stent may 
alleviate symptoms r elating to malignant oesoph -
ageal strictures. The left panel shows an endo -
scopic view of a deployed stent, and the right 
panel shows the radiographic image.
Figure 15.9 Novel upper gastrointestinal therapeutic uses of oesoph-
agogastroduodenoscopy include the use of endoscopic mucosal 
resection to remove early gastric cancer leaving a clean base.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described regional ileitis in 1932.
selection and safe sedation practices are embedded in the 
unit policy. The mortality rate is estimated to be less than 
1:10 000, with a complication rate of approximately 1:1000. 
As mentioned above, the majority of adverse events relate to 
sedation and patient comorbidity. Particular caution should 
be exercised in patients with recent unstable cardiac isch -
aemia and respiratory compromise. Perforation can occur at 
any point in the upper gastrointestinal tract, including the 
oropharynx. It is rare during diagnostic procedures and is 
often associated with inexperience. Perforation is more com -
mon in therapeutic endoscopy, particularly oesophageal dil -
atation and EMR/ESD for early malignancy. Early diagnosis 
significantly improves outcome and thus all staff must be alert 
to the symptoms.
ENDOSCOPIC ASSESSMENT OF 
THE SMALL BOWEL
Introduction and indications
The requirement to visualise, biopsy and treat the small bowel 
is far less than in the stomach, biliary tree or colon, resulting 
in a time lag in technological advances. The most frequent 
indication is the investigation of gastrointestinal blood loss, 
which may present with either recurrent iron deficiency anae-
mia (occult haemorrhage) or recurrent overt blood loss per 
rectum (cryptic haemorrhage) in a patient with normal OGD 
(with duodenal biopsies) and colonoscopy. Other indications 
include the investigation of malabsorption; the exclusion of 
cryptic small bowel inflammation such as Crohn’s disease in 
patients with diarrhoea/abdominal pain and evidence of an 
inflammatory response; targeting lesions seen on radiological 
investigations; and surveillance for neoplasia in patients with 
inherited polyposis syndromes.
A standard enteroscope is able to reach and biopsy lesions 
detected in the proximal small bowel; however, even in the 
most experienced hands this is limited to approximately 100 
cm distal to the pylorus, although the use of a stiffening over-
tube may increase this somewhat. The procedure takes approxi-
mately 45 min and may be uncomfortable, requiring high doses 
of sedation with the attendant increased risk of perforation and 
sedation-related morbidity. Sonde endoscopy, in theory, has the 
potential to examine the entire small bowel. In this procedure 
a long thin endoscope is inserted transnasally into the stom -
ach and pushed through the pylorus with a gastroscope passed 
through the mouth. It is carried distally by peristalsis, which 
propels a balloon inflated at the tip. The technique has several 
limitations including a long examination time (6–8 hours), 
Prompt management includes radiological assessment 
using CT/water-soluble contrast studies, strict nil by mouth, 
intravenous fluids and antibiotics and early review by an 
experienced upper gastrointestinal surgeon.
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   225 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS226
patient discomfort, the danger of perforation and the inability 
to perform therapeutic procedures. For these reasons it is not  
widely performed and will soon become obsolete.
Therefore, until recently, barium follow-through or entero-
clysis were the most effective imaging modalities to visualise 
the distal duodenum, jejunum and ileum. Obviously these 
techniques do not give true mucosal views, and outside spe -
cialist centres their decreasing use has led to diminished exper-
tise and a reduced diagnostic yield. There have been rapid 
advances in axial radiological techniques such as MRI and CT 
enteroclysis, which demonstrate excellent diagnostic accuracy 
in this area (see Chapter 14). However, although these tech-
niques may yield information about vascularity and bowel wall 
thickening, they do not allow direct mucosal views, have no 
biopsy capability and have limited scope in terms of therapeu-
tics. Historically, if an area of interest was outside the reach 
of a standard enteroscope, direct access via enterotomy under 
either laparoscopic or open surgery was required. T wo major 
clinical advances over the last decade have revolutionised 
small bowel diagnosis and therapeutics. First, the development 
of the capsule endoscope allows diagnostic mucosal views of 
the entire small bowel to be obtained with minimal discomfort 
in unsedated patients. Second, the novel technique of single/
double-balloon enteroscopy allows endoscopic access to the 
entire small bowel for biopsy and therapeutics (Table 15.4).
Capsule endoscopy
The prototype capsule endoscope was developed at the Royal 
London Hospital in the UK by Professor Paul Swain. Sev -
eral companies have developed different systems for routine 
clinical use, but the basic principles remain identical. The 
 technique requires three main components: an ingestible 
capsule, a portable data recorder and a workstation equipped 
with image-processing software. The capsule consists of an 
optical dome and lens, two light-emitting diodes, a processor, 
a battery, a transmitter and an antenna encased in a resistant 
coat the size of a large vitamin pill (Figure 15.10). It acquires 
TABLE 15.4 Comparison of the advantages and 
disadvantages of the currently available modalities to 
endoscope the small intestine.
Technique Advantages Disadvantages
Traditional 
enteroscopy
Simple technique with 
wide availability
Full range of 
therapeutics available
Performed under 
sedation
Some discomfort
Can only access 
proximal small bowel
Capsule 
endoscopy
Able to visualise the 
entire small bowel
Preferable for patients
No sedation
Painless
No biopsies
Not controllable and no 
accurate localisation
Variable transit
Incomplete studies due 
to battery life
Not suitable for patients 
with strictures
Large capsule to swallow
Double/
single-balloon 
enteroscopy
Able to visualise the 
entire small bowel
Full range of 
therapeutics
Requires sedation/
general anaesthesia
Patient discomfort
May take 3–4 hours; may 
require admission
Specialist centres only
Complications include 
perforation
Battery
Transmitter
Antenna
Optical dome
Lens
Light-emitting diode (LED)
Processor
(a) (c)
(d)(b)
Figure 15.10 Complete diagnostic visual-
isation of the small bowel can be achieved 
with capsule endoscopy (a). The structure 
of the capsule is shown in (b). Clear muco-
sal pictures can be achieved here showing 
angioectasias (arrow) (c) and small bowel 
Crohn’s disease (d).
Christopher Paul Swain , Professor of Gastroenterology, The Royal London Hospital, London, UK.
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   226 25/10/2017   08:00Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatography 227
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
video images during natural propulsion through the digestive 
system that it transmits via a digital radiofrequency commu -
nication channel to the recorder unit worn outside the body; 
this also contains sensors that allow basic localisation of the 
site of image capture within the abdomen. Upon completion 
of the examination, the physician transfers the accumulated 
data to the workstation for interpretation via a high-capacity 
digital link. The workstation is a modified personal computer 
required for off-line data storage, interpretation and analysis 
of the acquired images and report generation.
The small bowel capsule provides good visualisation from 
mouth to colon with a high diagnostic yield. It compares 
favourably with the ‘gold standard’ techniques for the locali -
sation of cryptic and occult gastrointestinal bleeding and the 
diagnosis of small bowel Crohn’s disease. Use of the capsule 
endoscope is contraindicated in patients with known small 
bowel strictures in which it may impact, resulting in acute 
obstruction requiring retrieval at laparotomy or via laparos -
copy. Severe gastroparesis and pseudo-obstruction are also 
relative contraindications to its use. Some units advocate a 
barium follow-through or small bowel MRI to exclude stric -
turing disease in all patients before capsule endoscopy. How -
ever, there are well-reported episodes of capsule impaction in 
a stricture that was not visualised on prior imaging. Therefore, 
a ‘dummy’ patency capsule that can be tracked via a hand-
held device or conventional radiology as it passes through the 
intestine should be used in all patients where there is a possi-
bility of stricturing disease. The patency capsule will dissolve 
after 40 hours if it becomes impacted. Technology in this field 
is rapidly advancing, with capsule systems designed to image 
the oesophagus and colon nearing the market. Prototype cap-
sules that can be directed, take biopsies and deliver thermal 
therapy to angioectasia are in development.
Single/double-balloon enteroscopy
This technique allows the direct visualisation of and thera -
peutic intervention for the entire small bowel and may be 
attempted via either the oral or rectal route. Double-balloon 
enteroscopy was developed in 2001 in Japan; it involves the 
use of a thin enteroscope and an overtube, which are both 
fitted with a balloon. The procedure is usually carried out 
under general anaesthesia, but may be undertaken with the 
use of conscious sedation. The enteroscope and overtube are 
inserted through either the mouth or anus and steered to 
the proximal duodenum/terminal ileum in the conventional 
manner. Following this the endoscope is advanced a small 
distance in front of the overtube and the balloon at the end 
is inflated. Using the assistance of friction at the interface 
between the enteroscope and intestinal wall, the small bowel 
is accordioned back to the overtube. The overtube balloon is 
then deployed and the enteroscope balloon is deflated.
The process is then continued until the entire small 
bowel is visualised (Figure 15.11). In single-balloon enteros-
copy, developed more recently, an enteroscope and over -
tube are used, but only the overtube has a balloon attached. 
A full range of therapeutics including diagnostic biopsy, 
 polypectomy, APC and stent insertion are available for bal -
loon enteroscopy. Some experts advocate routine capsule 
 endoscopy before balloon enteroscopy in an attempt to local-
ise any lesions and plan whether oral or rectal access is more 
appropriate. The indications for single/double-balloon endos-
copy are given in Summary box 15.7.
Summary box 15.7
Current established indications for single/double-
balloon endoscopy
●● Bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract of obscure cause
●● Iron deficiency anaemia with normal colonoscopy and 
gastroscopy
●● Visualisation of and therapeutic intervention for abnormalities 
seen on traditional small bowel imaging/capsule endoscopy
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 15.11 The technique of double-balloon enteroscopy is per -
formed with an adapted enteroscope and overtube, both of which 
have inflatable balloons at their tip.
ENDOSCOPIC RETROGRADE 
CHOLANGIOPANCREATOGRAPHY
This procedure involves the use of a side-viewing duodenos -
cope, which is passed through the pylorus and into the second 
part of the duo denum to visualise the papilla. This is then 
cannulated, either directly with a catheter or with the help 
of a guidewire (Figure 15.12). Occasionally a small precut 
is required to gain access. By altering the angle of approach 
one can selectively cannulate the pancreatic duct or biliary 
tree, which is then visualised under fluoroscopy after con-
trast injection. The significant range of complications asso-
ciated with this procedure and improvements in radiological 
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   227 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS228
 imaging using magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) have rendered much diagnostic ERCP obsolete, and 
thus most procedures are currently performed for therapeu-
tic purposes. There is still a role for accessing cytology/biopsy 
specimens.
Therapeutic endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography
It is essential to ensure that patients have appropriate assess -
ment prior to therapeutic ERCP , which is associated with a 
significant morbidity and occasional mortality. All patients 
require routine blood screening including a clotting screen. 
Assessment of respiratory and cardiovascular comorbidity is 
essential. The use of supplementary oxygen and both cardiac 
and oxygen saturation monitoring during the procedure are 
essential because of the high level of sedation that is often 
required. 
The most common indication for therapeutic ERCP is the 
relief of biliary obstruction due to gallstone disease and benign 
or malignant biliary strictures. The preprocedural diagnosis 
can be confirmed by contrast injection, which will clearly dif-
ferentiate the filling defects associated with gallstones and the 
luminal narrowing of a stricture. If there is likely to be a delay 
in relieving an obstructed system, percutaneous drainage may 
be required.
The cornerstone of gallstone retrieval is an adequate 
biliary sphincterotomy, which is normally performed over a 
well-positioned guidewire using a sphincterotome connected 
to an electrosurgical unit. Most gallstones less than 1 cm in 
diameter will pass spontaneously in the days and weeks follow-
ing a sphincterotomy, but most endoscopists prefer to ensure 
duct clearance at the initial procedure to reduce the risk of 
impaction, cholangitis or pancreatitis. This can be achieved 
by trawling the duct using a balloon catheter or by extraction 
using a wire basket. If standard techniques fail, large or awk -
wardly placed stones can be crushed using mechanical litho -
tripsy. If adequate stone extraction cannot be achieved at the 
initial ERCP it is imperative to ensure biliary drainage with 
the placement of a removable plastic stent while alternative 
options are considered. These include surgery, endoscopically 
directed shockwaves under direct choledochoscopic vision 
(see below) and extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy with 
subsequent ERCP to remove stone fragments.
Dilation of benign biliary strictures uses balloon catheters 
similar to those used in angioplasty inserted over a guidewire 
under fluoroscopic control. It is traditional to insert a tem -
porary plastic stent to maintain drainage as several attempts 
at dilatation may be required. Self-expanding metal stents 
are most commonly used for the palliation of malignant bil-
iary obstruction and are also normally inserted after a mod -
est sphincterotomy. Correct stent placement can normally 
be confirmed by a flow of bile after release and by the pres -
ence of air in the biliary tree on follow-up plain abdominal 
radiographs. Stent malfunction, associated with recurrent or 
persistent biochemical cholestasis, may be due to poor initial 
stent position, stent migration, blockage with blood clot or 
debris or tumour ingrowth. A repeat procedure is required to 
assess the cause, which can usually be remedied by the inser -
tion of a second stent through the original one.
In addition to the standard techniques discussed above, 
ERCP is also used for pancreatic disease and the assessment 
of biliary dysmotility (sphincter of Oddi dysfunction) using 
manometry in specialist centres. Indications include pancre -
atic stone extraction, the dilatation of pancreatic duct stric-
tures and the transgastric drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts. 
To minimise the risks of subsequent pancreatitis, pancreatic 
sphincterotomy is most safely performed after the placement 
of a temporary pancreatic stent to prevent stasis within the 
pancreatic duct.
Visualisation and sampling of biliary lesions is becoming 
easier and more effective with the development of newer 
through-the-duodenoscope cholangioscopes that allow direct 
visualisation and instrumentation of the biliary and pancre -
atic ducts.
Complications associated 
with endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography
The same risks associated with other endoscopic procedures 
also apply to patients undergoing ERCP , but risks may be 
increased because of the increased patient frailty and high 
sedation levels required. Complications specific to ERCP 
Figure 15.12  During endoscopic retr ograde 
cholangiopancreatography a side-viewing duo-
denoscope is positioned opposite the papilla, 
which can then be cannulated using either a 
catheter or a guidewire (a). Contrast is injected 
to achieve a cholangiogram (b).
(a) (b)
Ruggero Oddi , 1845–1906, physiologist, Perugia, who later worked in Rome, Italy.
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   228 25/10/2017   08:00Colonoscopy 229
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
include duodenal perforation (1.3%)/haemorrhage (1.4%) 
after scope insertion or sphincterotomy, pancreatitis (4.3%) 
and sepsis (3–30%); the mortality rate approaches 1%. It is 
important to remember that postsphincterotomy complica -
tions may be retroperitoneal and, therefore, CT scanning is 
essential in patients with pain, tachycardia or hypotension 
postprocedure. Although normally mild, post-ERCP pancre -
atitis can be severe with extensive pancreatic necrosis and 
a significant mortality rate (Table 15.5). Many trials have 
assessed pharmacological strategies to reduce the incidence 
of pancreatitis. It is now recommended that, where there is 
no contraindication, all patients undergoing ERCP should be 
administered per-rectal indomethacin or diclofenac immedi -
ately before or after the procedure to reduce the risk of post-
ERCP pancreatitis.
TABLE 15.5 Risk factors for post-ERCP pancreatitis.
Definite Suspected SOD
Young age
Normal bilirubin
Prior ERCP-related pancreatitis
Difficult cannulation
Pancreatic duct contrast injection
Pancreatic sphincterotomy
Balloon dilatation of biliary sphincter
Possible Female sex
Low volume of ERCPs performed
Absent CBD stone
CBD, common bile duct; ERCP , endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography; SOD, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction.
COLONOSCOPY
Early attempts at colonoscopy were hindered by poor tech -
nique and the limitations of the available instruments. The 
ability to steer an endoscope around the entire colon and 
into the terminal ileum was made possible by the develop -
ment of fully flexible colonoscopes with greater than 90º 
angulation of the tip. Advances in bowel preparation have 
enhanced mucosal visualisation during the examination. T wo 
key revelations about the practical performance of colonos-
copy have allowed skilled operatives to achieve a greater than 
95% caecal intubation rate and frequent ileal intubation with 
minimal discomfort using light sedation. The first is that con-
tinued inward pressure of the endoscope results in the forma-
tion of loops within the mobile sigmoid and transverse colon, 
decreasing angulation control at the tip and removing the 
beneficial effect of shaft torque to aid steering around acute 
bends. The second is that pulling back the scope regularly 
with appropriate torque to ensure a straight passage through 
the sigmoid colon and around the splenic flexure greatly aids 
the completion of right-sided examination. Targeted abdom-
inal hand pressure to prevent loops in a mobile colon and 
regular patient position change to enhance mucosal views 
and remove residual bowel content are also important aids to 
successful colonoscopy. It is essential that caecal intubation is 
confirmed to avoid missing pathology by incorrectly assuming 
that the caecal pole has been reached. The landmarks may 
not be clear and, therefore, visualisation of the appendix ori -
fice or preferably terminal ileal intubation is necessary to con-
firm a complete colonoscopy (Figure 15.13).
Mucosal biopsies may either be targeted to areas of abnor-
mality or random to exclude microscopic colitis in a patient 
Johann Conrad Peyer , 1653–1712, Professor of Logic, Rhetoric and Medicine, Schaffhausen, Switzerland, described the lymph follicles in the intestine in 1677.
Figure 15.13 The caecal pole may not be easy to identify (a) and, 
therefore, the endoscopist should confirm complete colonoscopy by 
visualising the appendix orifice (b) (arrow) or preferably intubating the 
terminal ileum (c), which demonstrates villi and Peyer’s patches.
(a)
(b)
(c)
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   229 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS230
tented away from the bowel wall. A brief burst of monopolar 
current is used to coagulate the stalk, allowing the polyp to be 
removed. This is rarely performed in current practice due to 
an increased risk of immediate and delayed thermal damage 
to the bowel wall, particularly in the right colon. Larger pol -
yps with a defined stalk can be resected using snare polypec -
tomy with coagulating current either en bloc (French for ‘in a 
block’) or piecemeal depending on their size (Figure 15.14). 
Postpolypectomy bleeding can be prevented by the applica-
tion of haemoclips or an endoloop to the polyp stalk. Sessile 
polyps extending over several centimetres can be removed 
by endoscopic mucosal resection, which involves lifting the 
polyp away from the muscularis propria with a submucosal 
injection of saline to prevent iatrogenic perforation (Figure 
15.15). Any residual polyp is obliterated with APC. Care 
should be taken with all polypectomies in the right colon 
where the wall may only be 2–3 mm thick. Removal of large 
or extensive flat polyps should only be attempted by appropri-
ately trained endoscopists. Endoscopic submucosal dissection 
(ESD) can be used to remove large flat lesions which are not 
amenable to EMR.
Summary box 15.8
Indications for colonoscopy
●● Rectal bleeding with looser or more frequent stools +/− 
abdominal pain related to bowel actions
●● Iron deficiency anaemia (after biochemical confirmation +/− 
negative coeliac serology): oesophagogastroduodenoscopy 
and colonoscopy together
●● Right iliac fossa mass if ultrasound is suggestive of colonic 
origin
●● Change in bowel habit associated with fever/elevated 
inflammatory response
●● Chronic diarrhoea (>6 weeks) after sigmoidoscopy/rectal 
biopsy and negative coeliac serology
●● Follow-up of colorectal cancer and polyps
●● Screening of patients with a family history of colorectal cancer
●● Assessment/removal of a lesion seen on radiological 
examination
●● Assessment of ulcerative colitis/Crohn’s extent and activity
●● Surveillance of inflammatory bowel disease
●● Surveillance of acromegaly/ureterosigmoidostomy
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.14 Colonoscopy is the most appropriate investigation to 
detect colonic polyps (a), which can be removed by snar e polypec-
tomy during the same procedure leaving a clean polyp base (b).
with chronic watery diarrhoea but a macroscopically normal 
mucosa. Despite the increasing sophistication of radiological 
techniques to assess the colon, such as CT colonography, the 
ability to biopsy areas of abnormality and resect polyps will 
ensure that colonoscopy remains the most appropriate inves-
tigation for the majority of patients. Several countries includ-
ing the USA and the UK have recently introduced colorectal 
cancer (CRC) screening programmes in the asymptomatic 
population once they reach a predetermined age. The goal 
is to increase the number of early-stage CRCs detected and 
hence decrease mortality, as well as to identify and remove 
adenomatous polyps and prevent the onset of disease. 
Increased polyp detection rates are associated with a longer 
period of colonoscope withdrawal, optimal bowel prepara -
tion and retroversion of the colonoscope in the right colon to 
visualise both sides of colonic folds. Current research is assess-
ing whether polyp detection rates are also increased by the use 
of devices such as a ‘third eye’ and an endocuff. There is on-  
going debate about the relevant benefits of different screening 
modalities including colonoscopy, CT colonography, flexible 
sigmoidoscopy and biannual/one-off faecal occult blood test-
ing with colonoscopy only in positive patients. Whichever 
modality is used, colonoscopy is essential to resect any polyps 
identified and biopsy unresectable lesions. 
Therapeutic colonoscopy
The most common therapeutic procedure performed at colo -
noscopy is the resection of colonic polyps (Figure 15.14). 
Retrieved specimens can be assessed for risk factors for neo -
plastic progression and an appropriate surveillance strat -
egy determined ( http://www.bsg.org.uk/images/stories/docs/ 
clinical/guidelines/endoscopy/ccs_10.pdf). Small polyps up to 
5 mm should be removed by cheese-wiring with a ‘cold’ snare. 
Hot biopsy is a technique in which the tip of a small peduncu-
lated polyp is grasped between diathermy biopsy forceps and 
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   230 25/10/2017   08:00Colonoscopy 231
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 15.15  Large sessile polyps 
(a) can be removed by endoscopic 
mucosal r esection. First the polyp 
is raised on a bed of injected saline 
containing dye (b). This ensures that 
there is no submucosal invasion and 
protects from transmural perforation. 
A snare is closed around the polyp (c), 
which is then resected leaving a clean 
excision base (d).
Figure 15.16  A lar ge angioectasia of the colon. If this r esults in 
symptomatic anaemia, it should be obliterated with ar gon plasma 
coagulation.
APC and alternative thermal therapies such as heater 
probes are also used in the treatment of symptomatic angio-
ectasias of the colon (Figure 15.16). Laser photocoagulation 
may be used to debulk colonic tumours not suitable for resec-
tion. As with benign oesophageal strictures, through-the-
scope (TTS) balloons can be used to dilate short (less than 
5 cm) colonic strictures. The dilatation of surgical anastomo-
ses gives the most durable benefit as inflammatory strictures 
tend to recur even if intramucosal steroids are injected at the 
time of the dilatation. Finally, the colonoscopic placement of 
self-expanding metal stents may provide excellent palliation 
of inoperable malignant strictures (Figure 15.17) and may 
also play an invaluable role in decompressing an obstructed 
colon to allow planned as opposed to emergency surgery.
Complications of colonoscopy
Complications during routine diagnostic colonoscopy by an 
experienced colonocopist are rare, although perforations have 
been reported as a result of excessive shaft tip pressure and 
with excessive air insufflation in severe diverticular disease. 
Figure 15.17 Malignant colonic obstruction can be palliated or tem-
porarily relieved by insertion of a self-expanding metal stent (arrow).
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   231 25/10/2017   08:00CHAPTER 15  Gastrointestinal endoscopy
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS232
Total colonoscopy is contraindicated in the presence of severe 
colitis; a limited unprepped examination and careful mucosal 
biopsy only should be performed. Polypectomy is associated 
with a well-documented rate of perforation (approximately 
1%) and haemorrhage (1–2%). Immediate haemorrhage 
should be managed by re-snaring the polyp stalk where pos -
sible and applying tamponade for several minutes followed by 
careful coagulation if this is unsuccessful. Submucosal adrena-
line injection and the deployment of haemoclips are alterna-
tives if this is not possible. Delayed haemorrhage may occur 
1–14 days postpolypectomy and can normally be managed 
by conservative observation. Transfusion may occasionally 
be required, but repeat colonoscopy is rarely necessary. If rec-
ognised at the time of polypectomy, small perforations should 
be closed using clips and the patient admitted for observation. 
Symptoms of abdominal pain and cardiovascular compromise 
after a polypectomy should alert one to the risk of delayed 
perforation. Patients should be kept nil by mouth and receive 
intravenous resuscitation and antibiotics. Prompt assessment 
with plain radiography and a CT scan will often distinguish 
between a frank perforation and a transmural burn with asso-
ciated localised peritonitis (the postpolypectomy syndrome). 
Assessment by an experienced colorectal surgeon is essential, 
as surgery is often the most appropriate course of action.
ENDOSCOPIC ULTRASOUND
One key disadvantage of conventional endoscopy is that the 
views are limited to the mucosal surface and it is therefore 
not possible to diagnose submucosal or extraintestinal path -
ology. These limitations can be overcome using endoscopic 
ultrasound (EUS), which combines the traditional mucosal 
image with a separate ultrasound view that clearly depicts the 
intestinal layers and proximate extraintestinal structures. Its 
use has revolutionised the staging and management of upper 
gastrointestinal and hepatobiliary malignancy.
There are two main types of echoendoscope: the radial 
echoendoscope has a radially arranged ultrasound probe and 
a forward-viewing lens. This is used for diagnostic work such 
Figure 15.18  Endoscopic ultrasound image of an oesophageal 
tumour invading into the wall.
Figure 15.19 Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration 
of a pancreatic head mass.
as local tumour staging in the oesophagus and stomach. The 
linear echoendoscope is a side-viewing scope with a working 
channel much like an ERCP scope, and a linearly arranged 
ultrasound probe. This conformation allows ultrasound 
assessment and ultrasound-guided sampling of tissues to be 
performed (Figures 15.18 and 15.19) . It allows sampling of 
paraoesophageal and coeliac lymph nodes, sampling of pan -
creatic, biliary and other solid abdominal lesions and drainage 
of peripancreatic abscess or pseudocysts. Using TTS cysto -
tomes it is possible to perform EUS cystgastrostomy and stent 
placement, and increasingly biliary interventional procedures 
are being performed with EUS assistance.
‘Ragged’ edge suggesting invasion of adventitia
Muscularis propria
Tumour
EUS requires dedicated training, both in scope manipu -
lation and radiographic interpretation. Due to the width and 
lack of flexibility of the endo-ultrasound scope as well as the 
duration of complex therapeutic procedures, sedation is nor -
mally required, and some units perform tests using propofol-  
based anaesthesia. The main indications for endoscopic 
ultrasound are listed in Table 15.6. All patients undergoing 
therapeutic endoscopic ultrasound require a normal coag-
ulation screen. Complications include over-sedation and 
oesophageal perforation during diagnostic procedures and 
haemorrhage/perforation during therapeutic procedures.
TABLE 15.6 Indications for endoscopic ultrasound.
Diagnostic: Staging of oesophageal/gastric malignancy
Staging of hepatobiliary malignancy
Diagnosis of choledoccal microlithiasis
Therapeutic Biopsy of paraoesophageal lymph nodes
Biopsy of submucosal upper GI lesions
Biopsy of pancreaticobiliary mass
Biopsy of portal lymphadenopathy
Biopsy of left adrenal and left liver masses
Transgastric drainage of pancreatic pseudocyst
Coeliac plexus block
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   232 25/10/2017   08:00Further reading 233
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
IMPROVED ENDOSCOPIC 
IMAGING
Chromoendoscopy, narrow band 
imaging and high resolution 
magnification endoscopy
The ability to enhance lesion detection and achieve near-  
patient discrimination of pathology without the need for his-
tology is a common theme of several active areas of endoscopic 
development. The goal is to allow accurate discrimination of  
dysplasia grade in areas of Barrett’s oesophagus or quiescent 
ulcerative colitis and to aid polyp detection and the recogni -
tion of early gastric and colorectal cancer. The most widely 
available technique is chromoendoscopy, which involves the 
topical application of stains or pigments to improve tissue 
localisation, characterisation or diagnosis. Several agents have 
been described, which can broadly be categorised as absorp -
tive (vital) stains such as methylene blue; contrast (reactive) 
stains, such as indigo carmine; and those used for tattooing, 
such as India ink. Acetic acid can be used to improve dysplasia 
detection in Barrett’s oesophagus and Lugol’s iodine can be 
useful in detecting early squamous cell carcinoma. 
Narrow band imaging (NBI) relies on an optical filter 
technology that radically improves the visibility of capillar -
ies, veins and other subtle tissue structures by optimising the 
absorbance and scattering characteristics of light. NBI uses 
two discrete bands of light: one blue at 415 nm and one green 
at 540 nm. Narrow band blue light displays superficial capillary 
networks, whereas green light displays subepithelial vessels; 
when combined they offer an extremely high contrast image of 
the tissue surface. Autofluorescence images can also be used to 
increase lesion discrimination. Finally, high-resolution mag-
nifying endoscopy may be used alone or in combination with 
one of the above techniques to achieve near-cellular definition 
of the mucosa (Figure 15.20), and is of particular use in neo-
plasia surveillance. New directions for the future include the 
increased use of confocal endomicroscopy to achieve histolog-
ical images at the time of the endoscopic procedure.
CONCLUSIONS
Over the last 30 years endoscopy has become an integral part 
of the diagnostic work-up of patients with gastrointestinal dis-
ease. Whereas advances in radiology may obviate the need for 
some diagnostic procedures (routine OGD and ERCP), the 
ability to take mucosal biopsies will ensure that it retains a 
vital role. Moreover, on-going advances in technology such 
as magnifying endoscopy and chromoendoscopy are able to 
give near-histological quality definition to allow near-patient 
diagnosis. There have also been major advances in the range 
of conditions that are amenable to endoscopic therapy; such 
therapy may have substantially lower associated morbidity 
rates than traditional surgical approaches. However, as the 
scope of procedures widens and the age range/comorbidities 
of the patients increases it is beholden to the endoscopist 
to ensure that he or she adheres to appropriate governance/ 
consent and sedation practice to minimise complications.
FURTHER READING
Hawes RH, Fockens P , Varadarajulu S. Endosonography, 3rd edn. Phila-
delphia: Saunders, 2014.
Haycock A, Cohen J, Saunders BP et al. Cotton and Williams’ practical 
gastrointestinal endoscopy, 7th edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2014.
Veitch AM, Vanbiervliet G, Gershlick AH et al. Endoscopy in patients 
on antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy, including direct oral anti -
coagulants: British Society of Gastroenterology (BSG) and European 
Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) guidelines. Gut 2016; 
65: 374–89.
Figure 15.20 Endoscopic diagnostic accuracy can be improved by 
novel endoscopic techniques. This duodenal adenoma can be seen 
with conventional white light (a) (arrow), but its full extent is mor e 
clearly delineated using narrow band imaging (b) or chromoendos-
copy with indigo carmine (c).
(a)
(b)
(c)
02_15-B&L27_Pt2_Ch15.indd   233 25/10/2017   08:00Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To understand:
 • The value and limitations of tissue diagnosis
 • How tissue samples are processed
 • The role of histology and cytology
To be aware of:
 • The role of additional techniques used in 
clinical practice, including special stains, 
immunohistochemistry and molecular pathology
 • The principles of microscopic diagnosis, including the 
features of neoplasia
 • The importance of clinicopathological correlation
 • Management issues
Tissue and molecular diagnosis
16
INTRODUCTION
In the past, tissue diagnosis was restricted to macroscopic 
examination of autopsy material and of a limited range of 
surgical specimens. In the nineteenth century, microscopic 
examination of human tissue from autopsies and surgical pro-
cedures was introduced, and its value was accepted eventually 
by physicians and surgeons. Tissue analysis is now an integral 
and routine element of clinical management. It is heavily 
dependent on microscopy and is usually the responsibility of 
a histopathologist, who is a medically qualified practitioner. 
The specialty variably known as Histopathology, Anatomic 
Pathology or Cellular Pathology, encompasses histopathol-
ogy, cytopathology, autopsy work and molecular pathological 
tissue diagnosis.
Cellular pathology has changed considerably over the past 
few decades. There has been a steady increase in biopsy num-
bers, partly because of the widespread introduction of flexible 
endoscopy and also because of an ageing population with a 
higher risk of cancer. Screening programmes (breast, bowel 
and cervical) have had a major impact on volume and prac -
tice. New techniques have improved the quality and clinical 
value of histological assessment, while autopsies have steadily 
diminished in number. Adherence to national or international 
reporting standards, e.g. for cancer, is increasingly expected, 
as is participation by pathologists in multidisciplinary clinical 
management meetings. Tissue analysis has sometimes been 
replaced by newer less invasive methods, e.g. human papil -
loma virus (HPV) testing rather than cytological assessment 
of cervical smears for cervical cancer screening, while newer 
forms of radiology and imaging may be so informative that 
tissue analysis is not needed.
A modern cellular pathology department is usually located 
in a medium-sized or large hospital or in a purpose-built lab -
oratory. Typically, more than 80% of specimens are from the 
gastrointestinal tract, gynaecological tract, urological system 
or skin. In line with clinical services, highly specialised work 
such as neuropathology is largely confined to major regional 
centres.
REASONS FOR ASSESSMENT OF 
TISSUE
There are several reasons for tissue analysis. These include 
diagnosis, staging of disease, prediction of clinical outcome, 
selection of therapy and audit. These reasons are often inter -
related.
A new diagnosis may be made or a known diagnosis con -
firmed. Often, tissue analysis confirms or refines a suspected or 
suggested clinical diagnosis. There may be clues to a cause, e.g. 
Summary box 16.1
Reasons for tissue analysis
●● To make a new diagnosis
●● To confirm a suspected or established clinical diagnosis
●● To exclude additional diagnoses
●● To assist with prognosis
●● To stage tumours
●● To help select therapy and plan management
●● To assess response to treatment
●● Audit
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   234 25/10/2017   08:01Tissue specimens 235
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
granulomas. Additional diagnoses, either expected or unex-
pected, may be made. For example, an appendix removed for 
appendicitis could contain an incidental carcinoid tumour , 
polyp or carcinoma, while biopsies from a patient with inflam-
matory bowel disease may be taken to confirm the diagnosis 
and to exclude dysplasia but might reveal additional findings, 
e.g. cytomegalovirus or lymphoma.
Tissue analysis also helps, increasingly, to determine or 
refine treatment and prognosis. For example, the assessment 
of a cancer resection specimen confirms the diagnosis but 
perhaps more importantly provides information about fea -
tures such as tumour stage, vascular invasion and resection 
margin involvement, which in turn predict clinical outcome 
and help determine postoperative treatment. More recently, 
pathologists have been asked to assess the degree of tumour 
regression after neoadjuvant therapy. Increasingly, molecular 
pathological analysis of cancer tissue contributes to various 
aspects of management, including diagnostic categorisation, 
prognostic predictions and selection of targeted drug therapy.
Additionally, the pathologist’s assessment of resection 
specimens helps surgeons and radiologists to audit their per -
formance.
It is worth remembering that a tissue sample does not rep-
resent the entire patient. The interpretation of microscopic 
and molecular changes is enhanced considerably by correla -
tion with the clinical picture and the macroscopic findings. 
Accordingly, a request form with adequate clinical details 
should accompany all specimens. Essential details include site 
of biopsy, date of birth, gender, medications, relevant risk fac-
tors, past medical and surgical history and details of neoadju-
vant therapy in cancer cases.
TISSUE SPECIMENS
Routine tissue specimens received by a histopathology depart-
ment include those intended for histopathological analysis 
and those for cytopathological assessment. These two areas 
may overlap.
Histology
Specimens for histology are arbitrarily classified as biopsies 
and resections. Biopsies are taken for diagnosis and assess -
ment rather than treatment. A resection is usually done to 
remove a lesion (e.g. a tumour) or to manage a related prob -
lem (e.g. sleeve gastrectomy for obesity), but may also have 
other uses including diagnosis, staging, and determination 
of further management. Types of small biopsy include punch 
biopsy, needle core biopsy and mucosal biopsy. An excision 
biopsy is larger and serves as both a diagnostic biopsy and a 
limited resection.
All samples for routine histology are immediately placed 
in a fixative, usually formalin (10% formaldehyde), to pre -
serve morphology. Ultrasound-guided and computed tomog-
raphy (CT)-guided biopsies of focal and less accessible lesions 
have become more common and may pose challenges to the 
pathologist because of limited sample size.
Cytology
Cytological specimens can be obtained from many sites using 
a variety of approaches. Some are easy to obtain, e.g. urine 
and sputum, whereas others require more intervention. A 
conventional cervical smear is obtained by sampling the 
cervical transformation zone with a brush/broom. Bronchial 
aspirates, washings and brushings and gastrointestinal and 
 biliary brushings sample a relatively wide area and may there-
fore be useful for the diagnosis of neoplasia.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology may sample acces-
sible sites such as the breast, thyroid and superficial lymph 
nodes, while FNA from deeper and less accessible structures, 
e.g. liver , pancreas, kidney and lung, is usually assisted by 
ultrasound or CT guidance. Ultrasound-guided transbron -
chial FNA may be used for mediastinal masses and transmuco-
sal FNA for submucosal gastrointestinal lesions or perivisceral 
lesions. FNA cytology samples may be accompanied by a 
biopsy taken at the same procedure.
Fluids may be submitted directly to the laboratory for 
cytological assessment.
Fresh tissue
The most common indication for submission of a fresh tissue 
sample (i.e. without fixative) is rapid frozen section diagnosis, 
usually done intraoperatively. Other indications are micro-
biological assessment, electron microscopy, chemical analy-
ses (e.g. quantification of iron) and some types of molecular 
pathological analysis. Before fixing a histology or cytology 
specimen, the operator should consider whether any of these 
investigations might be useful.
Risk management
Safety and risk management are priorities in the laboratory. 
Any risk of contamination by transmissible infection, e.g. 
hepatitis B virus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), must 
be minimised by the use of warning labels, especially when 
fresh tissue is being submitted. Formalin kills many micro -
Summary box 16.2
Common types of tissue sample
●● Histology
Formalin-fixed tissue
 Biopsy
  Mucosal
  Punch
  Needle (cor e)
  Curettings
  Excision
 Resection
Fresh tissue (usually for frozen section)
●● Cytology
Cervical
Washings, brushings, scrapes
Fine-needle aspirate (FNA)
Fluids/sputum
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   235 25/10/2017   08:01CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS236
organisms, but any risk of infection should still be notified. 
Also, formalin itself is toxic to the eyes and skin. Accordingly, 
leaking or faulty specimen containers should be discarded. 
Containers must be labelled with the patient’s details to avoid 
errors of identity (Figure 16.1).
and sampling, a text description of the specimen and any 
abnormality is made. Small specimens such as biopsies are 
processed in their entirety. Representative samples are taken 
from any specimen too large to be processed whole (Figure 
16.3). This is traditionally done by a histopathologist, but 
increasingly may be done by specifically trained non-medical 
staff. In the UK, a local or national protocol for sampling 
is often followed. For example, samples from most types of 
cancer should include resection margins, tumour, lymph 
nodes, non-neoplastic tissue and any other abnormal areas. 
Coloured inks help to identify resection margins and surfaces 
as they are also visible under the microscope (Figure 16.4).
Specimens, or samples from specimens, are placed in plas-
tic cassettes (Figure 16.5) and then embedded in paraffin wax 
while in the cassette to make a tissue block (Figure 16.6). 
Sections with a thickness of approximately 5 μm (microns) 
are cut from the block using a microtome (Figure 16.7). The 
sections are placed on a glass slide and stained with haema -
toxylin and eosin (H&E) (Figure 16.1). This work is done by 
expert trained staff, known in the UK as biomedical scientists 
(BMSs). High standards are necessary because a poorly cut 
section may have various artefacts, such as lines and folds, 
which impede accurate assessment. H&E as the first-line stain 
has stood the test of time, probably because it is inexpensive, 
safe, fast, reliable, familiar and informative.
The stained sections are examined with a microscope (Fig-
ure 16.8) and the histological features are correlated with the 
clinical details and the macroscopic description. After com-
pletion of any further studies, the pathologist writes a report 
that is usually entered onto a computer system. 
SPECIMEN PROCESSING
Histology specimen
On arrival in the histopathology department, specimens 
are given a unique number and submitted for macroscopic 
assessment and sampling (‘cut up’). The largest specimens 
are opened (e.g. bowel) or sliced (e.g. uterus) and left to fix 
in formalin for at least 1 day (Figure 16.2). When they are 
fixed and, accordingly, in a suitable condition for cutting 
Figure 16.1 Sections on glass slides stained with haematoxylin and 
eosin (H&E). Each slide has a unique specimen identifying number 
(06S022081), a letter corresponding to the biopsy site (A1–F1) and a 
site label (e.g. DUOBX for duodenal biopsy).
Figure 16.2 (a) A colon from a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis has been opened longitudinally to allow fixation. Multiple polyps 
and a carcinoma are seen. (b) An oesophagogastrectomy containing a distal oesophageal tumour has been opened and sliced to allow fixation. 
(c) A uterus and an adjacent cystic lesion have been bisected with a knife to allow fixation (all figures courtesy of Dr J Chin Aleong, Barts Health 
NHS Trust, London, UK).
(a) (b) (c)
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   236 25/10/2017   08:01Specimen processing 237
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Figure 16.7 A section (thick arrow) being cut fr om a paraffin wax 
block (thin arrow) with a microtome.
Figure 16.3 A scalpel is used to take a sample from a r esection 
specimen.
Figure 16.4 (a) An unopened pancreatoduodenectomy specimen 
(posterior view). Four inks of different colours have been painted onto 
various resection margins and external surfaces. (b) Yellow ink on the 
edge of a histology section (thick arrow). Tumour (thin arrow) lies close 
to the surface. The distance between the tumour and a surface or a 
resection margin can be measured (double-headed arrow).
Figure 16.5 A tissue sample from a resection specimen is placed in 
a cassette.
Figure 16.6 Paraffin wax blocks. Cassettes of different colours allow 
specimens to be organised into groups.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.8 A double-headed microscope allows a consultant histo-
pathologist and a trainee to view a slide simultaneously.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   237 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS238
Storage
Resection specimens are generally stored for about 4–6 weeks. 
Tissue blocks are retained for as long as space permits, e.g. 30 
years, while glass slides might be retained for a shorter time, 
e.g. 10 years. Fresh tissue can be frozen and stored. Stored 
tissue may be useful for future clinical review, teaching, 
audit or research. In many countries, the subsequent use of 
stored tissue for non-clinical purposes is now subject to legal 
 constraints.
PRINCIPLES OF MICROSCOPIC 
DIAGNOSIS
Diagnosis of malignancy
Neoplasia is a broad term that includes benign and malignant 
tumours. Classification of a neoplasm or tumour as malignant 
Summary box 16.3
Histological processing: sequence of events
●● Biopsy or resection specimen received
●● Macroscopic (gross) description made
●● Specimen sampled (unless small enough to submit in its 
entirety)
●● Specimen or samples placed in cassette(s)
●● Paraffin wax block(s) made
●● 5-μm sections cut
●● Sections put on glass slides
●● Sections stained with H&E
●● Histopathologist examines slides
●● Histology compared with clinical and macroscopic findings
●● Further studies if necessary
●● Report entered onto computer system
●● Report authorised or signed
Summary box 16.4
Frozen section: advantages and disadvantages
Advantages:
●● Quick diagnosis
Disadvantages:
●● Labour intensive
●● Disruptive
●● Risk of infection
●● Poorer quality sections
●● Small sample required
●● Some tissue types difficult to process
Frozen section specimen
Frozen section diagnosis is useful when a very rapid answer 
is necessary for diagnosis or management. Surgeons are 
the main users of this service. A representative fresh tissue 
 sample of the area of interest is supplied by the surgeon and 
frozen quickly in the pathology laboratory, and sections are 
cut and stained within several minutes. There are a few dis -
advantages: fresh tissue carries a higher risk of infection than 
fixed tissue; the quality of a frozen section slide is inferior to 
that of routinely processed material, reducing the accuracy 
and precision of diagnosis; small samples are required; certain 
types of tissue (e.g. fat) are difficult to deal with; and the pro-
cess is time-consuming and disruptive for the histopathology 
 department.
Cytology specimen
Many samples for cytology can be smeared immediately onto 
glass slides, fixed (usually in alcohol) or air dried and stained 
immediately or later. Several slides are usually produced, some 
of which are stained with a Papanicolaou (Pap) stain and 
some with another method such as May–Grünwald–Giemsa 
(MGG) or Romanowsky. Pap stain is regarded as the preferred 
stain for fixed specimens while MGG is better for air-dried 
material. Often the sample will be stained with both. Cervical 
smears are usually stained with a Pap stain only (Figure 16.9). 
There has been a move to liquid-based thin-layer technol -
ogy for many samples, particularly cervical. For  liquid-based 
 cytology, the sampling device is usually washed in a liquid 
medium and the material obtained is then processed in the 
laboratory using purpose-built equipment.
George Nicholas Papanicolaou , 1883–1962, Professor of Anatomy, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA, reported on the value of cervical smears in the 
diagnosis of carcinoma of the uterus in 1941.
Richard May , b.1863, physician, Münich, Germany.
Ludwig Grünwald , b.1863, otolaryngologist, Münich, Germany.
Gustav Giemsa , 1867–1948, bacteriologist who became Privatdozent in Chemotherapy, at The University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
Dmitri Leonidovich Romanowsky , 1861–1921, Professor of Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russia.
Figure 16.9  A cervical smear stained with a Papanicolaou stain. 
Numerous cells are present (courtesy of Professor MT Sheaff, Barts 
Health NHS Trust).
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   238 25/10/2017   08:02Principles of microscopic diagnosis 239
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
The criteria for a histological diagnosis of malignancy are 
modified by the site and type of tissue. Carcinoma is the most 
common type of malignancy, and is typically diagnosed when 
epithelial cells invade beyond their normal boundaries. How-
ever, the categorisation of some types of non-epithelial pro -
liferations (e.g. lymphoid, mesenchymal) as malignant may 
rely on cytological and architectural features rather than on 
invasiveness. In some cases, e.g. certain endocrine tumours, 
histological distinction between benign and malignant may 
be impossible. In other cases, e.g. gastrointestinal stromal 
tumours (GIST) and neuroendocrine tumours, there may be 
risk categories rather than benign and malignant designa -
tions. The risk categories are based on combinations of histo-
logical features that help predict the likelihood of aggressive 
behaviour.
Additional techniques such as immunohistochemistry 
and clonality studies may help to confirm neoplasia or malig-
nancy (see below).
The term ‘dysplasia’ usually indicates that microscopic 
features of carcinoma, or similar to those of carcinoma, are 
present but that invasion has not occurred, e.g. cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), colorectal dysplasia (Figure 
16.14).
Summary box 16.5
Microscopic features of malignancy
●● Metastasis
●● Invasion
Of surrounding tissue
Vascular
Perineural
●● Architectural abnormalities
●● Necrosis
●● Numerous mitotic figures
●● Atypical mitotic figures
●● Nuclear abnormalities
Pleomorphism
Enlargement
Hyperchromaticity
Chromatin clumping
●● Nucleolar enlargement and multiplicity
Figure 16.10 Perineural invasion. A nerve is almost completely sur-
rounded by adenocarcinoma.
Nerve
(or as ‘cancer’) usually implies that it has the potential to 
behave aggressively. The main histological features of malig -
nancy are metastasis, invasion, architectural changes and 
cytological features, but the criteria for a diagnosis of malig-
nancy differ between anatomical sites and between tumour 
types.
Microscopic evidence of aggressive behaviour by the 
tumour is usually sufficient for a malignant label. For exam -
ple, metastasis to another organ such as lymph nodes or liver 
is virtually always diagnostic of malignancy. Invasion of sur -
rounding structures, perineural invasion (Figure 16.10) and 
vascular invasion (Figure 16.11) strongly suggest malignancy.
Other microscopic features that are typical of malignancy 
include derangement of the usual architecture, an increased 
number of mitotic figures, atypical mitoses and necrosis 
(tissue death) (Figure 16.12). Microscopic changes at the 
cellular level (cytological changes) include nuclear enlarge -
ment, an increased nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio, nuclear pleo -
morphism (variation in shape) and nuclear hyperchromasia 
(dark colour) (Figure 16.13a). Multiplicity, irregularity and 
enlargement of nucleoli may also be seen (Figure 16.13b).
Figure 16.11 Vascular invasion. Aggregates of carcinoma cells are 
present within blood vessels. The tumour is poorly differentiated. 
Figure 16.12 An area of necr osis in a poorly differentiated carci -
noma. 
Tumour
Necrosis
Viable tumour
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   239 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS240
There are various causes of a false-positive diagnosis of 
malignancy. These include contamination of a specimen 
with tumour from elsewhere, interchanging of specimens and 
observer error. Several conditions can mimic malignancy his-
tologically. For example, radiation effect on a mucosal layer 
can mimic malignancy, as can the histological changes in 
regenerating tissue adjacent to an ulcer. Additional studies 
may also be misleading, particularly if interpreted in isola -
tion. The risk of interpretative error by the histopathologist 
is reduced by thorough training, regular updating, discussion 
of difficult cases with colleagues and avoidance of excessive 
workloads. The surgeon also helps to minimise such errors by 
supplying good clinical details, e.g. a history of radiotherapy.
A false-negative diagnosis, i.e. failure to diagnose malig -
nancy when present, may reflect absence of tumour in the 
specimen or failure of the pathologist to recognise the changes 
as neoplastic. 
Histological types of malignancy
A malignant tumour showing features of epithelial differ -
entiation, and typically arising in an epithelial layer, is a 
carcinoma. Other important types of malignancy include 
malignant melanoma (melanocytes) (Figure 16.13b), lym-
phoma (lymphoid cells) and sarcoma (mesenchymal cells). 
Further subclassification is usually possible. For example, a 
carcinoma can be classified as squamous cell carcinoma if it 
shows evidence of keratinisation (Figure 16.15), adenocar -
cinoma if it shows evidence of glandular differentiation (in 
the form of tubule formation and/or mucin production) (Fig-
ure 16.16), neuroendocrine carcinoma/small cell carcinoma 
(Figure 16.13a) (usually requiring immunohistochemical 
confirmation), clear cell carcinoma (Figure 16.17) or one of 
many other types.
Prognostic factors for malignant tumours
Tissue assessment is important for cancer prognosis. Stage is 
generally the most important prognostic factor for carcino -
mas. The commonly used and internationally accepted UICC 
(Union internationale contre le cancer)/AJCC (American 
Joint Committee on Cancer) staging schemes depend heavily 
on the histopathological TNM ( Tumour Node Metastasis) 
category (pTNM), although the M category is usually evalu-
ated clinically and the final stage is derived from a combina -
tion of clinical, imaging, pathological and other assessments. 
Degree of differentiation may also be prognostic and is usu -
ally determined microscopically. Well-differentiated tumours 
recapitulate some of the features of their non-neoplastic 
Summary box 16.6
Causes of false-positive diagnoses of malignancy
●● Interchanged samples
●● Contamination
●● Interpretative error
●● Treatment-induced change
●● Ulceration
Figure 16.14 A colonic biopsy from a tubular adenoma with low-
grade dysplasia. There is one non-dysplastic crypt (lower right cor -
ner). The remaining crypts show features of dysplasia, including 
nuclear stratification (multilayering) and nuclear hyperchromaticity 
(dark colour).
Figure 16.13 Cytological features of malignancy. (a) A high-grade 
neuroendocrine carcinoma showing nuclear pleomorphism (variation 
in shape) and variation in nuclear size. There are several mitotic figures 
(arrows). (b) A malignant melanoma showing nuclear pleomorphism 
and prominent nucleoli (arrow) (courtesy of Dr E Husain, Aberdeen 
Royal Infirmary, United Kingdom).
(a)
(b)
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   240 25/10/2017   08:02Principles of microscopic diagnosis 241
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
 tissue  counterparts (Figures 16.15 and 16.16), whereas 
poorly differentiated tumours do not (Figures 16.11 and 
16.12). Other histological features associated with a worse 
prognosis include vascular invasion (Figure 16.11), perineu-
ral invasion (Figure 16.10) and positive resection margins. 
The prognostic value of these factors differs between tumour 
types and sites.
Non-neoplastic and inflammatory 
conditions
Some of the commonest surgical specimens in the pathology 
laboratory are taken for the management of non-neoplas -
tic disease. These include appendectomies for appendicitis, 
cholecystectomies for gallstone disease, hysterectomies for 
fibroids, partial gastrectomies for obesity, skin lesions such 
as sebaceous cysts and chippings from prostate glands with 
hyperplasia. All specimens are examined thoroughly in order 
to confirm the suspected clinical diagnosis and also to exclude 
other conditions that are not necessarily apparent to the sur -
geon, e.g. dysplastic and malignant lesions of the gallbladder, 
sarcomatous change within uterine fibroids or adenocarci-
noma in prostatic chippings. Correlation with the clinical 
picture may be particularly important if a biopsy is taken spe-
cifically for non-neoplastic disease. For example, full clinical 
details are essential for meaningful interpretation of inflam -
matory bowel disease biopsies, inflammatory skin biopsies, 
renal biopsies and medical liver biopsies.
Microscopic features of 
inflammation
Acute inflammation is characterised by neutrophils (poly -
morphonuclear leucocytes) (Figure 16.18), and chronic 
inflammation by lymphocytes and plasma cells. Other inflam-
matory cells include eosinophils (Figure 16.19), mast cells 
and histiocytes. Granulomas (i.e. collections of epithelioid 
histiocytes) (Figure 16.20) raise the possibility of mycobac -
terial infection, fungal infection, sarcoid, Crohn’s disease or a 
reaction to foreign material, among numerous possible causes. 
Eosinophils in large numbers may reflect parasitic infection or 
allergy. Interpretation depends heavily on the site and clinical 
setting.
Other terms
Other specific tissue abnormalities are also detectable by 
microscopy. Histopathologists may use specific terms for these 
changes. For example, hyperplasia means an increase in cell 
number while hypertrophy refers to an increase in cell size. 
Atrophy encompasses a reduction in cell number and/or cell 
size. Metaplasia describes the change from one mature cell 
type to another, e.g. columnar metaplasia in the oesophagus 
(known as Barrett’s oesophagus) where squamous epithelium is 
Norman Rupert Barrett , 1903–1979, surgeon, St Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 16.17  A metastatic clear cell car cinoma, composed of 
sheets of cells with clear cytoplasm. A tumour with this appearance is 
most likely to be of renal origin.
Figure 16.15 A well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Irregu-
lar nests of squamous cells with foci of keratinisation (arrows).
Figure 16.16 A well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Gland forma -
tion (arrow) is obvious.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   241 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS242
replaced by gastric or intestinal type epithelium. Necrosis refers 
to cell or tissue death, typically as a result of external factors,  
and is often associated with cell swelling and inflammation. 
Apoptosis is a process of programmed cell death that occurs in 
normal cells as a result of internal signals, and typically causes 
cell shrinkage and nuclear chromatin condensation. 
ASSESSMENT
Light microscopy
Most tissue assessment depends on conventional light 
microscopy. Microscopes have several lenses with various 
powers of magnification, typically ranging from ×20 to ×400 
or more. A low-power lens allows a sample to be scanned and 
its overall architecture to be assessed, while a high-power 
lens allows a closer and more detailed view (Figure 16.21). 
A teaching arm and a camera can be attached to most micro-
scopes (Figure 16.8). Polarisation can be used to detect for -
eign material (e.g. sutures) or to assess a special stain (e.g. 
Congo red).
Histological assessment
In a histological preparation, the microscopic structure of the 
tissue is preserved, allowing direct visualisation of architec -
ture. Accordingly, the pathologist can see not only the char -
acteristics of the cells that form the tissue, but also the way in 
which these cells are related to one another and the way in 
which different tissue compartments are arranged.
Cytological assessment
A cytological preparation consists of a sample of cells. Archi-
tecture cannot be determined, because intact tissue is absent or 
sparse (Figures 16.9 and 16.22). Therefore, assessment relies 
mainly on the characteristics of the cells themselves. Accord-
ingly, it may be difficult to diagnose malignancy because many 
of the criteria, particularly invasiveness, cannot be assessed. 
However, cytology has several potential advantages over his-
tology. A wider area may be sampled, and obtaining a specimen 
may be easier and less traumatic. Processing times are usually 
shorter and costs lower. Also, non-medical staff can be trained 
to report the cases, particularly cervical smears (Figure 16.9).
Figure 16.18  An acute inflammatory pr ocess characterised by 
numerous neutrophils. Note the typical multilobated nuclei in many 
cells (arrows).
Figure 16.19 An inflammatory lesion in which eosinophils, charac -
terised by bright red cytoplasm, are predominant.
Figure 16.20 (a) A granuloma with necrosis, suggesting tuber cu-
losis. Multinucleate giant cells of Langhan’s type are also present 
(arrow). (b) A Ziehl–Neelsen stain (different case) shows numerous 
acid-fast bacilli.
(a)
(b)
Congo red  is sodium diphenylbisazobisnaphthylamine sulphonate.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   242 25/10/2017   08:02Assessment 243
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Screening
Screening programmes aim to detect and treat premalignant 
tissue changes, e.g. dysplasia, or early stage malignancy (rather 
than advanced disease). They may rely on cytology, histology 
or both. The largest is the cervical cancer programme, which 
currently uses cytology initially, with biopsy and histology 
follow-up if appropriate. The breast cancer screening pro-
gramme may use cytology and/or histology, while the bowel 
cancer screening programme relies initially on a non-tissue-
based test followed, if appropriate, by endoscopy and, where 
required, biopsy and histology. Screening for cancer in ulcer-
ative colitis relies on endoscopic assessment and histology.
Specimen adequacy
There are several possible reasons for an inadequate speci -
men. The operator may fail to sample the intended organ or 
lesion, or may take too few samples to detect a heterogeneous 
abnormality. A sample from the centre of a necrotic or ulcer-
ated lesion might include no viable tissue. Superficial biopsies 
from a carcinoma may fail to distinguish dysplasia (Figure 
16.14) from invasive carcinoma. Cautery and crush artefact 
are sometimes severe enough to impede assessment. 
Summary box 16.7
Cytology compared with histology
Advantages:
●● Wider area may be sampled
●● Sampling may be less invasive
●● Fast
●● Cheap
Disadvantages:
●● Cannot assess tissue architecture
●● Less amenable to further studies
Summary box 16.8
Reasons for an inadequate sample
Histology and cytology:
●● Failure to sample the intended organ or lesion
●● Sample too limited
●● Non-viable tissue
Histology:
●● Sample too superficial
●● Cautery artefact
●● Crush artefact
Figure 16.22  (a) A cytology preparation of a pleural ef fusion. 
Numerous cells with atypical features are present. (b) Immunohis-
tochemistry shows positive staining for carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA), favouring carcinoma over mesothelioma
(b)
(a)
Figure 16.21 (a) Low-power view of an umbilical nodule. Glands 
are distributed irr egularly through the tissue. (b) High-power view 
shows benign columnar epithelium lining the glands (arrow), favouring 
endometriosis over carcinoma.
(a)
(b)
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   243 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS244
Deeper levels and extra blocks
The pathologist may request ‘deeper levels’, whereby the 
BMS cuts further into the paraffin block to obtain further 
sections. For example, deeper levels of a histologically atyp -
ical but non-invasive epithelial lesion might show foci of 
invasion, allowing carcinoma to be diagnosed. Extra blocks 
may be taken from a resection specimen if it has been sam -
pled inadequately, e.g. if insufficient lymph no des have been 
retrieved from a cancer case.
FURTHER WORK
Further diagnostic work is performed on a significant minority 
of histology specimens, and includes special stains, immuno -
histochemistry and various molecular pathology techniques 
such as in situ hybridisation and polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR)-based methods. Electron microscopy is used less often. 
Some techniques can also be applied to cytology specimens 
(Figure 16.22).
Special stains
A ‘special stain’ is a stain that is not routine, i.e. not an 
H&E stain. Immunohistochemical stains are conventionally 
excluded from this category. Some special stains demonstrate 
normal substances in increased quantities or in abnormal 
locations. The periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain demonstrates 
both glycogen and mucin, whereas a diastase PAS (D-PAS) 
stain demonstrates mucin, e.g. in an adenocarcinoma. Perls 
Prussian blue stain demonstrates iron accumulation (Figure 
16.23), e.g. in haemochromatosis. A reticulin stain helps to 
demonstrate fibrosis (Figure 16.24). Elastic stains also show 
fibrosis and can highlight blood vessels by outlining their elas-
tic laminae. Special stains can also reveal the accumulation 
of abnormal substances, e.g. a Congo red stain for amyloid.
Summary box 16.9
Additional techniques
●● Special stains
●● Immunohistochemistry
●● Electron microscopy 
●● Molecular pathology
●● In situ hybridisation, including fluorescence in situ 
hybridisation (FISH)
●● PCR-based techniques
Figure 16.23 (a) Brown pigment in a biopsy . (b) A Perls stain is 
positive, indicating that the pigment is iron.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.24 (a) A liver biopsy stained with haematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E) in which the severity of fibrosis cannot be determined. (b) A 
reticulin stain demonstrates fibrous bridges (arrows).
(a)
(b)
Hugo Schiff , 1834–1915, German biochemist who worked in Florence, Italy.
Max Perls , 1843–1881, pathologist, Giesen, Germany.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   244 25/10/2017   08:02Further work 245
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Special stains are also useful for the diagnosis of infection. 
For example, a Ziehl–Neelsen stain demonstrates acid-fast 
bacilli, particularly mycobacteria, by staining them bright red 
in a blue background (Figure 16.20). Mycobacteria cannot 
be seen on H&E slides. Other microorganisms that may be 
detectable on H&E but are easier to see with a special stain 
include fungi (PAS or Grocott stain), protozoa (Giemsa stain) 
and spirochaetes (Warthin–Starry stain).
Electron microscopy
Electron microscopy allows tissue to be visualised at very  
high magnification, e.g. ×1000 to ×500 000. It may help to  
decide the lineage of a non-neoplastic or neoplastic cell 
in difficult cases and may help to determine the nature of 
abnormal deposits, e.g. in renal disease. Unfortunately, it is 
time-consuming, labour intensive and expensive, and is now 
used very selectively.
Immunohistochemistry 
Immunohistochemistry was introduced in the 1970s and 
has had a major impact on histopathological diagnosis. This 
technique detects a specific antigen using an antibo dy. The 
antibody is labelled with a dye and when bound to its target 
antigen is seen in the tissue section as a coloured stain, often 
brown (Figure 16.25). This allows the presence, tissue dis -
tribution and cellular localisation of an antigen to be deter -
mined. It can also be used to quantify expression: for example, 
Ki67 is a cell cycle marker that allows a proliferative index to 
be calculated, which in turn has prognostic value for neuroen-
docrine tumours and other neoplasms. Immunohistochemis -
try can be applied to fixed and frozen tissue and to cytological 
preparations (Figure 16.22b). It is specific, safe, quick and 
relatively inexpensive. However, false-positive results can 
result from non-specific staining or from cross-reaction with 
similar antigens. Over-reliance on immunohistochemistry by 
clinicians and pathologists should be avoided.
Immunohistochemistry: tumour pathology
Immunohistochemistry has multiple applications in tumour 
pathology, including elucidation of site of origin and deter -
mination of cell type/direction of differentiation. Immuno -
histochemistry may also help to confirm neoplasia, determine 
the selection of treatment, refine prognostic predictions and 
screen for known underlying genetic changes. 
Various immunohistochemical stains are used to detect 
cell type. Cytokeratins are expressed by epithelial cells. Cyto-
keratin positivity favours carcinoma (Figure 16.25) over 
Summary box 16.10
Common special stains
●● PAS: glycogen, fungi
●● D-PAS: mucin
●● Perls Prussian blue: iron
●● Reticulin: reticulin fibres, fibrosis
●● van Gieson: collagen
●● Congo red: amyloid
●● Ziehl–Neelsen: mycobacteria
Summary box 16.11
Some immunohistochemical stains used for tumours
●● Cell type/site of origin:
Epithelial (carcinoma): cytokeratins
Lymphoid (lymphoma): CD45, CD3, CD20
Melanocytic (melanoma): S100, HMB45, Melan A
Neuroendocrine: synaptophysin, chromogranin
Vascular: CD31
Myoid: desmin, actin
●● Site of origin/cell type:
Prostate: prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
Lung: thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
Thyroid: thyroglobulin
Colorectum: cytokeratin 20 (CK20), CDX2
Liver: HepPar
Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST): CD117, DOG-1
●● Prognosis and treatment:
Breast and gastric carcinomas: HER2 
Neuroendocrine tumours: Ki67 labelling index
●● Screening for mutations
Colorectal carcinoma: mismatch repair genes (MLH1, 
MSH2, MSH6, PMS2)
Ira Thompson van Gieson , 1866–1913, American neuropathologist, described this stain in 1889.
Franz Heinrich Paul Ziehl , 1859–1926, neurologist, Lübeck, Germany.
Friedrich Carl Adolf Neelsen , 1854–1894, pathologist, prosector, the Stadt-Krankenhaus, Dresden, Germany.
Aldred Scott Warthin , 1866–1931, Professor of Pathology, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Figure 16.25 Diffuse immunohistochemical staining (brown) for a 
pancytokeratin marker in a malignancy, favouring car cinoma over 
other tumours.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   245 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS246
other malignancies. Lymphoid markers include the panlym -
phoid marker CD45, the T -cell marker CD3 and the B-cell 
marker CD20. Markers of melanocytic differentiation include 
S100, MelanA and HMB45. Chromogranin, synaptophysin 
and CD56 stain neuroendocrine tumours such as carcinoid 
and small cell carcinoma. A gastrointestinal stromal tumour 
(GIST) typically expresses CD117 (Figure 16.26) and DOG-
1. Endothelial cell markers include CD31, which may high -
light vascular invasion or confirm a diagnosis of vascular 
neoplasia.
The site of origin of a metastatic tumour may be suggested 
by H&E appearances. For example, an adenocarcinoma 
has several possible sources. A clear cell carcinoma (Figure 
16.17) is often of renal origin. Immunohistochemical stains 
may provide further information. Some are highly specific for 
an anatomical site, e.g. prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and 
thyroglobulin. Others are somewhat less specific, but still 
useful, e.g. thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), a marker 
of bronchogenic origin; HepPar, that suggests hepatocellular 
origin; and cytokeratin 20 and CDX2, typically expressed by 
colorectal carcinoma. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is 
seen in several types of carcinoma (Figure 16.22b). However, 
some malignancies, especially poorly differentiated examples, 
do not conform to the typical patterns. Therefore, the clini -
cal picture and imaging results should always be taken into 
account.
Less often, immunohistochemistry is used to help confirm 
malignancy. For example, kappa or lambda light chain restric-
tion (expression of only one immunoglobulin light chain) in 
lymphoid proliferations suggests clonality and, in turn, neo-
plasia rather than a reactive process. Strong expression of p53 
may support a diagnosis of dysplasia or neoplasia in specific 
settings.
Immunohistochemistry also plays a role in the selection of 
treatment and in predicting prognosis. For example, carcino -
mas of the breast are routinely assessed for oestrogen receptor 
(ER) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) 
status, while lymphomas are typically subjected to a compre -
hensive panel of markers that help determine treatment and 
prognosis. Ki67 proliferative index is an important prognostic 
factor for neuroendocrine tumours and for some other neo-
plasms (Figure 16.27).
Immunohistochemistry: infections and other 
applications
There are antibodies to many infective agents, including cyto-
megalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), herpes sim -
plex virus, human herpes virus 8 (HHV8), hepatitis B virus 
and Helicobacter pylori. Some of these organisms, e.g. H. pylori 
and CMV , can be seen or suspected on H&E slides, while 
others, e.g. EBV and HHV8, require immunohistochemistry 
or other techniques for their detection.
Immunohistochemistry can also be used to study immu -
noglobulin and complement expression (e.g. in lymphomas 
or renal biopsies); to assess the abnormal accumulation of 
various proteins such as alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT); to 
characterise amyloid; and to screen for mismatch repair gene 
mutations. As molecular pathological techniques progress, 
further immunohistochemical markers that detect specific 
Summary box 16.12
Uses of immunohistochemistry
●● Cell type
●● Neoplasia:
Differentiation
Determination of site of origin
Confirmation of neoplasia
Selection of treatment
Screening for mutations
Prognosis
●● Microorganisms
●● Other:
Amyloid
Immunoglobulins
Complement
Michael Anthony Epstein , b.1921, formerly Professor of Pathology, the University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
Yvonne Barr , b.1931, virologist who emigrated to Australia. Epstein and Barr discovered this virus in 1964.
Figure 16.26 (a) A metastatic tumour composed of spindle cells. 
Gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) was suspected. (b) Positive 
immunohistochemistry for CD117, confirming GIST.
(a)
(b)
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   246 25/10/2017   08:02Diagnostic molecular pathology 247
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
gene mutations are being developed and may become useful 
in clinical practice in the future. 
DIAGNOSTIC MOLECULAR 
PATHOLOGY
The broad heading of diagnostic molecular pathology refers 
to multiple tests that assess molecules (proteins, ribonucleic 
acid [RNA] and deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA]) in tissue. The 
information that they provide may be useful for diagnosis, 
prognostic predictions, identifying patients with a hereditary 
cancer risk, determining treatment and identifying residual 
disease after treatment. Immunohistochemistry is conven -
tionally excluded from this category.
Methods
In situ hybridisation
In situ hybridisation (ISH) uses a labelled oligonucleotide 
probe targeted at a specific sequence of RNA or DNA. It can 
be performed on fixed or fresh tissue sections, allowing the 
presence or absence of a particular sequence and its location 
to be seen in situ. Autoradiography, fluorescence micros -
copy or immunohistochemistry can be used for visualisation. 
Chromogenic in situ hybridisation (CISH) combines ISH and 
immunohistochemistry for the detection of DNA regions and 
it is widely and routinely used in pathology laboratories for 
the detection of HER2 amplifications. Viral genomes, e.g. 
EBV (Figure 16.28), CMV and human papillomavirus, can 
be detected using this approach. ISH plays an important role 
in the management of tumours (see below).
Polymerase chain reaction
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplifies DNA, yield-
ing millions of copies from a single copy of a selected target. 
RNA also may be amplified, using the technique of reverse 
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). PCR is fast and safe and can 
be performed on homogenised fresh or formalin-fixed tissue. 
PCR-based methods have many applications in oncology (see 
below), including mutational analysis (Figures 16.29 and 
16.30), testing for clonality (Figure 16.31), detection of 
transcripts resulting from cytogenetic changes, detection of 
amplifications, demonstration of microsatellite instability and 
detection of gene hypermethylation. PCR-based methods can 
also be used to detect microorganisms. 
Cytogenetics and FISH
Cytogenetics is the microscopic study of chromosomal changes 
in individual cells. Conventional cytogenetics is complemen-
ted, and is increasingly being replaced, by newer techniques 
including interphase cytogenetics and RT-PCR. Interphase 
cytogenetics relies mainly on FISH, although other forms of 
ISH may be used. Cytogenetic tests seek alterations such as 
gene amplification (e.g. HER2 in breast and upper gastroin -
testinal cancer; MDM2 in liposarcoma and atypical lipomas), 
Figure 16.27  Immunohistochemistry for Ki67. The proliferative 
index is approximately 10%.
Figure 16.28 In situ hybridisation for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) show-
ing extensive nuclear positivity (black nuclei) in a gastric adenocarci -
noma.
Figure 16.29 Sanger sequencing showing wild type BRAF (above) 
and a BRAF V600E mutation (below) (courtesy of Dr M Rodri -
guez-Justo, UCL-AD, Cancer Institute, London, United Kingdom).
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   247 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS248
loss of segments of chromosomal material, loss of whole chro-
mosomes (e.g. renal cell carcinoma) and translocations and 
fusion genes (e.g. haematological and soft tissue tumours). 
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry (FC) is a laser- or impedance-based technique 
used for cell counting, cell sorting, biomarker detection and 
protein engineering. Cells are suspended in a stream of fluid 
and passed by an electronic detection apparatus. It is useful 
for detecting antigens in haematological neoplasms, usually 
in blood samples, and for determining ploidy, i.e. the number 
of sets of chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell. Although tra-
ditional FC is of limited value for tissue analysis, new applica-
tions on image cytometric DNA analysis (ICDA) have been 
developed that allow detection of aneuploidy in tissue sec-
tions of gastrointestinal cancers. 
5000
E1: IGK A G15-537
Lower 296 345 509 811 Upper
Sample intensity [FU]
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
25
50
100
200
300
400
500
700
1,000
1,500
Size
(bp)
Figure 16.30 KRAS mutation detected using next generation sequencing (Ion Torrent, Life Technologies) (courtesy of Dr M Rodriguez-Justo).
Figure 16.31 Clonality analysis showing a repr oducible clonal peak (296) consistent with IG-kappa gene/clonal rearrangement (IG-Kappa 
Gene clonality assay, Invivoscribe) (courtesy of Dr M Rodriguez-Justo).
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   248 25/10/2017   08:02Diagnostic molecular pathology 249
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Gene changes in tumours 
In normal circumstances, the division and proliferation of cells 
is carefully controlled. For example, various growth factors 
influence division by binding to specific cell surface tyrosine 
kinase receptors resulting in the initiation of an intracellular 
cascade of changes. Damaged cells may undergo apoptosis, a 
carefully regulated process of programmed cell death.
Tumours occur as a consequence of uncontrolled cell pro-
liferation. Abnormalities of numerous genes can affect cell 
proliferation and favour tumour development. The genes that 
are involved fall into two main categories. Those that stim -
ulate cell proliferation are known as proto-oncogenes (often 
referred to as oncogenes), while those that inhibit prolifera -
tion are called tumour suppressor genes. Inappropriate acti -
vation of proto-oncogenes may accelerate cell proliferation, 
while inhibition of tumour suppressor genes may remove the 
controls that retard cell growth and division.
Several types of gene or nucleic acid abnormality can occur 
during tumorigenesis. Mutations are a very common type of 
abnormality. They are changes in the sequence of nucleic 
acids, usually DNA. Mutations can be either germline, i.e. 
inherited from a parent and accordingly present in every cell 
in the body; or somatic, i.e. acquired at some point during life 
and affecting only some cells in the body. Mutations are of 
several types. Point mutations are single nucleotide changes, 
where one base pair is replaced by another. Other types of 
mutation include deletions and insertions (indels). Examples 
of clinically relevant mutations include p53 tumour suppres-
sor gene mutations, causing production of an abnormal p53 
protein that lacks suppressor function; and mutation of the 
KIT gene, causing ligand-independent activation of a growth 
factor receptor.
Other abnormalities of genes include amplification, e.g. 
HER2, resulting in over-expression of the growth factor; 
translocations, e.g. t14:18 in follicular lymphoma that results 
in juxtaposition of the anti-apoptotic bcl-2 gene to a regu -
latory region of an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene, with 
subsequent bcl-2 overexpression; and loss of one of the two 
copies of a particular gene, or loss of heterozygosity.
Gene defects may ultimately interfere with the function 
of proteins involved in various regulatory processes, such as 
cell cycle control (e.g. p53); apoptosis (e.g. bcl-2); and signal 
transduction pathways. The latter can be affected by abnor -
malities of growth factor receptors or of intracellular com -
ponents such as KRAS (Figure 16.30) and NRAS. DNA 
mismatch repair (MMR) genes can also be affected, causing 
instability of repeated sequences of DNA called microsatel-
lites (known as microsatellite instability or MSI).
Epigenetic changes
Epigenetic factors are external to the gene and can switch 
it on or off. The latter is known as epigenetic silencing and 
can result from DNA methylation (addition of a methyl 
group to DNA with alteration of its structure), modifications 
of histones (components of chromatin) and RNA-associated 
silencing. Loss of methylation with gene activation can occur 
in tumours. Conversely, hypermethylation of tumour suppres-
sor genes or of the mismatch repair gene MLH1 can reduce 
their activity, favouring malignancy. The importance and 
high frequency of epigenetic changes in tumours is increas -
ingly being recognised. 
Detection of mutations
There are two broadly related areas of clinical practice that 
rely on mutational analysis. Firstly, tumour tissue DNA can 
be analysed for mutations to improve diagnostic precision, 
enhance treatment plans and help predict clinical outcome. 
Secondly, a sample (usually blood) may be submitted for 
detection of germline mutations that are characteristic of an 
inherited disease. This is referred to as genetic testing and 
can be used to confirm non-neoplastic conditions, such as 
cystic fibrosis, or to diagnose a hereditary predisposition to 
cancer, e.g. Lynch syndrome (see below). Genetic testing may 
be offered to those who have a strong family history of cancer 
or whose clinical presentation suggests a family history of can-
cer, e.g. diagnosis before the age of 50.
Mutational analysis is based on PCR and requires 
extraction of DNA from tissue (or from other sources such as 
blood). It includes sequencing-based screening methods (e.g. 
Sanger sequencing, pyrosequencing) (Figure 16.29), screen-
ing methods comparing mutated with normal DNA and tar -
geted mutation detection methods.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS or NextGen) (Figure 
16.30) has emerged relatively recently and has already changed 
cancer management profoundly. The term NGS encompasses 
several methods, each of which performs massively parallel 
sequencing, allowing millions of fragments of DNA to be exam-
ined simultaneously for mutations. It is quicker and potentially 
cheaper than older methods and is applicable to formalin-fixed 
tissue. Targeted NGS is capable of identifying multiple known 
and novel mutations and other variants in genes of interest in 
a single test. In addition, NGS is able to detect low-frequency 
alleles with higher sensitivity towards low-frequency mutations 
compared with traditional Sanger sequencing.
New powerful platforms have been developed recently, 
designed to detect simultaneously not only mutations but 
also copy number variants (CVN) and gene fusions in more 
than 100 genes involved in human oncogenesis with mini -
mal nuclear acid (DNA and RNA) sample input (Oncomine 
 cancer Panel).
NGS has several applications, including prediction of 
tumour response to therapy, prediction of clinical behaviour 
and, increasingly, diagnosis.
Adequate amounts of tumour DNA must be present in 
the tissue sample for these techniques to be successful. Many 
Summary box 16.13
Indications for molecular pathology testing of tissue
●● Diagnosis and classification of tumours
●● Confirmation of neoplasia: clonality
●● Staging
●● Prognosis
●● Selection of therapy
●● Monitoring disease burden
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   249 25/10/2017   08:02CHAPTER 16  Tissue and molecular diagnosis
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS250
 samples include both non-neoplastic tissue and tumour. If 
necessary, microdissection of the area of interest can be done 
using conventional techniques or laser-assisted approaches.
Molecular testing: examples of 
clinical settings
Lymphoma
The distinction between benign and malignant lymphoid 
proliferations relies initially on morphology, immunohisto -
chemistry and the clinical setting, but is sometimes difficult. 
Clonal immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) gene rearrange -
ments in B-cell proliferations and clonal T-cell receptor gene 
rearrangements in T-cell proliferations favour lymphoma over 
reactive proliferations, although clonality is not synonymous 
with malignancy. Clonality is typically detected using PCR-
based methods (Figure 16.31). Also, identification of charac-
teristic cytogenetic abnormalities plays a very important role 
in diagnosis, classification and management of various lym -
phomas and other haematological neoplasms. 
Soft tissue tumours
The diagnosis of many types of soft tissue tumour/sarcoma is 
assisted by molecular testing. Examples include Ewing’ s sar-
coma, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma and leiomyosarcoma. Char-
acteristic cytogenetic changes are usually detected by FISH. 
Gastrointestinal stromal tumour
Most GISTS have either a KIT gene mutation or a PDG -
FRA gene mutation, more often the former . Identification 
of known mutations helps confirm the diagnosis of GIST in 
difficult cases. Mutational profile may also help predict clin-
ical outcome and response to chemotherapy (e.g. imatinib, a 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor).
Treatment of advanced colorectal 
carcinoma (CRC), lung cancer and 
malignant melanoma
An increasingly common reason for molecular testing is the 
prediction of response to drug therapy for advanced carcino -
mas and other malignancies (‘theranostics’). In CRC, the 
anti-EGFR monoclonal antibo dies cetuximab and panitu -
mumab are used in combination with chemotherapy for met-
astatic disease. This drug is less likely to be effective if KRAS 
or NRAS mutations are present than if a tumour is ‘wild-type’ 
(i.e. has no RAS mutation). In lung cancer, response to the 
anti-EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor Gefitinib is confined to 
a minority of lesions and is predicted by specific EGFR muta-
tions, while response to the anaplastic lymphoma kinase 
(ALK) inhibitor crizotinib is predicted by ALK gene rear -
rangement. In metastatic malignant melanoma, response to 
the BRAF kinase inhibitor vemurafenib is predicted by spe-
cific BRAF mutations. 
HER2 gene amplification in breast and 
gastric cancer
The management of breast cancer, and more recently of 
untreated metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma, is influenced 
by the tumour’s HER2 status. Patients whose tumours over -
express HER2 are offered treatment with the monoclonal 
antibody trastuzumab. Screening for HER2 overexpression 
relies on immunohistochemistry. Confirmation or exclusion 
of underlying gene amplification in equivocal cases depends 
on FISH testing or PCR.
Mismatch repair genes
CRC and endometrial carcinoma can harbour germline or 
sporadic abnormalities of mismatch repair (MMR) genes 
(MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2). Lynch syndrome, char -
acterised by germline MMR gene defects, predisposes to CRC 
and other tumours that may occur at a relatively young age. 
Immunohistochemistry is a common screening method for 
MMR mutations. Loss of immunohistochemical staining by 
neoplastic cells is a marker for a genetic defect and an indi -
cation for considering genetic testing of patients and their 
 families for Lynch syndrome (Figure 16.32). In addition, 
MMR gene defects in CRC predict lower recurrence rates, 
later recurrence, a better  response to 5-FU-based chemo -
therapy and better survival rates. 
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.32 Immunohistochemical screening for mismatch r epair 
gene mutations in a carcinoma. (a) Nuclear MLH1 expression is 
retained (arrows showing positively staining brown neoplastic nuclei). 
(b) In contrast, MSH2 expression is lost, suggesting a mismatch 
repair gene abnormality.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   250 25/10/2017   08:02Further reading 251
PART 2 | INVESTIGATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Staging and response to treatment
Tests can be used to confirm the presence or absence of a 
tumour at a particular anatomical site, thus refining staging. 
Similarly, they can help to assess the response to anti-cancer 
therapy. This has been particularly useful for haematological 
neoplasms such as myeloid leukaemias, where the presence 
of minimal residual disease can be detected by PCR-based 
methods.
Prognosis
Tests that help determine the selection of therapy for tumours 
may also have prognostic value, additional to that of estab -
lished prognostic factors, e.g. BRAF in CRC. Some genetic 
changes have prognostic value in one type of tumour but 
not another, e.g. MMR gene defects are more predictive for 
CRC than for endometrial cancer. Of course, the outcome of 
many tumours now depends to some extent on their response 
to drug therapy, and accordingly a molecular test predicting 
response to therapy is at the same time prognostic. Packages 
of tests with additional prognostic value are also available, 
e.g. Oncotype DX, which analyses multiple genes in breast 
cancer tissue. 
Cancer ‘precision medicine’
This refers to the development of individualised cancer care 
plans, on the basis of molecular abnormalities. Germline and 
somatic mutations may be taken into consideration, so as to 
tailor treatments precisely and to target the cancer cells as 
effectively as possible. With the advent of NGS, analysis of a 
single sample of tumour tissue for multiple known and novel 
mutations that may predict treatment response is possible. 
In addition, mutations affecting as few as 5% of neoplastic 
cells can be detected. Other techniques may be used at the 
same time to detect abnormalities in the proteome (protein), 
transcriptome (mRNA), metabolome (metabolites) or epig-
enome, sometimes referred to as ‘omics’ assays. Such plans 
may, inevitably, be very complex. 
Summary: diagnostic molecular 
pathology 
Progress in molecular pathology is undoubtedly improving 
patient management. There is justifiable enthusiasm for the 
potential of emerging techniques. However, factors such as 
tumour heterogeneity, development of resistance to treat -
ment and the genetic plasticity of many cancers could limit 
the development of precision medicine. Cost is also a consid-
eration. Furthermore, the results of molecular studies should 
be interpreted not in isolation but with the clinical setting 
and basic tumour morphology in mind. For example, several 
types of tumour, including melanoma, CRC and papillary car-
cinoma of the thyroid, may have the same BRAF mutation, 
but the response to specific anti-BRAF therapy depends on 
the histology and the anatomical site. Similarly, the clinical 
implications of MMR gene defects in CRC and endometrial 
cancer are dissimilar. Finally, it is worth remembering that an 
H&E stained slide is inexpensive, easy to produce and a good 
summary of the genetic complexity of cells. 
AUTOPSY
In the past, advances in medical knowledge were sometimes 
based on autopsy findings. Autopsies remain very useful for 
medical education and audit, as well as identifying the cause 
of death. In the UK there are two types of autopsy. The first 
is the coroner’s postmortem, when the coroner decides that 
there is a need, or is obliged, to establish the cause of death. 
No consent from relatives is required. The second is the hos -
pital autopsy, which requires relatives’ consent. Valuable 
information may be revealed through both of these routes, 
especially in the unusual event of death following surgery.
FINAL COMMENTS
Analysis of tissue has played an increasingly important role in 
clinical management over the past few decades, and there has 
been rapid recent progress in the field of diagnostic molecular 
pathology. Pathologists need to work more closely with clini-
cians than ever before in order to optimise management, and 
to ensure that the value and limitations of tissue diagnosis 
and of new technologies are appreciated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author is very grateful to the following contributors: 
Professor MT Sheaff, for assistance with the sections of this 
chapter that discuss cytology and autopsy; Dr M Rodriguez-
Justo, for reviewing and improving the section on diagnostic 
molecular pathology.
FURTHER READING
Kumar V , Abbas AK, Aster JC. In: Robbins and Cotran. Pathologic basis 
of disease, 9th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, 2015.
Rosai J (ed). Rosai and Ackerman’s surgical pathology , 10th edn. Phila-
delphia: Mosby Elsevier, 2011.
02_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   251 25/10/2017   08:0202_16-B&L27_Pt2_Ch16.indd   252 25/10/2017   08:02
PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
17 Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient  ...... 254
18 Anaesthesia and pain relief ................................................................... 269
19 Nutrition and fluid therapy  .................................................................... 278
20 Postoperative care .................................................................................... 290
21 Day case surgery ....................................................................................... 301
Perioperative care
3
03_17A-B&L27_Pt3.indd   253 25/10/2017   08:03Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To be able to organise the preoperative care and the oper-
ating list 
To understand preoperative preparation for surgery: 
 • Surgical, medical and anaesthetic aspects of 
assessment 
 • How to optimise the patient’s condition 
 • How to identify and optimise the patient at higher risk
 • Importance of critical care in management
 • How to take consent
 • How to organise an operating list
Preoperative care including the high-risk 
surgical patient
17
INTRODUCTION
The stress of major surgery can lead to increased oxygen 
demand by about 40%. Changes such as cytokine release-re -
lated inflammatory changes, endocrine responses, hyperco -
agulability and redistribution of fluid between compartments 
may last several postoperative days. The purpose of careful 
preoperative planning is to minimise the unwanted effects of 
these physiological changes.
Systematic history taking, examination and ordering of 
investigations at the preoperative clinic should include not 
only an assessment of functional reserve but also the formula-
tion of advice on optimisation, to best cope with the antici-
pated operative stress. General practitioner (GP) records and 
hospital notes are useful sources of baseline information. GPs 
can help by monitoring chronic conditions, adjusting medi -
cations, and facilitating in weight reduction, exercise and the 
cessation of smoking.
A simple questionnaire, working within agreed guide -
lines, can identify high-risk patients undergoing high-risk 
surgery needing specific tests and optimisation (see later). 
Patients with severe comorbidities or undergoing high-risk 
surgery should be referred to specialists to quantify and to 
reduce perioperative risks. Risks of surgery, anaesthesia and 
the effects of comorbid conditions should be discussed so that 
the patient can make an informed decision. Patients should 
be given advice on ‘nil by mouth’ (NBM) and regular medica-
tion and premedication at the preoperative visit.
A plan for the operating list should be drawn-up and all 
those involved in making the list run smoothly should be 
informed. The World Health Organization (WHO) check -
list, which is started just prior to induction of anaesthesia and 
continued during and after the surgery, aims to improve the 
safety of anaesthesia and surgery.
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
Evidence suggests that correction of anaemia, better diabetes 
control, preoperative exercises and better nutrition leads to 
better patient outcomes and fewer postoperative complica -
tions. Based on population statistics, associated comorbidities 
and the type of surgery, one can estimate risks for an individ-
ual undergoing surgery and various tools and scores (see later) 
can be used as risk predictors.
History taking 
Each organ system problem should be noted with dates, aeti -
ology and treatment delivered (Table 17.1). Screening ques -
tions will reveal ‘fitness’ for surgery and anaesthesia. Patients 
with recent chest infections should be assessed for anaesthetic 
risks and postoperative surgical infection. Increasing severity 
of symptoms generally indicates worsening of the condition 
and possible need for a change in medication. Inability to 
achieve four metabolic equivalents, e.g. climbing a flight of 
stairs, increases cardiac risk after major surgery. Some factors 
leading to these findings may be amenable to treatment pre-
operatively such as anaemia, angina, palpitations or obesity.
Summary box 17.1
Preoperative plan for the best patient outcomes
●● Gather and record all relevant information
●● Optimise patient condition 
●● Choose surgery that offers minimal risk and maximum benefit 
●● Anticipate and plan for adverse events
●● Adequate hydration, nutrition and exercise are advised
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   254 25/10/2017   08:05Patient assessment 255
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
The history of past surgery and anaesthesia can reveal the 
problems one may face during current hospitalisation (e.g. 
intra-abdominal adhesions for planned laparoscopic surgery, 
suxamethonium apnoea). The use of recreational drugs and 
alcohol consumption should be noted as they are known to be 
associated with adverse outcomes. Check for allergies and risk 
factors for deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Social history, ability 
to communicate and mobility are important in planning reha-
bilitation after surgery. 
Examination 
Patients should be treated with respect and dignity, receive a 
clear explanation of the examination undertaken and be kept 
as comfortable as possible (Table 17.2). A chaperone should 
be present, especially for intimate examinations. This is will 
often be part of a local guideline or policy.
In symptomatic patients one should look specifically for 
evidence of cardiac failure (raised jugular venous pressure 
(JVP), fine pulmonary crackles, gallop rhythm), peripheral 
vascular disease (loss of peripheral pulses, ulcerations) and 
valvular heart disease with characteristic murmurs (e.g. ejec -
tion systolic murmur in aortic stenosis, pansystolic murmur 
in tricuspid regurgitation and mid-diastolic murmur in mitral 
stenosis heard at respective areas on auscultation). When pos-
sible, the medical or surgical treatments for these conditions 
should be started and the patient stabilised before elective 
surgery. UK statistics show that patients with cardiac failure 
or cirrhosis even though on treatment have a high (8%) ‘30-
day mortality’ after major surgery.
The presence of a rapid respiratory rate, reduced air entry, 
crepitations and rhonchi may indicate respiratory problems. 
A history of dyspnoea along with examination findings of 
tachycardia, raised JVP , tricuspid regurgitation, hepatomegaly 
and oedematous feet will indicate severe respiratory disease 
with pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular failure.
Summary box 17.2
Principles of history-taking
●● Listen. What is the problem? (Open questions)
●● Clarify. What does the patient expect? (Closed questions)
●● Narrow. Differential diagnosis (Focused questions)
●● Fitness. Comorbidities (Fixed questions)
TABLE 17.1 Key topics in past medical history.
Cardiovascular
●● Ischaemic heart disease – angina, myocardial infarction
●● Hypertension
●● Heart failure
●● Dysrhythmia
●● Peripheral vascular disease
●● Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
Respiratory
●● Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
●● Asthma
●● Respiratory infections
Gastrointestinal
●● Peptic ulcer disease and gastro-oesophageal reflux
●● Liver disease 
Genitourinary tract
●● Urinary tract infection
●● Renal dysfunction
Neurological
●● Epilepsy
●● Cerebrovascular accidents and transient ischaemic attacks
●● Psychiatric disorders
●● Cognitive function
Endocrine/metabolic
●● Diabetes
●● Thyroid dysfunction
●● Phaeochromocytoma
●● Porphyria
Locomotor system
●● Osteoarthritis
●● Inflammatory arthropathy such as rheumatoid arthritis
Other
●● Human immunodeficiency virus
●● Hepatitis
●● Tuberculosis
●● Malignancy
●● Allergy
Previous surgery
●● Problems encountered
●● Family history of problems with anaesthesia
Entries in bold need to be recorded even when negative.
Summary box 17.3
Examination 
●● General. Positive findings even if not related to the proposed 
procedure should be explored further
●● Surgery related. Type and site of surgery, complications 
occurred due to underlying pathology
●● Systemic. Comorbidities and extent of limitation of each organ 
function
●● Specific. For example, suitability for positioning during surgery
TABLE 17.2 Medical examination. 
General Anaemia, jaundice, cyanosis, nutritional 
status, sources of infection (teeth, feet, leg 
ulcers)
Cardiovascular Pulse, blood pressure, heart sounds, bruits, 
peripheral oedema
Respiratory Respiratory rate and effort, chest expansion 
and percussion note, breath sounds, oxygen 
saturation
Gastrointestinal Abdominal masses, ascites, bowel sounds, 
hernia, genitalia
Neurological Consciousness level, cognitive function, 
sensation, muscle power, tone and reflexes 
Airway assessment
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   255 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE256
Examination specific to surgery
At preoperative assessment, the clinical findings, site, side, 
specific imaging or investigation findings related to the 
pathology for which the surgery is proposed should be noted. 
Suitability of the patient for the proposed surgical option and 
vice versa should also be assessed. For example, laparoscopic 
procedures are less invasive and are therefore preferred in 
most; however, not all patients can tolerate pneumoperito-
neum and positioning.
The type of surgery along with patient comorbidities deter-
mine perioperative risks, for example perioperative mortality 
in major surgery such as that of open aortic aneurysm repair in 
the UK is 3% and that with endovascular repair is 1%.
Sources of potential bacteraemia can compromise surgical 
results especially if artificial material is implanted, such as in 
joint replacement surgery or arterial grafting. Check for and 
treat infections in the preoperative period, e.g. infected toes, 
pressure sores, teeth and urine; screen the patients for methi-
cillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus colonisation. 
Investigations
The National Institute of Health and Care Excellence, UK 
(NICE) guidelines lay out the investigations needed for vari-
ous categories of surgery. 
exposure mean that chest radiographs should be restricted 
to specific patients, such as those with cardiac failure, 
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
acute respiratory symptoms, pulmonary cancer, metastasis 
or effusions or those who are deemed to be at risk of active 
pulmonary tuberculosis. 
 ● Clotting screen. If a patient has a history suggestive of 
a bleeding diathesis, liver disease, eclampsia, cholesta -
sis or has a family history of bleeding disorder, or is on 
antithrombotic or anticoagulant agents then coagulation 
screening will be needed. However, the effects of anti -
platelet agents, low molecular weight heparins and newer 
agents affecting factor Xa cannot be measured by routine 
laboratory tests. 
 ● Urinalysis. Dipstick testing of urine should be performed 
on all patients to detect urinary infection, biliuria, glycos-
uria and inappropriate osmolality.
 ● β-Human chorionic gonadotrophin. Women of child-bear-
ing age should be asked sensitively about their pregnancy 
status. If in doubt a laboratory test or a reliable pregnancy 
kit (low cost) can be used, after obtaining consent from 
the patient, to avoid danger of exposure to surgery and 
anaesthesia on the foetus. 
 ● Blood glucose and HbA1c. Poor control of diabetes can 
lead to perioperative infection and slow recovery in 
patients with diabetes mellitus and endocrine problems. 
HbA1C indicates how well diabetes has been controlled 
over a longer duration. Early mobilisation, oral intake and 
return to routine medication should be the goals in man -
agement of diabetes.
 ● Arterial blood gases. A low-cost tool that can give quick 
and vital information in acute or chronic severe respira -
tory conditions, acid–base disturbances and conditions 
where there is changing milieu, e.g. immediately before 
kidney transplant. 
 ● Liver function tests. These are indicated in patients with 
jaundice, known or suspected hepatitis, cirrhosis, malig -
nancy or in patients with poor nutritional status.
 ● Other investigations. Specialist radiological views and 
recent imaging are sometimes required. If imaging is going 
to be needed during surgery, then this needs to be planned 
in advance. 
SPECIFIC PREOPERATIVE 
PROBLEMS AND MANAGEMENT
Specific medical problems encountered during preoperative 
assessment should be corrected to the best possible level. 
Many patients with severe disease (see later) will need to be 
referred to specialists; the referral letter should include all 
the details including history, examination and investigation 
results. 
Cardiovascular disease
Perioperative cardiovascular complications are frequent. 
Patients who can climb a flight of stairs without getting 
short of breath or chest pain or needing to stop are likely to 
Summary box 17.4
Investigations needed
●● Type of surgery. Major surgery can lead to organ system 
dysfunction needing most investigations
●● Patient. For example, sickle cell test for patients of Afro-
Caribbean origin with family history of sickle cell disease
●● Comorbidities. For example, peak flow rates for severe 
asthmatics
 ● Full blood count. A full bloo d count (FBC) is needed for 
major operations, in the elderly and in those with anaemia 
or pathology with ongoing blood loss and chronic disease. 
In case of suspicion or history of sickle crisis, a sickle cell 
test is needed in patients of Afro-Caribbean and Indian 
subcontinent origin. 
 ● Urea and electrolytes. Urea and electrolytes (U&Es) are 
needed before all major operations, in most patients over 
65 years of age especially with cardiovascular , renal and 
endocrine disease, or if significant blood loss is antic -
ipated. It is also needed in those on medications that 
affect electrolyte levels, e.g. steroids, diuretics, digoxin, 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, intravenous fluid 
or nutrition therapy and endocrine problems. 
 ● Electrocardiography. Electrocardiography (ECG) is 
required for those patients over 65 years of age and symp -
tomatic patients with a history of rheumatic fever , dia -
betes, cardiovascular, renal and cerebrovascular disease, 
with and without severe respiratory problems. It will also 
depend on if the surgery is minor/intermediate or major.
 ● Chest radiograph. Cost-effectiveness and risks of radiation 
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   256 25/10/2017   08:05Specific preoperativ e problems and management 257
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
tolerate a wide range of surgeries with an acceptable risk of 
perioperative cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. How -
ever, at preoperative assessment it is important to identify 
the patients who have a high perioperative risk of major 
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) including myocar -
dial infarction (MI), and make appropriate arrangements 
to reduce this risk. Patients at high risk are those with isch -
aemic heart disease (IHD), congestive cardiac failure (CCF), 
arrhythmias, severe peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovas -
cular disease or significant renal impairment, especially if 
they are undergoing major intra-abdominal or intra-thoracic 
surgery.
In patients with ischaemic heart disease the cardiac and 
coronary reserve can be evaluated using a stress test (stress 
ECG, stress echocardiogram, myocardial scintigraphy). The 
tests have a high negative predictive value but a relatively 
low positive predictive value. If the test is negative, the 
patient is unlikely to have IHD; conversely, if it is positive 
the chances of the patient actually having IHD is not neces -
sarily very high, but there is a need for further investigation 
such as coronary angiography. Recently, measurement of the 
fractional coronary flow reserve (FFR) during coronary angi -
ography using a pressure wire, has made it possible to identify 
coronary lesions that have the largest impact on myocardial 
perfusion.
In patients with any suggestion of valvular heart disease 
or poor left ventricular function, an echocardiogram should 
be obtained. Pressure gradients across the valves, dimensions 
of the chambers and contractility can be determined using 
echocardiography; an ejection fraction of less than 30% is 
associated with poor patient outcomes.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing provides a non-invasive 
assessment of combined pulmonary, cardiac and circulatory 
function.
The patient should be referred to a cardiologist if:
 ● A murmur is heard and the patient is symptomatic.
 ● The patient is known to have poor left ventricular func -
tion or cardiomegaly. 
 ● Ischaemic changes can be seen on ECG even if the 
patient is not symptomatic (silent ischaemia, silent MIs 
are frequent).
 ● There is an abnormal rhythm on the ECG, for example 
tachy-/bradycardia or heart block. 
Hypertension, ischaemic heart 
disease (IHD) and coronary stents
Prior to elective surgery blood pressure should be controlled 
to near 160/100 mmHg. If a new antihypertensive agent is 
introduced, a stabilisation period of at least 2 weeks should 
be allowed.
Patients with angina, that is not well controlled, should 
be investigated further by a cardiologist. The indications for 
coronary revascularisation in these patients before major sur-
gery are the same as the medical indications. Pharmacological 
protection is indicated. Patients on β-blockers and on statins 
should be maintained on their medication. Initiating statins 
preoperatively should be considered. Most long-term car -
diac medications should be continued over the perioperative 
period. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
and receptor blockers are often omitted 24 hours prior to sur-
gery and reintroduced gradually in the postoperative period.
After a proven myocardial infarction (Figure 17.1), elec-
tive surgery should be postponed for 3–6 months to reduce 
the risk of perioperative reinfarction. As primary percutane -
ous intervention is the treatment of choice for acute coro -
nary syndromes, many patients receive stents and are on dual 
antiplatelet therapy for 12 months. If surgery is absolutely 
necessary within the period of dual antiplatelet therapy, the 
management strategy should be decided jointly by surgeon, 
cardiologist, anaesthetist and patient, as it is essential to 
consider the balance of risk of continuing antiplatelet agents 
(with the risk of increased bleeding) and stopping them (with 
the risk of stent thrombosis).
The risk of stent thrombosis with consequences of MI and 
death is reduced if elective surgery is delayed until after dual 
antiplatelet therapy is no longer needed (about 6 weeks after 
bare metal and 12 months after drug-eluting stent insertion, 
although with the newest drug-eluting stents 6 months dual 
antiplatelet therapy may be enough).
Summary box 17.5
Preoperative management of patients with systemic 
disease
●● Capacity. Baseline organ function capacity should be 
assessed
●● Optimisation. Medication, lifestyle changes, specialist referral 
will improve organ capacity 
●● Alternative. Minimally impacting procedure, appropriate 
postoperative care will improve outcomes 
●● Theatre preparations. Timing, teamwork, special instruments 
and equipment 
V1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
Figure 17.1 Preoperative electrocardiogram of a patient who com -
plained of chest pain the pr evious day, showing recent transmural 
anterior myocardial infarction with Q waves and ST elevation.
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   257 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE258
If surgery cannot be postponed and the risk of significant 
perioperative bleeding is low, dual antiplatelet therapy can 
be continued during surgery. If the benefits of surgery can be 
negated by bleeding in closed cavities (spinal, intracranial, 
cardiac, posterior chamber of the eye and prostate surgery) 
clopidogrel or ticagrelor therapy may have to be stopped and, 
if possible, aspirin continued. However, a cardiology opinion 
should be sought. 
Dysrhythmias
In patients with atrial fibrillation, β-blockers, digoxin or cal-
cium channel blockers should be started preoperatively (or 
continued if the patient is already on such medication) in 
order to control rate and possibly rhythm. Cardiac output 
can increase by 15% if sinus rhythm is restored. Warfarin in 
patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) should be stopped 5 days 
preoperatively to achieve an international normalised ratio 
(INR) of 1.5 or less, which is safe for most surgery. The newer 
anticoagulants such as dabigatran (direct thrombin inhib-
itor) or rivaroxaban, apixaban and edoxaban (direct factor 
Xa inhibitors) do not have antagonists and must be stopped 
preoperatively, generally for 2–3 days in patients with normal 
renal function and longer when renal function is impaired. 
Alternative anticoagulation is not required in the periopera -
tive period unless the risk of stroke is high (high CHA2DS2-
VACs score). Bridging therapy with unfractionated heparin 
or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is recommended 
for patients with AF and a mechanical heart valve under -
going procedures that require interruption of warfarin. Deci -
sions on bridging therapy should balance the risks of stroke 
and bleeding.
Implanted pacemakers and cardiac 
defibrillators 
Checks and appropriate reprogramming should be done 
preoperatively by specialists. Monopolar diathermy activ-
ity during surgery may be sensed by the pacemaker as ven -
tricular fibrillation. Therefore, cardioversion and overpace 
modes must be turned off (and switched on after surgery) or 
converted to ‘ventricle paced, not sensed with no response 
to sensing’ (VOO) mode. Bipolar diathermy should be made 
available at surgery.
Symptomatic heart blocks and asymptomatic second- 
(Mobitz II) and third-degree heart blocks, if discovered at pre-
operative assessment clinic, will need cardiology consultation 
and temporary or permanent pacemaker insertion.
Figures 17.2 and 17.3  illustrate ECGs from two cases 
requiring preoperative optimisation.
Valvular heart disease
While anaesthetic management is altered to achieve haemo-
dynamic stability in moderate valvular diseases, the patients 
with severe aortic and mitral stenosis may benefit from val -
vuloplasty before elective non-cardiac surgery . Appropriate 
referral to anaesthetist and cardiologist should be made.
V1
I I
V5
Figure 17.2 Routine preoperative electrocardiogram in an 83-year-
old patient with no symptoms other than lethargy for the last 3 months. 
This shows complete heart block with dissociated P waves and QRS 
complexes, requiring preoperative pacing.
V1
II
V5
Figure 17.3 Atrial flutter.
In patients with mechanical heart valves, warfarin needs 
to be stopped for 5 days before surgery, and an infusion of 
unfractionated heparin started when the INR falls below 1.5. 
The activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), should 
be monitored to keep it at 1.5 times normal and the infusion 
is then stopped 2 hours before surgery . Heparin and warfarin 
should be started in the postoperative period, and heparin is 
stopped when the full effect of warfarin takes effect. Throm-
bin inhibitors and factor Xa inhibitors are not licensed and 
should not be used in patients with mechanical valves.
Anaemia and blood transfusion
Patients found to be anaemic at preoperative assessment 
should be investigated for the cause of their anaemia. They 
should be treated with iron and vitamin supplements. 
Chronic anaemia is well tolerated in the perioperative period; 
however, if the patient is undergoing a major procedure pre -
operative transfusion may be considered. If excessive bleeding 
is expected, then a preoperative ‘group and save’ should be 
performed and an appropriate number of units of blood cross-
matched.
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   258 25/10/2017   08:05Specific preoperativ e problems and management 259
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Some patients may refuse blood transfusion, for example 
a Jehovah’s witness. In such a case, during the consent pro -
cess (see later) discussion should include which blood prod -
uct and/or device system (e.g. cell salvage, reinfusion from 
drains) is acceptable. The discussion should extend to other 
areas, for example whether refusal of transfusion would apply 
in life-threatening situations. As in all consent processes, the 
discussion and outcome should be clearly documented (see 
Further reading; RCS 2016). 
Respiratory disease
Postoperative respiratory complications, such as pneumo -
nia, are a major cause of morbidity and mortality especially 
after major abdominal and thoracic surgery. A patient’ s cur-
rent respiratory status should be compared with their ‘normal 
state’. Make a note of the severity of the asthma and COPD, 
such as past hospital admissions for treatment of the condi-
tion, records of pulmonary function tests, use of oral steroids, 
home oxygen, non-invasive ventilation support and evidence 
of right heart failure.
A preoperative chest radiograph or scan is useful in a 
patient with known emphysematous bullae, pulmonary can -
cer, metastasis or effusions.
Patients on oral steroid treatment, oxygen therapy or who 
have a forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV 1) 
less than 30% of predicted value (for age, weight and height), 
or PaCO2 level of greater than 6kPa, have severe disease and 
are at risk of pneumonia and respiratory failure in the postop-
erative period.
Patients should continue to use their regular inhalers 
until the start of anaesthesia. Brittle asthmatics may also need 
extra steroid cover. Encourage the patients to be compliant 
with the medications, take a balanced diet and stop smok -
ing. Information should be provided to indicate perioperative 
risks associated with smoking. Stopping smoking reduces car-
bon monoxide levels and offers the patient a better ability to 
clear sputum. Evidence suggests that preoperative inspiratory 
muscle training significantly improves respiratory (muscle) 
function in the early postoperative period, reducing the risk 
of pulmonary complications.
Regional anaesthetic techniques and less invasive surgical 
options should be considered in severe cases. Elective surgery 
should be postponed until acute exacerbations are treated. 
The patient should be referred to a respiratory physician if:
 ● There is a severe disease or significant deterioration.
 ● Major surgery is planned in a patient with significant 
respiratory comorbidities.
 ● Right heart failure is present – dyspnoea, fatigue, tricuspid 
regurgitation, hepatomegaly and oedematous feet.
 ● The patient is young and has severe respiratory problems 
(indicates a rare condition).
Gastrointestinal disease
Nil by mouth and regular medications
Patients are advised not to take solids within 6 hours and 
clear fluids (isotonic drinks and water) within 2 hours before 
anaesthesia to avoid the risk of acid aspiration syndrome. 
These restrictions are further reduced in infants, as keeping 
hydrated reduces discomfort and is known to improve post -
operative outcomes.
If the surgery is delayed, oral intake of clear fluids should 
be allowed until 2 hours before surgery or intravenous fluids 
should be started, especially in vulnerable groups of patients, 
e.g. children, the elderly and diabetics.
Patients can continue to take their specified routine med-
ications with sips of water in the NBM period. 
Regurgitation risk
Patients with hiatus hernia, obesity, pregnancy and diabetes 
are at high risk of pulmonary aspiration, even if they have 
been NBM before elective surgery. Clear antacids, H2-recep-
tor blockers, e.g. ranitidine, or proton pump inhibitors, e.g. 
omeprazole, may be given at an appropriate time in the pre-
operative period.
Liver disease
In patients with liver disease, the cause of the disease needs 
to be known, as well as any evidence of clotting problems, 
renal involvement and encephalopathy. Elective surgery 
should be postponed until any acute episode has settled 
(e.g. cholangitis). The blood tests that need to be performed 
include liver function tests, coagulation, blood glucose and 
U&Es. The presence of ascites, oesophageal varices, hypo -
albuminaemia and sodium and water retention should be 
noted, as all can influence the choice and outcome of anaes -
thesia and surgery.
Genitourinary disease
Renal disease
Underlying conditions leading to chronic renal failure such 
as diabetes mellitus, hypertension and ischaemic heart dis-
ease, should be stabilised before elective surgery. Appropriate 
measures should be taken to treat acidosis, hypocalcaemia 
and hyperkalaemia of greater than 6 mmol/L. Arrangements 
should be made to continue peritoneal or haemodialysis until 
a few hours before surgery. After the final dialysis before sur -
gery, a blood sample should be sent for FBC and U&Es.
Chronic renal failure patients often suffer chronic micro -
cytic anaemia that is well tolerated; therefore, preoperative 
blood transfusion is often not necessary.
Acute kidney injury can present with an acute surgical 
problem, for example bowel obstruction needing emergency 
surgery. In these patients, medical treatment should be started 
at the earliest opportunity and carried on through surgery and 
through into the critical care unit.
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   259 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE260
Urinary tract infection
Uncomplicated urinary infections are common in women, 
while outflow uropathy with chronically infected urine is 
common in men. These infections should be treated before 
embarking on elective surgery where infection carries dire 
consequences, e.g. joint replacement. For emergency proce-
dures, antibiotics should be started and care taken to ensure 
that the patient maintains a good urine output before, during 
and after surgery. 
Endocrine and metabolic disorders
Malnutrition
Body mass index (BMI) is weight in kilograms divided by 
height in metres squared. A BMI of less than 18.5 indicates 
nutritional impairment and a BMI below 15 is associated with 
significant hospital mortality. Nutritional support for a mini-
mum of 2 weeks before surgery is required to have any impact 
on subsequent morbidity.
If a patient is unlikely to be able to eat for a significant 
period, arrangements should be made by the preoperative 
assessment team to start nutritional support in the immediate 
postoperative phase. 
Obesity
Morbid obesity can be defined as BMI of more than 35 (other 
definitions exist) and is associated with increased risk of post-
operative complications. Patients should be made aware of 
risks involved and advised on healthy eating and taking reg -
ular exercise.
Associated sleep apnoea can be predicted by using a clin -
ical scoring system, the perioperative sleep apnoea prediction 
(P-SAP) score or sleep apnoea studies. There is evidence 
to suggest that patient outcomes improve with more than 6 
weeks of use of a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
device preoperatively, and cholesterol reducing agents in the 
perioperative phase.
If possible surgery should be delayed until the patient is 
more active and has lost weight. If this fails, prophylactic 
measures need to be taken (such as preventative measures 
for acid aspiration and DVT) and associated risks need to be 
explained prior to the surgery. 
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes and associated cardiovascular and renal complications 
should be controlled to as near normal level as possible before 
embarking on elective surgery. Any history of hyper- and 
hypoglycaemic episodes, and hospital admissions, should be 
noted. HbA1c levels should be checked. For elective surgery, 
HBA1c of <69 mmol/mol is recommended. Lipid-lowering 
medication should be started in patients who are in a high-
risk group for cardiovascular complications of diabetes.
Patients with diabetes should be first on the operating list 
and, if the operation is in the morning, advised to omit the 
morning dose of medication and breakfast. Though tight con-
trol of blood sugar is not needed, the patient’s blood sugar 
levels should be checked 2 hourly. For those on the after -
noon list, breakfast can be given with half their regular dose 
of intermediate-acting insulin (or full dose oral antidiabetic 
agents) and then managed with regular blood sugar checks as 
above. An intravenous insulin sliding scale should be started for 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus patients undergoing major 
surgery, or if blood sugar is difficult to control for other reasons. 
Adrenocortical suppression
Patients receiving oral adrenocortical steroids should be asked 
about the dose and duration of the medication in view of sup-
plementation with extra doses of steroids perioperatively, to 
avoid an Addisonian crisis.
Coagulation disorders
Thrombophilia
Patients with a strong family history or previous personal his-
tory of thrombosis should be identified (Table 17.3). They will 
need thromboprophylaxis in the perioperative period.
The progesterone-only contraceptive pill should be con-
tinued; however, the risks of continuing the combined pill 
(slight increase risk of significant thrombosis) should be 
weighed against the risks of an unplanned pregnancy. Con-
sider stopping oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives or 
hormone replacement therapy 4 weeks before surgery (NICE 
guidance; see Further reading). The reader is advised to use an 
appropriate resource for precise formulation information and 
current guidance.
Patients with a low risk of thromboembolism can be 
given thromboembolism-deterrent stockings to wear during 
the perioperative period. High-risk patients with a history of 
recurrent DVT, pulmonary embolism and arterial thrombosis 
will be on warfarin. This should be stopped before surgery and 
replaced by low molecular weight heparin or factor Xa inhib-
itors. Local or national guidelines advise what type of DVT 
prophylaxis should be used for each type of surgery. 
Neurological and psychiatric 
disorders
In patients with a history of stroke, pre-existing neurological 
deficit should be recorded. These patients may be on anti-
Thomas Addison , 1795–1860, physician, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described the effects of disease of the suprarenal capsules in 1849.
TABLE 17.3 Risk factors for thrombosis.
●● Age >60 years
●● Obesity BMI >30 kg/m2
●● Trauma or surgery (especially of the abdomen, pelvis and lower 
limbs), anaesthesia >90 minutes
●● Reduced mobility for more than 3 days 
●● Pregnancy/puerperium
●● Varicose veins with phlebitis
●● Drugs, e.g. oestrogen contraceptive, HRT, smoking 
●● Known active cancer or on treatment, significant medical 
comorbidities, critical care admission
●● Family/personal history of thrombosis, e.g. deficiencies in 
antithrombin III, protein S and C
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   260 25/10/2017   08:05Specific preoperativ e problems and management 261
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
platelet agents or anticoagulants. If it is felt that the neurolog-
ical and cardiovascular thrombotic risks are low, antiplatelet 
agents should be withdrawn (7 days for aspirin, 10 days for 
clopidogrel). If the thrombotic risks are perceived to be high 
and the patient is undergoing surgery with a high risk of 
bleeding, aspirin alone should be continued.
Anticonvulsants and anti-Parkinson medication is contin-
ued perioperatively to help early mobilisation of the patient.
Lithium should be stopped 24 hours prior to surgery; blood 
levels should be measured to exclude toxicity. The anaesthe -
tist should be informed if patients are on psychiatric medica -
tions such as tricyclic antidepressants or monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors, as these may interact with anaesthetic drugs. 
Musculoskeletal disorders
Rheumatoid arthritis can lead to an unstable cervical spine 
with the possibility of spinal cord injury during intubation. 
Therefore, flexion and extension lateral cervical spine radio -
graphs should be obtained in symptomatic patients (Figures 
17.4 and 17.5).
Assessment of the severity of renal, cardiac valvular and 
pericardial involvement as well as restrictive lung disease, 
should be carried out. Rheumatologists will advise on steroids 
and disease-modifying drugs so as to balance immunosuppres-
sion (chance of infections) against the need to stabilise the 
disease perioperatively (stopping disease modifying drugs can 
lead to flare-up of the disease).
In ankylosing spondylitis patients, in addition to the prob-
lems discussed above, techniques of spinal or epidural anaes -
thesia are often challenging. Patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus may exhibit a hypercoagulable state along 
with airway difficulties.
With certain types of orthopaedic operations, such as joint 
replacement, antibiotic prophylaxis will be required, and will 
usually follow specific local or national guidelines. 
Airway assessment
The ability to intubate the trachea and oxygenate the patient 
are basic and crucial skills of the anaesthetist. The ease or 
difficulty encountered when performing airway manoeuvres 
can be predicted by simple examination findings of full mouth 
opening (modified Mallampati class), jaw protrusion, neck 
movement and thyromental distance. The anaesthetist should 
look for loose teeth, obvious tumours, scars, infections, obe -
sity, thickness of the neck, etc., which will indicate difficulty 
in visualising the airway. When more than one of the above 
tests are positive, the chances of experiencing difficulty in 
obtaining and securing the airway become greater. To obtain 
the modified Mallampati class, the anaesthetist sits in front 
of the patient who is asked to open their mouth and protrude 
the tongue (Figure 17.6). The higher the grade, the higher 
the risk in obtaining and securing an airway (Table 17.4).
Figure 17.5 Flexion view in the same patient as in Figure 17.4. Note 
the large increase in the atlantodens interval, implying significant 
instability at this level.
Figure 17.4 Extension view of cervical spine in patient with rheuma-
toid arthritis.
SR Mallampati  published the original article suggesting that the size of the base of the tongue is an important factor determining the degree of difficulty of direct 
laryngoscopy in the Canadian Anaesthetists’ Society Journal in 1985. The original Mallampati classifications was modified from a total of three to four classes by 
GLT Sampsoon and JRB Young after reviewing a series of obstetric and general surgical patients who had had difficult intubations. 
Preoperative assessment in 
emergency surgery
In urgent or emergency surgery the principles of preoperative 
assessment should be the same as in elective surgery, except 
that the opportunity to optimise the condition is limited by 
time constraints. Medical assessment and treatments should 
be started (e.g. as per Advanced Trauma Life Support guide -
lines) even if there is no time to complete them before the 
start of the surgical procedure. Some risks may be reduced but 
some may persist and, whenever possible, these need to be 
explained to the patient. 
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   261 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE262
ASSESSMENT OF THE HIGH-
RISK PATIENT
Despite higher-risk patients presenting for surgery , the 
perioperative mortality has decreased significantly over the 
last half a century, especially in resource-rich countries. In 
a published systematic review in The Lancet (Bainbridge et 
al., 2012), perioperative mortality has declined from 10  603 
per million (95% CI: 10  423–10 784) in the 1970s to 1176 
per million (1148–1205) in the 1990s–2000s (p<0·0001). 
However, there remains a subgroup of patients who are 
at higher risk of morbidity and mortality after surgery. By 
identifying high-risk patients in the preoperative phase and 
planning their perioperative management, morbidity and 
mortality can be reduced.
Patients who have a predicted mortality ≥5% should be 
considered as ‘high risk’. It is estimated that although the 
high-risk group accounts for less than 15% of all surgical pro-
cedures, they contribute to more than 80% of all periopera -
tive deaths in UK.
What causes these patients to be at a high risk of death 
and complications after surgery? After surgery tissue destruc-
tion, blood loss, fluid shifts, changes in temperature, pain and 
anxiety result in increased demands for oxygen delivery to the 
tissues. This demand increases from an average of 110 mL/
min/m2 at rest to 170 mL/min/m2 in the postoperative period. 
Most patients meet this increase in demand by increasing 
their cardiac output and tissue oxygen extraction. Patients 
who are unable to meet these demands, as a result of a limited 
cardiorespiratory reserve, are at a risk of oxygen debt.
Occult hypovolemia resulting from fluid shift or blood loss 
can further impair oxygen delivery. Splanchnic vasoconstric-
tion to compensate for this may result in gut ischaemia. Those 
with coronary or cerebrovascular disease are also at a higher 
risk of myocardial ischaemia or stroke. 
Factors contributing to risk 
Risk is a complex interaction of multiple factors that can be 
classified into patient and surgical factors. Patient factors are 
listed in Table 17.5 . The elderly, though not independently 
at higher risk, not only suffer more cardiac, pulmonary and 
renal disease but also require surgery four times as often as the 
rest of the population. Around 10% of the population over 
65 have frailty with increasing incidence with age. Frailty is 
a distinctive state that is related to ageing. Multiple body sys-
tems lose their in-built reserves in the elderly.
The type of surgery contributes independently and is listed 
in Table 17.6. This risk increases if the surgery is performed 
as an emergency. Often, the underlying condition necessitat-
ing surgery itself may be associated with an increased risk of 
complications. For example, a patient with severe peripheral 
vascular disease resulting from heavy smoking, may need a 
femoral-popliteal bypass graft and can be expected also to 
have significant COPD and IHD.
Moreover, when mortality by type of surgery is adjusted 
for patient risk factors, the apparent hierarchy of surgical risk 
may change. The average mortality risk for an individual 
patient undergoing thoracic surgery, for example, is likely to 
be higher than the average risk for that same patient undergo-
ing vascular surgery. Complications associated with the latter 
are nevertheless more frequent because vascular patients have 
greater medical risk factors (Table 17.7).
Summary box 17.6
Preoperative assessment for emergency surgery
●● Start. Similar principles to that for elective surgery 
●● Constraints. Time, facilities available 
●● Consent. May not be possible in life-saving emergencies 
●● Organisational efforts. For example, local/national algorithms 
for treatment of the patient with multiple injuries
TABLE 17.5 Patient factors that predispose to high risk of 
morbidity and mortality.
Previous severe cardiorespiratory illness, e.g. acute myocardial 
infarction, COPD or stroke 
Late stage vascular disease involving aorta
Age >70 years with limited physiological reserve in one or more 
vital organs
Extensive surgery for carcinoma
Acute abdominal catastrophe with haemodynamic instability (e.g. 
peritonitis)
Acute massive blood loss >8 units
Septicaemia
Positive blood culture or septic focus
Respiratory failure: PaO2 <8 kPa or FiO2 >0.4 or mechanical 
ventilation >48 h
Acute renal failure: urea >20 mmol or creatinine >260 mmol/L
(Based on clinical criteria used by Shoemaker and colleagues modified by 
Boyd.)
Figure 17.6 Normal mouth opening view.
TABLE 17.4 Airway assessment (Samsoon and Young 
modified Mallampati test). 
●● Fauces, pillars, soft palate and uvula seen Grade 1
●● Fauces, soft palate with some part of uvula seen Grade 2
●● Soft palate seen Grade 3
●● Hard palate only seen Grade 4
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   262 25/10/2017   08:05Assessment of the high-risk patient 263
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
In summary, the typical high-risk patient is the elderly 
patient with coexisting conditions such as IHD and/or COPD 
undergoing major surgery. The risk will increase if the surgery 
is performed as an emergency.
Management of risk
The key to managing patients effectively is the identification 
and accurate quantification of the risk, and subsequent mea -
sures taken to minimise it.
Realistic estimates of risk are the cornerstone of informed 
patient consent and shared decision making. The patient 
and the surgeon may choose a less extensive or even a non-  
surgical option where risks of the definitive procedure are 
deemed to be too high or unacceptable. The Royal College 
of Surgeons (RCS) of England has recommended that the 
patients who are predicted to have greater than 5% mor -
tality risk should have active consultant input in all stages 
of their management.
Surgical procedures in those with predicted mortality of 
>10% should be conducted under the direct supervision of 
consultant surgeon or anaesthetist, unless the consultants are 
satisfied with the seniority and competence of the staff man -
aging these patients. Moreover, those with a mortality >10% 
should be managed in the critical care facility.
Depending on particular comorbidities, it may be possi -
ble for a patient’s underlying conditions to be improved by 
optimising their medical therapy. Additional physiological 
optimisation may take the form of measures to minimise myo-
cardial ischaemia or measures to improve oxygen delivery to 
the other major organs, depending on the prevailing risks.
Optimisation before surgery can be more effective in a crit-
ical care environment and patients may need to be admitted 
to a high dependency unit (HDU) or intensive therapy unit 
(ITU) preoperatively. The likelihood of the high-risk patient 
requiring postoperative critical care should be planned preop-
eratively and discussed with the duty critical care physician.
The identification of patients who will benefit the most 
from these interventions is important, not only for the 
improvement of outcomes but also the effective allocation of 
resources. As discussed above, emergency surgery is associated 
with higher risks because by its very nature there is less time 
and opportunity to organise these additional levels of care. 
TABLE 17.6 Surgery specific estimates of risk 
High risk (cardiac 
risk >5%)
Intermediate risk 
(cardiac risk 1–5%)
Low risk (cardiac 
risk <1%)
Open aortic
Major vascular
Peripheral vascular
Urgent body cavity
Elective abdominal
Carotid
Endovascular 
aneurysm
Head and neck
Major neurosurgery
Arthroplasty
Elective pulmonary
Major urology
Breast
Dental
Thyroid
Ophthalmic
Gynaecological
Reconstructive
Minor orthopaedic
Minor urology
(From Eagle et al. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002; 39(3): 542–53.)
TABLE 17.7 The effect of adjustment for patient factors 
on surgery-specific operative mortality.
Type of surgery Unadjusted 30-day 
mortality (% (rank))
Adjusted 30-day 
mortality (%(rank))
Vascular
Thoracic
Abdominal
Cardiac
Neurosurgery
Orthopaedic
ENT
Urology
Gynaecology
Breast
5.97 (1)
3.40 (2)
2.73 (3)
2.70 (4)
1.74 (5)
1.25 (6)
0.85 (7)
0.81 (8)
0.13 (9)
0.07 (10)
0.98 (5)
2.28 (1)
1.83 (2)
1.13 (4)
1.60 (3)
0.49 (7)
0.68 (6)
0.38 (8)
0.17 (9)
0.08 (10)
(Modified from Noordzij et al. 2010.)
Identification of the high-risk patient
A number of scoring systems have been developed over the 
years with the aim of identifying high-risk patients (Table 17.8).
American Society of Anaesthesiologists 
system
The American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) scoring 
system is widely used. Although not designed to be used as a 
risk prediction score, it has a quantitative association with the 
predicted percentage of postoperative mortality (Table 17.9). 
However, it does not account for age or nature of surgery and 
the term ‘systemic disease’ in ASA grading introduces an ele-
ment of ‘subjectivity’. 
Metabolic equivalent 
As discussed earlier, overall functional physical fitness can be 
judged by the ability to tolerate metabolic equivalent tasks 
(METs) (Table 17.10). One MET is equivalent to the oxygen 
consumption of an adult at rest ( ~3.5 mL/kg/min). Different 
tasks are assigned a number of METs. If the patient is able to 
perform >4 METs (e.g. climbing at least one flight of stairs) 
they are considered suitable candidates for major surgery. 
However, once again this depends on a subjective assessment 
of the ability of a patient and may be overestimated by them.
Objective indices based on weighted scores pertaining to 
surgery and comorbidity, have been created to stratify cardiac 
risk. Examples include the Goldman cardiac risk index and 
Summary box 17.7
A practical approach to the care for the high-risk 
patient
●● Identify the high-risk patient
●● Assess the level of risk
●● Detailed preoperative assessment
●● Adequate resusciatation
●● Optimise medical management 
●● Investigation to define the underlying surgical problem 
●● Immediate and definitive treatment of underlying problems 
●● Consider admission to a critical care facility postoperatively
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   263 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE264
the revised cardiac risk index (RCRI) of Lee (Table 17.11). 
Although they can predict risk of cardiac complications, they 
are not designed to predict mortality. 
POSSUM score
The POSSUM score (Physiologic and Operative Sever -
ity Score for the enUmeration of Mortality and Morbidity) 
and its modifications (P-POSSUM, CR-POSSUM) are used 
to predict all-cause mortality in postoperative critical care 
patients as well as non-cardiac morbidity. 
ACS NSQIP score
The American College of Surgeons (ACS) National Surgi -
cal Quality Improvement Programme (NSQIP) surgical risk 
score estimates the chance of a complication or death after 
surgery for more than a thousand different surgical proce -
dures. It compares the patient’s risk with an average person’s 
risk. It is a web based tool done preoperatively. The risk is 
calculated based on surgical procedure and 19 patient-specific 
preoperative risk factors. 
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) can be used as a 
screening tool to identify high-risk patients. The oxygen (O2) 
consumption and carbon dioxide (CO 2) production of the 
patient are measured while they undergo a 10 minute period of 
incrementally demanding exercise (usually on a cycle ergom-
eter) up to their maximally tolerated level (Figure 17.7).
CPET is based on the principle that when a subject’s 
delivery of O2 to active tissues becomes inadequate, anaerobic 
metabolism begins; lactate is buffered by bicarbonate and the 
resulting CO 2 increases out of proportion to the escalation 
in physical difficulty and O 2 consumption. The ‘anaerobic 
threshold’ (AT) is the O 2 consumption in mL/kg/min above 
TABLE 17.8 Surgical risk scores classified by outcome measures and need for intraoperative information. 
Scores predicting mortality Scores predicting morbidity
Scores not requiring 
operative information
ASA
APACHE-II
Donati score
Hardman index
Glasgow aneurysm score
Sickness assessment
Boey score
Hacetteppe score
Physiological POSSUM
ACS NSQIP surgical risk score
ASA
APACHE-II
Goldman cardiac risk index
Veltkamp score
VA respiratory failure score
VA pneumonia prediction index
ACS NSQIP surgical risk score
Scores requiring operative 
information
Mannheim peritonitis index
Reiss index
Fitness score
POSSUM
P-POSSUM
Cleveland colorectal model
Surgical risk scale
POSSUM
P-POSSUM
APACHE-II, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II; VA, Veterans Affairs; P-POSSUM, Portsmouth-POSSUM; see text for additional abbreviations.
(Modified from Rex TE, Bates T. World J Emerg Surg 2007; 2: 16.) 
TABLE 17.9 Operative mortality by ASA grade. 
ASA 
Grade
Description 30 day 
mortality (%)
I
II
III
IV
V
E
Healthy
Mild systemic disease, no functional 
limitation
Severe systemic disease, definite 
functional limitation
Severe systemic disease, constant threat 
to life
Moribund patient unlikely to survive 24 
hours with or without operation
Emergency operation
0.1
0.7
3.5
18.3
93.3
–
(From Boyd O, Jackson N. Crit Care 2005; 9: 390–6.)
TABLE 17.10 Metabolic equivalent of task (MET).
●● 1 MET = 3.5 mL O2/kg/min (oxygen consumption by 40-year-
old,70 kg man at rest) 
●● 1 MET = eating and dressing 
●● 4 MET = climbing 2 flights of stairs 
●● 6 MET = short run 
●● >10 MET = able to participate in strenuous sport 
●● Patients who can exercise at 4 METS or above have lower risk 
of perioperative mortality
TABLE 17.11 The revised cardiac risk index (RCRI) of 
Lee.
Risk factors Risk of major 
cardiac 
complications (%)
History of ischaemic heart disease
History of compensated or prior heart failure
History of cerebrovascular disease
Diabetes mellitus
Renal insufficiency (creatinine >177 µmol/L)
High-risk surgery
Number of factors
0 = 0.4
1 = 0.9
2 = 7.0
3+ = 11.0
Lee Goldman , b.1948, Dean of Health Sciences and Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, since 2006. He developed his Index in 1977.
Thomas H Lee , Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Professor of Health Policy and Management, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   264 25/10/2017   08:05Assessment of the high-risk patient 265
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
which this occurs. Peak oxygen consumption (VO 2) is also 
measured. They are the end pro duct of a subject’s combined 
respiratory, cardiac, vascular and musculoskeletal fitness, and 
subjects with either an AT above a somewhat arbitrary cut-
off of 11 and a VO2 below 15 mL/kg/min are at higher risk of 
morbidity and mortality after surgery.
When CPET is not available, a simple walk test, such as 
the 6-minute walk test (6MWT) and the incremental shut -
tle walk test (ISWT), can be used to assess the functional 
capacity of the patient. They depend on the patient’ s ability 
to walk for a fixed 6 minute period or at increasing speed over 
a flat surface. 
Optimisation of the high-risk patient
As discussed above, all coexisting disease processes should be 
reviewed and optimised. Simple measures include stopping 
smoking (maximal benefit only seen if stopped for 8 weeks 
prior to surgery), reducing alcohol intake, losing weight, 
improving nutrition and/or haemoglobin levels. 
In the high-risk group there may a need for more complex 
investigations, review of medication or even consideration of 
further surgery. Patients scheduled for abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm (AAA) repair surgery for example, frequently require 
carotid duplex scans. If the scans reveal a significant blockage 
and a high risk of perioperative stroke, a carotid endarterec -
tomy may be indicated prior to AAA repair.
All high-risk patients benefit from multidisciplinary team 
care and the involvement of experienced physicians in the peri-
operative period. The impact and management of the comor-
bidities that commonly contribute to risk are outlined below.
Ischaemic heart disease
Perioperative myocardial infarction (MI) is associated with 
a high mortality (15–25%). Ischaemia, and ultimately MI, 
occur when the supply of oxygen to the myocardium is 
exceeded by its demand. This situation can be precipitated by 
hypotension, tachycardia and procoagulant states (of which 
the inflammatory response to surgery is an example).
Preparation of these patients for surgery should aim to 
optimise myocardial oxygen supply and demand ratio and so 
minimise the risk of myocardial ischaemia developing. This 
work may involve further investigations or even the decision 
to postpone non-cardiac surgery for 3–6 months after an MI. 
Some patients may require preoperative revascularisation, 
using either a coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or per-
cutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with a stent or angio-
plasty.
Minimising myocardial ischaemia
Anaesthesia techniques that dampen the stress response 
to surgery (especially minimising pain) and provide a good 
degree of cardiac stability should be used. Anaesthesia should 
avoid tachycardia, systolic hypertension and diastolic hypo -
tension, and may be facilitated by the use of invasive arte -
rial blood pressure monitoring. Blood loss must be accurately 
monitored and haemoglobin maintained at a level suitable 
for the patient’s cardiac risk factors. Perioperative use of 
β-blockers may be considered but this is controversial.
Troponin testing allows early diagnosis of perioperative 
MIs, but there are limited reperfusion options due to risk of 
bleeding from the surgical site. Admission to HDU should be 
considered for patients with IHD and supplemental oxygen 
therapy continued for 3–4 days.
Cardiac failure
Left ventricular failure is the end result of several conditions 
including IHD, hypertension, cardiomyopathies and valve 
dysfunction. Decompensated heart failure puts the patient 
at risk of multiorgan failure. Those with ejection fractions of 
less than 35%, and in whom the failure is undiagnosed or its 
severity underestimated, are at the highest risk. The patient’s 
functional capacity needs to be assessed and surgery may have 
to be delayed for investigations such as an echocardiogram 
and/or for optimisation of medical therapy. Drugs used in 
chronic heart failure have significant implications for periop-
erative care, and β-blockers and probably ACE inhibitors 
(unless renal perfusion is to be significantly affected) should 
be continued. Anaesthesia should ensure minimal myocardial 
depression and change in afterload during surgery. Arrhyth -
mias must be rapidly brought under control, particularly AF , 
and correcting any electrolyte imbalance is crucial in this 
respect. Invasive monitoring of trends in central venous and 
arterial pressure monitoring may help management, particu -
larly when large fluid shifts are expected to occur.
Respiratory failure 
Around 1.5% of patients develop lower respiratory tract 
infection after surgery with a 30-day mortality over 20%. 
Surgery, particularly open abdominal procedures under gen -
eral anaesthesia, result in changes to respiratory physiology . 
The functional residual capacity of the lungs is reduced. This 
combined with the respiratory depressant effect of residual 
anaesthetic agents, the patient’s limited mobility and pain 
from surgery causes atelectasis (failure of gas exchange due to 
alveolar collapse) and predisposes patients to postoperative 
Figure 17.7 Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET).
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   265 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE266
respiratory infection. Other complications including bron -
chospasm, pneumothorax and acute respiratory distress syn -
drome (ARDS) contribute as much to morbidity and length 
of hospital stay as cardiac complications. Respiratory failure 
defined as a PaO2 <8 kPa in air, PaO2/FiO2 <40 kPa or inabil-
ity to extubate a patient 48 hours after surgery, is by far the 
most significant of these and is associated with a mortality of 
27–40%.
Again, as with cardiac risk management, it may be nec -
essary to postpone surgery to allow medical optimisation or 
consider a non-operative option. Preoperatively, bronchodi -
lator therapy will be required in those with reversible obstruc-
tive airway disease and steroids may need to be started or 
increased. Nutritional status should be optimised and albu -
min levels corrected. Physiotherapy for postural drainage, and 
deep breathing exercises or incentive spirometry should be 
considered for patients at increased risk of respiratory com-
plications. General anaesthesia is associated with more respi-
ratory complications and so regional techniques should be 
considered where possible in these patients. Hypoxemia and 
CO2 retention leading to the need for reintubation is better 
avoided in those at risk, by delaying extubation until anal-
gesia, hydration and acid–base status have been corrected. 
Patients may benefit from ITU admission and this needs plan-
ning. Application of non-invasive respiratory support (Figure 
17.8) may allow certain patients to be extubated earlier.
Other comorbidities
Acute kidney injury, chronic kidney disease, diabetes, periph-
eral vascular disease and liver dysfunction are some of the 
medical conditions that contribute to risk and need to be 
optimised.
Sepsis
Sepsis needs urgent identification and treatment, as if not 
treated early it can lead to either a prolonged admission to 
a critical care unit or death. Early resuscitative measures in 
sepsis include administering broad spectrum antibiotics and 
treating hypotension, hypovolemia and elevated lactate lev-
els with appropriate intravenous fluids. It is also important to 
deal with the source of sepsis as early as possible.
Minimising the impact of surgery in 
the high-risk patient 
There are situations where the selection of one surgical tech-
nique over another may be significantly influenced by patient 
risk factors. Some procedures are not primarily high-risk but 
may become so in unsuitable patients. Laparoscopic surgery, 
for example, has come of age as a preferred technique for 
patients predisposed to postoperative respiratory complica -
tions, but its effect on cardiac physiology means the same may 
not apply to patients at risk of cardiac complications. The 
expanding demand and indications for minimal access surgery 
are now pushing the boundaries of intraoperative physiolog -
ical tolerance. Robotic prostatectomy and some laparoscopic 
colorectal procedures require a pneumoperitoneum with steep 
Trendelenburg (head down) positioning for several hours 
(Figure 17.9). This can be associated with adverse cardio -
vascular and neurological complications, such as myocardial 
ischaemia and increased intracranial pressure in the high risk 
group. This risk may be minimised by attention to patient 
selection.
Role of critical care and outreach 
services 
Optimal care in the high-risk group should be extended to 
include postoperative support, which for a majority of these 
patients means admission to a critical care bed. Reports from 
the National Confidential Enquiry into Surgical Deaths 
(NCEPOD) show that the majority of postoperative deaths 
Figure 17.8 Non-invasive ventilation.
 Figure 17.9 Robotic surgery.
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   266 25/10/2017   08:05Arranging theatre list 267
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
in the UK occur more than 5 days after surgery. Admission 
to a critical care unit allows for early intervention and a level 
of care that is difficult to deliver in the ward environment 
during this crucial period (Figure 17.10). The high-risk sur -
gical population accounts for 80% of postoperative deaths but 
only about 15–30% of high-risk surgical patients are admitted 
to a critical care unit at any time following surgery. One study 
that compared surgical mortality in the UK and the USA 
found an observed mortality of 9.95 % in the UK as compared 
to 2.1% in USA. It is suggested that the difference may be 
related to the provision of critical care services, with 8.6 crit-
ical care beds per 100 000 population in the UK compared to 
30.5 in the USA.
In the last decade, the role of critical care has been 
expanded to the concept of ‘critical care without walls’. The 
intensive care outreach services (ICORS) grew from a recog-
nition that there were many patients in the hospital who are 
at risk of being critically ill, and early identification of these 
patients using ‘early warning scores’ could allow for early 
intervention. The outreach team functions to bridge the gap 
between critical care unit and ward. 
CONSENT 
Consent should be both voluntary and informed. The pro -
cess of consent has evolved over the years and in the UK, 
following a recent legal judgement, new guidance has been 
published (see Further reading; RCS). This describes the 
importance of supported decision-making concerning a treat-
ment or operation. The guidance outlines the key principles 
of consent and how the discussion should:
 ● give the patient the information required to make a deci-
sion;
 ● be tailored to the individual patient;
 ● explain all reasonable treatment options;
 ● discuss all material* risks.
Furthermore, the guide explains that consent:
 ● should be written and recorded on a form;
 ● the key points of the discussion should be recorded in the 
case notes.
*Material risk: “whether, in the circumstances of the par ­
ticular case, a reasonable person in the patient’s position 
would be likely to attach significance to the risk, or the 
doctor is or should reasonably be aware that the particular 
patient would likely attach significance to it” (Source RCS 
2016).
Clearly in certain emergency situations, it may not be 
possible to follow all of the key principles. For consent to be 
given, the patient must have capacity, which includes the 
ability to understand the information provided, to retain 
and use the information to make a decision and to indicate 
what that decision is (see Further reading; RCS) . The sur -
geon should presume the patient has capacity for consent 
(Mental Capacity Act, 2005) unless during the process it is 
demonstrated that this is not the case. Generally, children are 
presumed to have capacity at 16 and for those under that age, 
capacity can be assessed (GMC guidance, 2007). 
The person obtaining consent must be appropriately 
experienced to do so.
Figure 17.10 A high-risk patient admitted to the intensive care unit 
postoperatively.
Summary box 17.8
Consent
●● Consent should be voluntary and informed
●● Supported decision-making is considered good practice
●● Explain all treatment options and material risks
●● Capacity is needed for a patient to give their consent
ARRANGING THEATRE LIST
The date, place and time of operation should be matched 
with availability of personnel. Appropriate equipment and 
instruments should be made available. The operating list 
should be distributed as early as possible to all staff who are 
involved in making the list run smoothly (Table 17.12). If this 
is done electronically, familiarity with the computer system is 
required.
Prioritise patients, e.g. children and diabetic patients 
should be placed at the beginning of the list; life- and 
limb-threatening surgery should take priority; cancer patients 
need to be treated early.
TABLE 17.12 Perioperative teams.
●● Ward, theatre and specialist nursing staff 
●● Anaesthetic and surgical teams
●● Radiology, pathology involvement 
●● Rehabilitation and social care workers
●● Specific personnel in individual cases
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   267 25/10/2017   08:05CHAPTER 17  Preoperative care including the high-risk surgical patient
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE268
FURTHER READING
Bainbridge D1, Martin J, Arango; Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
(Committee to Update the 1996 Guidelines on perioperative car -
diovascular M, Cheng D; Evidence-based Perioperative Clinical 
Outcomes Research (EPiCO R) Group. Perioperative and anaes -
thetic-related mortality in developed and developing countries: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012; 380(9847): 
1075–81.
Boyd O, Jackson N. How is risk defined in high-risk surgical patient 
management? Crit Care 2005; 9: 390–6.
Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Buller CE et al. ACCF/AHA focused update 
on perioperative beta blockade. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009; 54: 2102–
28.
Giglio MT, Marucci M, Testini M, Brienza N. Goal-directed haemody -
namic therapy and gastrointestinal complications in major surgery: 
a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J Anaesth 2009; 
103: 637–46.
Eagle KA, Berger PB, Calkins H et al.; American College of Cardiol -
ogy; American Heart Association.  ACC/AHA guideline update 
for perioperative cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery: 
executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association evaluation for noncardiac surgery .  J 
Am Coll Cardiol 2002; 39(3): 542–53.
European Society of Anaesthesiology, Task Force on preoperative eval-
uation of the adult noncardiac surgery patient. Preoperative evalua-
tion of the adult patient undergoing non-cardiac surgery: guidelines 
from the European Society of Anaesthesiology. Eur J Anaesthesiol  
2011; 28: 684–722.
Fleisher LA, Beckman JA, Brown KA et al. ACC/AHA 2007 Guidelines 
on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and care for noncardiac 
surgery: executive summary: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on practice 
guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2002 Guidelines on 
perioperative cardiovascular evaluation for noncardiac surgery): 
developed in collaboration with the American Society of Echocar -
diography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm 
Society, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular 
Medicine and Biology, and Society for Vascular Surgery. Circulation 
2007; 116: 1971–96.
General Medical Council. GMC guidance 0–18 years: Guidance for all 
doctors. 2007.
Lee TH, Marcantonio ER, Mangione CM et al. Derivation and prospec-
tive validation of a simple index for prediction of cardiac risk of 
major noncardiac surgery. Circulation 1999; 100: 1043–9.
Mental Capacity Act (2005) UK.
Minto G, Biccard B. Assessment of the high-risk perioperative patient. 
BJA Education 2014; 14(1): 12–17.
National Confidential Enquiry into Patient Outcome and Death. Know-
ing the risk. A review of the peri-operative care of surgical patients. 
2011. Available from www.ncepod.org.uk/2011report2/downloads/
POC_fullreport.pdf.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. CG3 preoperative 
tests: NICE guideline, June 2003.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Venous thrombo -
embolism: reducing the risk for patients in hospital. Clinical guide-
line (CG92), 2010, updated 2015. 
Noordzij PG1, Poldermans D, Schouten O et al.  Postoperative mortality 
in The Netherlands: a population-based analysis of surgery-specific 
risk in adults.  Anesthesiology 2010; 112(5): 1105–15.
Pearse RM1, Holt PJ, Grocott MP . Managing perioperative risk in 
patients undergoing elective non-cardiac surgery. BMJ 2011; 343: 
d5759.
Poldermans D, Bax JJ, Boersma E et al . Guidelines for preoperative 
cardiac risk assessment and perioperative cardiac management in 
non-cardiac surgery: the Task Force for preoperative cardiac risk 
assessment and perioperative cardiac management in non-cardiac 
surgery of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European 
Society of Anaesthesiology (ESA). Eur Heart J 2009; 30: 2769–812.
Ramachandran SK, Kheterpal S, Consens F et al. Derivation and valida-
tion of a simple perioperative sleep apnea prediction score. Anesth 
Analg 2010; 110: 1007–15.
Rix TE, Bates T. Preoperative risk scores for the prediction of outcome 
in elderly people who require emergency surgery. World J Emerg Surg 
2007; 2: 16.
Royal College of Surgeons of England/Department of Health. The 
higher risk general surgical patient: towards improved care for a for-
gotten group. 2011.
Royal College of Surgeons. Caring for patients who refuse blood. 2016.
Royal College of Surgeons. Consent: Supported Decision Making. 2016.
Sanon S, Rihal CS. Non-cardiac surgery after percutaneous interven-
tion. American Journal of Cardiology 2014; 114: 1613–20.
Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB et al. Prospective trial of supra -
normal values of survivors as therapeutic goals in high-risk surgical 
patients. Chest 1988; 94: 1176–86.
Stonelake S, Thomson P , Suggett N. Identification of the high-risk 
emergency surgical patient: which risk prediction model should be 
used? Ann Med Surg (Lond) 2015; 4(3): 240–7.
van Veen JJ, Spahn DR, Makris M. Routine preoperative coagulation 
test: an outdated practice? Br J Anaesth 2011; 106: 1–3.
03_17B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch17.indd   268 25/10/2017   08:05Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Anaesthesia and pain relief
Learning objectives
To gain an understanding of:
 • Techniques of anaesthesia and airway maintenance
 • Methods of providing pain relief
 • Local and regional anaesthesia techniques
 • The management of chronic pain and pain from 
malignant disease
HISTORY
Anaesthesia, as we know it today, was first successfully demon-
strated by William Morton, a local dentist, at the Massachu-
setts General Hospital Boston, USA on 16th October 1846 
when he administered ether to Gilbert Abbot for operation 
on a vascular tumour on his neck. Earlier Horace Wells had 
successfully used nitrous oxide in 1844 for painless extraction 
of teeth.
Simpson at Edinburgh University overcame some of the 
technical difficulties of ether administration by introducing 
chloroform. The benefits of anaesthesia were then universally 
recognised and antagonism by religious leaders was countered 
when Queen Victoria accepted chloroform from John Snow 
during the birth of Prince Leopold in 1853.
KEY PRINCIPLES OF 
ANAESTHESIA
Optimum patient care is dependent on a collaborative 
approach from anaesthetic and surgical teams, together with 
the other perioperative care providers. The importance of 
multidisciplinary collaboration has been clearly demon -
strated by national audits such as the Confidential Enquiries 
in Perioperative Deaths (CEPOD) and Enquiries into Maternal 
Deaths UK. These audits have led to changes in clinical and 
non-clinical practice to improve morbidity and mortality.
The use of a set of safety checklists in the operating theatre 
in the form of the World Health Organisation’s Surgical Safety 
Checklist has shown a reduction in incidence of perioperative 
untoward events.
The role of the modern anaesthetist has evolved from just 
being responsible for the patient in the operating suite into 
a ‘perioperative physician’ who optimises the patient for sur -
gery, assessing and minimising risk, cares for them during the 
operation, and then manages both pain and homeostasis in 
the postoperative period (Table 18.1).
Anaesthesia ; the name was suggested by Oliver Wendell-Homes and first appeared in Bailey’s English Dictionary in 1751.
Humphrey Davy , 1800, suggested that nitrous oxide inhalation might be used to relieve pain of surgical operations and named it ‘laughing gas’.
Henry Edmund Gaskin Boyle  in 1917 obtained his gas-oxygen machine which became the first ‘Boyle apparatus’.
William Thomas Gren Morton , 1819–1868, dentist who practised in Boston, MA, USA.
Sir James Young Simpson , 1811–1870, Professor of Midwifery, Edinburgh, UK.
Alexandrina Victoria , Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, 1837–1901.
John Snow , 1813–1858, general practitioner, London, UK, was one of the pioneers of anaesthesia.
Prince Leopold , 1853–1884, who later became Duke of Albany, was the eighth of Queen Victoria’s nine children, and her fourth son.
TABLE 18.1 Key features of commonly used intravenous 
anaesthetic agents.
Propofol (di-isopropyl phenol) Smooth induction, better 
haemodynamic stability, blunting of autonomic reflexes and ability 
to use as a continuous infusion
Thiopentone (barbiturate) Rapid induction, myocardial 
depression. Reduced metabolic rate and lowering of intracranial 
pressure is useful in neurosurgical patients but drop in blood 
pressure can give detrimental effects
Etomidate (steroid derivative) Good haemodynamic stability, 
brief duration of action, but concern over adrenocortical 
depression
Ketamine (phencyclidine derivative) Preservation of blood 
pressure and respiratory reflexes together with excellent analgesia 
makes it an ideal choice for field anaesthesia. Emergence delirium 
is associated with administration of ketamine
18
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   269 25/10/2017   08:06CHAPTER 18  Anaesthesia and pain relief
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE270
PREPARATION FOR 
ANAESTHESIA
In the previous chapter, the preoperative preparation for 
anaesthesia was discussed in detail, and its importance is 
emphasised ( Chapter 17). Moreover, a careful preassess-
ment, multidisciplinary approach, standardised care pathway 
with a carefully chosen anaesthetic and analgesic technique 
form the cornerstone of ‘enhanced recovery programmes’ 
being introduced recently across the surgical specialities (see 
 Chapter 20).
GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
General anaesthesia is commonly described as the triad of 
unconsciousness, analgesia and muscle relaxation.
better haemodynamic stability, excellent recovery profile and 
concerns over environmental effects of inhalational agents 
have made TIVA an attractive choice. TIVA is routinely used 
in neurosurgery, airway laser surgery, during cardiopulmonary 
bypass and for day-case anaesthesia (Figure 18.2).
Summary box 18.1
Ground rules for anaesthesia
●● Safe surgery is achieved by close teamwork between 
surgeon, anaesthetist and perioperative care providers
●● Safety checklists make sure that things are not forgotten
●● Risk assessments allow the best strategy to be chosen
●● Anaesthetists are extending their care into the pre- and 
postoperative phase
Summary box 18.2
The general anaesthetic triad
●● Amnesia: loss of awareness
●● Analgesia: pain relief
●● Muscle relaxation
Summary box 18.3
Special terms in anaesthesia
●● Rapid sequence induction (RSI) is a technique that allows the 
airway to be rapidly secured. It is used when there is a high 
risk of regurgitation that may lead to pulmonary aspiration
●● Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) is becoming increasingly 
popular
Induction of general anaesthesia is most frequently done by 
intravenous agents. Propofol has replaced thiopentone as the 
most widely used induction agent and can be used for main -
tenance of anaesthesia. Other infrequently used intravenous 
agents include etomidate and ketamine. Newer agents based 
on benzo diazepine receptor agonists, etomidate derivatives 
and fospropofol are still in the experimental stage.
Inhalational induction using agents such as non-pungent 
sevoflurane is useful in children, needle-phobic adults and 
those in whom a difficult airway is anticipated. These patients 
will have a higher risk of developing airway obstruction (Fig-
ure 18.1).
Rapid sequence induction (RSI) using a predetermined 
dose of intravenous anaesthetic agent together with rapidly 
acting muscle relaxant is used in those with high risk of regur-
gitation in order to secure the airway quickly. Commonly 
needed in emergency surgery it is also a technique of choice 
in any non-emergency surgery in a patient with delayed emp-
tying of stomach.
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA ) is becoming popu-
lar following the introduction of propofol and the ultra-short-
acting opioid remifentanil. The lack of a cumulative effect, 
Figure 18.1 Anaesthetic machine.
Figure 18.2 Total intravenous anaesthesia pumps in use.
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   270 25/10/2017   08:06General anaesthesia 271
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Maintenance of anaesthesia, on the other hand, can be 
done using continuous infusion of intravenous agent (propofol) 
or inhaled vapour such as isoflurane, sevoflurane or desflurane.
The use of nitrous oxide is declining despite its analgesic 
and weak anaesthetic properties due to concerns over postop-
erative nausea and vomiting. It also increases the size of the 
air bubble causing adverse effects, for example in eye, ear and 
abdominal surgery. Finally, it is possibly mutagenic and is a 
powerful greenhouse gas.
Management of airway during 
anaesthesia
Loss of muscle tone as a result of general anaesthesia means 
that the patient can no longer keep their airway open. There-
fore, the patients need their airway maintained for them. The 
use of muscle relaxants will mean that they will also be unable 
to breathe for themselves and so will require artificial venti -
lation. Head tilt, chin lift and jaw thrust manoeuvres, along 
with adjuncts such as oropharyngeal airways, are used to facil-
itate bag-mask ventilation while induction agents exert full 
effect. Laryngeal mask airway or endotracheal tube are then 
inserted and the patient is allowed to breathe spontaneously 
or is ventilated during the procedure.
The addition of a cuff to the endotracheal tube facilitates 
positive pressure ventilation and protects the lungs from aspi-
ration of regurgitated gastric contents.
Supraglottic airways
 ● Laryngeal mask airway (LMA).  Developed by Dr 
Archie Brain in the UK, the original LMA is a first-  
generation supraglottic airway. The mask with an inflat -
able cuff is inserted via the mouth and pro duces a seal 
around the glottic opening, providing a very reliable 
means of maintaining the airway. Its placement is less irri-
tating and less traumatic to a patient’s airway than endo -
tracheal intubation. The technique can be easily taught 
to non-anaesthetists and paramedics and can be used as 
an emergency airway management tool. Several varieties 
of first generation LMAs are available, including the clas-
sic LMA and the flexible LMA. Further advancement has 
led to the development of second-generation supra  glottic 
devices such as the ProSeal LMA, the i-Gel and LMA 
Supreme (Figure 18.3). These devices usually have an 
in-built ‘bite-block’ and an oesophageal drain tube; they 
can be used for ventilation of the lungs at higher inflation 
pressures and are more suitable for patients with a higher 
body mass index. There are also mo dified versions of the 
LMA including the intubating LMA (ILMA) that allow 
a blind technique in aiding insertion of a tracheal tube 
in difficult conditions. There is increasing evidence that 
second-generation devices have a good safety and efficacy 
profile and should be replacing all first-generation devices.
 ● Difficult intubation. Endotracheal intubation is feasible 
in most patients, but in a certain proportion of patients 
this may be difficult or impossible; if compounded by 
inability to ventilate the patient by bag-mask, conse -
quences can be catastrophic hypoxia. Many devices have 
been developed to aid intubation if difficulty is anticipated 
and protocols created by specialised societies to deal with 
such situations. One specialised method for intubation in 
difficult situations is the use of the fibreoptic intubating 
bronchoscope facilitated by topical local anaesthetic in 
awake patients or using general anaesthesia. The anaes -
thetist places the endotracheal tube in the trachea by 
threading the tube over the bronchoscope, and so places 
the tube in the trachea under direct bronchoscopic vision. 
An awake intubation requires careful patient selection, as 
it may not be a suitable technique for all patient groups 
(Figures 18.4, 18.5 and 18.6).
Archibald Ian Jeremy Brain , formerly anaesthetist, The Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, UK.
Sir Robert Reynolds Macintosh , 1897–1989, Nuffield Professor of Anaesthetics, The University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. First Chair in anaesthesia in 1937. First 
Chair in anaesthesia in USA: Ralph Waters, Wisconsin, USA in 1933. First examination for the Diploma in anaesthesia was held in London in 1935.
Sir Ivan Whiteside Magill , 1888–1986, anaesthetist, The Westminster Hospital, London, UK. During the First World War Sir Ivan Magill and Stanley Row-
botham, while working with Harold Gillies (pioneer of plastic surgery), developed tracheal intubation. Sir Magill is also remembered for his laryngoscope, Magill 
attachment and laryngeal forceps.
Figure 18.3 The laryngeal mask airway. The laryngeal mask airway 
(left), i-Gel airway (centre) and reinforced laryngeal mask airway (right).
Figure 18.4 The Macintosh laryngoscope with a standard blade (left) 
and McCoy’s modification of the Macintosh blade (right).
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   271 25/10/2017   08:06CHAPTER 18  Anaesthesia and pain relief
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE272
Summary box 18.4
Techniques for maintaining an airway
●● Chin lift and jaw thrust: suitable for short term when no aid 
available
●● Guedel airway: holds tongue forward but does not prevent 
aspiration
●● Supraglottic device: easy insertion, reliable airway, allows 
ventilation
●● Endotracheal intubation: secure and protected airway
Summary box 18.5
Complications of intubation
●● Failed intubation
●● Accidental bronchial intubation
●● Trauma to teeth, pharynx, larynx
●● Aspiration of gastric contents during intubation
●● Disconnection, blockage, kinking of tube
●● Delayed tracheal stenosis
Double lumen tubes and endobronchial tubes are used in 
procedures such as thoracoscopic, pulmonary and oesopha-
geal surgery to allow collapse of one lung (while ventilating 
the other) for ease of surgery. Their use is also essential to 
isolate the healthy lung in pyopneumothorax and in the case 
of a bronchopleural fistula.
Ventilating bronchoscopes and endobronchial catheters 
can be used to maintain oxygenation during laryngo-tracheal 
surgery or bronchoscopy by using intermittent jets of oxygen.
Muscle relaxation and artificial 
ventilation
Pharmacological blockade of neuromuscular transmission 
provides relaxation of muscles allowing easy surgical access, 
but the patient requires artificial ventilation.
Neuromuscular blocking agents are broadly classified into 
depolarising and non-depolarising groups according to their 
mode of action.
Suxamethonium is the most commonly used depolarising 
agent. It binds to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, result-
ing in opening of the cation channel leading to depolarisation 
and rapid relaxation of muscles. Despite its adverse effects 
such as hyperkalaemia, muscle pain, anaphylaxis and poten -
tially life-threatening malignant hyperthermia, suxametho -
nium is still widely used because of its quick onset and short 
duration of action. These properties are useful where rapid 
endotracheal intubation is necessary to protect the patient’s 
airway or short-duration surgery is performed.
Non-depolarising muscle relaxants act by competitive 
blockade of postsynaptic receptors at the neuromuscular junc-
tion. They provide longer, predictable activity, but require 
careful monitoring, appropriate timing and reversal of their 
action by agents such as neostigmine and sugammadex at the 
end of the procedure. A peripheral nerve stimulator is rou -
tinely used to monitor the depth of neuromuscular block and 
also to confirm satisfactory recovery of muscle power prior 
to extubation (Table 18.2). With the increasing availability 
and evidence of the use of sugammadex, the non-depolarising 
muscle relaxant rocuronium is an alternative to suxametho-
nium in the ‘rapid-sequence’ induction, as it allows reversal of 
its actions with sugammadex in a rapid manner.
Figure 18.5  Endotracheal devices. From left to right: an uncut 
 orotracheal tube; reinforced orotracheal tube; oral version of a Ring, 
Adair and Elwyn (RAE) preformed tube; nasal version of an RAE 
 preformed tube; tracheostomy tube.
Figure 18.6 Fibreoptic intubating bronchoscope.
The RAE tube  takes its name from the initials of the surnames of the people who introduced it, Wallace Harold Ring, John Adair and Richard Elwyn.
Arthur Ernest Guedel , 1883–1956, Clinical Professor of Anaesthesiology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Ventilation during anaesthesia
Mechanical ventilation is required when the patient’s spon -
taneous ventilation is inadequate or when the patient is not 
breathing because of the effects of the anaesthetic, analgesic 
agents or muscle relaxants.
In volume control ventilation, a preset volume is deliv -
ered by the machine irrespective of the airway pressure. The 
pressure generated will be in part dependent on the resistance 
and compliance of the airway. In laparoscopic surgery requir-
ing the Trendelenburg position (the patient is positioned 
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   272 25/10/2017   08:06Local anaesthesia 273
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
TABLE 18.2 Properties of commonly used muscle relaxants.
Suxamethonium Quickest onset, very short duration,
spontaneous recovery. Ideal for rapid intubation and for 
short procedures
Muscle pain, hyperkalaemia, prolonged apnoea and life-
threatening malignant hyperthermia
Vecuronium Long acting, minimal cardiovascular effect and less allergic 
reaction
Dependent on hepatic metabolism and renal clearance, 
hence caution if hepatic and renal impairment
Atracurium Intermediate acting. Non-enzymatic Hoffmann 
degradation.
Suitable in renal and hepatic failure
Histamine release and allergic reactions
Rocuronium Rapid onset, intermediate action.
Suitable for rapid intubation.
Rapid reversal possible using sugammadex
Allergic reactions.
Excreted unchanged via bile and urine
LOCAL ANAESTHESIA
Local anaesthetic drugs may be used to provide anaesthesia 
and analgesia as a sole agent or as adjuncts to general anaes -
thesia. Available techniques include topical anaesthesia, 
local infiltration, regional nerve blocks and central neuroax -
ial blocks (spinal and epidural anaesthesia) (Table 18.3).
head down), and in morbidly obese patients and those with 
lung disease, this may result in excessive pressures being 
developed, which may lead to barotrauma (pneumothorax).
In pressure control mode, the ventilator generates flow 
until a preset pressure is reached. The actual tidal volume 
delivered is variable and depends on airway resistance, 
intra-abdominal pressure and the degree of relaxation.
Positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) is often applied to 
help maintain functional residual capacity (FRC). This avoids 
lung collapse by opening collapsed alveoli, and maintains a 
greater area of gas exchange so reducing vascular shunting.
Summary box 18.6
Intermittent positive pressure ventilation
●● Volume controlled, which ensures adequate gas entry but 
risks high pressure damage
●● Pressure controlled, which avoids high pressure damage but 
risks inadequate ventilation
●● Positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) reduces alveolar 
collapse and reduces vascular shunting so improving 
perfusion
Monitoring and care during 
anaesthesia
A minimum basic monitoring of cardiovascular parameters is 
required during surgery. This includes:
 ● Vascular:
 ● electrocardiogram (ECG);
 ● blood pressure;
 ● Adequacy of ventilation:
 ● inspired oxygen concentration;
 ● oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry;
 ● end tidal carbon dioxide concentration.
Monitors of temperature, ventilation parameters and 
delivery of anaesthetic agents are also routinely used, while 
measurement of urine output and central venous pressure are 
recommended for major surgery.
Anaesthesia for day case surgery
This is discussed in Chapter 21.
TABLE 18.3 The common local anaesthetic drugs.
Name Maximum dose Comments
Lignocaine 3 mg/kg (7 mg/kg 
with adrenaline)
Early onset, short acting, 
good sensory block
Bupivacaine 2 mg/kg Long lasting, more 
cardiotoxic, must never 
be used intravenously
Prilocaine 6 mg/kg (9 mg/kg 
with adrenaline)
Least systemic 
toxicity, causes 
methaemoglobinaemia
Ropivacaine 3–4 mg/kg Less cardiotoxic, 
greater sensory–motor 
separation
Levobupivaciane 2 mg /kg Isomer of bupivacaine 
with fewer cardiotoxic 
properties
Local anaesthesia techniques can lead to complications 
that may be local, such as infection or haematoma, or sys-
temic due to overdose or accidental intravascular injection. 
The systemic effects of local anaesthetic agents are dose 
dependent and manifest as cardiovascular (cardiac arrhyth-
mia, cardiac arrest) or neurological (depressed consciousness, 
convulsions). Prilocaine overdose causes methaemoglobinae-
mia while bupivacaine overdose causes treatment-resistant 
ventricular arrhythmia and cardiac arrest.
The addition of adrenaline to local anaesthetic solutions 
hastens onset, prolongs duration of action and permits a higher 
upper dose limit. The use of adrenaline is contraindicated in 
patients with cardiovascular disease, those taking tricyclic and 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and in end-arterial locations.
Appropriately skilled personnel, resuscitation equipment 
and oxygen should always be available with local anaesthetic 
use because of the potential risks of life-threatening compli-
cations.
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   273 25/10/2017   08:06CHAPTER 18  Anaesthesia and pain relief
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE274
Regional anaesthesia
Regional anaesthesia involves central neuroaxial or periph-
eral nerve or plexus blocks. It has a clear advantage where 
general anaesthesia carries a higher risk of morbidity and 
mortality, such as in patients with debilitating respiratory 
and cardiovascular disease and obstetric cases. It also provides 
excellent pain relief in the postoperative period, reducing the 
need for analgesics such as opioids.
As with general anaesthesia obtaining venous access, 
monitoring vital parameters should be performed during 
regional anaesthesia.
Localising nerves using anatomical landmarks and elicit -
ing paraesthesia alone carries a high risk of nerve damage, 
intravascular injection and has lower success rate. The use of 
nerve stimulators to localise nerves improves success rate and 
reduces risks. Ultrasound-guided regional anaesthesia allows 
the visualisation of nerves and the spread of local anaesthet-
ics, enabling the use of a smaller dose of local anaesthetic 
agents, with improved success rates and safety.
TRANSVERSUS ABDOMINIS PLANE BLOCK
Transversus abdominis plane block (TAP) is growing rapidly 
in popularity. The technique has been shown to provide effec-
tive analgesia after a wide range of abdominal surgery. The 
T6–L1 segmental nerves enter the triangle of Petit just medial 
to the anterior axillary line. Injection of local anaesthetic into 
the fascial plane between the internal oblique and transversus 
abdominis muscles allows a block of all these nerves, and excel-
lent anaesthesia of the anterior abdominal wall (Figure 18.8).
Summary box 18.7
Types of anaesthesia
●● General anaesthesia may be more acceptable to the patients
●● Regional anaesthesia has major advantages in obstetrics and 
patients with respiratory compromise
●● Local blocks have been transformed by nerve stimulators and 
ultrasound guidance
●● All require full resuscitation and monitoring equipment to be 
available
Common local anaesthesia 
techniques
Topical anaesthesia
 ● EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) . This is a 
mixture of lignocaine and prilocaine for application to the 
skin for venepuncture in children.
 ● Cocaine. It may be called Mofatt’s solution (with an added 
mixture of adrenaline and so dium bicarbonate) and used 
in nasal surgery for anaesthesia and vasoconstriction.
 ● Lignocaine 2/4/10%. Spray to anaesthetise the airway 
during awake fibreoptic intubation.
Nerve blocks
 ● Interscalene block for shoulder surgery produces excellent 
postoperative analgesia. Complications include phrenic 
nerve block, Horner’ s syndrome, as well as accidental 
intravascular and spinal injection.
 ● Axillary brachial plexus block can be used as the sole 
anaesthetic technique for upper limb surgery (Figure 
18.7).
 ● Femoral and sciatic nerve blocks are often used for anaes-
thesia and analgesia for lower limb surgery.
Figure 18.7 (a, b) Ultrasound scans of brachial plexus block.
Figure 18.8 (a, b) Ultrasound scans of lateral abdominal wall and 
the spread of local anaesthetics.
(b)
(a)
(b)
(a)
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   274 25/10/2017   08:06Local anaesthesia 275
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
INTRAVENOUS REGIONAL ANAESTHESIA (BIER’S 
BLOCK)
Bier’s block produces excellent anaesthesia for short surgery, 
particularly for the upper limb (e.g. carpal tunnel release). 
Exsanguination using an Esmarch bandage, inflation of 
proximal cuff of the double tourniquet is followed by intra-
venous injection of prilocaine into the vein on the back of 
the hand that is being operated on. After 5–10 minutes the 
distal cuff of the tourniquet is inflated and then the proxi -
mal one deflated. Even if surgery is finished, the tourniquet 
should be left inflated until the local anaesthetic has bound 
to tissues (20 minutes), so that release of local anaesthetic 
into the systemic circulation does not occur. Lignocaine can 
be used with caution (consider safe dose and time of tour -
niquet inflation) but bupivacaine should never be used for 
Bier’s block.
Spinal anaesthesia
Spinal anaesthesia alone, and in combination with general 
anaesthesia or sedation is used extensively for lower limb, 
obstetric and pelvic surgery. Injection of a ‘single shot’ local 
anaesthetic agent intrathecally pro duces intense and rapid 
block for surgery. Addition of opioids provides prolonged 
postoperative analgesia but carries the risk of late respiratory 
depression.
Autonomic sympathetic blockade produces hypoten-
sion, particularly if the level of block is above T10. Caution 
is needed in patients with hypovolemia and cardiovascular 
disease.
The incidence of dural puncture headache can be mini -
mised by limiting the number of punctures and use of fine bore 
pencil tip needles designed to split rather than cut the dura.
Epidural anaesthesia
Epidural anaesthesia is slower in onset than spinal, but has 
the advantage of prolonged analgesia by multiple dosing or 
continuous infusion through a catheter placed in the epidural 
space. Being slower in onset, the resulting hypotension from 
sympathetic blockade can be better controlled and can reduce 
blood loss.
Continuous infusion (with a patient-controlled bolus) of 
weak local anaesthetic combined with opioids (such a fen -
tanyl) is routinely used for postoperative analgesia. Placement 
of an epidural catheter in the high thoracic region provides 
Chronic pain management
In surgical practice, the patient with chronic pain may pres-
ent for treatment of the cause (e.g. pancreatitis, malignancy), 
or concomitant benign pathology. Acute pain after surgery 
may progress to chronic pain and is believed to be due to 
inadequate treatment of acute pain itself.
Chronic pain may be of several types:
 ● Nociceptive pain  may result from musculoskeletal dis -
orders or cancer activating cutaneous nociceptors (pain 
receptors). Prolonged ischaemic or inflammatory pro -
cesses result in sensitisation of peripheral nociceptors and 
altered activity in the central nervous system, leading to 
exaggerated responses in the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord. The widened area of hyperalgesia and increased sen-
sitivity (allodynia) has been attributed to the increased 
transmission in the central nervous system.
 ● Neuropathic (or neurogenic) pain is dysfunction in 
peripheral or central nerves (excluding the ‘physiologi -
cal’ pain due to noxious stimulation of the nerve termi-
nals). It is classically of a ‘burning’, ‘shooting’ or ‘stabbing’ 
type and may be associated with allodynia, numbness and 
diminished thermal sensation. It is poorly responsive to 
opioids. Examples include trigeminal neuralgia, posther -
petic and diabetic neuropathy. Monoaminergic, tricyclic 
inhibitors and anticonvulsant drugs are the mainstay of 
treatment.
 ● Psychogenic pain  is associated with depressive illness; 
chronic pain and the illness may exacerbate each other.
August Karl Gustav Bier , 1861–1949, Professor of Surgery, Bonn (1903–1907) and Berlin, Germany (1907–1932).
Summary box 18.8
Local anaesthetics
●● EMLA cream for children needing injections
●● Regional and nerve blocks for limb surgery
●● Spinal anaesthesia offers quick onset and short duration of 
anaesthesia
●● Epidurals are more difficult but can then be topped-up 
postoperatively and used as continuous infusion
Figure 18.9 Equipment for epidural/spinal anaesthesia.
excellent analgesia for a wide variety of upper abdominal and 
thoracic surgical operations, enabling early mobilisation and 
reducing respiratory complications.
Epidural anaesthesia is technically more difficult than spi-
nal anaesthesia, with a higher failure rate and carries the risk 
of nerve damage, spinal injuries, accidental spinal injection 
of large volume of local anaesthetics and risk of infection and 
epidural haematoma (Figure 18.9).
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   275 25/10/2017   08:06CHAPTER 18  Anaesthesia and pain relief
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE276
Chronic pain control in benign 
disease
Surgical patients may present with chronic persistent pain 
(more than 3 months’ duration) from a variety of disorders 
including postoperative neuropathic pain, chronic inflamma-
tory disease, recurrent infection, degenerative bone or joint 
disease, nerve injury and sympathetic dystrophy. This may 
result from persistent excitation of the nociceptive pathways 
causing spontaneous firing of pain signals at N-methyl-D-  
aspartate receptors in the ascending pathways. This pain does 
not respond to opiates or neuroablative surgery and would 
merit neuropathic pain management.
Amputation of limbs may result in phantom limb pain; the 
likelihood is increased if the limb was painful before surgery. 
Continuous regional local anaesthetic blockade (epidural or 
brachial plexus) established before operation and continued 
postoperatively for a few days, is believed to effectively reduce 
the risk of phantom limb pain.
 ● Local anaesthetic and steroid injections can be effective 
around an inflamed nerve and they reduce the cycle of 
constant pain transmission with consequent muscle spasm. 
Transforaminal selective root blocks in the epidural space 
are used for the pain of nerve root irritation associated 
with or without minor disc prolapse, followed by active 
physiotherapy and rehabilitation to promote mobility.
 ● Nerve stimulation procedures  such as acupuncture and 
transcutaneous nerve stimulation, increase the endorphin 
production in the central nervous system. Nerve decom -
pression craniotomy rather than percutaneous coagu -
lation of the ganglion is now performed for trigeminal 
neuralgia. Spinal cord stimulation by dorsal column stim-
ulation is now a recognised and effective management of 
intractable neuropathic pain. This involves placement of 
electrodes in the posterior epidural space to allow dorsal 
column stimulation through an implantable pulse genera-
tor inserted in the body.
Drugs in chronic non-malignant pain
Paracetamol and the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) are the mainstay of musculoskeletal pain treat -
ment. The tricyclic antidepressant drugs and anticonvulsant 
agents are often useful for the pain of nerve injury, although 
side effects can prove troublesome and reduce compliance. 
Both pregabalin and gabapentin reduce spontaneous neuronal 
activity by their action on the alpha-2-delta subunit of cal -
cium channels, and are now used for managing neuropathic 
chronic pain. In more severe and debilitating non-malignant 
chronic pain, opioid analgesic drugs are used in slow release 
oral preparations of morphine and oxycodone, and trans-
cutaneous patches delivering fentanyl and buprenorphine. 
Tapentadol with its dual action on opioid and noradrenaline 
selective reuptake inhibition pathways may provide relief in 
patients with pain of both neuropathic and nociceptive ele -
ments. Combinations of drugs often prove useful to achieve 
the optimum of efficacy with minimal side effects.
Treatment of pain dependent on 
sympathetic nervous system activity
Even minor trauma and surgery, (often of a limb) can pro -
voke chronic burning pain, allo dynia, trophic changes and 
 resultant disuse due to excessive sympathetic adrenergic 
activity inducing vasconstriction and abnormal nociceptive 
transmission.
Management includes antineuropathic pain medications 
(pregabalin, gabapentin, amitriptyline) as part of multimodal 
analgesia with a multidisciplinary pain management approach 
including considerable input of psychological, targeted phys -
iotherapy and counselling. Interventional treatment may 
include local anaesthetic injection of stellate ganglion for 
upper limb symptoms. Percutaneous chemical lumbar sympa-
thectomy with local anaesthetic is used for relief of rest pain 
in advanced ischaemic disease of the legs.
Pain control in malignant disease
Pain is a common symptom associated with cancer, more so 
during the advanced stages. In intractable pain, the underly -
ing principle of treatment is to encourage independence of 
the patient and an active life in spite of the symptom. The 
World Health Organisation’s booklet advises use of a ‘pain 
stepladder’:
 ● First step.  Simple analgesics : aspirin, paracetamol, 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, tricyclic drugs or 
anticonvulsant drugs.
 ● Second step. Intermediate strength opioids: codeine, 
tram adol or dextropropoxyphene.
 ● Third step. Strong opioids: morphine (pethidine has now 
been withdrawn).
Oral opiate analgesia is necessary when the less power -
ful analgesic agents no longer control pain on movement, or 
enable the patient to sleep. Fear that the patient may develop 
an addiction to opiates is usually not justified in malignant 
disease. It is also important to distinguish between the 
addiction and dependence; the former being a psychosocial 
Summary box 18.9
Types of pain
●● Nociceptive pain arises from inflammation and ischaemia
●● Neuropathic pain arises from a dysfunction in the central 
nervous system
●● Psychogenic pain is modified by the mental state of the patient
Summary box 18.10
Pain control in benign disease
●● Bring pain under control before amputation to avoid phantom 
pain
●● Local anaesthetic and steroid injected around a nerve may 
reduce muscle spasm
●● Transcutaneous nerve stimulators (TNS) modifies pain by 
increasing endorphin production
●● Trigeminal neuralgia responds to decompression of the nerve
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   276 25/10/2017   08:06Further reading 277
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
phenomenon while the latter is a pure physiological response 
to a given drug. Some patients experience ‘breakthrough 
pain’ (acute, excruciating and incapacitating), which occurs 
either spontaneously or in relation to a specific predictable 
or unpredictable trigger, experienced by patients who have 
relatively stable and adequately controlled background pain.
Oral morphine, often used for chronic pain, can be pre -
scribed in short-acting liquid or tablet form and should be 
administered regularly every 4 hours until an adequate dose 
of drug has been titrated to control the pain over 24 hours. 
Once this is established, the daily dose can be divided into 
two separate administrations of enteric-coated, slow-release 
morphine tablets (MST morphine) every 12 hours. Addi -
tional short-acting opioids (morphine/fentanyl) can then be 
used to cover episodes of ‘breakthrough pain’. Nausea treated 
using antiemetic agents does not usually persist, but constipa-
tion is frequently a persistent complication requiring regular 
prevention by laxatives.
Infusion of subcutaneous, intravenous, 
intrathecal or epidural opiate drugs
The infusion of opiate is necessary if a patient is unable to 
take oral drugs. Subcutaneous infusion of diamorphine is sim-
ple and effective to administer. Epidural infusions of diamor -
phine with an external pump can be used on mobile patients. 
Intrathecal infusions with pumps programmed by external 
computers are used; however, there is a possibility of develop-
ing infection with catastrophic effects. Intravenous narcotic 
agents may be reserved for acute crises, such as pathological 
fractures.
Neurolytic techniques in cancer pain
These should only be used if the life expectancy is limited and 
the diagnosis is certain. The useful procedures are:
 ● Subcostal phenol injection for a rib metastasis.
 ● Coeliac plexus neurolytic block with alcohol for pain of 
pancreatic, gastric or hepatic cancer.
 ● Intrathecal neurolytic injection of hyperbaric phenol.
 ● Percutaneous anterolateral cordotomy divides the spi -
nothalamic ascending pain pathway. It is a highly effective 
technique in experienced hands, selectively eliminating 
pain and temperature sensation in a specific limited area.
Alternative strategies include:
 ● The development of antipituitary hormone drugs, such 
as tamoxifen and cyproterone, enables effective pharma -
cological therapy for the pain of widespread metastases 
instead of pituitary ablation surgery.
 ● Palliative radiotherapy can be most beneficial for the relief 
of pain in metastatic disease.
 ● Adjuvant drugs such as corticosteroids to reduce cerebral 
oedema or inflammation around a tumour may be useful 
in symptom control. Tricyclic antidepressants, anticon -
vulsants and flecainide are also used to reduce the pain of 
nerve injury.
In the management of chronic pain, a multidisciplinary 
approach by a team of medical and nursing staff working with 
psychologists, physiotherapists and occupational therapists 
can often achieve much more benefit than the use of pow-
erful drugs. ‘Pain Management Programmes’ lay out a logical 
structure for this.
Summary box 18.11
Options for controlling severe pain in malignant 
disease
●● Oral morphine using slow-release enteric-coated tablets
●● Slow infusion of opiates subcutaneously, by epidural or 
intrathecally
●● Neurolysis for patients with limited life expectancy
●● Palliative hormone, radiotherapy, or steroids control pain from 
swelling
FURTHER READING
Aitkenhead AR, Moppett IK, Rowbotham DJ, Thompson J. Smith and 
Aitkenhead’s textbook of anaesthesia , 6th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone Elsevier, 2013.
McLeod G, McCartney C, Wildsmith T (eds). Principles and practice 
of regional anaesthesia, 4th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
2012.
Rawal N (ed.). Management of acute and chronic pain. London: BMJ 
Books, 1998.
Sneyd JR. Recent advances in intravenous anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 
2004; 93: 725–36.
03_18-B&L27_Pt3_Ch18.indd   277 25/10/2017   08:06Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The causes and consequences of malnutrition in the 
surgical patient
 • Fluid and electrolyte requirements in the pre- and 
postoperative patient
 • The nutritional requirements of surgical patients and the 
nutritional consequences of intestinal resection
 • The different methods of providing nutritional support 
and their complications
Nutrition and fluid therapy
19
INTRODUCTION
Malnutrition is common. It occurs in about 30% of surgical 
patients with gastrointestinal disease and in up to 60% of those 
in whom hospital stay has been prolonged because of postop-
erative complications. It is frequently unrecognised and con -
sequently patients often do not receive appropriate support. 
There is a substantial body of evidence to show that patients 
who suffer starvation or have signs of malnutrition have a 
higher risk of complications and an increased risk of death 
in comparison with patients who have adequate nutritional 
reserves.
Long-standing protein–calorie malnutrition as seen in 
cachexia or general frailty is easy to recognise (Figure 19.1). 
Short-term undernutrition, although less easily recognised, 
frequently occurs in association with critical illness, major 
trauma, burns or surgery, and also impacts on patient recov -
ery. The aim of nutritional support is to identify those patients 
at risk of malnutrition and to ensure that their nutritional 
requirements are met by the most appropriate route and in a 
way that minimises complications.
PHYSIOLOGY
Metabolic response to 
starvation
After a short fast, lasting 12 hours or less, most food from the 
last meal will have been absorbed. Plasma insulin levels fall 
and glucagon levels rise, which facilitates the conversion of 
liver glycogen (approximately 200 g) into glucose. The liver , 
therefore, becomes an organ of glucose production under fast-
ing conditions. Many organs, including brain tissue, red and 
white blood cells and the renal medulla, can initially utilise 
only glucose for their metabolic needs. Additional stores of 
glycogen exist in muscle (500 g), but these cannot be utilised 
directly. Muscle glycogen is broken down (glycogenolysis) 
and converted to lactate, which is then exported to the liver 
where it is converted to glucose (Cori cycle). With increasing 
Carl Ferdinand Cori , 1896–1984, Professor of Pharmacology and later Biochemistry, Washington University Medical School, St Louis, MI, USA and his wife 
Gerty Theresa Cori, 1896–1957, also Professor of Biochemistry at the Washington University Medical School. In 1947, the Coris were awarded a share of the 
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for their discovery of how glycogen is catalytically converted.
Figure 19.1 Severely malnourished patient with wasting of fat and 
muscle.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   278 25/10/2017   08:07Nutritional assessment 279
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
duration of fasting (>24 hours), glycogen stores are depleted 
and de novo glucose production from non-carbohydrate pre-
cursors (gluconeogenesis) takes place, predominantly in the 
liver. Most of this glucose is derived from the breakdown of 
amino acids, particularly glutamine and alanine as a result of 
catabolism of skeletal muscle (up to 75 g per day). This pro-
tein catabolism in simple starvation is readily reversed with 
the provision of exogenous glucose.
With more prolonged fasting, there is an increased reli -
ance on fat oxidation to meet energy requirements. Increased 
breakdown of fat stores occurs, providing glycerol, which can 
be converted to glucose, and fatty acids, which can be used as 
a tissue fuel by almost all of the body’s tissues. Hepatic pro-
duction of ketones from fatty acids is facilitated by low insulin 
levels and, after 48–72 hours of fasting, the central nervous 
system may adapt to using ketone bodies as their primary fuel 
source. This conversion to a ‘fat fuel economy’ reduces the 
need for muscle breakdown by up to 55 g per day.
Another important adaptive response to starvation is a 
significant reduction in the resting energy expenditure, pos -
sibly mediated by a decline in the conversion of inactive 
thyroxine (T4) to active tri-iodothyronine (T3). Despite 
these adaptive responses, there remains an obligatory glucose 
requirement of about 200 g per day, even under conditions of 
prolonged fasting.
of high-energy intake is associated with an amelioration of 
the catabolic process and it may indeed be harmful; there is 
mounting evidence for the benefits of permissive underfeed -
ing in critically ill surgical patients.
NUTRITIONAL ASSESSMENT
Laboratory techniques
There is no single biochemical measurement that reliably 
identifies malnutrition. Albumin is not a measure of nutri -
tional status, particularly in the acute setting. Although a low 
serum albumin level (<30 g/L) is an indicator of poor prog -
nosis, hypoalbuminaemia invariably occurs because of alter -
ations in body fluid composition and because of increased 
capillary permeability related to ongoing sepsis. Malnutri-
tion is associated with defective immune function, and mea -
surement of lymphocyte count and skin testing for delayed 
hypersensitivity frequently reveal abnormalities in malnour -
ished patients. Immunity is not, however, a precise or reliable 
indicator of nutritional status, nor is it a practical method in 
routine clinical practice.
Body weight and anthropometry
A simple method of assessing nutritional status is to esti-
mate weight loss. Measured body weight is compared with 
ideal body weight obtained from tables or from the patient’s 
usual or  premorbid weight. Unintentional weight loss of more 
than 10% of a patient’s weight in the preceding 6 months is 
a good prognostic indicator of poor outcome. Body weight is 
 frequently corrected for height, allowing calculation of the 
body mass index (BMI, defined as bo dy weight in kilograms 
divided by height in metres squared). A BMI of less than 18.5 
indicates nutritional impairment and a BMI below 15 is asso-
ciated with significant hospital mortality. Major changes in 
fluid balance, which are common in critically ill patients, may 
make body weight and BMI unreliable indicators of nutritional 
status.
Anthropometric techniques incorporating measurements 
of skinfold thicknesses and mid-arm circumference per -
mit estimations of body fat and muscle mass, and these are 
indirect measures of energy and protein stores. These mea -
Summary box 19.1
Metabolic response to starvation
●● Low plasma insulin
●● High plasma glucagon
●● Hepatic glycogenolysis
●● Protein catabolism
●● Hepatic gluconeogenesis
●● Lipolysis: mobilisation of fat stores (increased fat oxidation) – 
overall decrease in protein and carbohydrate oxidation
●● Adaptive ketogenesis
●● Reduction in resting energy expenditure (from approximately 
25–30 kcal/kg per day to 15–20 kcal/kg per day
Metabolic response to trauma and 
sepsis
This is described in full in Chapter 1 and summarised in Sum-
mary box 19.2.
From a nutritional point of view, two factors deserve 
emphasis. First, in contrast to simple starvation, patients 
with trauma have impaired formation of ketones, and the 
breakdown of protein to synthesise glucose (gluconeogen -
esis) cannot be entirely prevented by the administration of 
glucose. Second, although it is generally accepted that the 
metabolic response to trauma and sepsis is always associated 
with ‘hypermetabolism’ or hypercatabolism’, these terms are 
ill defined and do not indicate the need for very high-energy 
intakes. There is no evidence to show that the provision 
Summary box 19.2
Metabolic response to trauma and sepsis
●● Increased counter-regulatory hormones: adrenaline, 
noradrenaline, cortisol, glucagon and growth hormone
●● Increased energy requirements (up to 40 kcal/kg per day)
●● Increased nitrogen requirements
●● Insulin resistance and glucose intolerance
●● Preferential oxidation of lipids
●● Increased gluconeogenesis and protein catabolism
●● Loss of adaptive ketogenesis
●● Fluid retention with associated hypoalbuminaemia
de novo  is Latin for ‘from the beginning’.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   279 25/10/2017   08:07CHAPTER 19  Nutrition and fluid therapy
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE280
surements are, however, insufficiently accurate in individual 
patients to permit planning of nutritional support regimens. 
Similarly, use of bioelectrical impedence analysis (BIA) per -
mits estimation of intra- and extracellular fluid volumes. 
These techniques are only useful if performed frequently on a 
sequential basis in individual patients; in this respect, trends 
are much more important than absolute impedance figures. 
All of these techniques are significantly impaired by the pres-
ence of oedema.
Clinical
The possibility of malnutrition should form part of the 
workup of all patients. A clinical assessment of nutritional 
status involves a focused history and physical examination, 
an assessment of risk of malabsorption or inadequate dietary 
intake and selected laboratory tests aimed at detecting spe -
cific nutrient deficiencies. This is termed ‘subjective global 
assessment’ and encompasses historical, symptomatic and 
physical parameters. Recently, the British Association of 
Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition introduced a malnutrition 
universal screening tool (MUST), which is a five-step screen-
ing tool to identify adults who are malnourished or at risk of 
undernutrition (Figure 19.2).
FLUID AND ELECTROL YTES
Fluid intake is derived from both exogenous (consumed liq-
uids) and endogenous (released during oxidation of solid 
foodstuffs) fluids. The average daily water balance of a healthy 
adult is shown in Table 19.1.
TABLE 19.1 Average daily water balance of a healthy 
adult in a temperate climate (70 kg).
Output Volume (mL) Intake Volume (mL)
Urine 1500 Water from 
beverage
200
Insensible 
losses
900 Water from food 1000
Faeces 100 Water from 
oxidation
300
Fluid losses occur by four routes:
1 Lungs. About 400 mL of water is lost in expired air 
each 24 hours. This is increased in dry atmospheres or in 
patients with a tracheostomy, emphasising the importance 
of humidification of inspired air.
Overall risk of undernutrition*
The MUST tool
0
Low
Routine clinical
care†
Observe Treat
† Involves treatment of underlying condition, and help with food choice and eating
 when necessary (also applies to other categories).
Repeat screening
Hospital – every week
Care homes – every month
Community – every year for 
special groups, e.g. those 
/H1102275 years
Hospital – document dietary 
and /f_luid intake for 3 days
Care homes (as for hospital)
Community – repeat screening, 
e.g. from /H110211 month to /H110226 months 
(with dietary advice if necessary)
Hospital – refer to dietician or 
implement local policies. 
Generally food /f_irst followed
by food forti/f_ication and 
supplements
Care homes (as for hospital)
Community (as for hospital)
*If height, weight or weight loss cannot be established, use documented or recalled 
values (if considered reliable). When measured or recalled height cannot be
obtained, use knee height as a surrogate measure.
If neither can be calculated, obtain an overall impression of malnutrition risk
(low, medium, high) using the following:
(i) Clinical impression (very thin, thin, average, overweight);
(iia) Clothes and/or jewellery have become loose /f_itting;
(iib) History of decreased food intake, loss of appetite or dysphagia up to 3–6 months;
(iic) Disease (underlying cause) and psychosocial/physical disabilities likely to cause weight loss.
1
Medium
2 or more
High
BMI (kg/m2)(i) (ii)
Add scores
Weight loss in 3–6 months (iii) Acute disease effect
Add a score of 2 if there
has been or is likely to be
no or very little nutritional
intake for /H110225 days
0 = /H110215%
1 = 5–10%
2 = /H1102210%
0 = /H1102220.0
1 = 18.5–2.0
2 = /H1102118.5
Figure 19.2 The malnutrition uni -
versal screening tool (MUST) for 
adults (adapted fr om Elia M (ed.). 
The MUST Report. Development 
and use of the ‘malnutrition uni -
versal screening tool’ (MUST) for 
adults. A report by the Malnutrition 
Advisory Group of the British Asso-
ciation for Parenteral and Enteral 
Nutrition. Report No. 152, 2003, 
ISBN 1 899467 70X).
Marinos Elia , contemporary, Head of the Adult Clinical Nutrition Group, The Medical Research Council, Cambridge, UK.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   280 25/10/2017   08:07Nutritional requir ements 281
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
2 Skin. In a temperate climate, skin (i.e. sweat) losses are 
between 600 and 1000 mL/day.
3 Faeces. Between 60 and 150 mL of water are lost daily in 
patients with normal bowel function.
4 Urine. The normal urine output is approximately 1500 mL/
day and, provided that the kidneys are healthy, the specific 
gravity of urine bears a direct relationship to volume. A 
minimum urine output of 400 mL/day is required to excrete 
the end products of protein metabolism.
Maintenance fluid requirements are calculated approxi -
mately from an estimation of insensible and obligatory losses. 
Various formulae are available for calculating fluid replace -
ment based on a patient’s weight or surface area. For example, 
30–40 mL/kg gives an estimate of daily requirements.
The following are the approximate daily requirements of 
some electrolytes in adults:
 ● sodium: 50–90 mM/day;
 ● potassium: 50 mM/day;
 ● calcium: 5 mM/day;
 ● magnesium: 1 mM/day.
The nature and type of fluid replacement therapy will be 
determined by individual patient needs. The composition of 
some commonly used solutions is shown in Table 19.2.
Note that Hartmann’s solution also contains lactate 
29 mmol/L. Dextrose solutions are also commonly employed. 
These provide water replacement without any electrolytes 
and with modest calorie supplements (1 litre of 5% dextrose 
contains 400 kcal). A typical daily maintenance fluid regimen 
would consist of a combination of 5% dextrose with either 
Hartmann’s or normal saline to a volume of 2 litres.
There has been much controversy in the literature 
regarding the respective merits of crystalloid versus colloid 
replacement. There is no consensus on this topic and the 
usual advice is to replace like with like. If the haematocrit 
is below 21%, blood transfusion may be required. There is 
increasing recognition, however, that albumin infusions are 
of little value.
In addition to maintenance requirements, ‘replacement’ 
fluids are required to correct pre-existing deficiencies and 
‘supplemental’ fluids are required to compensate for antici-
pated additional intestinal or other losses. The nature and 
volumes of these fluids are determined by:
 ● A careful assessment of the patient including pulse, blood 
pressure and central venous pressure, if available. Clinical 
examination to assess hydration status (peripheries, skin 
turgor, urine output and specific gravity of urine), urine 
and serum electrolytes and haematocrit.
 ● Estimation of losses already incurred and their nature: for 
example, vomiting, ileus, diarrhoea, excessive sweating or 
fluid losses from burns or other serious inflammatory con -
ditions.
 ● Estimation of supplemental fluids likely to be required 
in view of anticipated future losses from drains, fistulae, 
nasogastric tubes or abnormal urine or faecal losses.
 ● When an estimate of the volumes required has been made, 
the appropriate replacement fluid can be determined from 
a consideration of the electrolyte composition of gastro -
intestinal secretions. Most intestinal losses are adequately 
replaced with normal saline containing supplemental 
potassium (Table 19.3).
TABLE 19.3 Composition of gastrointestinal secretions 
(mmol/L).
Na K Cl HCO3
Saliva 10 25 10 30
Stomach 50 15 110 –
Duodenum 140 5 100 –
Ileum 140 5 100 30
Pancreas 140 5 75 115
Bile 140 5 100 35
NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Total enteral or parenteral nutrition necessitates the provi -
sion of the macronutrients, carbohydrate, fat and protein, 
together with vitamins, trace elements, electrolytes and 
water. When planning a feeding regime, the patient should 
be weighed and an assessment made of daily energy and pro-
tein requirements. Standard tables are available to permit 
these calculations. 
Daily needs may change depending on the patient’s condi-
tion. Overfeeding is the most common cause of complications, 
regardless of whether nutrition is provided enterally or 
parenterally. It is essential to monitor daily intake to provide 
an assessment of tolerance. In addition, regular biochemical 
monitoring is mandatory (Table 19.4).
TABLE 19.2 Composition of crystalloid and colloid solutions (mmol/L).
Solution Na K Ca Cl Lactate Colloid
Hartmann’s 131 5 2 111 29
Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) 154 154
Dextrose saline (4% dextrose in 0.18% saline) 30 30
Gelofusine 150 150 Gelatin 4%
Haemacel 145 5.1 <1 145 Polygelin 75 g/L
Hetastarch Hydroxyethyl starch 6%
Alexis Frank Hartmann , 1898–1964, paediatrician, St Louis, MO, USA.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   281 25/10/2017   08:07CHAPTER 19  Nutrition and fluid therapy
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE282
TABLE 19.4 Monitoring feeding regimes.
Daily Body weight
Fluid balance
Full blood count, urea and electrolytes
Blood glucose
Electrolyte content and volume of urine  
 and/or urine and intestinal losses
Temperature
Weekly (or more 
frequently if 
clinically indicated)
Urine and plasma osmolality
Calcium, magnesium, zinc and phosphate
Plasma proteins including albumin
Liver function tests including clotting factors 
Thiamine
Acid–base status 
Triglycerides
Fortnightly Serum vitamin B12
Folate 
Iron 
Lactate
Trace elements (zinc, copper, manganese)
Macronutrient requirements
Energy
The total energy requirement of a stable patient with a normal 
or moderately increased need is approximately 20–30 kcal/kg 
per day. Very few patients require energy intakes in excess of 
2000 kcal/day. Thus, in the majority of hospitalised patients in 
whom energy demands from activity are minimal, total energy 
requirements are approximately 1300–1800 kcal/day.
Carbohydrate
There is an obligatory glucose requirement to meet the needs 
of the central nervous system and certain haematopoietic 
cells, which is equivalent to about 2 g/kg per day. In addition, 
there is a physiological maximum to the amount of glucose 
that can be oxidised, which is approximately 4 mg/kg per 
minute (equivalent to about 1500 kcal/day in a 70-kg person), 
with the nonoxidised glucose being primarily converted to 
fat. However, optimal utilisation of energy during nutritional 
support is ensured by avoiding the infusion of glucose at rates 
approximating physiological maximums. Plasma glucose 
levels provide an indication of tolerance. Avoid hyperglycae-
mia. Provide energy as mixtures of glucose and fat. Glucose is 
the preferred carbohydrate source.
Fat
Dietary fat is composed of triglycerides of predominantly four 
long-chain fatty acids. There are two saturated fatty acids 
(palmitic (C16) and stearic (C18)) and two unsaturated fatty 
acids (oleic (C18 with one double bond) and linoleic (C18 
with two double bonds)). In addition, smaller amounts of lin-
olenic acid (C18 with three double bonds) and medium-chain 
fatty acids (C6–C10) are contained in the diet.
The unsaturated fatty acids, linoleic and linolenic acid, 
are considered essential because they cannot be synthesised 
in vivo from non-dietary sources. Both soybean and sunflower 
oil emulsions are rich sources of linoleic acid and provision of 
only 1 litre of emulsion per week avoids deficiency . Soybean 
emulsions contain approximately 7% alpha-linolenic acid 
(an omega-3 fatty acid). The provision of fat as a soybean 
oil-based emulsion on a regular basis will obviate the risk of 
essential fatty acid deficiency.
Safe and non-toxic fat emulsions based upon long-chain 
triglycerides (LCTs) have been commercially available for 
over 30 years. These emulsions provide a calorically dense 
product (9 kcal/g) and are now routinely used to supplement 
the provision of non-protein calories during parenteral nutri-
tion. Energy during parenteral nutrition should be given as 
a mixture of fat together with glucose. There is no evidence 
to suggest that any particular ratio of glucose to fat is opti-
mal, as long as under all conditions the basal requirements for 
glucose (100–200 g/day) and essential fatty acids (100–200 
g/week) are met. This ‘dual energy’ supply minimises meta -
bolic complications during parenteral nutrition, reduces fluid 
retention, enhances substrate utilisation (particularly in the 
septic patient) and is associated with reduced carbon dioxide 
production.
Concerns have been expressed about the possible immu-
nosuppressive effects of LCT emulsions. These are more 
likely to occur if the recommended infusion rates (0.15 g/kg 
per hour) are exceeded. Nonetheless, these concerns have 
prompted the development of newer emulsions based upon 
medium-chain triglycerides, omega-3 fatty acids and, most 
recently, structured triglycerides, which combine long and 
medium-chain triglycerides in the same emulsion. The evi -
dence of clinical benefit for these emulsions compared with 
conventional LCTs is tenuous, particularly if infusion rates 
are appropriate and hypertriglyceridaemia is avoided.
Protein
The basic requirement for nitrogen in patients without 
pre- existing malnutrition and without metabolic stress is  
0.10–0.15 g/kg per day. In hypermetabolic patients the nitro-
gen requirements increase to 0.20–0.25 g/kg per day. Although 
there may be a minority of patients in whom the requirements 
are higher, such as after acute weight loss when the objec -
tive of therapy is longterm repletion of lean body mass, there 
is little evidence that the provision of nitrogen in excess of  
14 g/day is beneficial.
Vitamins, minerals and trace elements
Whatever the method of feeding, these are all essential com-
ponents of nutritional regimes. The water-soluble vitamins 
B and C act as coenzymes in collagen formation and wound 
healing. Postoperatively, the vitamin C requirement increases 
to 60–80 mg/day. Supplemental vitamin B12 is often indi -
cated in patients who have undergone intestinal resection or 
gastric surgery and in those with a history of alcohol depen -
dence. Absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K 
is reduced in steatorrhoea and the absence of bile.
Sodium, potassium and phosphate are all subject to signi-
ficant losses, particularly in patients with diarrhoeal illness. 
in vivo  is Latin for ‘in a living thing’.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   282 25/10/2017   08:07Fluid and nutritional consequences of intestinal r esection 283
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Their levels need daily monitoring and appropriate replace -
ment.
Trace elements may also act as cofactors for metabolic 
processes. Normally , trace element requirements are met 
by the delivery of food to the gut and so patients on long-
term parenteral nutrition are at particular risk of depletion. 
Magnesium, zinc and iron levels may all be decreased as part 
of the inflammatory response. Supplementation is necessary 
to optimise utilisation of amino acids and to avoid refeeding 
syndrome.
FLUID AND NUTRITIONAL 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
INTESTINAL RESECTION
Up to 50% of the small intestine can be surgically removed 
or bypassed without permanent deleterious effects. With 
extensive resection (<150 cm of remaining small intestine), 
metabolic and nutritional consequences arise, resulting in the 
disease entity known as short bowel syndrome. The clinical 
presentation of patients with short bowel syndrome is depen-
dent upon the site and extent of intestinal resection.
Small bowel motility
Small bowel motility is three times slower in the ileum than 
in the jejunum. In addition, the ileocaecal valve may slow 
transit. The adult small bowel receives 5–6 litres of endog -
enous secretions and 2–3 litres of exogenous fluids per day. 
Most of this is reabsorbed in the small bowel. In the jeju -
num, the cellular junctions are leaky and jejunal contents are 
always isotonic. Fluid absorption in this region of bowel is 
inefficient compared with the ileum. It has been estimated 
that the efficiency of water absorption is 44% and 70% of 
the ingested load in the jejunum and ileum, respectively. The 
corresponding figures for sodium are 13% and 72%, respec -
tively. It can be seen, therefore, that the ileum is critical in 
the conservation of fluid and electrolytes.
Ileum
The ileum is the only site of absorption of vitamin B12 and 
bile salts. Bile salts are essential for the absorption of fats and 
fat-soluble vitamins. The enterohepatic circulation of bile 
salts is critical to maintain the bile salt pool. Following resec-
tion of the ileum, the loss of bile salts increases and is not met 
by an increase in synthesis. Depletion of the bile salt pool 
results in fat malabsorption. In addition, loss of bile salts into 
the colon affects colonic mucosa, causing a reduction in salt 
and water absorption, which increases stool losses.
Colon
Transit times in the colon vary between 24 and 150 hours. 
The efficiency of water and salt absorption in the colon 
exceeds 90%. Another important colonic function is the 
fermentation of carbohydrates to pro duce short-chain fatty 
acids. These have two important functions: first, they enhance 
water and salt absorption from the colon and, second, they are 
trophic to the colonocyte.
Effects of resection
Resection of proximal jejunum results in no significant alter -
ations in fluid and electrolyte levels as the ileum and colon 
can adapt to absorb the increased fluid and electrolyte load. 
Absorption of nutrients occurs throughout the small bowel, 
and resection of jejunum alone results in the ileum taking over 
this lost function. In this situation, there is no  malabsorption.
Resection of ileum results in a significant enhancement 
of gastric motility and acceleration of intestinal transit. Fol -
lowing ileal resection, the colon receives a much larger vol-
ume of fluid and electrolytes and it also receives bile salts, 
which reduce its ability to absorb salt and water, resulting 
in diarrhoea. Even the loss of 100 cm of ileum may cause 
 steatorrhoea, which can necessitate the administration of 
oral cholestyramine to bind bile salts. With larger resections 
(>100 cm) dietary fat restriction may be necessary . Regular 
parenteral vitamin B12 is required.
The most challenging patients are those with short bowel 
syndrome who have had in excess of 200 cm of small bowel 
resected together with colectomy. These patients will usually 
have a jejunostomy. They are conveniently divided into two 
groups termed ‘net absorbers’ and ‘net secretors’. Absorbers 
characteristically have more than 100 cm of residual jejunum 
and they absorb more water and sodium from the diet than 
passes through the stomach. These patients can be managed 
without supplementary parenteral fluids.
Secretors usually have less than 100  cm of residual jeju -
num and lose more water and sodium from their stoma than 
they take by mouth. These patients require supplements. 
Their usual daily jejunostomy output may exceed 4 litres per 
24 hours. The sodium content of jejunostomy losses or other 
high-output fistulae is about 90 mmol/L. Jejunal mucosa is 
leaky and rapid sodium fluxes occur across it. If water or any 
solution with a sodium concentration of less than 90 mmol/L 
is consumed, there is a net efflux of sodium from the plasma 
into the bowel lumen. It is therefore inappropriate to encour-
age patients with high-output jejunostomies (secretors) to 
drink large amounts of oral hypotonic solutions. Treatment 
begins with restricting the total amount of hypotonic fluids 
(water, tea, juices, etc.) consumed to less than 1 litre a day. 
Patients should be encouraged to take glucose and saline 
replacement solutions, which have a sodium concentration of 
at least 90 mmol/L. The World Health Organization (WHO) 
cholera solution has a sodium concentration of 90 mmol/L 
and is commonly used.
Complications of short bowel syndrome include peptic 
ulceration related to gastric hypersecretion, cholelithiasis 
because of interruption of the enterohepatic cycle of bile 
salts and hyperoxaluria as a result of the increased absorption 
of oxalate in the colon predisposing to renal stones. Some 
patients with short bowel syndrome develop a syndrome of 
slurred speech, ataxia and altered affect. The cause of this syn-
drome is fermentation of malabsorbed carbohydrates in the 
colon to d-lactate and absorption of this metabolite. Treat -
ment necessitates the use of a low carbohydrate diet.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   283 25/10/2017   08:07CHAPTER 19  Nutrition and fluid therapy
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE284
Anti-secretory drugs reduce the amount of fluid secreted 
from the stomach, liver and pancreas. These include 
H2-receptor antagonists, proton pump inhibitors and the 
somatostatin analogue octreotide. Octreotide also reduces 
gastrointestinal motility, while proton pump inhibitors lower 
gastric pH sufficiently to decrease the need for neutralisation 
of acid in the duodenum and proximal jejunum. This results 
in significant lowering of high jejunostomy outputs and dos-
age should be titrated against stoma effluent pH for optimal 
results. Anti-motility drugs include loperamide and codeine 
phosphate, which also decrease water and sodium output from 
the stoma by about 20%.
ARTIFICIAL NUTRITIONAL 
SUPPORT
The indications for nutritional support are simple. Any 
patient who has sustained 5 days of inadequate intake or who 
is anticipated to have no or inadequate intake for this period 
should be considered for nutritional support. The periods may 
be less in patients with pre-existing malnutrition. This con -
cept is important because it emphasises that the provision of 
nutritional support is not specific to certain conditions or dis-
eases. Although patients with Crohn’s disease or pancreatitis, 
or those who have undergone gastrointestinal resections, may 
frequently require nutritional support, it is the fact that they 
have had inadequate intakes for defined periods that is the 
indication rather than the specific disease process.
Enteral nutrition
The term ‘enteral feeding’ means delivery of nutrients into 
the gastrointestinal tract. The alimentary tract should be 
used whenever possible. This can be achieved with normal 
food, oral supplements (sip feeding) or with a variety of tube- 
feeding techniques delivering food into the stomach, duo -
denum or jejunum.
A variety of nutrient formulations are available for enteral 
feeding. These vary with respect to energy content, osmolar -
ity, fat and nitrogen content and nutrient complexity; most 
contain up to 1–2 kcal/mL and up to 0.6 g/mL of protein. 
Polymeric feeds contain intact protein and hence require 
digestion, whereas monomeric/elemental feeds contain nitro-
gen in the form of either free amino acids or, in some cases, 
peptides. These are less palatable and are used much less fre -
quently than in previous years. Newer feeding formulations 
are available that include glutamine and fibre to optimise 
intestinal nutrition, or immunonutrients such as arginine and 
fish oils, but these are expensive and their use is controversial.
Sip feeding
Commercially available supplementary sip feeds are used in 
patients who can drink but whose appetites are impaired or 
in whom adequate intakes cannot be maintained with ad 
libitum intakes. These feeds typically provide 200 kcal and 
2 g of nitrogen per 200 mL carton. There is good evidence 
to demonstrate that these sip-feeding techniques are associ -
ated with a significant overall increase in calorie and nitrogen 
intakes without detriment to spontaneous nutrition. The evi-
dence that these techniques improve patient outcomes is less 
convincing.
Tube-feeding techniques
Enteral nutrition can be achieved using conventional naso -
gastric tubes (Ryle’ s), fine-bore feeding tubes inserted into 
the stomach, surgical or percutaneous endoscopic gastros -
tomy (PEG) or, finally, postpyloric feeding utilising nasoje-
junal tubes or various types of jejunostomy (Figure 19.3). 
The choice of method will be determined by local circum -
stances and preference in many patients. Whichever method 
is adopted, it is impor  tant that tube feeding is supervised 
by an experienced dietician who will calculate the patient’s 
requirements and aim to achieve these within 2–3 days of the 
instigation of feeds. Conventionally , 20–30 mL are admin -
istered per hour initially, gradually increasing to goal rates 
within 48–72 hours. In most units, feeding is discontinued for 
4–5 hours overnight to allow gastric pH to return to normal. 
There is some evidence that this might reduce the incidence 
of nosocomial pneumonia and aspiration. There is good evi -
dence to confirm that feeding protocols optimise the toler -
ance of enteral nutrition. In these, aspirates are performed 
on a regular basis and if they exceed 200 mL in any 2-hour 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 18.3Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
PPN TPN
Nasogastric/
duodenal/jejunal
tube
Whole food
by mouth
Gastrostomy
tube
Jejunostomy
tube
Figure 19.3 Techniques used for adjuvant nutritional support. PPN, 
partial parenteral nutrition; TPN, total par enteral nutrition. Redrawn 
with permission from Rick Tharp, rxkinetics.com.
ad libitum  is Latin for ‘freely or as much as you wish’.
John Alfred Ryle , 1889–1950, Regius Professor of Medicine, Cambridge  University and later Professor of Social Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, UK, intro-
duced the Ryle’s tube in 1921.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   284 25/10/2017   08:07Artificial nutritional support 285
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
period, then feeding is temporarily discontinued or the rate of 
feed administration is diminished.
Tube blockage is common. All tubes should be flushed 
with water at least twice daily. If a buildup of solidiﬁed diet 
occurs, instillation into the tube of agents such as chymotryp-
sin may salvage a partially obstructed tube. Guidewires should 
not be used to clear blockages as these may perforate the tube 
and cause contiguous damage.
Nasogastric tubes are appropriate in a majority of patients. 
If feeding is maintained for more than a week or so, a fine-
bore feeding tube is preferable and is likely to cause fewer gas-
tric and oesophageal erosions. These are usually made from 
soft polyurethane or silicone elastomer and have an internal 
diameter of <3 mm.
Fine-bore tube insertion
The patient should be semi-recumbent. The introducer wire is 
lubricated and inserted into the fine-bore tube (Figure 19.4). 
The tube is passed through the nose and into the stomach via 
the nasopharynx and oesophagus. The wire is withdrawn and 
the tube is taped to the patient. There is a small risk of mal-
position into a bronchus or of causing pneumothorax. The 
position of the tube should be checked using plain abdominal 
radiography (Figure 19.5). Confirmation of position by pH 
testing is possible but limited by the difficulty of obtaining a 
fluid aspirate with narrow lumen tubes.
endoscopic control using local anaesthesia, known as PEG 
(percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy) tubes (Figure 19.6).
T wo methods of PEG are commonly used. The first is 
called the ‘direct-stab’ technique in which the endoscope is 
passed and the stomach filled with air. The endoscopist then 
watches a cannula entering the stomach having been inserted 
directly through the anterior abdominal wall. A guidewire is 
then passed through the cannula into the stomach. A gastros-
tomy tube (commercially available) may then be introduced 
into the stomach through a ‘peel away’ sheath. The alterna -
tive technique is the transoral or push-through technique, 
whereby a guidewire or suture is brought out of the stomach 
by the endoscope after transabdominal percutaneous inser -
tion and is either attached to a gastrostomy tube or the tube 
is pushed over a guidewire. The abdominal end of the wire 
Figure 19.4 A fine-bore feeding tube with its guidewire.
Gastrostomy
The placement of a tube through the abdominal wall directly 
into the stomach is termed ‘gastrostomy’. Historically , these 
were created surgically at the time of laparotomy . Today, 
the majority are performed by percutaneous insertion under 
Figure 19.5  Radiograph of a tube similar to that in Figure 19.4 
inserted beyond the duodenojejunal flexure.
Figure 19.6 Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   285 25/10/2017   08:07CHAPTER 19  Nutrition and fluid therapy
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE286
is then pulled, advancing the gastrostomy tube through the 
oesophagus and into the stomach. Continued pulling abuts it 
up against the abdominal wall.
If patients require enteral nutrition for prolonged periods 
(4–6 weeks), then PEG is preferable to an indwelling nasoga-
stric tube; this minimises the traumatic complications related 
to indwelling tubes. PEG does have procedure-specific com -
plications, although these are uncommon. Necrotising fasci -
itis and intra-abdominal wall abscesses have been recorded. 
Sepsis around the PEG site is more common and may necessi-
tate systemic antibiotics or repositioning. A persistent gastric 
fistula can occur on removal of a PEG if it has been in place 
for prolonged periods and epithelialisation of the tract has 
occurred. This necessitates surgical closure.
Jejunostomy
In recent years, the use of jejunal feeding has become increas-
ingly popular. This can be achieved using nasojejunal tubes 
or by placement of needle jejunostomy at the time of lapa-
rotomy. Some authorities advocate the use of jejunostomies 
on the basis that postpyloric feeding may be associated with 
a reduction in aspiration or enhanced tolerance of enteral 
nutrition. In particular, there are many advocates of jejunos -
tomies in patients with severe pancreatitis, in whom a degree 
of gastric outlet obstruction may be present, related to the 
oedematous head of pancreas. In most patients it is appropri -
ate to commence with conventional nasogastric feeding and 
progress to postpyloric feeding if the former is unsuccessful.
Nasojejunal tubes often necessitate the use of fluoros-
copy or endoscopy to achieve placement, which may delay 
commencement of feeding. Surgical jejunostomies, even 
using commercially available needle-insertion techniques, do 
involve creating a defect in the jejunum, which can leak or 
be associated with tube displacement; both of these complica-
tions result in peritonitis.
Complications
Most complications of enteral nutrition can be avoided with 
careful attention to detail and appropriate infusion rates. 
Patients should be nursed semi-recumbent to reduce the 
possibility of aspiration. Complications can be divided into 
those resulting from intubation of the gastrointestinal tract 
and those related to nutrient delivery. The former are more 
frequent with more invasive means of gaining access to the 
intestinal tract (see above under Enteral nutrition). The latter 
include diarrhoea, bloating and vomiting. Diarrhoea occurs 
in more than 30% of patients receiving enteral nutrition 
and is particularly common in the critically ill. Up to 60% 
of patients in intensive care units may fail to receive their 
targeted intakes. There is no evidence that the incidence of 
diarrhoea and bloating is reduced by the use of half-strength 
feeds. It is important to introduce normal feeds at a reduced 
rate according to patient tolerance. Metabolic complications 
associated with excessive feeding are uncommon in enterally 
fed patients. There have been reports of nosocomial enteric 
infections associated with contamination of feeds, which 
should be kept in sealed containers at 4°C and discarded once 
opened. In all patients, it is essential to monitor intakes accu-
rately as target intakes are often not achieved with enteral 
nutrition.
The complications of enteral nutrition are summarised in 
Summary box 19.3.
Parenteral nutrition
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is defined as the provision 
of all nutritional requirements by means of the intravenous 
route and without the use of the gastrointestinal tract.
Parenteral nutrition is indicated when energy and protein 
needs cannot be met by the enteral administration of these 
substrates. The most frequent clinical indications relate to 
those patients who have undergone massive resection of the 
small intestine, who have intestinal fistula or who have pro-
longed intestinal failure for other reasons.
Route of delivery: peripheral or 
central venous access
TPN can be administered either by a catheter inserted in the 
central vein or via a peripheral line. In the early days of paren-
teral nutrition, the only energy source available was hypertonic 
glucose, which, being hypertonic, had to be given into a cen-
tral vein to avoid thrombophlebitis. In the second half of the 
last century, there were a number of important developments 
that have influenced the administration of parenteral nutri -
tion. These include the identification of safe and non-toxic 
fat emulsions that are isotonic; pharmaceutical developments 
that permit carbohydrates, fats and amino acids to be mixed 
in single containers; and a recognition that the provision of 
Summary box 19.3
Complications of enteral nutrition
●● Tube-related
Malposition
Displacement
Blockage
Breakage/leakage
Local complications (e.g. erosion of skin/mucosa)
●● Gastrointestinal
Diarrhoea
Bloating, nausea, vomiting
Abdominal cramps
Aspiration
Constipation
●● Metabolic/biochemical
Electrolyte disorders
Vitamin, mineral, trace element deficiencies
Drug interactions
●● Infective
Exogenous (handling contamination)
Endogenous (patient)
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   286 25/10/2017   08:07Artificial nutritional support 287
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
energy during parenteral nutrition should be a mixture of glu-
cose and fat and that energy requirements are rarely in excess of 
2000 kcal/day (25–30 kcal/kg per day). These changes enabled 
the development of peripheral parenteral nutrition.
Peripheral
Peripheral feeding is appropriate for short-term feeding of up 
to 2 weeks. Access can be achieved either by means of a dedi-
cated catheter inserted into a peripheral vein and manoeuvred 
into the central venous system (peripherally inserted central 
venous catheter (PICC) line) or by using a conventional short 
cannula in the wrist veins. The former method has the advan-
tage of minimising inconvenience to the patient and clinician. 
PICC lines have a mean duration of survival of 7 days. The 
disadvantage is that when thrombophlebitis occurs, the vein 
is irrevocably destroyed. In the alternative approach, intrave-
nous nutrients are administered through a short cannula in 
wrist veins, infusing the patient’s nutritional requirements on 
a cyclical basis over 12 hours. The cannula is then removed 
and resited in the contralateral arm. Peripheral parenteral 
nutrition has the advantage that it avoids the complications 
associated with central venous administration, but suffers the 
disadvantage that it is limited by the development of throm -
bophlebitis (Figure 19.7). Peripheral feeding is not indicated 
if patients already have an indwelling central venous line or 
in those in whom long-term feeding is anticipated.
under ultrasound guidance; however, this will not be prac -
ticable for all cases. Most intensive care physicians and 
 anaesthetists favour cannulation of internal or external jug -
ular veins as these vessels are easily accessible. They suffer 
the disadvantage that the exit site is situated inconveniently 
on the side of the neck, where repeated movements result in 
disruption of the dressing with the attendant risk of sepsis. 
The infraclavicular subclavian approach is more suitable for 
feeding as the catheter then lies flat on the chest wall, which 
optimises nursing care (Figure 19.8).
For longer-term parenteral nutrition, Hickman lines are 
preferable. These are often inserted by a radiologist with flu -
oroscopic guidance or ultrasound. They incorporate a small 
cuff, which sits at the exit site of a subcutaneous tunnel. This 
is thought to minimise the possibility of line dislodgement and 
reduce the possibility of line sepsis. Whichever technique is 
employed, a postinsertion chest x-ray is essential before feed-
ing is commenced to confirm the absence of pneumothorax 
and that the catheter tip lies in the distal superior vena cava, 
to minimise the risk of central venous or cardiac thrombosis. 
Multilumen catheters can be used for the administration of 
TPN; one port should be employed for that sole purpose and 
strict protocols of aseptic care employed.
An alternative technique for central intravenous access 
allows the PICC technique under ultrasound guidance to can-
nulate the cephalic vein in the arm, which facilitates passage of 
a catheter into the bracheocephalic vein or superior vena cava. 
This has many advantages as it minimises the risks of insertion 
and ensures distance between the site of skin entry and the tip 
of the catheter. Thrombophlebitis, however, can occur.
Complications of parenteral 
nutrition
The commencement of TPN may precipitate or accentuate 
underlying nutrient deficiency by encouraging anabolism.  
Cannula removed
Extravasation/pain
Venoconstriction
Endothelial damage
Thrombus
(vein occlusion)
In/f_lammation/thrombosis
In/f_lammatory and vasoactive
mediators
Drug/infusion
administered
(further
venoconstriction)
New cannula inserted
PVT cycle
Figure 19.7  Cycle of causes of peripheral vein thr ombophlebitis 
(PVT) (after Payne-James J, Grimble G, Silk D (eds). Artificial nutri-
tion support in clinical practice, 2nd edn. London, Greenwich Medical 
Media, 2001).
Central
When the central venous route is chosen, the catheter can 
be inserted via the subclavian or internal or external jugular 
vein. There is good evidence to show that the safest means 
of establishing central venous access is by insertion of lines 
Figure 19.8 Infraclavicular subclavian line.
John Jason Payne-James , contemporary forensic physician and medical writer, Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, UK.
Robert O Hickman , b.1929, formerly paediatric nephrologist, Seattle Childrens’ Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   287 25/10/2017   08:07CHAPTER 19  Nutrition and fluid therapy
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE288
Common metabolic complications include fluid overload, 
hyperglycaemia, abnormalities of liver function and vitamin 
deficiencies. Fluid overload can be avoided by daily weigh-
ing of the patient. A weight change of >1 kg/day normally 
 indicates fluid retention. Hyperglycaemia is common because 
of insulin resistance in critically ill patients. Even modest rates 
of glucose administration may be associated with hyperglycae-
mia. Hyperglycaemic patients undergoing surgery are known 
to run a substantially higher risk of infectious complications.
Abnormalities of liver enzymes are common in patients 
who are receiving TPN. Although the precise mechanisms 
are unclear, intrahepatic cholestasis may occur and hepatic 
steatosis and hepatomegaly have been reported. Reducing the 
fat content or infusion of fat-free TPN may be required. If 
liver enzymes continue to deteriorate, TPN should be tempo-
rarily discontinued. In addition, overfeeding is a major factor 
in hepatic and other metabolic complications associated with 
TPN. Supplemental parenteral glutamine during parental 
nutrition should be considered, particularly in the critically 
ill patient.
Catheter-related sepsis occurs in 3–14% of patients. It 
may occur at the time of line insertion or afterwards by migra-
tion of skin bacteria along the external catheter surface. Some 
studies suggest that manoeuvring of the catheter hub due to 
frequent manipulation is a common cause. Contamination 
of the infusate is rare. Seeding on the catheter at the time 
of bacteraemia from a remote source may also cause catheter 
infection.
Diagnosis of catheter-related sepsis requires that the same 
organism is grown from the catheter tip as is recovered from 
blood and that the clinical features of infection resolve on 
removal of the catheter. Traditional methods of confirming 
line sepsis have necessitated removal of the line with subse -
quent bacteriological assessment. An alternative approach is 
to use an endoluminal brush passed down the catheter and 
withdrawn into a polythene sheath. The brush tip is cultured 
at the same time as performing blood cultures. Catheter sep -
sis is confirmed if identical organisms are cultured from brush 
and blood. A second alternative is to culture blood withdrawn 
through the catheter and compare this with peripheral blood 
cultures. If the colony count from the catheter sample is five 
or more times higher than that from peripheral blood, then 
line sepsis is probable.
Some of the complications of TPN may not be a direct 
result of the provision of nutrients by the intravenous route, 
but rather a consequence of the absence of luminal nutrients. 
This may cause a shift in the mucosa-associated intestinal 
microbiome, an increased mucosal proinflammatory state 
and the loss of epithelial barrier function leading to bacterial 
translocation of enteric organisms. The gut origin of sepsis, 
mediated by bacterial translocation, may be significant in 
critical illness and multiorgan failure.
The complications of parenteral nutrition are summarised 
in Summary box 19.4.
Refeeding syndrome
This syndrome is characterised by severe fluid and electrolyte 
shifts in malnourished patients undergoing refeeding. It can 
occur with either enteral or parenteral nutrition, but is more 
common with the latter. It results in hypophosphataemia, 
hypocalcaemia and hypomagnesaemia. These electrolyte dis-
orders can result in altered myocardial function, arrhythmias, 
deteriorating respiratory function, liver dysfunction, seizures, 
confusion, coma, tetany and death. Patients at risk include 
those with alcohol dependency, those suffering severe malnu-
trition, anorexics and those who have undergone prolonged 
periods of fasting. Treatment involves matching intakes with 
requirements and assiduously avoiding overfeeding. Calorie 
delivery should be increased slowly and vitamins adminis -
tered regularly. Hypophosphataemia and hypomagnesaemia 
require treatment.
Nutrition support teams
Multidisciplinary nutrition teams ensure cost-effective and 
safe nutritional support, irrespective of how this is adminis -
tered. The incidence of catheter-related sepsis is significantly 
reduced.
SUMMARY
Fluid therapy and nutritional support are fundamental 
to good surgical practice. Accurate fluid administration 
demands an understanding of maintenance requirements and 
an appreciation of the consequences of surgical disease on 
fluid losses. This requires knowledge of the consequences of 
surgical intervention and, in particular , intestinal resection. 
Malnutrition is common in hospital patients. All patients 
who have sustained or who are likely to sustain 5 days of 
Summary box 19.4
Complications of parenteral nutrition
●● Related to nutrient deficiency
Hypoglycaemia/hypocalcaemia/ hypophosphataemia/
hypomagnesaemia (refeeding syndrome)
Chronic deficiency syndromes (essential fatty acids, zinc, 
mineral and trace elements)
●● Related to overfeeding
Excess glucose: hyperglycaemia, hyperosmolar 
dehydration, hepatic steatosis, hypercapnia, increased 
sympathetic activity, fluid retention, electrolyte 
abnormalities
Excess fat: hypercholesterolaemia and formation of 
lipoprotein X, hypertriglyceridaemia, hypersensitivity 
reactions
Excess amino acids: hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis, 
hypercalcaemia, aminoacidaemia, uraemia
●● Related to sepsis
Catheter-related sepsis
Possible increased predisposition to systemic sepsis
●● Related to line
On insertion: pneumothorax, damage to adjacent artery, 
air embolism, thoracic duct damage, cardiac perforation or 
tamponade, pleural effusion, hydromediastinum
Long-term use: occlusion, venous thrombosis
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   288 25/10/2017   08:07Further reading 289
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
inadequate oral intake should be considered for nutritional 
support. This may be dietetic advice alone, sip feeding or 
enteral or parenteral nutrition. These are not mutually 
exclusive. The success or otherwise of nutritional support 
should be determined by tolerance to nutrients provided 
and nutritional end points, such as weight. It is unrealistic 
to expect nutritional support to alter the natural history of 
disease. It is imperative that nutrition-related morbidity is 
kept to a minimum. This necessitates the appropriate selection 
of feeding method, careful assessment of fluid, energy and 
protein requirements, which are regularly monitored, and the 
avoidance of overfeeding.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
With thanks to Marcel Gatt and Clare McNaught.
FURTHER READING
British Association Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition. BAPEN. Avail -
able from: (www.bapen.org.uk/res_pub.html).
Elia M, Ljungqvist O, Stratton R, Lanham SA (eds). Nutrition Society 
textbook: clinical nutrition, 2nd edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
Nice guideline: Nutrition support for adults: oral nutrition support, 
enteral tube feeding and parenteral nutrition. Clinical guidelines 
(CG32). Feb 2006.
03_19-B&L27_Pt3_Ch19.indd   289 25/10/2017   08:07Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • What is required to deliver immediate postoperative care
 • What are the common postoperative problems seen in 
the immediate postoperative period
 • How to predict and prevent common postoperative 
complications
 • How to recognise and treat common postoperative 
complications
 • The principles of enhanced recovery
 • A system for discharging patients
Postoperative care
20
INTRODUCTION
The aim of postoperative care is to provide the patient with 
as quick, painless and safe a recovery from surgery as possible. 
This requires the appropriate knowledge and skills to manage 
medical, as well as surgical, postoperative problems. 
Standards of postanaesthesia care in 
the immediate postoperative period
Both the American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) and 
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland 
(AAGBI) have set standards for the provision of immediate 
postoperative care of patients who have undergone a pro -
cedure requiring a general anaesthetic or central neuraxial 
blockade. In brief, they both specify that care should be under-
taken in a dedicated postanaesthetic care unit (PACU) with 
staff trained in the management of patients in the immediate 
postoperative care period. Standards for equipment (includ-
ing resuscitation, difficult airway and monitoring), drugs and 
schedules of measurement of patient vital signs are described, 
as well as the discharge criteria each patient must satisfy prior 
to transfer out.
Immediate postoperative care
In many settings around the world, the process starts with a 
‘sign out’ as part of the World Health Organization check list. 
The theatre team should then formally hand over the care 
of the patient to the PACU staff. The information provided 
should include the patient’s name, age, the surgical proce -
dure, existing medical problems, allergies, the anaesthetic 
and analgesics given, fluid replacement, blood loss, urine out-
put, any surgical and anaesthetic problems encountered or 
expected and a plan for the management of pain and nausea 
or vomiting.
Postoperative observations
The patient’s vital signs (including pulse, bloo d pressure and 
pulse oximetry reading), level of consciousness, pain and hydra-
tion status are monitored in the recovery room and supportive 
treatment is given. In recent years, patient observations have 
been collated in recording systems designed to provide an early 
warning of clinical deterioration (Figure 20.1).
Surgery-specific observations such as Doppler flow for a 
free flap, regular neurological evaluation and laboratory tests, 
such as blood gas analysis, should also be performed when 
necessary.
The patient can be discharged from PACU when they ful-
fil the following criteria:
 ● Patient is fully conscious.
 ● Respiration and oxygenation are satisfactory.
 ● Patient is normothermic, not in pain and not nauseous.
 ● Cardiovascular parameters are stable.
 ● Oxygen, fluids and analgesics have been prescribed.
 ● There are no concerns related to the surgical procedure.
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   290 25/10/2017   08:08Introduction 291
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Figure 20.1 An example of an early warning system using patient observations; the National Early Warning System from the Royal  College of 
Physicians.
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   291 25/10/2017   08:08CHAPTER 20  Postoperative care
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE292
SYSTEM-SPECIFIC 
POSTOPERATIVE 
COMPLICATIONS
Postoperative complications are an important cause of mor -
bidity, mortality, extended hospital stay and increased costs. 
Most patients at increased risk of developing postoperative 
complications can be identified prior to surgery at the pre -
operative assessment clinic using a variety of scoring systems 
(for example the American College of Surgeons National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Programme risk stratification 
for perioperative myocardial infarction and cardiac arrest 
(NSQiP) surgical risk calculator, see Chapter 17). Early iden-
tification of risk allows for targeted, appropriate, anticipatory 
and supportive medical care, which will reduce both the inci-
dence and severity of such complications when they occur.
Classification of postoperative 
complications
There are three common approaches for the classification of 
postoperative complications of surgery:
1 Linked to time after surgery:
 ● immediate (within 6 h of procedure);
 ● early (6–72 h);
 ● late (>72 h).
2 Generic and surgery specific.
3 Clavian-Dindo: this system relates to surgical compli-
cations only and is used to objectively and reproducibly 
measure the impact of the surgical complication on the 
outcome of the procedure. It is included here for com -
pleteness and will be discussed no further.
Respiratory system
Early detection of respiratory complications is facilitated by 
periodic assessment of airway patency, respiratory rate and 
routine oxygen saturation measurement, performed during 
emergence and recovery as described earlier.
Immediate respiratory complications
AIRWAY
Upper airway obstruction is one of the commonest immediate 
postoperative complications and can be due to laryngospasm, 
persisting relaxation of airway muscles, soft tissue oedema, 
haematoma, vocal cord dysfunction or foreign body. Vigilance 
and early intervention are necessary to prevent harm to the 
patient. Most interventions are simple and involve manual 
support of the jaw or insertion of an oral or nasal airway.
RESPIRATION
The residual effects of anaesthetic drugs (neuromuscular block-
ers, anaesthetic agents, opioids) can contribute to reduced or 
impaired adequacy of ventilation postoperatively. Continu-
ous pulse oximetry and respiratory rate evaluation can identify 
respiratory compromise and consequent hypoxia early. Supple-
mental oxygen should be given to all patients in PACU until 
adequate respiration and oxygenation are restored.
HYPOXAEMIA
This may occur, in addition to the situations already described 
above, as a consequence of acute pulmonary oedema (fluid 
overload, cardiac failure, postobstructive), bronchospasm, 
pneumothorax (Figure 20.2), aspiration and, rarely, pulmo-
nary embolism (Figure 20.3). De novo  pneumonia is very 
Summary box 20.1
Postoperative period
●● All anaesthetised patients should be recovered in a dedicated 
PACU
●● All vital parameters should be monitored and documented 
according to local protocols
●● Treat pain and nausea/vomiting
●● Observe for complications
Figure 20.2 Radiograph showing a right tension pneumothorax with 
tracheal deviation to the left (courtesy of Professor Stephen Eustace, 
Dublin).
Figure 20.3 Computed tomography (CT) scan showing pulmonary 
artery blood embolism (arr ow) (courtesy of Pr ofessor Stephen Eus -
tace, Dublin).
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   292 25/10/2017   08:08System-specific post operative complications 293
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
unusual in the immediate postoperative period. Hypoxae-
mia develops most quickly in patients with obstructive sleep 
apnoea, lung disease and obesity, who should therefore be 
closely observed.
Patients with hypoxaemia should be treated urgently. 
If the patient is breathing spontaneously, oxygen should be 
administered at 15 L/min using a non-rebreathing mask. A 
head tilt, chin lift or jaw thrust should relieve obstruction 
related to reduced muscle tone. Suctioning of any blood or 
secretions and insertion of an oropharyngeal airway may be 
needed. Early anaesthetic intervention may be required.
SURGERY-SPECIFIC
Vocal cord palsy (as a consequence of recurrent laryngeal 
nerve injury), neck haematoma and post-tonsillectomy bleed-
ing are recognised and life-threatening complications of head 
and neck surgery, which need immediate medical attention 
for safe resolution.
Early and late respiratory complications
Early and late postoperative pulmonary complications are a sig-
nificant cause of postoperative morbidity and mortality (figures 
vary between 5% and 70%). Complications include fever (due 
to microatelectasis), cough, dyspnoea, bronchospasm, hyper -
capnoea, atelectasis (Figure 20.4), pneumonia (Figure 20.5), 
pleural effusion, pneumothorax and respiratory failure. The risk 
of each varies with the patient and the type of surgery being 
performed. Thoracic or abdominal surgery carries the highest 
risk. The majority of patients at risk (obese, smokers, chronic 
lung disease, obstructive sleep apnoea, poor nutritional status) 
can be identified preoperatively, facilitating the development 
of strategies that will reduce the impact of surgery on the indi-
vidual patient.
Cardiovascular system
Cardiovascular complications are the leading cause of 
death within 30 days after non-cardiac surgery. Recent tri -
als, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine , have 
identified ways to improve safety and therefore outcome (see 
Further reading).
Routine pulse, blood pressure, and electrocardiographic 
(ECG) monitoring detect cardiovascular complications, 
reduce adverse outcomes and should be recorded during 
emergence from, and recovery after, anaesthesia. There are 
certain categories of patient and procedure for which routine 
cardiovascular monitoring may be required for upwards of 
24 hours, usually in a PACU or high-dependency unit.
Immediate cardiovascular complications
HYPOTENSION
In the immediate postoperative period this is associated with 
adverse outcomes. Multivariable analysis from the POISE-2 
trial showed that clinically important hypotension was an 
Figure 20.4 Radiograph showing right upper lobe atelectasis (cour-
tesy of Professor Stephen Eustace, Dublin).
Summary box 20.2
Respiratory complications
●● Respiratory complications can occur either immediately or a 
few days later on the ward
●● Obesity, smoking, chronic lung disease, poor nutritional status 
and obstructive sleep apnoea predispose to a higher risk of 
respiratory complications
●● Early intervention and multidisciplinary involvement can 
prevent life-threatening respiratory complications
Figure 20-.5 Radiograph showing classical Staphylococcus aureus 
pneumonia (courtesy of Professor Stephen Eustace, Dublin).
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   293 25/10/2017   08:08CHAPTER 20  Postoperative care
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE294
independent predictor of the subsequent risk of myocardial 
infarction (see Further reading).
Hypotension may be due to hypovolaemia, myocardial 
impairment or vasodilatation from subarachnoid and 
epidural anaesthesia. Other causes of hypotension 
such as surgical bleeding, sepsis, arrhythmias, tension 
pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, pericardial tamponade 
and anaphylaxis should also be considered in the differential 
diagnosis.
Treatment should be aimed at the cause. Postopera -
tive hypotension leading to end-organ dysfunction, (e.g. 
decreased urine output <0.5 mL/kg/h, decreased level of con-
sciousness, myocardial ischaemia, capillary refill >2 seconds) 
needs immediate management with fluid and may require the 
use of vasopressors and inotropes.
HYPERTENSION
Hypertension is also common. It may be due to pain, agi-
tation, anxiety, bladder spasm secondary to urinary cathe-
terisation or pre-existing poorly-controlled hypertension. 
Consequences include bleeding from vascular suture lines, 
cerebrovascular haemorrhage and myocardial ischaemia or 
infarction.
MYOCARDIAL ISCHAEMIA
Patients with a history of cardiovascular disease or with 
known cardiac risk factors undergoing major surgery are 
at risk of major adverse cardiac events. This risk can be 
predicted preoperatively using the ACS National Surgical 
Quality Improvement Programme (NSQIP) risk stratification 
for perioperative myocardial infarction and cardiac arrest 
(MICA). Symptoms can include retrosternal pain radiating 
into the neck, jaw or arms, nausea, dyspnoea or syncope, but 
many events in the perioperative period are silent.
ECG changes can include ST-elevation in two continuous 
leads, new left bundle branch block or an arrhythmia. In the 
case of a non-ST segment MI, only a rise in serial troponin 
levels will clarify the diagnosis. Cardiologists should be 
involved early and may start coronary reperfusion therapy 
in the form of primary percutaneous coronary intervention 
or thrombolysis. These should be discussed with the surgical 
team due to the risk of bleeding after major surgery.
ARRHYTHMIAS
When they occur in the postoperative period, arrhythmias 
can cause hypotension, myocardial ischaemia and cardiac 
arrest. Treatment should be guided by the Resuscitation 
Council periarrest guidelines.
Tachycardia (sinus or supraventricular) may occur 
due to anxiety, pain, myocardial ischaemia or infarction, 
hypovolaemia, sepsis or hypoxia in the postoperative 
period. Consideration should be given to correction of 
the underlying causes and rate controlled with β-blockers, 
amiodarone or cardioversion, depending on the state of the 
patient.
Sinus bradycardia may be normal in athletes but it may 
also be associated with hypoxia, preoperative β-blockers, 
digoxin and increased intracranial pressure. Pharmacological 
options include glycopyrrolate or atropine intravenously.
Renal and urinary system
Acute kidney injury
About one-quarter of cases of hospital-acquired renal failure 
occur in the perioperative period and are associated with high 
mortality, especially after cardiac and major vascular surgery. 
Patients with known chronic renal disease, diabetes, liver fail-
ure, peripheral vascular disease and cardiac failure are at high 
risk (Table 20.1). 
According to national guidance (National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence, NICE) based on several defi-
nitions, acute kidney injury can be detected by the following 
criteria (see Further reading):
 ● a rise in serum creatinine of 26 μmol/L or greater within 
48 hours;
Summary box 20.3
Cardiovascular complications
●● Hypotension and hypertension in the postoperative period 
can be multifactorial and result in serious morbidity
●● Arrhythmias can be prevented and corrected by treating 
hypotension and electrolyte imbalance
●● Arrhythmias, myocardial ischaemia/infarction and stroke 
will need management with the help of cardiologists and 
neurologists
STROKE
Stroke is a recognised complication of carotid endarterectomy 
surgery both early (secondary to emboli) and later (secondary 
to cerebral hyperperfusion syndrome). It is also a recognised 
consequence of both hypotension and hypertension. Throm -
bolysis may be indicated but the neurology and surgical teams 
must discuss together the risks and benefits of such a treat-
ment plan.
Early and late cardiovascular complications
Major postoperative cardiac complications account for at 
least one-third of postoperative deaths, resulting in sub -
stantial rates of complications, prolonged length of stay and 
increased medical costs.
MI, congestive heart failure, arrhythmias and stroke need 
to be identified and treated early. Recent studies advocate 
shared postoperative care of patients at high risk, in order that 
the signs of deterioration may be identified early and treated 
(see Further reading).
TABLE 20.1 Common causes of acute kidney injury.
Prerenal
 
Hypotension
Hypovolaemia
Renal
 
 
 
Nephrotoxic drugs (gentamicin, diuretics, 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Surgery involving renal vessels
Myoglobinuria
Sepsis
Postrenal
 
Ureteric injury
Blocked urethral catheter
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   294 25/10/2017   08:08General postoperativ e complications 295
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
 ● a ≥50% rise in serum creatinine known or presumed to 
have occurred within the past 7 days;
 ● a fall in urine output to less than 0.5 mL/kg/h for more 
than 6 hours in adults and more than 8 hours in children 
and young people;
 ● a ≥25% fall in estimated glomerular filtration rate in chil-
dren and young people within the past 7 days.
Urinary retention
Inability to void after surgery is common with pelvic and 
perineal operations, or after procedures performed under 
spinal anaesthesia. Pain, hypovolaemia, problems with access 
to urinals and bed pans and a lack of privacy on wards may 
contribute to the problem of urine retention. The diagnosis 
of retention may be confirmed by clinical examination and by 
using ultrasound imaging. Catheterisation should be performed 
prophylactically when an operation is expected to last 3 hours 
or longer, or when large volumes of fluid are administered.
Urinary infection
Urinary infection is one of the most commonly acquired 
infections in the postoperative period. Patients may present 
with dysuria and/or pyrexia. Immunocompromised patients, 
diabetics and those patients with a history of urinary retention 
are known to be at higher risk. Treatment involves adequate 
hydration, proper bladder drainage and antibiotics depending 
on the sensitivity of the microorganisms.
intraoperative administration of narcotics and benzodiaze -
pines, change of medications, electrolyte and fluid abnor -
malities, constipation, catheterisation and an unfamiliar 
environment (Table 20.2).
Correcting any reversible cause, involving relatives or 
friends whom the patient knows and pain control can all con-
tribute to reducing the impact and duration of delirium. As a 
last option, haloperidol may be given in titrated doses accord-
ing to local protocols.
Central nervous system
Postoperative delirium
With an increasingly frail and elderly population presenting 
for elective surgery, the incidence of postoperative delirium 
(POD) is increasing. POD is frequently recognised late and 
has significant postoperative sequelae.
POD can occur during recovery from anaesthesia or a few 
days after surgery. The overall incidence of POD is 5–50%. It 
occurs more frequently in the elderly orthopaedic patient and 
those undergoing emergency surgical procedures. Delirium is 
associated with increased all-cause morbidity, mortality and 
discharge to a nursing home. There are two types of delir -
ium – hyperactive (restlessness, incoherent speech, agitation, 
hallucinations) and hypoactive (withdrawn, poorly respon -
sive to the environment, depressed). Preoperative risk factors 
for POD include pre-existing cognitive impairment, demen-
tia, frailty, Parkinson’s disease, severe illness, renal impair -
ment and depression. Precipitating factors include surgery, 
TABLE 20.2 Causes of delirium.
Renal
 
 
 
Renal failure/uraemia
Hyponatraemia and electrolyte disorders
Urinary tract infection
Urinary retention
Respiratory
 
Hypoxia, e.g. chest infection
Atelectasis
Cardiovascular
 
 
 
 
 
Pulmonary embolism
Dehydration
Septic shock
Myocardial infarction
Chronic heart failure
Arrhythmia
Drugs
 
 
 
 
Opiates including heroin
Hypnotics
Cocaine
Alcohol withdrawal
Hypoglycaemia
Neurological
 
 
 
Epilepsy
Encephalopathy
Head injury
Cerebrovascular accident
Idiopathic (rare)
 
 
Hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Addison’s disease
Stroke – has been discussed above.
Seizures – are uncommon except in those patients with 
known poorly-controlled epilepsy. They may occur as a com-
plication of neurosurgery.
Summary box 20.4
Renal and urinary complications
●● Postoperative renal failure is associated with high mortality
●● Prophylactic measures to prevent renal failure should be taken 
in high-risk cases
●● Urinary retention and infection are common problems 
postoperatively
Thomas Addison , 1795–1860, physician, Guy’s Hospital. London, UK, described the effects of disease of the suprarenal capsules in 1849.
GENERAL POSTOPERATIVE 
COMPLICATIONS
Bleeding
Postoperative haemorrhage is most common in the immediate 
postoperative period. It may be caused by an arterial or venous 
leak, but also by a generalised ooze or a coagulopathy . Slow 
bleeds may go undetected for hours and then the patient 
suddenly decompensates. All patients must have their vital 
signs (pulse rate, blood pressure, oximetry, central venous 
pressure, if available, and urine output) monitored regularly. 
Dressings and drains should be inspected regularly in the first 24 
hours after surgery. If haemorrhage is suspected, blood samples 
should be taken for a full blood count, coagulation profile and 
cross match. A large bore intravenous cannula should be sited 
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   295 25/10/2017   08:08CHAPTER 20  Postoperative care
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE296
anticoagulation initially, followed by longer -term warfarin 
or new oral anticoagulant (refer to national guidance, e.g. 
NICE; see Further reading). In some patients with a large 
DVT, a caval filter may be required to decrease the possibility 
of pulmonary embolism.
Pulmonary embolus
Pulmonary embolism (PE) is not usually an immediate com-
plication, but can present in the early postoperative period. 
Thrombus can arise from DVT in the legs/pelvis, venae cavae 
or the right atrium. Signs and symptoms depend on the size of 
the embolus and may range from dyspnoea, cough, and pleu -
ritic chest pain to sudden cardiovascular collapse. Diagnosis 
of PE begins with history (including risk factors and recent 
surgery) and physical examination (which may include signs 
of DVT). Investigations may include, depending on the pre-
sentation, ECG, chest radiograph, blood tests (arterial blood 
gas and d-dimer) and radiological tests (usually CT pulmo-
nary angiography). If the presentation includes cardiovas-
cular collapse, resuscitation will be needed. Thrombolysis 
can be considered with massive PE causing cardiovascular 
collapse, but this should include senior clinical opinion and 
would generally follow appropriate guidelines. The patient 
may need inotropes and admission to the intensive care unit. 
In less severe cases of PE, supportive measures include oxygen 
therapy and analgesia. After initial resuscitation, the patient 
will need anticoagulation, initially parenteral anticoagu -
lation, followed by long-term oral anticoagulation (refer to 
national guidance, e.g. NICE; see Further reading). A vena 
cava filter may be needed if anticoagulation is not possible 
or if the patient has an embolism while anticoagulated (see 
Further reading).
Fever
About 40% of patients develop pyrexia after major surgery; 
however, in most cases no cause is found. The inflammatory 
response to surgical trauma may manifest itself as fever, and 
so pyrexia does not necessarily imply sepsis. However, in all 
patients with a pyrexia, a focus of infection should be sought.
Summary box 20.5
Postoperative bleeding
●● All hospitals should have a major haemorrhage protocol in 
place
●● Need to transfuse blood in absence of continued bleeding in 
patients with haemoglobin >75 g/L should be weighed against 
the risks
and fluid resuscitation commenced. If the source of bleeding is 
in doubt and the patient is stable, an ultrasound or computed 
tomography (CT) scan may be required to determine the nature 
of the bleed (most commonly if a haematoma is suspected in 
the days following surgery). If the patient’s cardiovascular 
system is unstable or compromised in any way (for example 
neck haematoma or bleeding tonsil) they should be taken back 
to the operating theatre immediately.
The treatment of haemorrhage is both to stop the bleeding 
and supportive. Supportive treatment includes oxygen and 
fluid resuscitation. It may require correction of coagulopathy. 
All patients will require close observation. Blood transfusion 
carries risks (acute haemolytic transfusion reaction, sensitisa-
tion, fluid overload, hyperkalaemia, transfusion-related lung 
injury and transmission of blood-borne infection). There is 
much published about what is the right transfusion trigger 
and how to balance the need for adequate tissue perfusion and 
the risks of transfusion. The decision about when to transfuse 
should be based on the individual patient; in general, how -
ever, the accepted transfusion trigger is 75 g/L except in the 
presence of known or suspected coronary artery disease when 
a higher trigger is acceptable.
All hospitals should have a ‘major haemorrhage protocol’ 
in place. The consultant surgeon, anaesthetist and haematol-
ogist should all be involved early on in the care of unstable 
patients.
TABLE 20.3 Stratification surgical procedure and the asso-
ciated risk of deep vein thrombosis.
Low
●● Maxillofacial surgery
●● Neurosurgery
●● Cardiothoracic surgery
Medium
●● Inguinal hernia repair
●● Abdominal surgery
●● Gynaecological surgery
●● Urological surgery
High
●● Pelvic elective and trauma surgery
●● Total knee and hip replacement
John Homans , 1877–1954, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Deep vein thrombosis
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a well-known and, when 
complicated by pulmonary embolus, potentially fatal compli-
cation of surgery (Table 20.3). All hospitals must have a pro-
cess for screening all surgical patients to identify those at risk 
and for implementing prophylactic measures. There is inter -
national agreement on risk and therapeutic options. Methods 
of prevention are guided by the risk score and include the 
use of compression stockings, calf pumps and pharmacological 
agents, such as low molecular weight heparin.
The symptoms and signs of DVT include calf pain, swelling, 
warmth, redness and engorged veins. However, most will show 
no physical signs. On palpation the muscle may be tender and 
there may be a positive Homans’ sign (calf pain on dorsiflexion 
of the foot), but this test is neither sensitive nor specific.
Duplex Doppler ultrasound and venography can be used 
to assess flow and the presence of a thrombosis. Other inves -
tigations include D-dimer. If a significant DVT is found (one 
that extends above the knee), treatment with parenteral 
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   296 25/10/2017   08:08Surgery-specific complications 297
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
The causes of a raised temperature postoperatively include:
 ● atelectasis of the lung;
 ● superficial and deep wound infection;
 ● chest infection, urinary tract infection and thrombophlebitis;
 ● wound infection, anastomotic leakage, intracavitary col -
lections and abscesses.
The possible causes of pyrexia of a non-infective origin 
include:
 ● DVT;
 ● transfusion reactions;
 ● wound haematomas;
 ● atelectasis;
 ● drug reactions.
Patients with a persistent pyrexia need a thorough review. 
Relevant investigations include full bloo d count, urine cul -
ture, sputum microscopy and blood cultures.
Pressure sores
Patients undergoing surgery for a prolonged period of time are 
vulnerable to the development of a pressure sore or to wors -
ening of a pre-existing sore. Careful positioning and padding 
of the patient is standard practice intraoperatively to reduce 
risk. Pressure sores occur as a result of friction or persisting 
pressure on soft tissues. They particularly affect the pressure 
points of a recumbent patient, including the sacrum, greater 
trochanter and heels. Risk factors are poor nutritional status, 
dehydration and lack of mobility and nerve block anaesthesia 
technique. Early mobilisation prevents pressure sores. High-
risk patients may be nursed on an air mattress, which auto -
matically relieves the pressure areas.
Summary box 20.6
Fever
●● A very common problem postoperatively
●● Consider infection in the lung, urine and wound
Wound dehiscence
Wound dehiscence is disruption of any or all of the layers in 
a wound. Dehiscence may occur in up to 3% of abdominal 
wounds and is very distressing to the patient.
Wound dehiscence most commonly occurs from the fifth 
to the eighth postoperative day when the strength of the 
wound is at its weakest. It may herald an underlying abscess 
and usually presents with a serosanguinous discharge. The 
patient may have felt a popping sensation during straining 
or coughing. Most patients will need to return to the operat -
ing theatre for resuturing. In some patients it may be appro -
priate to leave the wound open and treat with dressings or 
vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) pumps.
Summary box 20.7
Risk factors in wound dehiscence
General
●● Malnourishment
●● Diabetes
●● Obesity
●● Renal failure
●● Jaundice
●● Sepsis
●● Cancer
●● Treatment with steroids
Local
●● Inadequate or poor closure of wound
●● Poor local wound healing, e.g. because of infection, 
haematoma or seroma
●● Increased intra-abdominal pressure, e.g. in postoperative 
patients suffering from chronic obstructive airway disease, 
during excessive coughing
Summary box 20.8
Preventing pressure sores
●● Recognise patients at risk
●● Address nutritional status
●● Keep patients mobile or regularly turned if bed-bound
SURGERY-SPECIFIC 
COMPLICATIONS
Abdominal surgery
The abdomen should be examined daily for excessive disten -
sion, tenderness or drainage from wounds or drain sites. In 
certain operations, such as those for intestinal obstruction, 
oesophageal and gastric procedures, a nasogastric tube may 
be required. It is of particular value in those patients suffering 
from ileus or a marked level of altered consciousness, who are 
therefore liable to aspirate.
Paralytic ileus
Paralytic ileus may present with nausea, vomiting, loss of 
appetite, bowel distension and absence of flatus or bowel 
movements. Following laparotomy, gastrointestinal motility 
temporarily decreases. Treatment is usually supportive, with 
maintenance of adequate hydration and electrolyte levels. 
However, intestinal complications may present as prolonged 
ileus and so should be actively sought and treated.
Return of function of the intestine occurs in the follow -
ing order: small bowel, large bowel and then stomach. This 
pattern allows the passage of faeces despite continuing lack 
of stomach emptying and, therefore, vomiting may continue 
even when the lower bowel has already started functioning 
normally.
Localised infection
An abscess may present with persistent abdominal pain, focal 
tenderness and a spiking fever. The patient may have a pro -
longed ileus. If the abscess is deep-seated these symptoms may 
be absent. The patient will have a neutrophilic leucocytosis 
and may have positive blood cultures. An ultrasound or CT 
scan of the abdomen should identify any suspicious collection 
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   297 25/10/2017   08:08CHAPTER 20  Postoperative care
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE298
and will identify a subphrenic abscess, which can otherwise 
be difficult to find.
damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which can produce 
voice change.
Thoracic surgery
Careful fluid management is important in patients under -
going a lobectomy or pneumonectomy as they are susceptible 
to fluid overload in the first 24–48 hours postoperatively. 
Chest drains require regular review . If the fluid in a chest 
drain swings then the drain has been correctly inserted into 
the pleural cavity. If the chest drain continues to bubble then 
a bronchopleural fistula probably exists. A haemothorax or 
pleural effusion will reveal itself as a prolonged loss of blood 
or fluid, respectively, into the drain. Cardiac patients require 
continuous ECG monitoring postoperatively.
Neurosurgery
Postoperatively the patient should be kept under close obser-
vation. A rise in intracranial pressure may be signalled by a 
deterioration in the state of consciousness, as well as by neu -
rological signs. Some patients may have an intracranial mon-
itoring device to allow for more sensitive monitoring.
Vascular surgery
The patency of grafts and anastomoses, for example femo -
ropopliteal bypasses and abdominal aneurysmal, needs to be 
checked by regular clinical assessment of the limbs and by 
Doppler ultrasound in the postoperative phase.
Plastic surgery
The viability of flaps is crucial and the perfusion needs to be 
monitored regularly. The blood supply may be compromised 
by position, dressings or collection of fluids or blood beneath 
the flap.
Urology
Catheter patency must be checked regularly following uro -
logical surgery. In patients who have undergone transure -
thral resection of the prostate (TURP), continuous bladder 
irrigation may be used. More generalised complications can 
occur, for example transurethral resection syndrome, and are 
discussed further in the appropriate section.
GENERAL POSTOPERATIVE 
PROBLEMS AND MANAGEMENT
When considering postoperative problems, the importance 
of pain control and fluid management should be appreciated, 
and the reader is directed to Chapters 18 and 19.
Nausea and vomiting
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) are unpleasant 
for patients, can delay recovery and prolong length of stay . 
Summary box 20.9
The main complications after abdominal surgery
●● Paralytic ileus
●● Bleeding or abscess
●● Anastomotic leakage
Orthopaedic surgery
Neurovascular supply to the extremity
Patients who have undergone extremity surgery, for example 
open reduction and internal fixation of a fracture, require reg-
ular neurovascular observations, both in recovery and on the 
ward (this will usually follow a local or national guideline). 
Moreover, if a tourniquet has been used, the restoration of 
the distal neurovascular supply should be established. Careful 
documentation of findings before and after surgery will allow 
comparison. Concern about the neurovascular status requires 
urgent and experienced surgical review and further manage -
ment. Circumferential casts can be split and dressings cut 
down to skin.
Compartment syndrome
Raised pressure in an osseofascial compartment can prevent 
adequate tissue perfusion and present after surgery. Patients 
with compartment syndrome complain of pain out of propor-
tion to that expected, pain that is increasing and pain on pas-
sive stretching of the muscles in the affected compartment. 
Other symptoms that relate to pressure on nerves (paraly -
sis, paraesthesia) and blood vessels (pallor and pulselesness) 
occur late. When suspected, prompt senior input is required. 
In terms of initial management, circumferential casts can be 
split, dressings cut down to skin and the limb elevated. Fur -
ther management will require experienced judgement and 
may include compartment pressure monitoring and/or fasci -
otomies. Compartment syndrome is considered more exten-
sively in Chapter 28.
Summary box 20.10
Compartment syndrome symptoms and signs
●● Pain out of proportion to that expected
●● Pain that is increasing
●● Pain on passive stretching of the muscles in the affected 
compartment
●● Paralysis, paraesthesia, pallor and pulselessness generally 
occur late
Neck surgery
Patients having neck surgery , e.g. thyroid surgery, must be 
observed for accumulation of blood in the wound, which 
may cause rapid asphyxia. Another potential complication is 
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   298 25/10/2017   08:08Enhanced recov ery 299
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
They can lead to more serious complications including aspi-
ration pneumonia, precipitation of bleeding and dehiscence 
of wounds by dislodging the clots and bursting suture lines. In 
neurosurgical patients PONV may precipitate raised intracra-
nial pressure with disastrous effects.
Risk factors for PONV include female gender, non- 
smoking, and a history of PONV , motion sickness or migraine. 
Use of volatile anaesthetic agents, opioids and nitrous oxide 
add to the risk. Duration and type of surgery also affect the 
incidence of PONV .
The risk of PONV can be estimated by using validated risk 
scores such as the Apfel (Table 20.4) or Koivuranta scores 
and appropriate preoperative strategies applied to high-risk 
individuals.
Treatment of PONV includes adequate treatment of pain, 
anxiety, hypotension and dehydration.  Antiemetics can be 
administered both prophylactically and for treatment. A mul-
timodal pharmacological approach, using drugs that work at 
different sites, such as HT3 receptor antagonists (e.g. ondan-
setron), steroids (e.g. dexamethasone), phenothiazines (e.g. 
prochlorperazine) and antihistamines (e.g. cyclizine), is the 
most effective.
TABLE 20.4 Apfel score to predict postoperative nausea 
and vomiting (PONV).
Characteristics Points
Female sex 1
History of motion sickness or PONV 1
Non-smoker 1
Postoperative opioid treatment is planned 1
Total: ____
Score Probability of PONV (%)
0 10
1 21
2 39
3 61
4 78
Hypothermia and shivering
Anaesthesia induces loss of thermoregulatory control. Expo -
sure of skin and organs to a cold operating environment, anti-
septic skin preparation (that cools by evaporation), and the 
infusion of cold intravenous fluids all lead to hypothermia. 
This in turn can lead to shivering, with imbalance of oxy -
gen supply and demand (risking cardiac morbidity), a hypo -
coagulable state and immune function impairment, with the 
possibility of wound infection, dehiscence and anastomotic 
breakdown. It is now expected that temperature is moni -
tored intraoperatively and the incidence of postoperative 
hypothermia has decreased significantly as a consequence. 
Active warming devices should be used to treat hypothermia 
as appropriate.
Drains
Drains are used to prevent accumulation of blood, serosan-
guinous or purulent fluid or to allow the early diagnosis of a 
leaking surgical anastomosis. In clean surgery, such as joint 
replacement, blood collected in drains can be transfused back 
into the patient provided that an adequate volume is col -
lected rapidly and that a specifically-designed drain and filter 
system is used.
The use of surgical drains has decreased in recent years 
as the evidence for their benefits has been questioned. Com -
plications of drains include trauma to surrounding tissues 
and infection. The quantity and character of drain fluid can 
be used to identify an abdominal complication such as fluid 
leakage (e.g. bile or pancreatic fluid) or bleeding.
Drains should be removed as soon as possible and cer -
tainly once the drainage has stopped or become less than 
25 mL/day.
Wound care
Within hours of the wound being surgically closed, the dead 
space fills up with an inflammatory exudate. Within 48 hours 
of closure a layer of epidermal cells from the wound edge 
bridges the gap. Consequently, sterile dressings applied in 
theatre should not be removed before this time.
Wounds should be inspected only if there is a con -
cern about their condition or the dressing needs changing. 
Inspection of the wound should be performed under sterile 
conditions. If the wound looks inflamed, a wound swab can 
be taken and sent for microbiological examination, but this 
can be unreliable. Infected wounds and haematomata may 
need treatment with antibiotics or even wound washout. If 
a surgical procedure is performed it gives an opportunity to 
collect samples for bacteriology (before any antibiotics, if the 
patient’s general condition allows), to excise dead tissue and 
to control any bleeding. Depending on location, the wound 
may require packing if it is contaminated or if non-viable tis-
sue remains. The dressing should then be changed regularly 
until the wound is clean.
Skin sutures or clips are usually removed between 6 and 
10 days after surgery. The period can be shorter in wounds on 
the face or neck, and are left longer if the incision has been 
closed under tension. Wound healing is delayed in patients 
who are malnourished, or have vitamin A and C deficiency. 
Steroids also inhibit the adequate healing of wounds as they 
inhibit protein synthesis and fibroblast proliferation. Poor -
ly-controlled diabetes delays wound healing and increases the 
risk of infection at the surgical site.
ENHANCED RECOVERY
Enhanced recovery is an approach to the perioperative care 
of patients undergoing surgery. It is designed to speed clini -
cal recovery of the patient and reduce both the cost and the 
length of stay of the patient in the hospital. It is achieved by 
optimising the health of the patient before surgery through 
prehabilitation and then delivering evidence-based best care 
in the perioperative period.
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   299 25/10/2017   08:08CHAPTER 20  Postoperative care
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE300
Postoperative strategies advocated by enhanced recovery 
protocols include:
 ● Early planned physiotherapy and mobilisation.
 ● Early oral hydration and nourishment.
 ● Opioid-sparing analgesia regimens that include the use of 
regional blocks, regular non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs and paracetamol.
 ● Discharge planning is started before the patient is admitted 
to hospital and involves support from stoma care nurses, 
physiotherapists and other community care workers.
Early mobilisation is encouraged to reduce the risks of DVT, 
urinary retention, atelectasis, pressure sores and faecal impac-
tion. Telephone follow-up is carried out to make sure that the 
patient is recovering well.
DISCHARGE OF PATIENTS
Patients discharged home need a ‘discharge letter’ detailing 
the postoperative plan. The discharge letter should include 
details of the final diagnosis, the treatment and any com -
plications that may have occurred. There should be advice 
for referring the patient back to hospital and indications for 
readmission if specific problems do occur. The general practi-
tioner (GP) should be informed of the subsequent care plan, 
including follow-up, physiotherapy and other support needed. 
Pathology results should be included if available, and the basis 
of these in the subsequent care plan should be described along 
with the prognosis if appropriate.
Follow-up in clinic
Patients should only be reviewed in clinic when a key deci -
sion on management needs to be made. The findings and the 
care plan agreed with the patient at the clinic appointment 
should be included in a letter to the patient’s GP , as well as 
in a clear entry in the notes or electronic patient record. This 
should include advice on how to recognise the onset of com-
plications and what to do if there is concern. Patients should 
be discharged from clinic as soon as their GP or they them -
selves, can manage their care.
FURTHER READING
American Society of Anesthesiologists. Practice guidelines for postanes-
thetic care. Anesthesiology 2013; 118(2): 291–307.
Devereaux PJ, Sessier DI. Cardiac complications in patients undergoing 
major non-cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med 2015; 373: 2258–69.
Devereaux PJ, Sessler DI, Leslie K, et al.; POISE-2 Investigators. Cloni-
dine in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. N Engl J Med 2014; 
370(16): 1504–13.
Gan TJ, Meyer TA, Apfel CC et al. Society for ambulatory anesthesia 
guidelines for the management of postoperative nausea and vomit -
ing. Anesth Analg 2007; 105(6): 1615–28.
Gupta PK, Gupta H, Sundaram A et al. Development and validation of a 
risk calculator for prediction of cardiac risk after surgery. Circulation 
2011; 124: 381.
http://riskcalculator.facs.org/RiskCalculator/
http://www .aagbi.org/publications/guidelines/immediate-post-anaes  
thesia-recovery-2013
Intensive care society website: http://www.ics.ac.uk/intensive_care_ 
professional/standards_and_guidelines/levels_of_critical_care_for_
adult_patients
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Venous thrombo-
embolic diseases: diagnosis, management and thrombophilia testing. 
Clinical guideline (CG144), June 2012, updated November 2015.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Acute kidney 
injury: prevention, detection and management. Clinical guideline 
(CG169), August 2013.
Summary box 20.11
Discharge letter
Diagnosis
Treatment
Laboratory results
Complications
Discharge plan
Support needed
Follow-up
03_20-B&L27_Pt3_Ch20.indd   300 25/10/2017   08:08Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Day case surgery
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The concept of the day surgery pathway
 • The importance of patient selection and preoperative 
assessment
 • Basic principles of anaesthesia for day surgery
 • The spectrum of surgical procedures suitable for day 
surgery
 • Postoperative management and discharge 
arrangements 
DAY SURGERY 
The delivery of a surgical procedure on a day case basis offers 
advantages in providing significant benefits for both patient 
and healthcare providers. The removal of an overnight stay 
causes less disruption to the patient’s domestic and social 
situation, and provides significant financial savings to the 
hospital. In resource-rich countries, day surgery is now an 
integral component of healthcare delivery, while in resource-
poor countries, day surgery is increasing in popularity due to 
patient preference and healthcare reorganisation.
Day surgery is defined as the admission and discharge of a 
patient for a specific procedure within the 12-hour working 
day. Where a patient requires an overnight admission, then 
the term ‘23 hour stay’ should be used.
Day surgery is a patient pathway, not a surgical procedure, 
and extends from first patient contact to final discharge (Fig-
ure 21.1). Success in day surgery requires each component of 
the pathway to be safe and efficient and to be performed in 
sequence. Unplanned overnight admissions are minimised by 
ensuring that:
 ● the patient is informed and fit for the procedure; 
 ● the procedure itself is achievable as a day case; 
Summary box 21.1 
Definition of terms used in ambulatory surgery
●● Outpatient surgery: not admitted to a ward facility
●● Procedure room surgery: surgery not requiring full sterile 
theatre facilities
●● Day or same-day surgery: admitted and discharged within the 
12-hour day
●● Overnight stay: 23-hour admission with early morning 
discharge
●● Short-stay surgery: admission of up to 72 hours
Referring
doctor
Specialist
consultation
Preoperative
assessment
Schedule
&
admission
Surgery Recovery
Diagnostics
+
optimisation
Successful
discharge
Method to return patients
unsuitable for surgical or medical reasons
Unplanned
overnight
admission
 ● the procedure is scheduled early on the operating list to 
allow safe recovery and discharge; and
 ● the home environment can support a postoperative ambu-
latory patient.
MODELS OF CARE
Office-based care
This model, common in North America and Europe, where 
diagnostics and ambulatory interventions are performed in 
Figure 21.1 Elective day surgery pathway.
James H Nicoll, 1864–1921 , paediatric surgeon, Glasgow, Scotland, specialised in pyloric stenosis and spina bifida and pioneered the ‘Glasgow dispensary’, where 
his work earned him the title of ‘father of Day Surgery’. He was made Legion of Honour France.
21 
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   301 25/10/2017   08:09CHAPTER 21   Day case surgery
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE302
consultation premises, allows patients ready access to ‘high 
street’ care. The downside is that the practice is usually lim-
ited to procedures under local anaesthesia, with or without 
conscious sedation. The use of general anaesthesia is limited, 
as this requires additional equipment and personnel, and 
raises safety issues in an isolated facility.
Stand-alone day surgery facilities 
Where day case procedures are performed in isolated facili-
ties, either on a remote site, or in the campus of the parent 
hospital, the workload is free from interference by emergency 
admissions. The spectrum of procedures performed is, by 
necessity, limited to those under local or regional anaesthesia 
or minor to intermediate procedures under general anaesthe-
sia, to avoid unplanned overnight admissions and the require-
ment to transfer the patient to the parent hospital, which may 
be some distance away.
Self-contained integrated day 
surgery facilities
Though structurally part of a hospital, self-contained units 
have their own reception, ward, theatre and recovery areas 
and are functionally separate from the main hospital and 
potential disruption by emergency admissions. The back-up 
facilities of the main hospital are readily available if required, 
so these units can undertake a full spectrum of day surgery 
procedures. The growing demand for day surgery can lead to 
capacity issues and there may be duplication of costly capi-
tal equipment where procedures are performed on both a day 
case and inpatient basis.
Integrated day and short-stay 
surgery facilities
This type of unit allows complete flexibility in the delivery of 
day and short-stay surgery, with the ability to embark on more 
challenging day surgery procedures or consider day surgery 
on less fit patients. The availability of overnight beds has its 
downside: the preassessment team may convert fewer patients 
from overnight stay to day surgery by adopting the easy option 
of keeping the more challenging patient in overnight. More-
over, the availability of beds rather than day surgery recovery 
trolleys, puts these ambulatory beds at risk from emergency 
admissions.
While dedicated day surgery facilities are welcome, 
regardless of model, they are not mandatory for the success -
ful delivery of the day surgery pathway. Success does require a 
dedicated day ward facility, where the staff can concentrate 
on the timely recovery and discharge of the day case patient. 
In mixed wards of day cases and inpatients, nursing and medi-
cal staff naturally prioritise the care of the less fit patient, and 
it may be easier to keep the day case patient overnight, rather 
than ensuring an optimum discharge process.
SELECTION CRITERIA
Medical criteria
Age 
There is no upper age limit. The physiological health of the 
patient is a superior determinant of day surgery success.
TABLE 21.1 The American Society of Anaesthesiologists 
(ASA) Physical Status Classification (American Society of 
Anaesthesiologists 1963).
ASA 1 A normal healthy patient
ASA 2 A patient with mild systemic disease
ASA 3 A patient with severe systemic disease
ASA 4 A patient with severe systemic disease that is a 
constant threat to life
ASA 5 A moribund patient who is not expected to 
survive without the operation
Summary box 21.2
Selection criteria for day surgery 
●● Medical: use physiological rather than chronological age 
ASA status over 2 requires careful review 
Provided that the BMI is under 40, this alone is not a 
contraindication
●● Social: a responsible adult carer must be available for the first 
24 hours, for the elderly and patients at risk of covert 
bleeding
home conditions need to be suitable 
ability to contact hospital in an emergency
●● Surgical: operations up to 2 hours
recognised day surgery procedures 
ability to eat and drink within a reasonable timescale
Comorbidity 
Day surgery units traditionally use the American Society of 
Anaesthesiologists (ASA) Classification, which is a crude 
evaluation of chronic health (Table 21.1). Stand-alone units 
often confine their criteria to ASA 1 and 2 patients, while 
ASA 3 patients are more suitable for hospital-integrated 
units. Patients with significant respiratory or cardiovascular 
disease should be reviewed by an anaesthetist before being 
accepted for day surgery (see Chapter 17). Many patients who 
are fit but hypertensive are incorrectly excluded from day 
surgery. There is no evidence to support cancellation when 
blood pressure is below 180/110 mmHg.
Diabetes
The incidence of diabetes is increasing worldwide. Patients 
with well-controlled Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes are good can-
didates for the well-managed day surgery pathway. Control 
can be assessed by measuring their HBA1c, with a level of 
below 8.5% indicating good control. Diabetes is associated 
with potentially severe comorbidities, such as renal disease, 
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   302 25/10/2017   08:09Selection criteria 303
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
autonomic neuropathy and cardiovascular disease, and so 
these patients must be assessed carefully preoperatively and 
managed by an experienced team. It is important to have pro-
tocols for the care of diabetic patients that have been agreed 
with the local diabetic team and to involve them in the care 
of more complex patients. Success depends on ensuring these 
patients return to normal eating and drinking and managing 
their own diabetes as quickly as possible in the postoperative 
period.
Traditional care, with placing the patient first on the list 
and providing them with instructions on management of their 
medication preoperatively, works well. Those on morning 
lists can simply miss their morning dose of oral hypoglycae -
mic medication or insulin, though they must be instructed to 
bring their medications with them and to manage any hypo -
glycaemia as they would normally. Those on afternoon lists 
and those patients who are on more complex therapy, such as 
continuous subcutaneous infusions, can still be managed with 
input from the anaesthetic or diabetic team.
Epilepsy
A diagnosis of epilepsy does not contraindicate day surgery. 
Patients who have well-controlled epilepsy should be man -
aged as normal patients, though it is important to ensure that 
their regular medication is not omitted in the preoperative 
period. Patients who are on medication but remain poorly 
controlled need careful review and discussion with their med-
ical and anaesthetic teams. However, if they have suitable 
home support and the proposed surgery does not put them at 
risk, then they too are suitable for day surgery.
Obesity 
The body mass index (BMI) is calculated as weight in kilo -
grams divided by the square of height in metres (kg/m 2) and 
obesity is defined as a BMI >30 (Figure 21.2). Traditional 
guidelines are conservative about obesity due to fears of 
intra- and postoperative complications. Although there is an 
increased incidence of non-serious respiratory complications 
intraoperatively and in the immediate postoperative recovery 
Weight in kilograms
Weight in kilograms
Height in metres
Height in metres
40
11
11
11
12
12
12
12
13
13
13
14
14
14
15
15
15
16
16
16
17
17
18
18
1.92
1.90
1.88
1.86
1.84
1.82
1.80
1.78
1.76
1.74
1.72
1.70
1.68
1.66
1.64
1.62
1.60
1.58
1.56
1.54
1.52
1.50
1.48
1.92
1.90
1.88
1.86
1.84
1.82
1.80
1.78
1.76
1.74
1.72
1.70
1.68
1.66
1.64
1.62
1.60
1.58
1.56
1.54
1.52
1.50
1.48
45
12
12
13
13
13
14
14
14
15
15
15
16
16
16
17
17
18
18
18
19
19
20
21
21
25
32
37
41
50
14
14
14
14
15
15
15
16
16
17
17
17
18
18
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
55
15
15
16
16
16
17
17
17
18
18
19
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
23
23
24
24
25
60
16
17
17
17
18
18
19
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
25
25
26
27
27
65
18
18
18
19
19
20
20
21
21
21
22
22
23
24
24
25
25
26
27
27
28
29
30
70
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
27
27
28
29
30
30
31
32
75
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
27
27
28
29
29
30
31
32
32
33
34
80
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
27
28
28
29
30
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
85
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
27
27
28
29
29
30
31
32
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
90
24
25
25
26
27
27
28
28
29
30
30
31
32
33
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
95
26
26
27
27
28
29
29
30
31
31
32
33
34
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
100
27
28
28
29
30
30
31
32
32
33
34
35
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
46
105
28
29
30
30
31
32
32
33
34
35
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
47
48
110
30
30
31
32
32
33
34
35
36
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
48
49
50
115
31
32
33
33
34
35
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
53
120
33
33
34
35
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
51
52
53
55
125
34
35
35
36
37
38
39
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
48
49
50
51
53
54
56
57
130
35
36
37
38
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
52
53
55
56
58
59
135
37
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
53
54
55
57
58
60
62
140
40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140
38
39
40
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
50
51
52
53
55
56
58
59
61
62
64
BMI 20–25
BMI 25–30
BMI 30–35
BMI 35–40
BMI >40
Figure 21.2 Body mass index calculator.
Adolphe Quetelet, 1796–1874 , Belgian mathematician, astronomer and statistician, the pioneer in establishing the criteria of obesity that became known as the 
Quetelet Index. In 1972 Ancel Keys (1904–2004), an American scientist from the University of Minnesota and an expert on human nutrition, public health and 
epidemiology, named it the body mass index.
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   303 25/10/2017   08:09CHAPTER 21   Day case surgery
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE304
period, the course of these patients is otherwise uneventful. 
They should however , be managed by experienced medical 
and nursing staff. Hypertension, congestive cardiac failure and 
sleep apnoea are all more common in patients with morbid 
obesity, but in selected and optimised patients, a BMI up to 40 
for surface procedures and 38 for laparoscopic procedures are 
acceptable and achievable in advanced units. Patients estab-
lished on nasal positive airway pressure for obstructive sleep 
apnoea can be managed successfully. 
Anticoagulants
Patients are generally on oral anticoagulants due to atrial 
fibrillation, previous thromboembolism or because they have 
a metal heart valve. It is therefore important to review these 
patients carefully before deciding to discontinue their antico-
agulant for their operation. When it is felt that surgery will 
require its discontinuation, this should be discussed with their 
cardiologist and the risks involved explained to the patient. 
Social criteria
Safe and comfortable discharge home requires the patient to 
be accompanied by a responsible and physically able adult. 
A journey time to home of 1 hour or less is advocated, but 
the comfort of the journey rather than the time involved is 
more relevant. Home circumstances require appropriate toi -
let facilities and the means of contacting the hospital should 
complications occur. 
Surgical criteria 
Patients undergoing procedures up to 2 hours in duration 
can safely undergo day surgery with modern anaesthetic 
techniques. The degree of surgical trauma is an important 
determinant of success, with entry to abdominal and thoracic 
cavities confined to minimal access techniques. Whatever the 
procedure, the main requirement is that there is suitable con-
trol of pain and the ability to drink and eat in a reasonable 
timescale. With day surgery now applicable to more major 
and prolonged procedures, patients should undergo a venous 
thromboembolism risk assessment and have prophylaxis 
provided if required. 
PREOPERATIVE ASSESSMENT
The evaluation and optimisation of a patient’s fitness for sur-
gery is known as preoperative assessment (see Chapter 17 ) 
and is best performed by a specialist nursing team with support 
from an anaesthetist with an interest in day surgery. All elec-
tive surgical patients should be initially regarded as suitable 
for day surgery until proved otherwise. The assessment should 
be performed early in the pathway to allow time to optimise 
health problems before surgery The consultation consists of 
a basic health screen to include the measurement of BMI, 
blood pressure and an assessment of past medical history with 
current medication recorded. Appropriate investigations are 
performed to ensure the patient is fit for surgery. The patient 
and/or their carer should be given verbal and written informa-
tion regarding admission, operation and discharge.
PERIOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT 
Scheduling 
With dedicated day surgery lists, major procedures should be 
scheduled early on morning lists to allow maximum recovery 
time. When the list is in the afternoon, the allocation of local 
or regional anaesthetic cases later in the day helps reduce 
unplanned overnight admissions. When mixed lists of day 
and inpatient cases are planned, then day cases are scheduled 
first. The mixing of day and complex inpatient cases is not 
advisable. The complex case may be inappropriately delayed 
if the day case is scheduled first and, conversely, if the day 
case patient is scheduled later, there is a risk of cancellation 
or unplanned overnight admission for the day case.
Anaesthesia and analgesia 
Successful day surgery anaesthesia requires a multimodal 
approach to analgesia, while ensuring patients are given 
optimal dosages of anaesthetic agent (see Chapter 18). The 
agents used matter less than the skill of the person providing 
anaesthesia.
Multimodal analgesia starts in the preoperative period and 
unless contraindicated, patients should receive full oral doses 
of paracetamol and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, 
such as ibuprofen. Intraoperative anaesthesia can be main-
tained by any of the traditional inhalational agents. Total 
intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) techniques using propofol 
are also popular and offer the advantage of reduced postop -
erative nausea and vomiting (PONV). The use of intraopera-
tive analgesia will depend on the procedure being performed. 
When available, the anaesthetist should use short-acting 
opioids (fentanyl, alfentanil). Careful use of these agents  
can minimise the incidence of PONV . Where the choice 
is limited to morphine, this should be used in small doses 
(<0.1 mg/kg) to minimise sedation and PONV . Wherever 
possible, a long-acting local anaesthetic agent such as bupiva-
caine should be injected into wounds by the surgeon.
Pain levels should be routinely assessed in the postopera -
tive recovery area. Further doses of paracetamol, fentanyl or 
low doses of morphine can be used to ensure that patients are 
comfortable prior to return to the ward.
Postoperative complications
The range of postoperative complications is no different 
from inpatient surgery. However, the fact that the patient is 
discharged home within a few hours of surgery requires proac-
tive monitoring in the immediate postoperative period. 
Summary box 21.3
Preoperative assessment 
●● On all day surgery patients
●● Early in the patient pathway
●● By a specialist nursing team with anaesthetic support
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   304 25/10/2017   08:09Elective day sur gery 305
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
Summary box 21.4
Optimal analgesia and anaesthesia 
●● Multimodal analgesia with paracetamol and NSAIDs (if not 
contraindicated) should be given preoperatively
●● Use long-acting local anaesthetic infiltration of the surgical 
wound
●● Careful dosing of inhalational or intravenous agents should be 
used to maintain anaesthesia
●● Avoid long-acting opiates such as morphine, to reduce the 
incidence of sedation and PONV
Summary box 21.5 
Surgical haemorrhage
●● Reactionary: occurs 4–6 hours after surgery and is caused 
by ligature slippage, clot displacement or cessation of 
vasospasm after mobilisation or coughing
●● Secondary: occurs more than 24 hours after surgery and is 
due to infection eroding a vessel
Reactionary haemorrhage is uncommon but requires care-
ful consideration following tonsillectomy and laparoscopic 
procedures. Reactionary haemorrhage following tonsillec -
tomy occurs within the first 6 hours and these patients should 
be monitored for this period. The danger in laparoscopic sur-
gery is covert haemorrhage, especially in young fit patients 
who can lose over 15% of their blood volume before showing 
any cardiovascular signs of hypovolaemia (tachycardia and 
hypotension). These patients require a high index of suspi -
cion as the first signs can often be as subtle as slow recov -
ery and mobilisation or uncontrolled abdominal pain. When 
problems do occur, there should be clear escalation policies to 
ensure the patient is reviewed by the surgical team as soon as 
possible. Nausea and vomiting is not uncommon and should 
be managed actively to maximise successful discharge (Figure 
21.3). 
ELECTIVE DAY SURGERY
For some surgical specialties, over 90% of their elective work-
load can be achieved in day surgery. As a result, teaching and 
training now routinely occurs on day surgery lists but requires 
structure and close supervision. As the spectrum of proce-
dures has increased and become more challenging, many sur-
geons have increased their involvement in day surgery. This is 
important because safe and efficient day surgery demands the 
competence and skill of an experienced surgeon. Some sur -
geons have concerns regarding patient safety after discharge. 
The risk of postoperative haemorrhage occurring once the 
patient has returned home is often stated as a major reason to 
keep the patient in hospital overnight, especially where the 
abdominal or thoracic cavities have been entered. Reaction -
ary haemorrhage commonly occurs in the first 4–6 hours after 
surgery, but the patient is unlikely to have been discharged 
home within this time period. It may be caused by slippage of 
a ligature or displacement of blood clot, precipitated by a rise 
in blood pressure, coughing or increased mobility. Postopera-
tive monitoring of vital signs should alert the recovery team 
to any underlying bleed. Secondary haemorrhage is defined 
as occurring at least 24 hours after surgery but usually pres -
ents several days later, as it is due to postoperative infection. 
Thus, even if the patient had stayed overnight, these post -
operative bleeds are still likely to occur once the patient has 
returned home.
Patient with PONV
Give intravenous /f_luids to hydrate the patient 
(10–15 mL/kg over 1 hour) and intravenous antiemetic, 
e.g. cyclizine, prochlorperazine
Review after 1 hour
If still a problem then give a second antiemetic of 
different type, e.g. ondansetron, dexamethasone
Patient is hydrated and can be reassured that 
no further active management is possible 
Offer choice if admission or to be discharged home
Figure 21.3  Active management of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting (PONV).
Good surgical technique requires minimal tissue traction 
or tension and goo d haemostasis. In day surgery these attri -
butes are even more important. The number and variety of 
surgical procedures performed on a day case basis is increasing 
year on year. Volume procedures in general surgery where the 
British Association of Day Surgery considers at least 40% of 
procedures can be performed on a day case basis, are shown 
in Table 21.2.
TABLE 21.2 Volume procedures where 40% or more 
should be performed on a day case basis.
Abdominal Excisional/treatment of anal lesions, 
haemorrhoidectomy, primary and recurrent 
inguinal/femoral herniae, laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy, laparoscopic fundoplication, 
pilonidal sinus surgery
Breast Excision/biopsy breast lesion, sentinel node 
excision
Genitourinary Laser prostatectomy, orchidectomy, 
circumcision, excision of hydrocoele/varicocoele/
epididymis
Orthopaedic Dupuytren’s fasciectomy, carpal tunnel release, 
therapeutic arthroscopy of knee or shoulder, 
bunion operations, removal of metalwork
Vascular Varicose vein procedures, thoracoscopic 
sympathectomy
British Association of Day Surgery 2012.
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   305 25/10/2017   08:09CHAPTER 21   Day case surgery
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE306
EMERGENCY DAY SURGERY
Many emergency surgical procedures are minor and non-
life threatening, and traditionally have been considered low 
priority for surgical intervention. The prioritisation of more 
urgent cases to restricted emergency theatre slots may result 
in extensive delays for minor cases, with unnecessary bed stays 
and preoperative starvation. Many of these cases, such as inci-
sion and drainage of abscesses, can be safely discharged home 
after their initial evaluation in the emergency department. 
They are provided with adequate analgesia and scheduled to 
return to the hospital at an appointed time the following day, 
suitably starved for their operation. This allows same-day dis-
charge for minor emergency procedures.
If performed early in the day, the surgery rather than the 
pathway, may be defined as ‘day case’. Some patients may, 
by chance, achieve a true day case pathway with admission, 
operation and discharge in the same day, provided they are 
admitted early in the day, there is no diagnostic delay and a 
theatre slot is available. Others may only achieve day case 
surgery, but not a day case pathway, if there has been diagnos-
tic or clinical delay on admission (Figure 21.4). Common 
procedures suitable for the emergency day surgery pathways 
are shown in Table 21.3.
The success of an emergency day surgery pathway is depen-
dent on the identification of unallocated theatre slots. These 
may be planned where there is reasonable predictability of 
emergency cases or may arise on elective lists, either day case 
or inpatient, due to patient cancellations. Emergency facili -
ties may also be underutilised when there are delays in getting 
the more seriously ill patient to surgery. There is therefore an 
opportunity, providing staff are available, to utilise the empty 
theatre for a minor case before bringing the optimised sick 
patient to operation. This allows the ambulatory patient to be 
discharged on the day of surgery, provided discharge protocols 
are in place. This balance between clinical and managerial 
priority can be difficult to achieve without surgical experi -
ence, but forethought can permit a positive outcome for the 
quality of emergency patient care and the managerial require-
ment to shorten duration of stay.
When designing an emergency day surgery pathway, tradi-
tional day surgery selection criteria are ignored, with clinical 
judgement used to determine whether patients are appropri -
ate for day surgery. The only absolute contraindications are 
systemic sepsis, unstable diabetes, major comorbidities and if 
parenteral, rather than oral, analgesia is required.
DISCHARGE
The assessment of when a patient is fit for discharge is best 
performed by trained day surgery nurses using strict discharge 
criteria (Table 21.4). While postoperative review by the sur -
gical team is encouraged, the discharge should not be delayed 
by failure of their timely attendance. A suitable supply of 
analgesics for the management of pain should be provided. 
Paracetamol, NSAIDs and codeine form the basis of the drugs 
available in many countries. 
Summary box 21.6
Successful day surgery requirements
●● Minimal access techniques
●● Good haemostasis
●● Avoidance of unnecessary tissue handling or tension
Home and planned 
readmission
Clinical or 
diagnostic delay
Emergency 
admission Operation
Same day
Same day
A A
B B
C C
Discharge
Figure 21.4 Emergency day sur gery pathways. A, Planned pr eoperative discharge home with imminent return for day surgery. B, ‘True’ 
emergency day surgery with the entire pathway of admission, surgery and discharge on the same day. C, Preoperative delay, but surgery and 
discharge on a day case basis.
TABLE 21.3 Common procedures suitable for the 
emergency day surgery pathway.
Arthroscopy
Biopsy (temporal, lymph node)
Evacuation retained products of conception
Irreducible or strangulated hernia (inguinal, femoral, paraumbilical)
Incision and drainage of abscess (axillary, groin, neck, perianal, 
pilonidal)
K-wiring (finger or wrist)
Laparoscopic appendicectomy
Laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy
Reduction and internal fixation
Tendon repair
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   306 25/10/2017   08:09Further reading 307
PART 3 | PERIOPERATIVE CARE
FURTHER READING
McWhinnie D, Jackson I, Smith I, Skues M. Patient safety in the ambula-
tory pathway. British Association of Day Surgery Handbook Series. 
London: BADS, 2013.
McWhinnie D, Skues M, Thompson D, Richards S, Connolly V . Ambu-
latory emergency care. British Association of Day Surgery Handbook 
Series. London: BADS, 2016.
Smith I, McWhinnie D, Jackson I. Day case surgery. Oxford Handbook 
Series. Oxford: Oxford Medical Publications, 2012.
TABLE 21.4 Discharge criteria.
Vital signs stable for at least 1 hour
Correct orientation as to time, place and person
Adequate pain control with supply of oral analgesia
Understands how to use oral analgesia supplied 
Ability to dress and walk where appropriate
Minimal nausea, vomiting or dizziness
Has taken oral fluids
Minimal bleeding or wound drainage
Has passed urine (if appropriate)
Has a responsible adult to take them home
Written and verbal instructions given about postoperative care
Knows when to come back for follow-up (if appropriate)
Emergency contact number supplied
03_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   307 25/10/2017   08:0903_21-B&L27_Pt3_Ch21.indd   308 25/10/2017   08:09
PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
22 Introduction to trauma  ........................................................................... 310
23 Early assessment and management of severe trauma ............... 322
24 Traumatic brain injury .............................................................................. 328
25 Neck and spine .......................................................................................... 338
26 Maxillofacial trauma ................................................................................. 355
27 Torso trauma  .............................................................................................. 364
28 Extremity trauma ........................................................................................ 381
29 Disaster surgery ......................................................................................... 409
30 Conflict surgery .......................................................................................... 424
Trauma
4
04_22A-B&L27_Pt4.indd   309 25/10/2017   08:11Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • Become familiar with the timeline concept in trauma 
management
 • Understand how to assess a trauma problem
 • Learn how to respond to a trauma problem
 • Understand how to select early total care and damage 
control surgical strategies
Introduction to trauma
22 
DEFINITION OF TRAUMA
Trauma originates from the Greek word meaning ‘wound’. It 
implies that a physical force exerted on a person has led to 
a physical injury. External energy forms and forces that can 
lead to injury include chemical, thermal, ionising radiation 
and, most frequently, those of mechanical origin. The degree 
and severity of trauma sustained can vary substantially and 
depend upon the magnitude of force exerted. 
Major trauma denotes injuries to more than one body 
region and organ system. In the next group of chapters, 
trauma will be examined from a variety of viewpoints, inter -
connected to different specialties. In this section we will 
examine the facets that bind the whole topic together.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE 
PROBLEM
Trauma remains the most common cause of death and disabil-
ity in children and young adults in the resource-rich countries. 
Globally, approximately 10 000 people die daily as a result of 
an injury. Road traffic accidents (RTA), falls and intentional 
violence have been identified as the major vectors of trau -
matic injury. It is notable that the major burden of injury is 
increasingly occurring in middle- and low-income countries 
as they industrialise and adopt motorised transportation. 
In terms of the annual incidence and trends over time 
there is variation from country to country. Information is usu-
ally obtained from national statistics organisations that use 
the International Classification of Disease, a system that can 
be limited in providing accurate descriptions of injury sever -
ity. However, the Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS) dictionary 
consists of a greater level of detail (including more than 2000 
injury codes) and assigns to every injury a severity score 
between 1 (mild) and 6 (maximum). This can be summated 
into the so called Injury Severity Score (ISS), providing an 
image of the anatomical severity of injury suffered by the indi-
vidual patient. Major trauma is defined as an ISS greater than 
15, which can be written as >15. The majority of hospital 
admissions with injury have low ISS values, ranging between 
the values 4 and 8, and are secondary to single isolated limb 
fractures and isolated mild head injury. Overall, major trauma 
affects approximately 15% of all injured patients. 
The total number of casualties from RTA alone reported 
to the police in Great Britain during 2015 was 186 189, which 
was around 4% lower when compared with 2014. Of these, 
21 657 people were seriously injured, among whom 1730 lost 
their lives, representing a 3% decrease compared with 2014. 
Across Europe, according to the data presented by the Euro-
pean Transport Safety Council’s Performance Index (PIN) 
report, it appears that fatalities rose in the majority of coun-
tries. Of the 32 countries covered, 21 had an increase in the 
number of fatalities in 2015, ten had a decrease, and one 
remained unchanged. Since countries do not use the same 
definition of serious injury, international comparisons are 
based on road deaths per million inhabitants (Figure 22.1). 
The United Kingdom as a whole had 27.7 deaths per million 
inhabitants in 2015. The only European countries with a bet-
ter rate than this in 2015 were Sweden with 26.6, Malta with 
25.6 and Norway with 22.6. The UK and Sweden have been 
consistently at the head of this table for a number of years.
A large proportion of the severely injured survivors expe -
rience long-term or permanent disability as a result of their 
injuries. Almost 30% of them are no longer able to return to 
their previous occupation and a great deal of time is lost from 
work. These individuals end up having profound changes in 
their lifestyle, with long-term pain and suffering. It should be 
emphasised that an injury not only affects the injured person 
but also affects everyone who is involved in the injured per -
son’s life. The impact of the modern epidemic of road traffic 
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   310 25/10/2017   08:13The management of trauma 311
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
accidents on the universal epidemic of violent injury can -
not be overstated. The annual direct medical cost of injuries 
treated in hospitals and additional care facilities is estimated 
to be £3.7 billion. Moreover, additional costs, due to loss 
of earnings, loss of productivity and quality of life damage, 
increase the total sum significantly.
While young patients are involved in road traffic acci-
dents characterised by high energy transfer, older patients 
may sustain injuries from falls (low energy transfer). The most 
common group to be admitted to hospital in the UK are older 
patients who have sustained a ‘fragility’ fracture. Approxi -
mately 65 000 to 70 000 patients are admitted annually with 
proximal femoral fractures, among whom 30% over the age 
of 65 will die within a year of the incident. Most of the rest 
will end up having diminished independence and functional 
capacity. It is therefore no surprise that this particular cohort 
of patients, which will increase in the coming years owing 
to the anticipated increase in life expectancy, is thought to 
represent a huge burden on healthcare services and society 
in general.
In general terms, the vast majority of injuries sustained are 
not limb threatening or life threatening. They are straight-
forward and most patients are expected to recover fully and 
return to their preinjury status. Nonetheless, the challenge 
remains to appreciate and diagnose the injuries at an early 
stage, with an awareness of important features that may influ-
ence the outcome. 
For instance, we must be vigilant not to miss non- 
accidental injury (NAI) in children (see Chapter 39) and 
injuries in other age groups related to an underlying disease 
process rather than the injury itself, for example pathological 
fractures. Of note, it has been shown that in 66% of cases 
when children die as a result of abuse, there has been some pre-
vious interaction with a health professional or social services 
but the seriousness of the situation was not fully appreciated. 
THE MANAGEMENT OF TRAUMA
From the moment that injury is sustained, every aspect of 
decision making and management is essential in terms of the 
survival of the victim. Our initial assessment and concepts of 
management have specific objectives and are usually based 
on knowledge acquired over a long period of time in prac -
tice. A better understanding of the physiological processes 
underpinning the host responses to an acute threat to our 
homeostatic mechanisms, together with protocols formulated 
to allow clinicians to use standardised measures and to speak 
a common language, have revolutionised the way we manage 
patients. All of the above help to reduce delays, particularly 
when under pressure to make a decision. However, it remains 
crucial to understand the reasoning as to why we are carrying 
them out. 
In trauma, as in other acute conditions, the patient is par-
ticularly reliant upon the clinician. A patient with a chronic 
condition is familiar with the nature of their problem and 
the way in which it is progressing. The surgeon may offer a 
remedy and the patient may consider the potential benefits 
and choose appropriately whether to accept it. The injured 
patient does not know what will happen without treatment 
and so relies on their surgeon to inform them of both the nat-
ural history and the potential benefits of any intervention. 
The implication is that as surgeons we have a duty to be aware 
of both. 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
NO*
MT
SE
GB
UK
CH
DK
IE*
ES*
NL
IL
DE*
FI
SK
EE
FR
AT*
IT*
SI
PT*
LU
BE*
CY
RS*
CZ
EL*
PL
LT*
HR
LV
RO
BG
Road deaths per million inhabitants
*Countries with provisional fatality /f_igures.
Countries marked with a red outline have fewer than 150 deaths per 
year and therefore the fatality rate can vary signi/f_icantly between years.
Figure 22.1 Number of road deaths per million inhabitants.
Summary box 22.1
Trauma: the magnitude of the problem
●● The vast majority of injuries are not life or limb threatening
●● Severe trauma continues to be a major cause of death in 
young patients
●● Older patients with fragility fractures pose an additional 
burden to the healthcare system
●● Look for important features of injuries that could influence the 
outcome
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   311 25/10/2017   08:13CHAPTER 22   Introduction t o trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA312
The significance of time in the 
outcome
Injury can occur in the blink of an eye. In the seconds prior 
to the application of the external injury force or vector, the 
patient is at their normal baseline, which can be called time 
zero. All subsequent events, including the acute physiological 
response to injury, the body’s internal mechanisms to main -
tain homeostasis (to compensate for the sequelae of trauma), 
the healing processes and the actions instigated by health 
professionals, are associated with a ‘timeline’. Being familiar 
with the ‘timeline principle’, one should be aware that there 
is a critical time window in which we can intervene for a 
positive treatment outcome, before the loss of compensatory 
mechanisms. Moreover, the timeline allows evaluation of any 
progress made from time zero to other important events and 
to reflect on whether a specific course of action could have 
been performed better. 
Overall, interventions can be distinguished as emergency 
(life saving), acute (restoring haemodynamic stability) and 
delayed or semielective, focusing on the treatment of post -
fracture fixation complications (non-union, infection and 
malunion from the orthopaedic trauma point of view).
It is essential to appreciate that the physiological crisis ini-
tiated in the immediate aftermath of trauma will continue to 
evolve and the risk of mortality is substantial unless the correct 
and timely interventions are performed. For instance, condi -
tions such as airway obstruction, tension haemothorax and 
haemopericardium can progress very rapidly if left untreated 
and should be given priority in terms of our initial medical 
response to the injured patient. Thus, the seriousness and the 
immediate impact of a specific clinical condition should be 
prioritised and treated in a systematic approach (what kills 
first should be managed first). This concept of the hierarchy of 
medical responses can only be applied and become effective 
when we are in a position to diagnose early the underlying 
clinical conditions (Figure 22.2). 
The ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) system 
delineates an order of priorities set by ABCD; that is, airway, 
breathing, circulation and disability (neurology). This hier -
archy of priorities is instituted upon the ‘time dependence’ 
principle. The clinician should bear in mind that a successful 
management plan is dependent on, first, the time needed to 
evaluate and diagnose the nature of the problem and, second, 
the time taken to respond effectively to the condition discov-
ered (Figure 22.3). 
Evaluating and diagnosing a condition can be challeng -
ing, as the initial clinical signs may be non-specific. The 
clinical condition will continue to evolve as the time pro -
gresses, but by the time the diagnosis has been made it may be 
too late to prevent mortality. Taking into consideration the 
mechanism of the accident and promptly requesting special 
investigations, for example computed tomography (CT), the 
underlying diagnosis can be made punctually, thus allowing 
intervention in a timely fashion. 
A patient presenting following a road traffic accident with 
a scalp laceration and a reduced Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 
score of 13/15 represents an example of such a scenario, where 
a drop in the GCS could be related to a head injury or to 
the presence of shock and hypoxia. An injury to the brain 
can deteriorate with the development of an expanding hae -
matoma, which can be diagnosed with a head CT prior to the 
presentation of clinical signs. Surgical decompression can be 
organised speedily, reducing the risk of morbidity and mor -
tality. In this situation, if the time taken to make the diagno-
sis was prolonged and the clinical signs had presented prior 
to treatment intervention, it may be too late to prevent the 
death of the patient (Figure 22.4). This clinical case scenario 
demonstrates the principle that we need to introduce a treat-
ment response even before we have made the definitive diag-
nosis if we want to save the patient’s life. It is clear, therefore, 
that the ‘timeline concept’ is critical in the safe management 
of trauma patients. 
Reducing the diagnosis time and response time of our 
interventions is dependent not only on the clinical staff but 
also on the availability of resources. Recently, the 24/7 avail-
ability of the trauma team and the designation of regional 
hospitals to operate as Level I Trauma Centres, with the 
availability of all disciplines and appropriate equipment on 
site, has provided the necessary foundation for the develop -
ment of a unified trauma care system in England. Indeed, the 
first reports published on its effectiveness in saving lives have 
been very positive. 
The ‘timeline concept’ that has been discussed in the 
management of patients with multiple trauma can be applied 
Ischaemic limb
Extradural haematoma
Intra-abdominal bleeding
Airway obstruction
0 Time
Overall timeline for generic injury
Assessment time
Response time
Death
0 Time
Figure 22.3  Diagrammatic representation of the r elationship bet­
ween assessment and response times. In this example, ther e is time 
to assess and respond effectively before death.
Figure 22.2 Estimated time from incident to death or irretrievable 
damage for various conditions.
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   312 25/10/2017   08:13Assessment and response 313
PART 4 | TRAUMA
to patients with isolated injuries. The key issue, irrespective 
of the type of patient managed, with or without multiple inju-
ries, is to reduce unnecessary delays in making the diagnosis 
and initiating appropriate treatment. Such a global approach 
would save lives, minimise morbidity and would make the 
healthcare system more efficient in terms of resource utilisa -
tion, as well as cost-effectiveness. 
Finally, it should not be forgotten that all clinical con -
ditions are characterised by a dynamic process. This implies 
that our observations and analysis of the situation can change 
rapidly and to an extent that interventions would have to 
be modified accordingly. Ongoing evaluation of the patient 
is therefore essential in order to identify and respond to the 
changes noted in a timely fashion (as previously discussed). 
The initial primary survey, applied according to the ATLS 
protocol in trauma patients, should be followed by secondary 
and tertiary clinical assessment, even after the acute phase of 
treatment has been completed successfully. Ongoing moni -
toring of vital organ activity, ordering of the necessary bio -
chemical and radiological investigations and recording of 
all the findings in a single place can allow easier evaluation 
and identification of trends over time to facilitate prompt 
intervention. Such a strategy may reduce the risk of having 
un diag nosed injuries and delays in their treatment. A number 
of studies have been published reporting on missed injuries 
and making some recommendations on how to avoid this.
The timeline following an injury is continuous, and the 
accumulated documentation may become voluminous, com-
plex and confusing. It is helpful periodically to make the 
effort to stand back and summarise the situation. The UK 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), 
in their recent Trauma Guidelines, recognise this and advise 
that a plain language summary of the situation directed at the 
patient’s family doctor, but intelligible and available to the 
patient or carers, should be available within 24 hours. 
ASSESSMENT AND RESPONSE
The assessment of trauma
The initial assessment of the trauma patient, besides the 
clinical examination, should include analysis of the interac-
tions between the patient, the mechanism of injury and the 
extent of the injury sustained. Being able to synthesise the 
inter-relationships among these parameters is essential to 
addressing the pressures of the ‘timeline concept’ previously 
discussed. The associations among these three factors are 
usually very clear, but can be hidden. 
For instance, a 50-year-old male restrained passenger in a 
car involved in a head-on collision with another vehicle may 
sustain rib fractures, a sternal fracture, thoracic spine fracture 
and possibly cardiac contusion. Abdominal injuries could also 
be suspected but, overall, the clinician, knowing the mecha-
nism, can proceed quickly in making the diagnosis and initi-
ating treatment. However, in cases where no association can 
be synthesised (between the mechanism of the accident, the 
patient’s condition and the clinical signs observed) the rea -
sons behind this ‘picture’ should be sought, for example the 
reported mechanism may have been underestimated. We will 
now analyse how the clinician can make best use of the infor-
mation available.
Summary box 22.2
The importance of time
●● The ‘timeline concept’ is an essential component of trauma 
management
●● Assessment should be completed within a set time
●● The time to respond is limited
●● Both assessment and response should take place in the time 
window prior to irreversible damage or death
Fracture
on
imaging
Haematoma
on imaging
Clinically
obvious
Components of response time
Subtle
clinical
signs
Evolving assessment for extradural haematoma
Refer Transfer Anaesthetise Decompress
Death
Time0
Overall timeline for extradural haematoma
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 22.4  Diagrammatic representation of the r elationship 
between assessment and response times for extradural haematoma: 
(a) the stages of assessment, (b) the components of the response 
and (c) the overall time from incident to death. It can be seen that 
relying on obvious clinical signs gives insufficient time to respond 
effectively.
Summary box 22.3
The assessment of trauma
●● Include the information formula: mechanism + patient = injury 
●● Look for both obvious and less obvious features 
●● Identify more reasons when the above formula does not make 
sense
Mechanisms
Mechanisms may be blunt, penetrating or even of a com -
bined nature (Table 22.1). Blunt trauma can be categorised 
as direct or indirect, and continues to be the most common 
mechanism. In a direct mechanism, the damage is localised to 
the site of injury. In contrast, in an indirect mechanism the 
damage occurs at a distant site after transmission of the force 
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   313 25/10/2017   08:13CHAPTER 22   Introduction t o trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA314
exerted. For example, a direct kick to the medial aspect of 
the mid-shaft of the tibia in a footballer by an opponent will 
induce an isolated tibial fracture. Such an injury represents a 
direct mechanism with bruising and ecchymosis at the area of 
the force exertion. On the other hand, a fall from a height of 
1 metre with a twisting moment as the foot hits the ground 
can lead to a spiral fracture of the distal tibia. In this situation, 
the vector of the force was transmitted through the bo dy’s 
tissues to a location some distance away from its original 
point of application. In this case, other injuries should also 
be looked for, such as a fibular fracture or even an ipsilateral 
tibial plateau fracture, around the knee joint area. Similarly, a 
motor vehicle crash associated with direct trauma of the knee 
joint of the driver on the dashboard of the car could induce 
a fracture dislocation of the acetabulum and hip joint (trans -
mission of force from the knee joint to the hip socket – an 
indirect blunt mechanism) (Figure 22.5). 
The ‘timeline concept’ previously discussed may or may 
not be urgent, depending on the location and type of injury 
sustained. For instance, a minimally displaced tibial fracture 
that a footballer has sustained can be treated satisfactorily for 
some time after the moment of injury but, in contrast, a frac-
ture of the acetabulum with a hip dislocation (as described 
above) represents an emergency owing to the potential devel-
opment of neurovascular complications (damage to sciatic 
nerve; avascular necrosis of the femoral head). Therefore, the 
clinician’s decision-making process should take into account 
both the peculiarities of the type of injury sustained and the 
anatomical location involved. 
Moreover, it should be appreciated that the conduction 
of energy in an indirect mechanism, which is transferred via 
the soft tissues or fluid, can be difficult both to understand 
and to diagnose (accurately and promptly). For example, the 
rise in pressure secondary to a lower abdominal force could 
be passed to the vascular tree (aorta), leading to unexpected 
haemorrhage and death. All in all, one can argue that the 
effects of direct mechanisms are easier to comprehend than 
those of indirect ones. 
Penetrating mechanisms can be divided into those 
caused by sharp objects and those induced by firearms (see 
Chapter 30). With regard to injuries caused by sharp objects, 
it is necessary to take into account the length of the sharp 
object, its surface area and the size of the entry point. The 
sharp object, for example a pair of scissors, will cause damage 
to the underlying tissues that it contacts (skin, subcutaneous 
fat, fascia, etc.). Local examination will confirm the extent of 
the injury and the need for wound exploration. Being famil -
iar with the relevant anatomy of the area involved allows 
assessment of the peripheral nerve function, and tendon and 
muscle integrity. Here again the ‘timeline concept’ of prompt 
assessment and response (treatment) can be crucial in cases 
where there is vascular injury, a compartment syndrome due 
to internal bleeding or even joint penetration that could lead 
to septic arthritis. Knowledge of the anatomical structures at 
risk is essential to making the right decision in a timely fash -
ion. This is particularly critical for penetrating wounds over 
the torso (see Chapter 27), because it is not always easy to 
establish the track that the sharp object has followed. In this 
context, it should not be forgotten that the abdominal struc-
tures extend higher than anticipated, and as high as the level 
of the fifth rib in expiration. 
TABLE 22.1 Examples of patterns of injury.
Mechanism Obvious features Covert injuries
Left­sided impact 
from road traffic 
accident
Lateral compression of 
the pelvis
Splenic rupture
Left­sided 
pneumothorax
Extradural haematoma
Flexion 
distraction (lap 
belt)
Chance fracture of the 
lumbar spine
Duodenal rupture
Dislocated knee Popliteal artery 
disruption
Head injury Cervical spine fracture
Electrocution Burn on hand and 
collapse
Posterior dislocation of 
the shoulder
Dashboard 
impact
Knee wound Posterior dislocation of 
the hip
Figure 22.5 The injury force in a car accident can be transmitted 
from the dashboard, to the knee and then to the hip, which is the site 
of injury.
Summary box 22.4
Sharp object injuries
●● Think about the length of the sharp object involved
●● Knowledge of the local anatomy is essential
●● Remember that abdominal structures at risk of injury extend 
high into the chest
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   314 25/10/2017   08:13Assessment and response 315
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Firearms induce penetrating injuries, which are more dif-
ficult to comprehend than incisional injuries caused by sharp 
objects. For instance, a high velocity projectile (bullet) causes 
extensive damage to the tissues as it travels, inducing lateral 
acceleration far from the point of impact, and producing 
either a permanent or a temporary cavity (see Chapter 30). 
The importance of the temporary cavity is that it lasts only 
for milliseconds and usually is not evident during the clinical 
examination. It is important to be aware that this temporary 
cavity usually extends far from the boundaries of the appar -
ent injury (Figure 22.6). Awareness of this phenomenon will 
ensure that the surgeon carries out sufficient exploration and 
wound excision.
Patient factors
All patients possess a unique profile and medical history and 
so will react and respond differently to a given traumatic inci-
dent. Children and adults of different ages will sustain differ -
ent injuries as a result of the same mechanism. For instance, 
a car hitting a pedestrian will induce different injuries in an 
adult, compared with a child (Figure 22.7). It is important to 
consider the other aspects of the patient’s history. Past medi-
cal history, medication and allergy risk will direct not only the 
clinical assessment but also the treatment. 
Obvious injuries
Some injuries are very obvious and can be identified before 
details of the mechanism or patient are known. One can take 
advantage of this, as the presence of an obvious injury can 
inform and lead to the identification of another which is less 
obvious. Obvious injuries are usually visible externally. It is 
therefore no surprise that at the end of the ABCD protocol 
there is also an E, referring to exposure and the need to look 
for other signs of injury. Bruising to the scrotum of a motorcy-
clist following a collision with a car suggests a pelvic fracture. 
Contusion over the greater trochanter of the proximal femur 
in an older patient experiencing difficulty with straight leg 
raise points to a neck of femur fracture. Finger-shaped bruises 
on a child’s arms or thighs suggest NAI. The presence of a 
seat belt mark on the lower abdomen of a patient involved 
in a car crash and who has substantial abdominal pain points 
to damage inside the abdomen. Thus, exposure of the trauma 
patient should be routine practice in order to avoid missing 
the ‘obvious’. 
Hidden factors
MECHANISMS
When analysis of the relationship of the formula ‘mechanism 
+ patient = injury’ does not seem to add up, then the hidden 
information may be contained in the mechanism. Occasion -
ally, it is observed that there has been a deliberate attempt 
to misinform. While the majority of alert and orientated 
patients tell the truth, others, in order to protect themselves 
or others, may fabricate a mechanism. This may mislead the 
clinician and lead them to look for the wrong pattern of inju-
ries. For instance, a young patient with a calcaneal fracture 
may report that this was the result of a fall into a hole in the 
road, when in fact it had occurred during a burglary, following 
a fall from a height of 10 metres. This can delay the accurate 
diagnosis of the specific injury and may prevent the diagnosis 
of other important injuries, such as a lumbar spine fracture. 
Although the patient should be given the chance to tell their 
Summary box 22.5 
Firearm injuries
●● High velocity bullets induce permanent and temporary 
cavitation
●● Temporary cavitation can contain foreign material
●● Low velocity bullets induce similar damage to knives
Figure 22.6 A pr ojectile passing thr ough a gelatin block: (a) low 
energy transfer; (b) high energy transfer; (c) the effect of high energy 
transfer on tissues (courtesy of Professor J Ryan). 
(a)
(b)
(c)
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   315 25/10/2017   08:13CHAPTER 22   Introduction t o trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA316
nisms are usually in place and can be followed by passing on 
the problem to the appropriate team and professionals (see 
Chapter 39). 
Another important issue is the fact that any obvious inju-
ries may provide important evidence regarding the mecha-
nism, which may be important to a criminal investigation. 
We must endeavour, without compromising treatment, not 
to affect such evidence by our medical actions and bear in 
mind that forensic evidence may be needed for a conviction 
at a later stage. Furthermore, the importance is made more 
apparent if we consider that the victim of an attack may sub-
sequently be a murder victim. 
story, it should not always be believed, particularly if there are 
inconsistencies.
A hidden mechanism can also arise when the patient is 
unable to give their history of events, for instance patients 
who are unconscious. The physically and mentally vulner -
able include older patients, perhaps with dementia, and very 
young children. The difficulty or inability to report the injury 
is compounded by the fact that it might relate to criminal 
activity (e.g. NAI). Parameters that should alert the clinician 
and raise suspicion of NAI include:
 ● external signs of injuries not consistent with the mecha -
nism reported;
 ● long bone fractures in a preambulatory child; 
 ● inconsistent or changing history;
 ● aggressive or unusual behaviour of carers at interview;
 ● posterior rib injuries.
It must be emphasised that the clinician, in addition to 
diagnosis and treatment, must also protect the patient from 
further harm. This is of paramount importance when dealing 
with vulnerable individuals (children and the elderly). If the 
early signs of abuse are ignored or not taken seriously, it may 
not be possible to prevent later episo des, where serious harm 
may occur. While NAI is a serious issue to address, mecha -
1 year
22.9 cm
(9 in)
22.9 cm
(9 in) 19.0 cm
(7.5 in)
17.8 cm
(7 in)
16.5 cm
(6.5 in)
15.2 cm
(6 in)
Adult
Adult
15 years
10 years
5 years
3 years
15 y 10 y 5 y 3 y 1 y
Summary box 22.6
Hidden mechanisms
●● The vast majority of conscious patients will tell the truth
●● Patients involved in criminal activity may not tell the truth
●● Fear of abuse may prevent vulnerable patients from telling the 
truth
●● Clinicians have the responsibility to take action when NAI is 
suspected
Figure 22.7 Body proportions at various ages and anatomical location of injuries when hit by a car. 
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   316 25/10/2017   08:13The response to trauma 317
PART 4 | TRAUMA
PATIENTS
In circumstances where the injury and mechanism are incon-
sistent, one should consider the possibility that the patient 
may have an unknown pre-existing condition. For example, 
an apparently healthy middle-aged woman who bends to lift 
a box and sustains a fracture at the thoracolumbar junction 
of her spine may have pathological weakness of the vertebral 
bone, such as advanced osteoporosis. Treatment should not be 
confined to the local injury, but should extend to appropriate 
investigation and treatment of the underlying fragility of the 
skeleton, thus reducing the risk of further fracture. Similarly, 
fractures may be secondary to an undiagnosed or poorly con -
trolled medical condition. For example, a patient presenting 
with a scalp laceration and a wrist fracture may have fallen 
as a result of a transient ischaemic attack (a hidden patient 
factor). In this situation, it is essential to include a medical 
secondary survey to identify the real cause of the injuries sus-
tained and prevent further trauma. 
INJURIES
When analysis of the formula ‘mechanism + patient = injury’ 
has failed to identify hidden injury, there are two other 
approaches:
1 the look everywhere approach;
2 the focused exclusion approach.
Look everywhere appr oach. This represents the sec -
ondary and tertiary elements of the ATLS system and 
involves a detailed secondary survey , from top to bottom 
and at different time points : soon after the initial treat -
ment phase when measures relating to saving the patient’s 
life have been completed, the day after injury , e.g. during 
a ward round, or several days after injury , e.g. when the 
patient first wakes up in the intensive care environment. 
The implementation of whole body CT (WBCT) (scanning 
the whole body) in all major trauma centres has allowed the 
clinical team to pick up injuries early. Such injuries would 
have been missed in the past when reliance was made on 
the initial radiographs of the chest, pelvis and cervical spine. 
The threshold for using more WBCT has been lowered sub -
stantially. There is no doubt that WBCT scan algorithms 
have been shown to accelerate diagnostic work-up, but their 
effect on survival is controversial. Moreover, concerns have 
been voiced about the overexposure of patients to radiation 
with the increasing and often uncritical use of  this type of 
scan. The effective radiation dose to all organs from a single 
full-body CT is 12 –16 millisieverts  (mSv). Survivors  of the 
atomic bomb whose radiation dose ranged 5 –100 mSv had 
a statistically significant increase in  the risk of solid cancers. 
Overall, the risks associated with one scan are relatively 
modest, approximately 1 in 1250, or 0.08%. However, it has 
been reported that widespread liberal CT use is responsible 
for 1.5–2.0% of all cancers in the USA. Of interest , WBCT 
equates to 76 chest x-rays or 6 months of background radia -
tion. It has been suggested that it  should be requested wisely 
and that developing a triaging protocol can minimise the 
critisim of its overuse.
Focused exclusion approach . This is based on the 
knowledge that some specific injuries are missed on a remark-
ably regular basis. Such injury patterns include metatarsal and 
metacarpal fractures, scaphoid fractures, perilunate disloca -
tions and posterior shoulder dislocations. When such injuries 
are suspected, a detailed focused history, clinical examination 
and appropriate investigations should be carried out to either 
confirm or exclude them. 
THE RESPONSE TO TRAUMA
Completion of the initial assessment according to the formula 
(patient + mechanism = injury) should provide the neces -
sary information to formulate and execute a ‘response’ (treat-
ment). During this stage of care, the response to injury will 
continue to evolve and decompensation may occur unexpect-
edly. Vigilance is required throughout management to iden-
tify the potential exhaustion of reserve mechanisms. 
The patient’s response to injury
From the time of the accident, a cascade of physiological 
responses will be upregulated to maintain survival. All such 
responses are part of homeostatic mechanisms that alter with 
the time elapsed following injury. The timing and nature 
of interventions should be altered accordingly. Important 
patient responses that require prompt attention, in order to 
avoid a subsequent negative impact on the patient’s haemo -
dynamic condition, include the body temperature, oxygen -
ation and organ perfusion. A decline in body temperature is 
a frequent finding after injury and may be due to exposure, 
blood loss and inactivity. Measures should be taken not only 
to prevent further reduction in temperature but also to restore 
it. Covering the patient with appropriate blankets during 
transportation, resuscitation and in the theatre environment 
will minimise the risk of hypothermia, coagulation distur -
bances and ongoing bleeding.  
Patient oxygenation can be optimised with the adminis-
tration of inspired oxygen or ventilation if needed. 
Blood loss can give rise to an altered level of conscious -
ness, low blood pressure, reduced perfusion of the extremities 
(skin discolouration) and tachycardia. By way of response, 
endogenous clotting factors are activated to stop the bleeding 
and to maintain adequate circulatory volume. A further con-
sideration is that traumatised lung parenchyma cannot toler -
ate surplus fluid. Therefore, the latest resuscitation guidelines 
advocate a reduction in crystalloid administration and the 
Summary box 22.7
Trauma assessment
●● Knowledge of timelines for important diagnoses is essential
●● Initial assessment should focus on what kills first
●● Screen high­risk patients before clinical signs become 
apparent, as it may be too late to intervene once signs 
develop
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   317 25/10/2017   08:13CHAPTER 22   Introduction t o trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA318
early transfusion of bloo d products. Furthermore, there is a 
need to quickly identify and stop the source of bleeding. 
Another important part of the response to injury is the 
activation of the immune–inflammatory system. Acute phase 
mediators are released systemically, stimulating cellular ele -
ments (polymorphonuclear leukocytes) to interact with the 
endothelium. Under certain circumstances, extravasation 
of leukocytes may take place, with possible autodestruction. 
Clinical decisions should aim to minimise the risk of an exag-
gerated immune–inflammatory reaction. Surgical procedures, 
which can act as a second hit, where injury is considered the 
first hit, should be carefully timed and selected. 
The medical response to injury
Initial management
Where resources are available, a patient found to have sus -
tained serious injuries at the scene of the accident will lead 
the paramedics to activate ‘the trauma team on call’, allowing 
personnel to await the patient’s arrival in the resuscitation 
room. The team leader, according to the ATLS protocol, 
will assign trained nurses and doctors to specific tasks. Pro -
tective clothing, such as gloves and lead aprons, is required 
to protect the personnel from fluids and radiation exposure. 
Following the ATLS protocol should be a routine process, 
involving experienced team members and ideally avoiding 
careless delays, which may compromise the response time. 
Potential problems can be predicted. The involvement of dif-
ferent disciplines in assessing and planning treatment of inju-
ries in different body areas may lead to issues around priority, 
which can lead to confusion and uncertainty: ‘Who should go 
first?’ ‘What investigation should be next?’ It is the role of the 
team leader to ensure that this is avoided and that decisions 
which may be critical for the patient’s wellbeing are executed 
smoothly. 
In situations where the system operates according to 
locally developed protocols, someone should have the respon-
sibility of overruling the protocol if this would be to the best 
interest of the patient, in order to keep the process rolling. 
Following common pathways to manage patients can save 
time and reduce errors. The management of hip fractures in 
older age groups has improved in the UK with the regulated 
and monitored involvement of surgeons, geriatricians and 
anaesthetists. However, early labelling can also be mislead-
ing and troublesome. For instance, an older female patient 
with multiple medical problems might, after falling down a 
step, sustain an ankle fracture and be given the label ‘ankle 
fracture’. Once the label is given the ‘pathway’ is set and she 
may be placed in a plaster of Paris back slab and be admitted 
for fixation under the care of someone who thinks primarily 
about mechanical matters. The so-called ‘accidental benign 
falls’ may be associated with more severe pathology and inju-
ries. Furthermore, a patient may fall as a result of a medical 
condition (e.g. a mini stroke) and, in addition to an ankle 
fracture, may sustain other injuries including fractures of the 
pubic ramus and ribs. The wrong label may disguise the seri -
ousness of the injuries sustained and the fact that the patient’s 
condition may rapidly deteriorate, putting their life at risk. 
The first person in the diagnostic chain has disproportion -
ate responsibility. Early labelling after inappropriate assess -
ment can be incorrect and direct the patient to the wrong 
care pathway. In general terms, all patients, and particularly 
vulnerable patients, should undergo physiological triage to 
reduce the risk of being wrongly assigned. 
Beyond the first hour
Following the initial assessment and management according 
to the ATLS protocol, and when the end points of resuscita -
tion have been accomplished, further interventions are nec-
essary in a patient with multiple injuries. The presence of an 
open book pelvic fracture, a lumbar spine fracture, a femoral 
fracture, a liver laceration and a tarsometatarsal dislocation 
are examples of outstanding injuries waiting treatment. The 
timing of the initiation of fixation, the type of fixation to use 
and the priority of various injuries have been points of discus-
sion for some years. 
The original work by Bone et al . in the 1980s, demon-
strating the benefits of early fracture fixation of all injuries, 
led to the acceptance and wide application of the so called 
‘early total care’ (ETC) philosophy. This practice became the 
gold standard of treatment for patients with multiple inju-
ries. However, in some specific patient groups, for example 
those with severe chest and/or head injuries or those in an 
extreme physiological state (with ongoing bleeding from 
different sources such as abdomen, pelvis and chest), it was 
observed that the ETC concept led to early complications 
and mortality. 
Knowledge acquired at the molecular level related to the 
immune–inflammatory response to injury and the concepts 
of the phenomena of the first hit (the impact exerted on the 
homeostatic mechanisms as a result of the original trauma 
sustained) and the second hit (the additional physiological 
stress induced by surgical procedures) led to the acceptance 
and implementation of the so call ‘damage control orthopae-
dics’ (DCO) philosophy, which is called damage control sur -
gery (DCS) in more generalised settings (see later chapters). 
The stages of DCO are:
 ● resuscitation;
 ● haemorrhage control;
 ● decompression;
 ● decontamination;
 ● fracture splintage.
In the DCO concept, initially any long bone fractures and 
the pelvis are temporarily stabilised with the use of external 
fixators. Definitive stabilisation of the fractures (conversion 
of the external fixators to intramedullary (IM) nailing for 
the femur and plating of the pelvis) would take place usually 
4 days later, when the physiological state of the patient has 
been stabilised. In contrast, a patient with similar injuries who 
has stable physiology throughout would be managed with IM 
nailing of the femoral fracture and plating of the pelvis within 
the first 24–36 hours: the ETC approach. The two strategies 
of fracture fixation, the ETC and DCS, are currently practised 
on the basis of some specific criteria. The vast majority of 
poly trauma patients are suitable for ETC (80–90%). Specific 
criteria are shown in Table 22.2. 
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   318 25/10/2017   08:13Local protocols and guidelines 319
PART 4 | TRAUMA
It is important for the clinician to appreciate that the 
physiology of the patient can change rapidly. Patients with 
a high injury severity score, the so called ‘patient at risk’ can 
decompensate quickly. Ongoing evaluation of the patient is 
therefore paramount to allow the clinician to choose the right 
strategy for the right patient. ETC and DCS should comple -
ment, rather than compete with, each other. The decision 
regarding ‘who should go first, what is to be fixed first and 
with what type of implant’ is, most of the time, straightfor -
ward. Nonetheless, the clinician should always be prepared 
for the unexpected and have a bail out solution ready to be 
implemented. 
Consequently, a plan should always be made available to 
the trauma team to inform them about the details of treat -
ment, particularly in the operating room environment. The 
plan can be recorded on a whiteboard with clear guidance 
on the alternative pathway to be implemented should the 
patient’s condition deteriorate. Ongoing monitoring of such 
parameters as core temperature, lactate, base excess, coagu -
lation, etc. will give knowledge of the patient’s condition at 
any time point during care. Appropriate decisions can then 
be taken to ensure that the safety of the patient has not been 
compromised. For instance, if the ETC concept has been 
applied and a polytrauma patient with a head injury and chest 
trauma is on the operating table, waiting to have a femoral 
fracture stabilised with IM nailing, and their condition dete-
riorates the ETC plan can be changed to DCO (an external 
fixator can be applied quickly to stabilise the femoral fracture 
temporarily). This allows prompt transfer of the patient to the 
intensive care unit (ICU) where resuscitation can continue 
within a safe environment with ongoing monitoring of vital 
organ function (lungs and brain). 
When injuries involve the input of different disciplines 
in terms of surgical intervention, for instance a general sur -
geon for a liver laceration, a neurosurgeon for an intracranial 
haematoma, an orthopaedic surgeon for a pelvic and femoral 
fracture and a maxillofacial surgeon for a depressed orbital 
fracture, the most important intervention should go first. 
Clearly, communication and prioritisation among the team 
members is essential. As each procedure nears its completion, 
communication with the anaesthetist will allow a decision 
as to whether it is safe to go on to the next procedure. Not 
infrequently, and assuming that it is technically possible, two 
teams can work simultaneously to significantly shorten the 
time the patient will spend in the operating theatre environ -
ment and allow subsequent prompt transfer to the ICU for 
optimisation and ongoing monitoring. 
LOCAL PROTOCOLS AND 
GUIDELINES
While the ATLS protocol has become the standard of care 
for the initial management of patients with multiple injuries, 
other protocols and guidelines have also been developed to 
allow the treatment of patients in a more standardised way. It 
is not uncommon for each trauma centre to develop its own 
local guidelines, although national guidelines may also exist. 
Regional guidelines may refer to smaller areas of practice, 
such as antibiotic prophylaxis for open fractures, mass transfu-
sion, pharmacotherapy for coagulation disturbances, steroids 
for spinal cord injuries, clearance of the cervical spine and 
angiographic embolisation of pelvic fractures. These proto -
cols can facilitate quicker decision making, eliminating delays 
and benefiting the patient. They also protect the clinician 
and care provider with regard to medicolegal issues. An exam-
ple referring to angiographic embolisation of pelvic fractures 
is shown in Figure 22.8. 
Local policies focusing on the creation of single charts 
facilitating daily input of patients’ vital signs and biochem -
ical results are useful in allowing sequential observation of 
the results, which can demonstrate important trends. These 
trends can be useful in identifying early a clinical condition 
which can be treated within the timeline frame concept 
and prior to the establishment of irreversible damage to the 
affected organ, at which point any form of intervention will 
be meaningless. For instance, the clinical evolution of respi-
ratory insufficiency in an individual without pre-existing lung 
disease secondary to pulmonary embolism is easier to identify 
by evaluating the trend in the oxygen saturation of inspired 
oxygen. 
Planning an individual operation
Operative procedures in a polytrauma patient struggling for 
survival are critical in the acute phase. Their outcome can 
TABLE 22.2 Criteria for damage control surgery (DCS) 
and early total care (ETC).
Criteria for DCS Criteria for ETC
Hypothermia: <34°C Stable haemodynamics
Acidosis: pH <7.2 No need for vasoactive/
inotropic stimulation
Serum lactate >5 mmol/L No hypoxaemia, no hypercapnia
Coagulopathy Serum lactate <2 mmol/L
Blood pressure <70 mmHg Normal coagulation
Transfusion approaching 
15 units
Normothermia
Injury severity score >36 Urinary output >1 mL/kg/hour
Unstable
Theatre
Arterial
blush
CT scan
No arterial
blush
Embolisation
Stabilisation of pelvis and pelvic packing
Stable (reponds to 
initial resuscitation)
Figure 22.8 Pelvic fracture: angiography protocol. 
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   319 25/10/2017   08:13CHAPTER 22   Introduction t o trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA320
affect morbidity and mortality. For this reason, it is essen-
tial to get it right the first time. It is therefore also essential 
that there is adequate study of the problem to be solved, fol -
lowed by the appropriate planning and execution. Analysing 
the fracture pattern, and deciding about patient positioning, 
the surgical approach to be used to get adequate access to the 
bone for reduction, the type of implant to be used, the cor -
rect positioning of the implant, the soft tissue handling and 
the type of rehabilitation, are just some of the parameters for 
consideration. 
The surgeon should answer questions such as: Is it the 
optimum time to carry out the procedure? Am I the most 
appropriate person to carry out the procedure? Have I made 
a contingency plan should the procedure become difficult to 
complete? What is my plan A, B, or C so I am able to success-
fully finish the procedure? Recording all the important issues 
on a piece of paper, or suitable alternative, will ensure that 
no parameter of importance will be left out of the planning. 
In order that the procedure runs smoothly in theatre, docu -
mentation of the plan can be made on the white board. Such 
a practice will allow every member of the surgical team to be 
aware of the potential issues to be addressed and the plan of 
action that has been decided. The appropriate surgical equip-
ment for plans A, B and C can be clearly identified and kept 
in close proximity to the operating theatre. The above strat -
egy will eliminate unnecessary detail and ensure that there 
will be no surprises, for instance required equipment found to 
be unavailable.
The response to the mechanism of 
injury (injury prevention)
Not infrequently, patients are seen who have been injured 
at the same geographical area with the same mechanism. A 
possible scenario is that, over a period of a few weeks, several 
patients are noted to present with a fall of 2–3 metres, in the 
same location, from a particular bridge. Further investiga -
tion might establish that the bridge is easy to access, perhaps 
because of damage to safety measures. With appropriate steps 
the damage can be rectified and the access to the bridge lim -
ited, preventing further harm. In this example, the surgeon is 
involved in both the treatment and the prevention of injury. 
Therefore, when a mechanism of injury becomes more fre -
quent and is associated with serious life-threatening trauma, 
it is essential to take steps either to eliminate the mechanism 
or to lessen the consequences.
The issue of injury prevention is not only an important 
consideration for clinicians but also for other stakeholders, 
for example politicians (developing appropriate legislation 
relevant to road safety), manufacturers (optimising the safety 
of cars) and the construction industry. This accounts for the 
improvements in safety that can be achieved. 
Summary box 22.8
The response to trauma
●● Rationalise patient management with development of 
protocols and guidelines
●● Avoid unnecessary delays
●● Observe trends and identify promptly evolving conditions
Summary box 22.9
Planning an individual operation
●● Adequate preoperative planning is essential to eliminate 
unnecessary delays
●● Document the plan to ensure no important parameter is left 
out
●● A whiteboard can be used to demonstrate the order of plan 
execution and act as a means of communication with the staff
Summary box 22.10
Response to the mechanism of injury
●● Be alert to identify frequent patterns of injury 
●● Many stakeholders, including clinicians, should engage in 
injury prevention
●● Legislation and education are essential
Summary box 22.11
Response to patient factors
●● Older patients may be vulnerable to injury, owing to poor bone 
stock and other comorbidities
●● Bone protection treatment is essential
●● Development of local and national guidelines to respond to 
patient factors is desirable
The response to patient factors
Injuries presenting with increased frequency in an individ-
ual patient require special attention. Older patients, perhaps 
with multiple medical problems, can represent such a vulner-
able group. The reduced bone mineral density making their 
skeletons ‘fragile’ is associated with an increased risk of frac -
ture. Hip fractures, wrist fractures, spinal fractures and pelvic 
fractures are just some of the many results following minimal 
trauma. The risk of fracture is increased with the presence 
of comorbidities such as visual impairment, parkinsonism or 
transient ischaemic heart attacks. Consequently, knowing 
the parameters associated with a particular group of patients, 
attempts can be made to reduce the number of patients requir-
ing treatment. For instance, prescription of bone protection 
therapy and addressing early the medical comorbidities (e.g. 
cataract surgery) may help to reduce the number and severity 
of injuries sustained. Development of specific guidelines and 
protocols can facilitate the much needed implementation of 
unified measures allowing easy patient access and treatment.
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   320 25/10/2017   08:13Further reading 321
PART 4 | TRAUMA
CONCLUSION
Trauma can affect all patient age groups. The severity of 
injury depends on the type and nature of the mechanical force 
applied. The formula ‘patient + mechanism = injury’ should 
be kept in mind when dealing with trauma patients. There is 
a connection among the three components of the formula, all 
of which should fit together in a coherent way. When no rela-
tionship can be made, examine for pre-existing pathology and 
hidden injuries, or consider whether the history given by the 
patient is at fault (including deliberate attempts to mislead). 
Be aware of the timeline concept because there is a min -
imum response time to initiate and complete treatment in 
order to deal with a specific condition successfully. 
Early assessment and management of patients with multi-
ple injuries is carried our using the ATLS protocol and other 
guidelines developed either locally or at a national level. Sub-
sequent treatment for definitive stabilisation can be person -
alised by one of two of the existing fracture fixation strategies, 
ETC or DCO. Specific criteria can assist the clinician to make 
the right decision for the right patient. Different groups of 
patients, such as older patients and children, have different 
demands and should be managed accordingly. While we, as 
clinicians, are focusing on treating the injury sustained, we 
have other responsibilities including our active involvement 
in preventive measures. Preventive measures should be com -
missioned when particular mechanisms can be identified as 
being common or important causes of injury.
FURTHER READING
Bone LB, Johnson KD, Weigelt J, Scheinberg R. Early versus delayed sta-
bilization of femoral fractures: a prospective randomized study . Clin 
Orthop Relat Res 2004; 422: 11–16.
Department for Transport. Reported road casualties in Great Brit-
ain. Main results 2015 . Available at: https://www.gov.uk/govern-
ment/statistics/reported-road-casualties-in-great-britain-main-  
results-2015 (accessed on 11/11/16).
Giannoudis PV , Giannoudis VP , Horwitz DS. Time to think outside 
the box: ‘Prompt-Individualised-Safe Management’ (PR.I.S.M.) 
should prevail in patients with multiple injuries. Injury 2017; 48(7): 
1279–82.
Hajibandeh S, Hajibandeh S, Idehen N. Meta-analysis of the effect of 
tertiary survey on missed injury rate in trauma patients. Injury 2015; 
46(12): 2474–82.
Huber-Wagner S, Lefering R, Qvick LM et al.; Working Group on Poly-
trauma of the German Trauma Society . Effect of whole-body CT 
during trauma resuscitation on survival: a retrospective, multicentre 
study. Lancet 2009; 373(9673): 1455–61.
Hui CM, MacGregor JH, Tien HC, Kortbeek JB. Radiation dose from 
initial trauma assessment and resuscitation: review of the literature. 
Can J Surg 2009; 52(2): 147–52.
Kehoe A, Smith JE, Edwards A, Yates D, Lecky F. The changing face of 
major trauma in the UK. Emerg Med J 2015; 32(12): 911–5. 
Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K et al . Global and regional morta -
lity from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: 
a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. 
Lancet 2012; 380(9859): 2095–128.
Palmer CS, Gabbe BJ, Cameron PA. Injury. Defining major trauma using 
the 2008 Abbreviated Injury Scale. Injury 2016; 47(1): 109–15.
Roberts CS, Pape HC, Jones AL et al . Damage control orthopaedics: 
evolving concepts in the treatment of patients who have sustained 
orthopaedic trauma. Instr Course Lect 2005; 54: 447–62.
Shore R, Walsh L, Azizova T, Rühm W . Risk of solid cancer in low dose-
rate radiation epidemiological studies and the dose-rate effectiveness 
factor. Int J Radiat Biol 2017; 15: 1–15. 
Tammelin E, Handolin L, Sö derlund T. Missed injuries in polytrauma 
patients after trauma: tertiary survey in trauma intensive care unit. 
Scand J Surg 2016; 105(4): 241–7. 
Summary box 22.12
Conclusion
●● Look for hidden injuries
●● Remember the timeline concept
●● Specific criteria will decide the fixation strategy: ETC or DCO
04_22B-B&L27_Pt4_Ch22.indd   321 25/10/2017   08:13Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • How to identify and assess the severely injured patient
 • Early treatment goals for multiply injured patients
 • Understand the role of permissive hypotension, 
tranexamic acid and massive transfusion protocols
 • Understand the principles of damage control surgery 
(DCS) versus early total care (ETC)
Early assessment and management  
of severe trauma
23
IDENTIFICATION OF SEVERE 
TRAUMA
The severely injured patient, with multiple injuries to 
different body systems, poses unique diagnostic and 
treatment challenges. The early assessment and management 
of severe trauma begins in the prehospital environment. 
Many of these patients will be easily identified at the scene 
of injury and forewarning the receiving hospital allows the 
activation of the trauma team to prepare for the patient’s 
arrival. Key information in the pre-alert includes basic 
demographic information (age and gender), mechanism 
of injury, injuries identified and vital signs, including 
respiratory rate, pulse, blood pressure and Glasgow Coma 
Scale (GCS).
Patients that are identified prehospital as sustaining, or 
at high risk of sustaining, severe multisystem trauma should 
generate trauma team activation in the receiving hospital. It 
should be noted that not all patients with severe multisystem 
trauma are immediately obvious. An elderly patient falling 
down a few steps can easily sustain a hip fracture, multiple rib 
fractures and a small subdural haemorrhage. At first glance 
the patient can appear well, but their injury severity score 
(ISS) and potential mortality could easily exceed those of the 
younger patient with multiple open long bone fractures. Both 
patients are critically injured and should be managed with the 
same principles in mind.
ROLE OF THE TRAUMA TEAM
All hospitals managing severe trauma should have a dedi -
cated trauma team, who are available immediately to attend 
and manage patients presenting with severe trauma. The 
composition of the team will depend on local policies but it 
will invariably involve doctors from the emergency depart-
ment, anaesthetics and/or critical care, orthopaedics and gen-
eral surgery. Increasingly, radiology and haematology doctors 
are contributing to the trauma team, as part of the patient’s 
initial assessment and management. Hospitals managing large 
volumes of cases of severe multisystem trauma are recognising 
the need for an enhanced trauma team activation for the most 
severely injured patients – the so called ‘code-red trauma 
call’. Patients identified prehospital as being haemodynami-
cally unstable or with acute airway compromise may initiate 
‘code-red’, triggering the automatic attendance of the most 
senior clinicians from each discipline prior to the patient’s 
arrival and prehospital activation of massive transfusion  
protocols.
The role of the trauma team is to apply the principles of 
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) to rapidly identify 
and treat life-threatening injuries during the primary 
survey. The principle advantage of a trauma team is that 
this activity can occur concurrently instead of sequentially; 
while the anaesthetist may be assessing and managing the 
patient’s airway, another team member can be assessing 
and managing the patient’s breathing, etc. The importance 
of the trauma team leader cannot be overemphasised: they 
brief and prepare the team, coordinate these sequential 
activities, manage time, interpret findings and plan the next 
move. Increasing recognition of the importance of this role 
has led to the development of postgraduate training courses 
designed to teach both the technical and non-technical skills 
required. Generally, the trauma team leader and most senior 
clinicians should be standing back from the patient, looking 
at the bigger picture, in order to anticipate the next key  
decisions.
04_23-B&L27_Pt4_Ch23.indd   322 25/10/2017   08:14Primary surve y 323
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
PRIMARY SURVEY
The primary survey aims to identify and manage the most 
immediately life-threatening pathologies first and follows 
cABCDE.
c: Exsanguinating external 
haemorrhage
Experience from war zones over the past 20 years has shown 
that exsanguinating external haemorrhage from massive 
arterial bleeding needs to be controlled even before the 
airway is managed (see Chapter 30). Most of these injuries 
are due to gunshot wounds or blasts and are mainly seen in 
military practice. However, they are encountered in civilian 
practice. Bleeding must be controlled immediately by the 
application of packs and pressure directly onto the bleeding 
wound and artery. Haemostatic dressings that contain agents 
that augment local coagulation are now available. Failure 
to control bleeding in the limb by direct pressure should be 
followed by the application of a tourniquet proximal to the 
wound. In the field, simple tourniquets can be improvised 
if pneumatic tourniquets are not available. It is vital to 
appreciate that once a tourniquet is applied the limb 
becomes ischaemic – the time for which the tourniquet is 
applied must be recorded on the patient and the patient 
requires urgent surgical control of the bleeding in order to 
reperfuse the limb.
A: Airway with cervical spine control
All trauma patients should have their cervical spine immobil-
ised and protected throughout. An immediate assessment of 
the patient’s airway is made. A compromised airway requires 
a stepwise progression, first clearing the airway by suctioning 
secretions or blood, followed by simple airway manoeuvres 
such as a jaw thrust, chin lift and insertion of an oropharyn -
geal or nasopharyngeal airway. Advanced airway manoeuvres 
necessitate the insertion of a cuffed endotracheal tube. This 
may require an anaesthetic with rapid sequence induction 
or a surgical airway. Emergency intubation of the severely 
injured trauma patient is a difficult and demanding skill – 
standardised and rehearsed procedures should be in place for 
failure to intubate (Figure 23.1). Equipment and expertise 
for achieving a surgical airway must be readily available.
B: Breathing and ventilation
All patients should receive high-flow oxygen. Life-threaten -
ing chest pathology such as tension pneumothorax, massive 
haemothorax and flail segment should be diagnosed and man-
aged immediately. Equipment and expertise for rapid inser -
tion of intercostal chest drains should be available.
C: Circulation and haemorrhage
All patients require adequate intravenous access with at 
least two large-bore intravenous (IV) cannulae. Equipment 
and expertise for insertion of central or intraosseous venous 
access should be available where peripheral access is not easily 
obtainable. Blood should be taken for cross-match and labo -
ratory assessment, including haemoglobin and venous lactate. 
An assessment of the haemodynamic status should be made 
to identify shocked patients: the skin may be pale, cool and 
sweaty, the pulse rate raised to over 100 per minute and the 
blood pressure low. A pelvic binder should be applied to all 
haemodynamically unstable patients following blunt trauma 
and not removed until after a pelvic fracture has been excluded. 
Hypotensive trauma patients are treated as hypovolaemic until 
proven otherwise. The priority is now simultaneous fluid resus-
citation and identification of the source of the haemorrhage.
Summary box 23.1
The role of the trauma team
●● Allows the simultaneous and efficient application of ATLS 
principles to rapidly identify and treat life-threatening 
pathologies
●● Should be led by the most senior clinician
●● The most senior clinicians from each specialty should attend 
‘code red trauma calls’
●● The team leader should be trying constantly to anticipate the 
next move
Figure 23.1 Unrestrained driver with severe craniofacial injury (cour-
tesy of Johannesburg Hospital Trauma Unit).
04_23-B&L27_Pt4_Ch23.indd   323 25/10/2017   08:14CHAPTER 23  Early assessment and management of sever e trauma 
PART 4 | TRAUMA324
Permissive hypotension, massive transfusion 
protocols and tranexamic acid
The initial aim of resuscitation is to maintain the blood sup-
ply to the vital organs: the brain, heart and kidneys. For a 
short time, this can be achieved with a target systolic blood 
pressure of 70–90 mmHg, although a higher pressure of >90 
mmHg should be the target if a head injury is suspected. Small 
boluses of IV fluids (e.g. 250 mL of O negative blood, or nor -
mal saline if blood is not immediately available) should be 
administered to achieve this target, which should result in a 
palpable radial pulse. Excessive intravenous crystalloid or col-
loid solutions should be avoided because they cause haemo-
dilution, increase coagulopathy and increase the risk of adult 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). However, the key to 
this approach of permissive hypotension is that it is time lim-
ited. The primary source of haemorrhage must be identified 
and controlled as soon as possible.
Severely injured hypovolaemic patients should be resusci-
tated with blood and blood products, not crystalloid/colloid 
fluids. These must be warmed. All hospitals managing severe 
trauma should have a massive transfusion protocol which aims 
to provide blood and blood products in a ratio of 1 packed red 
cells:1 fresh frozen plasma:1 platelets.
TRANEXAMIC ACID
Tranexamic acid is an antifibrinolytic drug that reduces the 
risk of mortality from bleeding in both blunt and penetrating 
trauma. One gram is given intravenously over 10 minutes, 
followed by a further 1 g dose over 8 hours. Tranexamic acid 
should be given to all trauma patients suspected to have sig -
nificant haemorrhage, including those with a systolic blood 
pressure of <110 mmHg or a pulse of over 110 per minute. 
It needs to be administered within 3 hours of injury and in 
the UK it is normally given by paramedics in the prehospital 
environment.
investigations should aim rapidly to confirm or exclude sig-
nificant bleeding from each of these sites. Computed tomog -
raphy (CT) from the head to pelvis with IV contrast, the so 
called ‘whole body CT’ (WBCT) is the gold standard inves -
tigation in patients with signs or symptoms of multiple injury 
or deranged physiology, but note that WBCT should not be 
performed on the basis of the mechanism of injury alone (see 
Further reading). There is no role for scanning selective body 
systems in the severely injured trauma patient. Wherever pos-
sible, WBCT should be performed as soon as possible during 
the patient’s resuscitation. A provisional ‘hot report’ can be 
issued within minutes to identify immediate life-threatening 
pathology to the trauma team. A more detailed definitive 
report should be available within 30–60 minutes.
Traditionally, chest and pelvis radiographs have been 
obtained early in the assessment of patients with polytrauma 
but these investigations are increasingly omitted in favour of 
obtaining a rapid CT scan, as described above. Most trauma 
centres now have rapid access to CT scanners located within, 
or immediately adjacent to, the resuscitation area. This 
has allowed haemodynamically unstable patients to have a 
WBCT with resuscitation by the trauma team continuing 
simultaneously during CT. Identifying which patients are too 
haemodynamically unstable to scan safely is a difficult deci -
sion for the trauma team leader and will be influenced by local 
factors and facilities.
Some patients will be so haemodynamically unstable on 
arrival that they need immediate surgical control of their 
haemorrhage before a CT scan. The most likely sources are 
abdominal or pelvic bleeding. An immediate chest radiograph 
will exclude catastrophic intrathoracic haemorrhage. An 
immediate pelvic radiograph is essential but should not delay 
transfer to the operating room. A focused abdominal sonog -
raphy for trauma (FAST) scan (if immediately available) may 
also be useful in this scenario to locate the major source of 
haemorrhage. All patients undergoing immediate laparotomy 
in the operating room should have a pelvic binder applied 
and not removed. A correctly positioned pelvic binder at the 
level of the greater trochanters does not obstruct trauma lap -
arotomy. These patients will invariably require a WBCT scan 
after surgical control of haemorrhage has been achieved.
Summary box 23.2
Severe hypovolaemia
●● Tranexamic acid reduces mortality after trauma
●● All traumatised patients with signs of shock should receive 
tranexamic acid as soon as possible after injury
●● All trauma centres should have an established massive 
transfusion protocol
●● Severely hypovolaemic trauma patients should be 
resuscitated using blood and blood products
●● The only role for crystalloids in the initial management of 
severely hypovolaemic patients is for the administration of 
small quantities to maintain blood pressure while waiting for 
blood products to arrive
Identification and management of 
haemorrhage
The sites of major haemorrhage in trauma patients are the 
chest, abdomen, pelvis, long bones and external haemor -
rhage (Figure 23.2). Blunt trauma patients frequently have 
multiple sources of haemorrhage. Clinical examination and 
Summary box 23.3
‘Whole body CT’ (WBCT)
●● WBCT from the head to pelvis with IV contrast is the gold 
standard investigation of the severely injured adult blunt 
trauma patient
●● There is no role for selective scanning of body systems in 
these patients
●● WBCT scan is a time-critical investigation and should be 
obtained as early as possible in resuscitation of the severely 
injured patient
●● Any patient undergoing immediate trauma laparotomy after 
blunt trauma without a WBCT scan should have a pelvic 
binder applied and not removed until a pelvic fracture is 
excluded. Such patients should have an immediate pelvic 
radiograph either in the emergency department, or as they 
arrive in the operating room
04_23-B&L27_Pt4_Ch23.indd   324 25/10/2017   08:14Primary surve y 325
PART 4 | TRAUMA
D: Disability and E: Exposure
On admission, the GCS score should be calculated (Table 
23.1), the pupils assessed for size and reaction to light and the 
patient observed to determine whether they are moving all 
four limbs. The core temperature must be recorded. Patients 
are managed with cervical spine protection (cervical collar 
and blocks) and protection of the thoracolumbar spine using 
standard log roll techniques until a spinal injury has been 
excluded. Early WBCT scan will rapidly  identify the majority 
of intracranial and spinal pathology.
The patient must be adequately exposed to allow a 
 thorough and systematic clinical examination during the sec-
ondary survey but they must be kept warm. Trauma patients 
are frequently hypothermic and this will further increase 
coagulopathy. Every effort should be made to maintain nor -
mal temperature by minimising unnecessary exposure of 
the patient, and by using warmed blankets and trolleys and 
warmed fluids during resuscitation.
Log-rolling patients with severe pelvic fractures may harm 
the patient by disturbing established blot clots. Log-rolling 
should not occur until a pelvic fracture has been radiograph -
ically excluded. If patients need to be moved during their 
primary survey, such as when moving on to the CT scan -
ning gantry, a 20° roll with inline spinal stabilisation should 
be used. Modern ‘Scoop Stretchers’ mean that there is no 
requirement to roll any patient more than 20° until a pelvic 
fracture has been excluded.
Figure 23.2 (a–d) Severe degloving injuries to the upper and lower 
limbs following a high-speed road traffic accident. The initial appear-
ance and severity of the injury should not detract from following the 
important Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) sequence in evalu -
ating and treating immediate life-threatening injuries.
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
TABLE 23.1 Glasgow Coma Scale
Best eye response (E) Best verbal response (V) Best motor response (M)
4 Eyes opening spontaneously 5 Oriented 6 Obeys commands
3 Eye opening to speech 4 Confused 5 Localises to pain
2 Eye opening in response to pain 3 Inappropriates words 4 Withdraws from pain
1 No eye opening 2 Incomprehensible sounds 3 Flexion in response to pain
1 None 2 Extension to pain
1 No motor response
04_23-B&L27_Pt4_Ch23.indd   325 25/10/2017   08:14CHAPTER 23  Early assessment and management of sever e trauma 
PART 4 | TRAUMA326
Formal log-rolling of the blunt trauma patient to exam -
ine the back during the primary survey adds minimal useful 
clinical information, delays the WBCT scan and may cause 
harm to a patient with a pelvic fracture. It should be deferred 
until after the primary survey, with the exception of patients 
with penetrating trauma, where it is important to identify the 
presence of a posterior torso wound.
Mechanical testing of the pelvis in the emergency room 
(‘springing the pelvis’) adds no useful clinical examination 
and will disrupt any blot clot that has formed around a pel -
vic fracture. It should never be performed – a pelvic fracture 
should always be diagnosed radiographically.
objectives and then move the patient to a critical care envi-
ronment and continue with resuscitation.
Subsequent definitive reconstructive procedures are 
deferred until the patient is adequately resuscitated and 
physiologically optimised. DCS in the abdomen is limited 
to packing and control of haemorrhage, debridement and 
resection of devitalised tissue and removal of contamination 
by foreign bodies or faeces. Damage control orthopaedic 
surgery is limited to debridement of severe open fractures, 
rapid temporary splintage or stabilisation of long bone 
fractures and decompression of limb compartment syndrome 
where required.
Revascularisation of a limb following arterial injury may 
be appropriate for isolated injuries but in the patient with 
severe multiple system trauma it may increase the threat to 
life and therefore amputation may be the better option. Such 
patients are then transferred to critical care for further resus -
citation and physiological stabilisation before definitive surgi-
cal procedures can be planned.
The majority of trauma patients respond well to resuscita-
tion and are not physiologically compromised after appropri -
ate resuscitation. A number of physiological indices are used 
to evaluate the response to resuscitation, including a pulse 
rate less than 100 per minute, normal blood pressure and 
respiratory rate, as well as urine output >30 mL per hour. The 
patient should not have hypothermia (temperature <35°C) 
nor evidence of acidosis on arterial blood gases and should 
have a normal coagulation screen.
Lactate levels are also a good indicator of tissue perfusion 
and should rapidly return to normal. In this situation, it is 
usually safe for the surgeon to proceed with definitive repair 
or reconstruction of injured organs.
For musculoskeletal injuries, early total care allows 
definitive fixation of all unstable long bone, spinal and pelvic 
fractures within 36 hours of injury. This facilitates nursing 
care, allows early mobilisation of the patient and reduces 
pulmonary complications and length of stay on intensive 
care.
If a sequence of fracture fixations is required, at the con -
clusion of each procedure the surgeon and anaesthetist should 
determine whether the patient’s physiological status has 
been maintained sufficiently to allow the next procedure, or 
whether the patient should return to critical care for a further 
period of resuscitation.
Summary box 23.4
The cABCDE of trauma care
●● c – Control of massive external haemorrhage
●● A – Airway with cervical spine protection
●● B – Breathing and ventilation
●● C –  Circulation and haemorrhage control: apply a pelvic 
binder and do not remove until a pelvic fracture is 
excluded
●● D – Disability (neurological status)
●● E – Exposure (assess for other injuries)
SECONDARY SURVEY
All severely injured patients require a detailed top to toe 
examination after life-threatening injuries have been 
identified and managed during the primary survey. Patients 
may be intubated and unresponsive at this point, limiting 
the accuracy of clinical examination. Such patients should 
have a ‘tertiary survey’ when extubated and alert, to identify 
any missed ‘minor’ injuries such as a scaphoid fracture in the 
wrist or a rotator cuff tear in the shoulder . These injuries 
have the potential to cause significant long-term disability. 
It is essential that the findings of the primary, secondary and 
tertiary surveys are clearly recorded in the patient case notes.
DAMAGE CONTROL SURGERY 
VERSUS EARL Y TOTAL CARE
As discussed in Chapter 22, the concept of damage control 
surgery (DCS) was developed because severely traumatised 
patients with impaired physiology have poor outcomes after 
lengthy and complex surgical reconstructive procedures per-
formed shortly after their trauma. Prolonged procedures result 
in additional trauma and further immune and physiological 
derangement; the ‘triad of death’, a cycle of acidosis, coagu -
lopathy and hypothermia, may develop and result in multi -
organ failure and death.
Consequently, surgical interventions in the trauma 
patient with physiological abnormality are limited to rapid 
life- and limb-saving procedures: control of haemorrhage, 
decompression of cavities (e.g. craniotomy), revascularisation 
of ischaemic organs and limbs and removal of contamination. 
This damage control approach aims to rapidly achieve these 
Summary box 23.5
Early total care versus damage control surgery
●● Early total care describes the definitive management of a 
patient’s injuries within 36 hours of injury after a period of 
initial resuscitation
●● Damage control surgery describes simultaneous resuscitation 
with early rapid life- and limb-saving surgery. Time-consuming 
definitive surgery is deferred until the patient’s physiological 
status allows
●● An early total care approach can be changed to a damage 
control approach if the patient’s physiology deteriorates 
during definitive surgery
04_23-B&L27_Pt4_Ch23.indd   326 25/10/2017   08:14Further reading 327
PART 4 | TRAUMA
SUMMARY
The early assessment and management of trauma patients 
should follow established ATLS principles.
A WBCT scan, from the head to the pelvis, with IV 
contrast is the gold standard investigation for major trauma 
patients and should be performed early and whenever possible.
Warmed blood and blood products in a 1:1:1 ratio should 
be used with tranexamic acid in the early resuscitation of hae-
modynamically unstable trauma patients.
Trauma patients requiring surgery should have an early 
decision made whether a damage control or ETC approach is 
required. Surgical procedures in physiologically compromised 
patients should be limited to those required to save the life 
and/or limb of the patient, while simultaneous resuscitation 
is continued.
FURTHER READING
Sierink HJC, Treskes K, Edwards MJR et al ., for the REACT-2 study 
group. Immediate total-body CT scanning versus conventional im -
aging and selective CT scanning in patients with severe trauma (RE-
ACT-2): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2016; 388: 673–83.Summary box 23.6
Venous lactate is an essential marker of resuscitation
●● <2 mmol/L – Early total care
●● 2–3 mmol/L – Look at the trend (increasing or decreasing)
●● >3 mmol/L – May be under-resuscitated; should either have 
further resuscitation or damage control surgery (DCS) if 
surgery is urgent
●● >5 mmol/L – DCS (see Chapters 22 and 27)
Venous lactate
Venous lactate is a useful marker of resuscitation and physio-
logical state. A normal lactate (<2 mmol/L) is a sign that the 
patient is probably resuscitated and suitable for early total 
care. An elevated lactate (>3 mmol/L) suggests the patient is 
under-resuscitated and should either have a period of further 
resuscitation, or DCS if surgery is urgent. If a patient’s lactate 
is 2–3 mmol/L then the trend (upwards or downwards) should 
be noted and the other physiological markers considered, to 
determine whether the patient is suitable for definitive surgi-
cal procedures.
The identification of patients suitable for ETC versus DCS 
should be made by senior surgeons and anaesthetists/critical 
care doctors. This may be an easy decision, for example the 
haemodynamically unstable patient with intra-abdominal 
bleeding will always undergo rapid damage control laparot-
omy. In other cases a careful review of the patient’s physiology 
and coagulation state will be required.
04_23-B&L27_Pt4_Ch23.indd   327 25/10/2017   08:14Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The physiology of cerebral blood flow and the 
pathophysiology of raised intracranial pressure
 • The classification and assessment of head injury
 • Management and sequelae of minor and mild traumatic 
brain injury
 • Medical and surgical management of moderate and 
severe traumatic brain injury
T raumatic brain injury
24 
INTRODUCTION
Head injury accounts for 3–4% of emergency department 
attendances, with around 1500 cases per 100 000 population 
per year in the UK. Annual mortality attributable to head 
injury is estimated at 9 per 100 000, and it remains the leading 
cause of death and disability from childhood to early mid-
dle age, with an estimated 2% of the US population suffer -
ing long-term disability as a result of head injury. Road traffic 
accidents are the leading cause of head injury, being respon -
sible for up to 50% of cases. Other common mechanisms of 
injury include falls and assault. There is significant geographi-
cal variation, for example firearms are the third leading cause 
in the US.
Significant traumatic brain injury can be considered a 
combination of the primary injury sustained on impact, and 
secondary injury developing in the following hours and days. 
Understanding the importance of intracranial pressure and 
related parameters is key to minimising secondary injury and 
improving outcomes.
INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
Intracranial pressure and 
cerebral blood flow
The brain depends on continuous perfusion for oxygen and 
glucose delivery, and hence survival. Normal cerebral bloo d 
flow (CBF) is about 55 mL per minute for every 100 grams 
of brain tissue. Ischaemia results when this rate drops below 
20 mL per minute, and even lower levels will result in infarc-
tion unless promptly corrected.
Flow depends on cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP), the 
difference between mean arterial pressure (MAP) and intra -
cranial pressure (ICP).
CPP (75–105  mmHg) = MAP (90–110  mmHg) – ICP 
(5–15 mmHg)
Typical normal values are given in parentheses. In fact, in 
the normal brain, variations in vascular tone maintain a con-
stant CBF across a range of MAP between 50 and 150 mmHg 
(or higher in the setting of chronic hypertension), and a 
corresponding range of CPP , the process of cerebral auto -
regulation. 
The Monro Kellie doctrine and herniation 
syndromes
Alexander Monro observed in 1783 that the cranium is a 
‘rigid box’ containing a ‘nearly incompressible brain’. Any 
expansion in the contents, especially haematoma and brain 
swelling, may be initially accommodated by exclusion of fluid 
components, venous bloo d and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). 
Further expansion is associated with an exponential rise in 
ICP (Figure 24.1)
Uncontrolled increases in ICP result in cerebral hernia-
tion (Figure 24.2). Typically, herniation of the uncus of the 
temporal lobe over the tentorium results in pupil abnormal -
ities (see Pupils below), usually occurring first on the side of 
any expanding haematoma. Cerebellar tonsillar herniation 
through the foramen magnum compresses medullary vasomo-
tor and respiratory centres, classically producing Cushing’s 
Summary box 24.1
Intracranial pressure (ICP)
●● A continuous supply of oxygenated blood is essential for brain 
survival
●● Raised ICP can compromise cerebral perfusion, resulting in a 
cycle of secondary brain injury and swelling
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   328 25/10/2017   08:15Minor and mild head injury 329
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
triad – hypertension, bradycardia and irregular respiration. 
The patient is then said to be ‘coning’, and brainstem death 
will result without immediate intervention.
CLASSIFICATION OF HEAD 
INJURY
Severity of head injury is classified according to the postresus-
citation Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Table 24.1), as it is 
the GCS score, and in particular the motor score (see Table 
24.4), that is the best predictor of neurological outcome. In 
broad terms, significantly obtunded patients have mo derate 
injuries and comatose patients have severe injuries; alcohol 
and drug effects often complicate the classification.
MINOR AND MILD HEAD INJURY
After exclusion of associated cervical spine injury, the major 
concern for these patients is to avoid discharge during the 
‘lucid interval’ that may precede delayed deterioration due to 
an expanding intracranial haematoma. In general, patients 
with isolated head injuries and without ongoing deficits can 
safely be discharged from the emergency department, pro -
vided they meet suitable criteria, for instance those provided 
by the UK National Institute for Heath and Care Excellence 
(Table 24.2). 
Normal
Venous
blood
Venous
bloodVenous
blood
Arterial
blood Brain
Brain
Brain
Arterial
blood
Arterial
blood
CSF
CSF
CSF
Mass
Mass
Skull
Skull
Skull
Mass lesion – 
compensation phase
Mass lesion – 
brain herniation
(a)
90
80
70
60
50
40
Compensation
Point of
decompensation
Brain
herniation
Intracranial pressure (mmHg)
30
20
10
0 10
(b)
20 30 40 50
Mass lesion size (arbitrary units)
60 70 80 90 100 110 120
Figure 24.1 The Monro Kellie doctrine accounts for the ability of the 
intracranial compartment to accommodate expanding mass lesions, 
primarily by excluding venous blood and cerebr ospinal fluid (CSF), 
and the rapid rise in pressure associated with exhaustion of this com-
pensation.
1
2
34
5
Figure 24.2 Brain herniation. Herniation of the cingulate gyrus under 
the falx cerebri is termed subfalcine her niation (1). (2) Midline shift is 
evident. (3) Uncal herniation: the temporal lobe is herniating over the 
tentorium cerebelli where it can compress the third nerve. (4) Central 
herniation and (5) tonsillar herniation result in brainstem compromise, 
manifesting as Cushing’s triad.
TABLE 24.1 Head injury classification using the Glasgow 
Coma Scale (GCS) score. 
Minor head injury GCS 15 with no loss of consciousness 
(LOC)
Mild head injury GCS 14 or 15 with LOC
Moderate head injury GCS 9–13
Severe head injury GCS 3–8
Summary box 24.2
Minor and mild head injury
●● Decisions on imaging and discharge are best made guided by 
published criteria
●● In preverbal children and other vulnerable groups, non-
accidental injury must be considered 
●● Amnesia, confusion, headaches and somnolence are typical 
features of concussion
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   329 25/10/2017   08:15CHAPTER 24   Traumatic brain injury
PART 4 | TRAUMA330
Patients who do not meet all the discharge criteria will 
need admission for a further period of observation, and/or 
brain imaging. Early computed tomography (CT) imaging is 
desirable in patients with a persistent reduced conscious level, 
focal deficits, suspected fractures or risk factors for intracranial 
bleed (Table 24.3). Significant clinical or radiological abnor-
malities should be discussed with the neurosurgical service. 
Many of these patients will struggle with features of concus -
sion for a period after their injury , with headaches and som-
nolence typical. Follow-up by a head injury specialist nurse or 
equivalent is therefore desirable.
Non-accidental injury
Head injury in children and vulnerable adults may be due to 
abuse. Significant findings include delayed presentation, inju-
ries of disparate age, retinal haemorrhages, bilateral chronic 
subdural haematomas, multiple skull fractures and neurologi-
cal injury without external signs of trauma.
Concussion, second impact 
syndrome and postconcussive 
syndrome
Concussion is defined as alteration of consciousness as a result 
of closed head injury, but is generally used in describing mild 
head injury without imaging abnormalities; loss of conscious-
ness (LO C) at the time of injury is not a prerequisite. Key 
features include confusion and amnesia. The patient may 
be lethargic, easily distractable, forgetful, slow to interact 
or emotionally labile. Gait disturbance and incoordination 
may be seen. It is claimed that while symptomatic following 
a head injury, patients may be especially vulnerable to repeat 
impacts. It is proposed that in the context of disordered 
cerebral autoregulation, a second minor injury may trigger a 
form of malignant cerebral oedema refractory to treatment. 
Although the existence of the syndrome is disputed, and it is 
certainly rare, it should be considered in advice to individuals 
engaged in sports or activities carrying a risk of further injury: 
symptomatic players should not return to play.
Postconcussive syndrome is a loosely defined constel -
lation of symptoms, persisting for a prolonged period after 
injury, and exacerbated in some patients by the potential for 
secondary gain (compensation). Patients may report somatic 
features such as headache, dizziness and disorders of hearing 
and vision. They may also suffer a variety of neurocognitive 
and neuropsychological disturbances, including difficulty 
with concentration and recall, insomnia, emotional lability, 
fatigue, depression and personality change.
MODERATE AND SEVERE 
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Resuscitation and evaluation
Resuscitation is performed according to Advanced Trauma 
and Life Support (ATLS) guidelines, beginning with manage-
ment of the airway and cervical spine control,  and proceed-
ing to assess and manage breathing and circulation. History 
obtained in parallel is key to shaping ongoing management.
History
Mechanism 
In moderate and severe traumatic brain injury (TBI), history 
must be obtained from witnesses and paramedics. High-  
energy mechanisms of injury, including fall from a height or 
high-speed road traffic accident (RTA), will require careful 
clinical and radiological exclusion of associated multi  system 
TABLE 24.2 National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence discharge criteria in minor and mild head injury.
●● GCS 15/15 with no focal deficits
●● Normal CT brain if indicated (see below)
●● Patient not under the influence of alcohol or drugs
●● Patient accompanied by a responsible adult
●● Verbal and written head injury advice: seek medical attention if:
 ● Persistent/worsening headache despite analgesia
 ● Persistent vomiting
 ● Drowsiness
 ● Visual disturbance
 ● Limb weakness or numbness
CT, computed tomography; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale.
TABLE 24.3 National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence guidelines for computed tomography (CT) in 
head injury.
Indications for CT imaging within 1 hour 
GCS <13 at any point
GCS <15 at 2 hours
Focal neurological deficit
Suspected open, depressed or basal skull fracture
More than one episode of vomiting
Post-traumatic seizure
Indications for CT imaging within 8 hours
Age >65 years 
Coagulopathy (e.g. aspirin, warfarin or rivaroxaban use)
Dangerous mechanism of injury (e.g. fall from a height, road traffic 
accident)
Retrograde amnesia >30 minutes
Summary box 24.3
History
Bystanders and paramedics may give vital information on the:
●● preinjury state (fits, alcohol, chest pain)
●● mechanism and energy involved in the injury (speed of 
vehicles, height fallen)
●● conscious state and haemodynamic stability of the patient 
after the accident
●● length of time taken for extrication
Check the medication history especially anticoagulants and 
antiplatelet agents
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   330 25/10/2017   08:15Moderate and sev ere traumatic brain injury 331
PART 4 | TRAUMA
and spinal injury (see Chapter 25). In the case of RT As 
in particular, extraction time and evidence of hypoxia or 
haemodynamic instability at the scene is important infor -
mation to obtain from the paramedics. Falls and crashes are 
often caused by a primary medical problem such as myocar -
dial infarction, hypoglycaemia or subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
with implications for management.
Neurological progression
A specific check should be made for any loss of consciousness 
at the time of injury, and its duration. The GCS and pupil 
responses at the scene and on arrival in the emergency depart-
ment should be obtained and documented. They should also 
be checked regularly thereafter; deterioration  in GCS is an 
important index of developing, and potentially reversible, 
secondary injury. It is also useful to assess the extent of amne-
sia, retrograde (events prior to the injury) and anterograde 
(events afterwards). If the patient was intubated at the scene 
of the accident it is valuable to know whether the patient was 
moving all four limbs before this.
Past medical history
Details of the patient’s medical background should be 
obtained, including allergies and normal medications. Of 
particular note here, are antiplatelet agents, potentially 
requiring platelet transfusion especially if surgery is required, 
and anticoagulants, which may need reversal. 
Examination: primary survey
ATLS guidelines address a fundamental priority, ensuring 
uninterrupted perfusion of the brain with oxygenated blood. 
This is especially important after a head injury given the dis -
turbance to intracranial autoregulation and the sensitivity of 
the primary injured brain tissue to further insult. Bleeding 
from scalp lacerations may require management as part of the 
primary survey, as the blood loss can be substantial and ongo-
ing. Check the responsiveness of the pupils, conscious level 
and for any gross focal neurological deficits. Blood glucose 
level should also be measured as early as possible as hypogly -
caemia is very dangerous and easily reversible.
Pupils
The pupil size should be recorded in millimetres, and reac -
tivity documented as present, sluggish or absent. Uncal 
herniation (Figure 24.2) can compress the third nerve, com-
promising the parasympathetic supply to the pupil. Unop -
posed sympathetic activity produces a sluggish enlarged pupil, 
progressing to fixed and dilated under continued compression. 
Established pupil changes may reflect pathology anywhere in 
the eye or the reflex loop made up by the optic nerve, the 
oculomotor nerve and the brainstem. Direct ocular trauma 
or nerve injury in association with a skull base fracture can 
cause mydriasis (dilated pupil) present from the time of injury. 
Pre-existing discrepancy in pupil size (anisocoria), as a result 
of Holmes–Adie pupil or cataracts for example, may also com-
plicate assessment. 
Glasgow Coma Scale score
The GCS is the sum of scores on three components as detailed 
in Table 24.4. The breakdown of the GCS into eye open-
ing, verbal and motor components should always be recorded 
and used when communicating the status to other doctors. 
Remember that the score represents the best performance 
elicited, so a patient flexing in response to a painful stimulus 
on the left and localising on the right scores ‘M5’. A sternal 
or supraorbital rub, or trapezius squeeze represents an appro -
priate painful stimulus.
Neurological deficit
Gross focal neurological deficits, such as paraplegia, may be 
evident at the primary survey, and an assessment to exclude 
such deficit should be carried out, especially if the patient is to 
Summary box 24.4
Primary survey 
●● Ensure adequate oxygenation and circulation
●● Exclude hypoglycaemia
●● Check pupil size and response and Glasgow Coma Scale 
score as soon as possible
●● Check for focal neurological deficits before intubation, if 
possible
Sir Gordon Morgon Holmes , 1876–1965, physician, The National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen’s Square, London, UK.
William John Adie , 1886–1935, physician, The National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen’s Square, London, UK.
TABLE 24.4 Glasgow Coma Scale score for head injury.
Eyes open Spontaneously 4
To verbal command 3
To painful stimulus 2
Do not open 1
Verbal Normal oriented conversation 5
Confused 4
Inappropriate/words only 3
Sounds only 2
No sounds 1
Intubated patient T
Motor Obeys commands 6
Localises to pain 5
Withdrawal/flexion 4
Abnormal flexion 3
Extension 2
No motor response 1
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   331 25/10/2017   08:15CHAPTER 24   Traumatic brain injury
PART 4 | TRAUMA332
be intubated so that subsequent examination will be impos-
sible. Detailed neurological examination is included in the 
secondary survey. 
Examination: secondary survey
A full secondary survey will be required. Particular attention 
must be paid to head, neck and spine.
Head
Examination of the head should include inspection and pal -
pation of the scalp for evidence of subgaleal haematoma and 
scalp lacerations, which may bleed profusely, and potentially 
overlie fractures. Examine the face for evidence of fractures, 
especially to the orbital rim, zygoma and maxilla. Clinical evi-
dence of a skull base fracture may include Battle’s sign (Figure 
24.3), and ‘racoon’ or ‘panda’ eyes (bilateral periorbital bruis-
ing). Haemotympanum, or overt bleeding from the ear if the 
tympanic membrane has ruptured, and CSF rhinnorrhoea or 
otorrhoea are also highly suggestive of a fracture of the base 
of the skull.
A complete examination of the cranial nerves will reveal, 
for example, facial or vestibulo-cochlear nerve damage associ-
ated with skull base fracture. Midbrain or brainstem dysfunc-
tion may produce gaze paresis (inability of eye to look across 
beyond the midline), dysconjugate gaze (inability of the eyes 
to work together) or roving eye movements. Inspect the 
conjunctiva and cornea of the eyes, and the retina using an 
ophthalmoscope, looking for hyphaema (blood in the ante -
rior chamber of the eye), papilloedema or retinal detachment. 
Blood in the mouth may be due to tongue-biting at seizure. 
The GCS and pupil status, assessed as part of the primary sur-
vey, require re-evaluation at the secondary survey and regu -
larly thereafter.
Neck and spine
Studies have demonstrated an incidence of cervical fracture 
of up to 10% in association with moderate and severe TBI. 
Cervical spine injury must be presumed in the context of 
head injury until actively excluded. In a high-energy mecha -
nism such as RTA or fall from a height, thoracic and lumbar 
spine injuries must also be excluded. Plain radiographs can be 
of limited value in excluding significant cervical spine injury. 
Even CT imaging does not exclude the possibility of signifi-
cant ligamentous injury. Therefore, whenever feasible, these 
patients should be managed in a hard collar until the neck 
can be cleared clinically.
A peripheral nerve examination with documentation 
of limb tone, power, reflexes and sensation needs to be per -
formed early to identify spinal pathology. This is especially 
important in patients who may subsequently be intubated and 
ventilated, when this assessment will no longer be possible. 
Obtunded patients should move all four limbs in response to 
an appropriate painful stimulus.
The patient will need to be log-rolled to palpate for thor -
acic or lumbar deformity, and any cervical collar should be 
removed at this stage to allow palpation of the cervical spine, 
before it is replaced. If there is associated spinal injury, a thor-
acic sensory level is much more easily established by sensory 
examination on the back. A per rectal examination is also 
performed at log-roll, assessing for anal tone, sensation in the 
awake patient and anal wink (sphincter seen to contract in 
response to a pinprick stimulus). Priapism is a strong predictor 
of severe cord injury even in intubated patients.
William Henry Battle , 1855–1936, surgeon, St Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK.
A racoon  is a small mammal native to North and Central America that has a pale face with dark rings round its eyes.
Figure 24.3 Battle’s sign. A skull base fractur e may be associated 
with bruising over the mastoid process.
Summary box 24.5
Secondary survey
●● Battle’s sign, periorbital bruising and blood in ears/nose/
mouth may point to base of skull fracture
●● Cervical spine fractures are common and must be actively 
excluded
●● Log-roll to check whole spine for steps and tenderness, and 
for per rectum exam
Surgical management
Fractures: skull vault
Closed linear fractures of the skull vault are managed con -
servatively. Open or comminuted fractures should be con -
sidered for debridement and prophylactic antibiotic therapy. 
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   332 25/10/2017   08:15Moderate and sev ere traumatic brain injury 333
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Depressed skull fractures involve inward displacement of a 
bone fragment by at least the thickness of the skull (Figures 
24.4 and 24.5). They occur when small objects hit the skull 
at high velocity. They are usually compound (open) fractures, 
and are associated with a high incidence of infection, neuro-
logical deficit and late-onset epilepsy. These fractures require 
exploration and elevation, especially where intracranial air is 
present pointing to a breach in the dura mater. Fractures that 
involve the air sinuses should generally be managed as open 
fractures, using broad spectrum antibiotics with or without 
exploration. 
Fractures: skull base
Clinical signs of skull base fracture include bleeding or CSF 
leak from the ears (otorrhoea) or nose (rhinnorrhea), and 
bruising behind the ear (Figure 24.3) or around the eyes. 
Skull base fractures may be complicated by pituitary dys -
function, arterial dissection or cranial nerve deficits, with 
anosmia, facial palsy or hearing loss typical. CSF leak will 
generally resolve spontaneously but persistent leak can result 
in meningitis so repair may be required. Blind nasogastric 
tube placement is contraindicated in these patients.
Extradural haematoma
Extradural haematoma (Figure 24.6) is a neurosurgical emer-
gency. It results from rupture of an artery , vein or venous 
sinus, in association with a skull fracture. The classical injury 
is a fracture to the thin squamous temporal bone, with asso -
ciated damage to the middle meningeal artery. Transient loss 
of consciousness is typical, and the patient may then present 
in the subsequent lucid interval with headache but without 
any neurological deficit. As the haematoma expands, com -
pensation is exhausted (see Monro Kellie doctrine above), 
with rapid deterioration. There is contralateral hemiparesis, 
reduced conscious level and ipsilateral pupillary dilatation, 
the cardinal signs of brain compression and herniation.
Although this classical presentation occurs in only one-
third of cases, it emphasises the potential for rapid avoidable 
Figure 24.4  A right frontal comminuted depr essed skull fracture, 
with a linear undisplaced fracture of the right parietal bone visible 
posteriorly.
Figure 24.5 A small depressed skull fracture of the parietal bone vis-
ible on axial bone windows (a), visualised on bone vault reconstruc -
tions (b) and with an underlying breach of dura (c).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Summary box 24.6
Extradural haemorrhage
●● Can follow relatively minor trauma with brief loss of 
consciousness
●● Followed by a lucid interval and then sudden deterioration
●● Lentiform lesion on computed tomography
●● Require immediate transfer to a neurosurgical unit for decision 
on evacuation
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   333 25/10/2017   08:15CHAPTER 24   Traumatic brain injury
PART 4 | TRAUMA334
and brain, constrained by the adherence of the dura to the 
skull. Mass effect may be evident, with compression of sur -
rounding brain and midline shift. Areas of mixed density sug-
gest active bleeding. A skull fracture will usually be evident. 
Extradural haematoma mandates urgent transfer to the most 
accessible neurosurgical facility, for immediate evacuation in 
deteriorating or comatose patients or those with large bleeds, 
and for close observation with serial imaging in other cases. 
The prognosis for promptly evacuated extradural haematoma, 
without associated primary brain injury, is excellent.
Acute subdural haematoma
Acute subdural haematoma (Figure 24.7a) is encountered 
in two broadly distinct contexts. Firstly, high-energy injury 
mechanisms can result in the rupture of cortical surface ves -
sels with significant associated primary brain injury. This 
results in expanding haematoma with rapid deterioration and 
Figure 24.6 (a) A large left extradural haematoma (note the bicon -
vex shape) exerts mass ef fect; a smaller right acute subdural hae-
matoma is also evident. (b) Right frontal intracerebral haematoma 
extending into the lateral ventricle is evident. There is a small right 
posterior extradural haematoma and traumatic subarachnoid bleed -
ing in the sulci of the right hemisphere. (c) A surgical temporal bone 
exposure showing a linear skull fracture with underlying extradural 
haematoma visible through a burr hole.
(a)
(b)
(c)
secondary brain injury in patients with minimal primary 
injury. 
On CT , extradural haematomas appear as a lentiform 
(lens-shaped or biconvex) hyperdense lesion between skull 
Figure 24.7  (a) Right-sided acute subdural haematoma (hyper -
dense). The substantial midline shift reflects brain swelling as well as 
bleeding; this is a high-energy injury. (b) Bilateral chronic subdural 
haematomas: the left is mixed density, the hypodense material repre-
senting old blood and the higher density indicating more recent bleed-
ing, probably loculated so requiring a craniotomy to evacuate. The 
bleed on the right is isodense, indicating intermediate age.
(a)
(b)
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   334 25/10/2017   08:16Moderate and sev ere traumatic brain injury 335
PART 4 | TRAUMA
developing signs of raised ICP , reminiscent of extradural hae-
matoma without the lucid interval. These collections require 
prompt evacuation, typically by craniotomy or craniectomy.
In a second group of patients, older and often anticoagu -
lated, a lower-energy injury leads to venous bleeding around 
the brain. Depending on the total volume of bleeding, the 
resulting haematoma may present early as acute subdural hae-
matoma, after delay and osmotic expansion as chronic sub -
dural haematoma or may even remain clinically silent. This 
latter group may present much later with a further ‘acute-on-
chronic’ subdural haematoma. On diagnosis, clotting function 
should be corrected wherever possible. Bleeds of significant 
size, with significant associated midline shift or with deteri -
orating neurology, require urgent evacuation. Smaller bleeds 
in neurologically stable patients may be managed conserva -
tively, at least initially: liquefaction of the clot over 7–10 days 
after the bleed may allow for a much less invasive evacuation 
through burr holes.
or hyperdense, and mixed density can indicate an acute-on-
chronic subdural haematoma.
Anticoagulation should be reversed, either by administra-
tion of vitamin K, or urgently by transfusion of recombinant 
clotting factors in patients who have deteriorated acutely. 
Conservative management, sometimes with administration 
of corticosteroids, can be considered for small bleeds without 
symptoms or with headache alone. For the majority, drainage 
is performed using burr holes. Urgency is dictated by the clin-
ical condition of the patient and imaging evidence of mass 
effect. If clinically stable, a delay of 7–10 days may be consid-
ered to allow platelet function to normalise after withdrawal 
of aspirin/clopidogrel. 
Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage
Trauma is the commonest cause of subarachnoid haemorrhage 
(Figures 24.6b, 24.8), and this is managed conservatively. 
It is not usually associated with significant vasospasm, which 
characterises aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage (see 
later). The possibility of spontaneous subarachnoid haemor -
rhage leading to collapse and so causing a head injury needs 
to be borne in mind, and formal or CT angiography may be 
required to exclude this.
Summary box 24.7
Acute subdural haemorrhage
●● High-energy injury, or elderly/anticoagulated
●● Generally requires urgent evacuation by craniotomy/
craniectomy
Since the dura is not adherent to the brain as it is to the 
skull, subdural blood is free to expand across the brain surface 
giving a diffuse concave appearance.
Chronic subdural haematoma
Chronic subdural haematoma (Figure 24.7b) is a common 
cause of acute neurological deterioration in the elderly. Cere-
bral atrophy in this age group results in stretching of cortical–
dural bridging veins, which are then vulnerable to rupture. 
The resulting haematoma can expand over days or weeks by 
osmosis, ultimately producing symptoms of raised ICP or focal 
deficits. There is usually a history of recent injury, but espe -
cially in the context of antiplatelet or anticoagulant medica -
tion even apparently trivial impacts may be responsible.
Summary box 24.8
Chronic subdural haemorrhage
●● Common in the elderly especially those on anticoagulants
●● Clinical deficits result from osmotic expansion of a degrading 
clot over days/weeks
●● Diffuse hypodense lesion on computed tomography
●● Burr hole drainage is usually preferred.
Figure 24.8 A large right extradural haematoma is evident. Ther e 
are widespread cerebral contusions most prominent in the left frontal 
lobe. There is traumatic subarachnoid blood in the third and lateral 
ventricles.
On presentation, it is important to exclude coexisting 
electrolyte disturbance and infections, which may contribute 
to clinical impairment. Imaging reveals diffuse hypodensity 
overlying the brain surface. Recent bleeding may be isodense 
Summary box 24.9
Specific head injuries
●● Traumatic vs. primary subarachnoid haemorrhage is an 
important distinction
●● Cerebral contusions arise adjacent to rough bone surfaces
●● Diffuse axonal injury results from extreme accelerations of the 
skull contents
●● Arterial dissection is associated with fractures of the skull 
base
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   335 25/10/2017   08:16CHAPTER 24   Traumatic brain injury
PART 4 | TRAUMA336
Cerebral contusions
Contusions are common and are found predominantly where 
brain is in contact with the irregularly ridged inside of the 
skull, i.e. at the inferior frontal lobes and temporal poles. 
‘Coup contre-coup’ contusions are brain injury at the site 
of impact and where the brain is struck by the inside of the 
skull on the far side, as the skull and brain accelerate and 
then decelerate out of synchrony with each other. Contusions 
appear heterogenous on CT, reflecting their composition of 
injured brain matter interspersed with acute blood (Figure 
24.8). Contusions rarely require surgical intervention, but 
may warrant delayed evacuation to reduce mass effect.
Diffuse axonal injury
This is a form of primary brain injury, seen in high-energy 
accidents, and which usually renders the patient comatose. It 
is strictly a pathological diagnosis made at postmortem, but 
haemorrhagic foci in the corpus callosum and dorsolateral 
rostral brainstem on CT may be suggestive, although the CT 
often appears normal.
Arterial dissection
Cerebral arterial dissection occurs spontaneously or in the 
context of trauma. In the hours after significant trauma, 
dissection of the carotid extracranially, or at the skull base 
in association with fractures, is most common. It presents 
with headache, neck pain and focal ischaemic deficits, due 
to occlusion by mural haematoma, thrombus and thrombo -
embolism. Intracranial dissection often affects the vertebral 
artery and may result in subarachnoid bleeding.
Medical management
From initial resuscitation, through surgical intervention and 
into the subsequent phase of intensive care management, 
medical management strategies aim to minimise secondary 
brain injury, through avoidance of hypoxia and hypotension 
and control of ICP . Unchecked, secondary injury leads to a 
further cycle of deterioration (Figures 24.2 and 24.9). 
severe TBI managed in non-neurosurgical centres, and this is 
reflected in NICE guidelines, which recommend early transfer 
irrespective of the need for surgery.
Control of intracranial pressure
Intubation and ventilation is required early in the manage-
ment of severe brain injury for airway control. It is often 
required in moderate brain injury to facilitate the safe man -
agement and transfer of unstable and frequently agitated 
patients and in order to control ICP . UK trauma audit and 
research network data indicate that severe TBI survival is 
better in a neurosurgical centre, irrespective of the need for 
surgery. Where there is evidence of raised ICP , for example 
pupil changes, a bolus of mannitol may be administered to 
control pressure temporarily while scanning and transferring 
the patient.
Management of the intubated patient, following evacu-
ation of any focal haematomas, is guided by ICP monitoring 
using a bolt ICP monitor, or else an external ventricular drain 
inserted into the lateral ventricle, which can also contribute 
to ICP control by permitting CSF drainage. A sustained rise 
of ICP over 20–25 mmHg above normal is associated with a 
poor outcome, and maintenance of a cerebral perfusion pres-
sure of at least 60 mmHg is important in preventing secondary 
injury.
ICP can be controlled by simple measures including rais-
ing the head of the bed and loosening the collar to improve 
venous drainage. Seizures and pyrexia should be actively con-
trolled. Medical management titrated to ICP includes esca-
lating doses of sedatives, analgesics and ultimately muscle 
relaxants. Target ventilatory and circulatory parameters are 
set out in Table 24.5.
Where these measures fail, neurointensivists may seek to 
control brain swelling using mannitol or hypertonic saline 
infusions. Where autoregulation is preserved, inducing high 
cerebral perfusion pressure may reduce ICP through vaso -
constriction. A range of further interventions are effective in 
controlling ICP , but evidence for long-term outcome benefit 
is limited or absent. These include induction of therapeutic 
hypothermia or thiopentone coma and surgical decompres -
sive craniectomy.
Raised
intracranial
pressure
Reduced
cerebral
perfusion
Deranged
autoregulationNecrosis
In/f_lammation
Hypoxia
Increased metabolic requirements – 
seizure, pyrexia, in/f_lammation
Hypotension
Secondary
brain injury
Figure 24.9 Brain swelling and mass lesions contribute to a raised 
intracranial pressure, which compromises perfusion, leading to sec -
ondary brain injury and further swelling.
Summary box 24.10
Medical management of head injury
●● First-line ICP control involves optimising sedation, ventilation 
and serum sodium levels
●● Paralysis and external ventricular CSF drainage are important 
adjuncts
●● There is little evidence for benefit with therapeutic 
hypothermia, barbiturate coma or decompressive craniectomy 
●● Check pituitary function, consider seizure prophylaxis, 
commence enteral nutrition within 72 hours
The role of neurosurgical centres
Early discussion of patients and imaging with the regional 
neurosurgical service is advisable. UK trauma audit and 
research network data show higher mortality in patients with 
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   336 25/10/2017   08:16Further reading 337
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Pituitary dysfunction
Electrolyte imbalance is common in TBI, and contributes to 
brain swelling and to causing seizures. Diverse mechanisms 
are involved. Cerebral salt wasting, a poorly understood form 
of excretory dysregulation in association with brain insult, 
leads to volume depletion and hyponatraemia. The syndrome 
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) leads to a 
water retention and hyponatraemia in the context of pituitary 
damage. This is of particular concern in head injury since low 
serum osmotic pressure can contribute to brain swelling, so 
hypotonic fluids are avoided in this setting. Conversely, ADH 
secretion may be compromised in the context of trauma, pro-
ducing diabetes insipidus resulting in hypernatraemia.
All aspects of pituitary function may be compromised in 
the setting of TBI. Routine screening of pituitary hormone 
levels and liaison with endocrinology is an important aspect 
of optimal medical management. Note that routine, rather 
than directed, administration of corticosteroids in severe 
head injury is associated with increased mortality and is not 
recommended.
Seizures
Seizures may occur early (within 7 days) or late. The cumu -
lative probability is between 2% (mild TBI) and 60% (severe 
TBI with exacerbating features). Risk factors include injury 
severity, especially the presence of intracerebral haemorrhage, 
and depressed skull fractures and tears of the dura. Antiepi-
leptics, typically phenytoin, are administered prophylactically 
to patients at high risk of seizures.
Nutrition
Enteral nutrition is preferred to intravenous parenteral nutri-
tion on grounds of cost and associated complications, and 
should be commenced within 72 hours of injury. Prokinetics 
(e.g. metaclopramide, erythromycin) can be administered to 
promote absorption.
Outcomes and sequelae
The long-term sequelae of moderate and severe traumatic 
brain injury include headache, memory and cognitive impair-
ments, contributing to the postconcussive syndrome described 
above. Rehabilitation represents a complex and prolonged 
multidisciplinary challenge. The Glasgow outcome score is 
used to quantify the degree of recovery achieved after head 
injury, especially for research purposes, and is detailed in Table 
24.6. Good recovery implies independence and potential to 
return to work rather than a full return to previous capacity.
TABLE 24.6 Glasgow outcome score (GOS).
Good recovery 5
Moderate disability 4
Severe disability 3
Persistent vegetative state 2
Dead 1
TABLE 24.5 Key parameters to maintain in head-injured 
patients in neurointensive care.
pCO2 = 4.5–5.0 kPa
pO2>11 kPa
MAP = 80–90 mmHg
ICP <20 mmHg
CPP >60 mmHg 
[Na+] >140 mmol/L
[K+] >4 mmol/L
FURTHER READING
Greenberg MS. Handbook of neurosurgery , 8th edn. Stuttgart: Thieme 
Medical Publishers, 2016.
Samandouras G (ed). The neurosurgeon’s handbook. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2010.
04_24-B&L27_Pt4_Ch24.indd   337 25/10/2017   08:16Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To be familiar with:
 • The accurate assessment of spinal trauma
 • The basic management of spinal trauma and the major 
pitfalls
 • The pathophysiology and types of spinal cord injury
 • The prognosis of spinal cord injury, factors affecting 
functional outcome and common associated 
complications
Neck and spine
25
ANATOMY OF THE SPINE AND 
SPINAL CORD
Spinal column anatomy
The vertebral column is composed of a series of motion 
segments (Figure 25.1). A motion segment consists of two 
adjacent vertebrae, their intervertebral disc and ligamentous 
restraints (Figure 25.2).
Vertebral body
Facet
joints
Pedicle
Figure 25.1 The spinal motion segment.
Regional variations
Upper cervical spine anatomy is designed to facilitate motion 
(Figure 25.3), and stability here is dependent on ligamentous 
restraints (Figure 25.4). Vertebral anatomy from C3 to C7 is 
similar. The cervicothoracic (Figure 25.5) and thoracolum­
bar junctions (Figure 25.6) are transitional zones where the 
1
23
4
5
Figure 25.2 Ligamentous spinal restraints. (1) Anterior longitudinal 
ligament, (2) intervertebral disc and posterior longitudinal ligament, 
(3) facet joint capsule, (4) interspinous ligament, (5) supraspinous 
ligament.
Posterior
tubercle
Atlas
(inferior view)
Dens
Axis
(posterosuperior view)
Posterior
arch
Posterior
articular
facet
Superior
articular
facet
Inferior
articular
facet
Anterior
arch
Anterior
tubercle
Spinous
process
Figure 25.3 Atlantoaxial bony anatomy.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   338 25/10/2017   08:17Anatomy of the spine and spinal cor d 339
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
divided into three columns: anterior, middle and posterior 
(Figure 25.7) If two or more columns of the spine are injured 
the spine is considered unstable. The AO classifications 
(Magerl and AO Spine Subaxial Classification System) are 
based on the mechanism of injury and used to assess spinal 
stability.
Summary box 25.1
Spinal column anatomy
●● Upper cervical spine stability is dependent on ligamentous 
restraints
●● The cervicothoracic and thoracolumbar junctions are common 
sites of injury
Ascending
band
Transverse
band
Cruciate
ligament
Posterior
longitudinal
ligament
Figure 25.4 Atlantoaxial ligaments.
Figure 25.5 Cervicothoracic facet subluxation (arrow) (easily missed 
with inadequate x-rays).
Figure 25.6  Coronal T2-weighted magnetic resonance image 
demonstrating a fracture dislocation at the thoracolumbar junction.
Anterior Middle Posterior
Figure 25.7 The three-column model of spinal stability.
spine changes from a mobile section (cervical and lumbar) 
to a more fixed one (thoracic). These two areas are common 
sites of injury.
Spinal stability
Spinal stability is the ability of the spine to withstand physio­
logical loads with acceptable pain, avoiding progressive 
deformity or neurological deficit. The spinal column can be 
Spinal neuroanatomy
The spinal cord extends from the foramen magnum to the L1/
L2 level, where it ends as the conus medullaris in adults (lower 
in children) (Figure 25.8). Below this level lies the cauda 
equina. Figure 25.9  illustrates a cross ­section of the spinal 
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   339 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA340
cord. The lateral spinothalamic tracts transmit the sensations 
of pain and temperature, the lateral corticospinal tracts are 
responsible for motor function and the posterior columns 
transmit position, vibration and deep pressure  sensation.
The spinothalamic tracts cross to the opposite side of the 
spinal cord within three levels of entering the cord. In contrast, 
the corticospinal tracts and the posterior columns decussate 
proximally at the craniocervical level. The tracts are topo ­
graphically arranged; proximal body function is represented 
centrally, with distal body function arranged peripherally.
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
Basic points
The advanced trauma life support (ATLS) principles apply in 
all cases (see Chapters 22 and 23). The spine should initially 
be immobilised using full spinal precautions, on the assump ­
tion that every trauma patient has a spinal injury until proven 
otherwise (Figure 25.10). The finding of a spinal injury 
makes it more (not less) likely that there will be a second 
injury at another level.
Spinal boards lead to skin breakdown in insensate patients, 
and are very uncomfortable for those with normal sensation 
(Figure 25.11). They should only be used for transferring 
patients.
Cord
Conus medullaris
Cauda equina
Figure 25.8 The spinal cord ends at T12/L1 at the conus medullaris, 
which gives rise to the cauda equina.
S
Dorsal
sulcus
Fasciculus
gracilis
Fasciculus
cuneatus
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Lateral
spinothalamic
tract
Dorsal
column
Lateral
column
Ventral
column
Ventral
/f_issure
Anterior
spinothalamic
tract
S
L T
C
C
C
T
T
L
L
Figure 25.9 A cross-section of the spinal cord.
Figure 25.10 Spinal immobilisation.
Figure 25.11  Pressure sores may develop rapidly in insensate 
patients.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   340 25/10/2017   08:17Physical examination 341
PART 4 | TRAUMA
PERTINENT HISTORY
The mechanism and velocity of injury should be determined 
at an early stage. A check for the presence of spinal pain 
should be made. The onset and duration of neurological 
symptoms should also be recorded.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Initial assessment
The primary survey always takes precedence, followed by a 
careful systems examination paying particular attention to 
the abdomen and chest. Spinal cord injury may mask signs of 
intra­abdominal injury.
Spinal examination
The overlying skin should be inspected (e.g. for possible 
penetrating wounds) and the entire spine must be palpated. 
A formal spinal log roll must be performed to achieve this 
 (Figure 25.12). Significant swelling, tenderness, palpable 
steps or gaps suggest a spinal injury. A rectal examination 
should be undertaken to assess anal tone and perianal sen ­
sation (see Neurological examination). Seatbelt marks on 
the abdomen and chest must be noted, as these suggest a 
high­energy accident.
Neurological examination
The American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) neurolog­
ical evaluation system (Figure 25.13) is an internationally 
accepted method of neurological evaluation.
Motor function is assessed using the Medical Research 
Council (MRC) grading system (0–5) in key muscle groups 
(Figure 25.13). A motor score can then be calculated (max­
imum 100).
Sensory function (light touch and pin prick) is assessed 
using the dermatomal map (Figure 25.13). A total sensory 
score is then calculated.
Rectal examination is performed to assess anal tone, vol ­
untary anal contraction and perianal sensation.
Level of neurological impairment
The ASIA Neurological Impairment Scale is based on the 
Frankel classification of spinal cord injury:
 ● A: complete spinal cord injury;
 ● B: sensation present, motor absent;
 ● C: sensation present, motor present but not useful (MRC 
grade <3/5);
 ● D: sensation present, motor useful (MRC grade ≥3/5);
 ● E: normal function.
Summary box 25.2
Patient assessment
●● Use ATLS principles in all cases of spinal injury
●● In polytrauma cases suspect a spinal injury
●● A second spinal injury at a remote level may be present in 
10% of cases
●● Spinal boards cause pressure sores
Figure 25.12 Spinal log roll.
Summary box 25.3
Physical examination
●● There are three types of shock following spinal cord injury
●● The ASIA neurological scoring system should be used
●● Functional motor power is grade 3/5 or higher
The unconscious patient
Definitive clearance of the spine may not be possible in the 
initial stages and spinal immobilisation should then be main­
tained, until MRI or equivalent can be used to rule out an 
unstable spinal injury.
Hans Ludwig Frankel , formerly Clinical Director, The National Spinal Injuries Centre, Stoke Mandeville, Buckinghamshire, UK.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   341 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA342
Patient Name
Examiner Name
AMERICAN SPINAL INJURY ASSOCIATION
Date/Time of Exam
STANDARD NEUROLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
OF SPINAL CORD INJURY
MOTOR SENSORY
KEY SENSORY POINTS
ISC   S
KEY MUSCLES
(scoring on reverse side)
Elbow /f_lexorsC5
R L
R L
C6
C7
UPPER LIMB
TOTAL
(MAXIMUM)
LOWER LIMB
TOTAL
(MAXIMUM)
Comments:
C8
T1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
Knee extensors
Hip /f_lexors
Ankle dorsi/f_lexors
Long toe extensors
Ankle plantar /f_lexors
Voluntary anal contraction
(Yes/No)
(MAXIMUM)
TOTALS
This form may be copied freely but should not be altered without permission from the American Spinal Injury Association.
(56) (56) (56)
(max: 112)
Caudal extent of partially
innervated segments
(max: 112)
(56)
Incomplete /H11005 Any sensory or motor function in S4–S5
The most caudal segment
with normal function
Wrist extensors
Elbow extensors
Finger /f_lexors (distal phalanx of middle /f_inger)
Finger abductors (little /f_inger)
(25) (25) (50)
(25) (25) (50)
LIGHT
TOUCH
R
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4–5 Any anal sensation (Yes/No)
L5 L5
L
4
L
4
L
3
L
3
L
2
L
2
S1 S1
S2
C8 C6
C7
S 3
S4–5
C6 C6
C5 C5
T3
C4 C4
C3
C3C2
C2
T2 T2
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1 L1
L2 L2
C2
C3
L3 L3
L4 L4
L5 L5
S1S1
S1
T1 T1
Palm
Dorsum Dorsum
Palm
S2
SENSORY
MOTOR
R L
PIN PRICK SCORE
LIGHT TOUCH SCORE
ZONE OF PARTIAL
PRESERVATION
COMPLETE OR INCOMPLETE?
{
NEUROLOGICAL
LEVEL
ASIA IMPAIRMENT SCALE
SENSORY
MOTOR
R L L 0 /H11005 absent
1 /H11005 impaired
2 /H11005 normal
NT /H11005 not testable
PIN
PRICK
Key
Sensory
Points
/H11001
/H11001
/H11001
/H11001 /H11005
/H11005
/H11005
/H11005
Figure 25.13 American Spinal Injury Association neurological evaluation.
Figure 25.14 Large prevertebral haematoma (arrows).
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Plain radiographs
A full cervical spine series includes anteroposterior and lat­
eral radiographs of the whole cervical spine, and open mouth 
views. Clear visualisation of the cervicothoracic junction is 
essential in all cases of suspected spinal injury, as this is a com­
mon site for injury and often not seen on a plain radiograph. 
If a spinal fracture is identified then further imaging of the 
whole spine is required because there is a 15% incidence of a 
further spinal fracture.
A system for evaluation of the lateral cervical 
spine radiograph
1 Assess prevertebral soft tissue swelling (Figure 25.14).
2 Assess sagittal alignment using three imaginary lines (Fig-
ure 25.15).
3 Assess for instability (Figure 25.16):
a. 3.5 mm of sagittal translation;
b. Sagittal angulation of >11° (compared to adjacent level).
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   342 25/10/2017   08:17Diagnostic imaging 343
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) scanning with two­dimensional 
(2D) reconstruction remains the gold standard in spinal 
trauma and is indicated for patients with suspected or visi ­
ble injuries on plain radiographs (Figure 25.17 ). Patients 
undergoing a head CT scan for closed head injury should also 
have a cervical screening CT. Often CT scans of the chest 
and abdomen are performed as part of the assessment of poly­
trauma patients and will usually include the spine.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is indicated in all cases 
with neurological deficit and where assessment of ligamen ­
tous structures is important (Figure 25.18).
Dynamic imaging
Lateral flexion–extension radiographs of the cervical spine 
should not be undertaken acutely although they can have a 
role in assessing spinal stability in the longer term.
Figure 25.16 Lateral cervical spine x-ray showing obvious spinal 
instability with marked sagittal angulation and translation. This patient 
walked into the outpatient department.
Figure 25.17 Axial computed tomography demonstrating a thora -
columbar fracture dislocation.
Figure 25.18  Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic r esonance imaging 
scan demonstrating a cervical spine subluxation and spinal cor d 
contusion.
a
b
c
Figure 25.15 The anterior (a), posterior (b) and spinolaminar (c) 
lines are useful in identifying anterior translation on lateral x-rays of 
the neck.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   343 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA344
In many cases of spinal trauma, formal open reduction and 
stabilisation using internal fixation is also required (Figure 
25.20).
Summary box 25.4
Diagnostic imaging of spinal injuries
●● Clear visualisation of the cervicothoracic junction is 
mandatory
●● Plain cervical spine radiographs fail to identity 15% of injuries
Figure 25.19 Skeletal traction using skull tongs.
(a) (b) (c)
(d)
Figure 25.20 (a) Thoracolumbar fracture dislocation, (b) treated with open reduction and pos-
terior fixation. (c) Bifacetal cervical spine dislocation. (d) Posterior stabilisation following closed 
reduction.
CLASSIFICATION AND 
MANAGEMENT OF SPINAL AND 
SPINAL CORD INJURIES
Basic management principles
Spinal realignment
In cases of cervical spine subluxation or dislocation, skeletal 
traction is necessary to achieve anatomical realignment. This 
is done using skull tongs (Figure 25.19).
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   344 25/10/2017   08:17Specific spinal injuries 345
PART 4 | TRAUMA
A halo brace can be used to perform a closed realignment 
and immobilisation of cervical fractures (Figure 25.21).
Stabilisation
The indication for operative intervention is influenced by the 
injury pattern, level of pain, degree of instability and the pres­
ence of a neurological deficit. The only absolute indication for 
surgery in spinal trauma is deteriorating neurological function.
Decompression of the neural elements
Realignment of the spine and correction of the spinal defor ­
mity may achieve an indirect decompression. A direct decom­
pression of the neural elements may also be indicated if there 
are bone fragments causing residual compression or a signif ­
icant haematoma (Figure 25.22). The timing of surgery in 
spinal cord trauma remains controversial.
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids are no longer indicated in acute spinal cord 
injury because of a lack of evidence to support efficacy. 
Steroids do have a role in non­traumatic spinal cord compres­
sion e.g. malignant spinal cord compression (MSCC).
SPECIFIC SPINAL INJURIES
Upper cervical spine (skull–C2)
Occipital condyle fracture
This is a relatively stable injury often associated with head 
injuries and is best treated in a hard collar for 6–8 weeks.
Occipitoatlantal dislocation
This injury is usually caused by high energy trauma and is 
often fatal. The dislocation may be anterior , posterior or 
Summary box 25.5
Management of spinal trauma
●● Neurological deficit determines management
●● Deteriorating neurological status requires surgical intervention
●● Corticosteroids are ineffective
Figure 25.21 External immobilisation using a halo jacket.
Figure 25.22 (a) Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging 
scan showing an L1 burst fracture and neural compression; (b) treated 
with combined anterior and posterior surgery.
(a)
(b)
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   345 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA346
 vertical (Figure 25.23). Power’s ratio (Figure 25.24) is used 
to assess skull translation. Treatment is with a halo brace or 
occipitocervical fixation.
Atlas fracture (Jefferson fracture)
Fracture of the C1 ring is associated with axial loading of the 
cervical spine and may be stable or unstable (Figure 25.25a , 
b). Associated transverse ligament rupture may occur (Figure 
25.25c). Most are treated non­operatively in a cervical collar 
or halo brace.
Atlantoaxial instability
This is defined as non ­physiological movement between C1 
and C2. It can be translational or rotatory and resolves either 
spontaneously or with traction followed by a cervical collar. 
Isolated, traumatic transverse ligament rupture leading to 
C1/2 instability is uncommon and is treated with posterior 
C1/2 fusion (Figure 25.26).
Odontoid fractures
There are three types of odontoid peg fracture (Figure 
25.27). Neurological injury is rare. The majority of acute 
injuries are treated non ­operatively in a hard collar or halo 
jacket for 3 months. Internal fixation with an anterior com­
pression screw is indicated for displaced fractures (Figure 
25.28), and a posterior C1/2 fusion is considered in cases of  
non­union. In the elderly, treatment in a soft collar should be 
considered on the basis that a relatively stable pseudarthrosis 
will occur.
Barry Powers , contemporary, Chief and Clinical Professor of Radiology, Duplin General Hospital, Kenansville, NC, USA, described his ratio in 1979.
Sir Geoffrey Jefferson , 1886–1961, Professor of Neurosurgery, University of Manchester, UK, became the UK’s first Professor of Neurosurgery in 1939. In 1947 
he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, a rare distinction for a practising surgeon. Although he became a neurosurgeon, he performed the first successful 
embolectomy in England in 1925 at Salford Royal Hospital.
Figure 25.23 Vertical occipitocervical dislocation.
A
B
C
O
Figure 25.24 Power’s ratio. BC/OA ≥1 indicates anterior translation, 
≤0.75 indicates posterior translation.
(a) (b)
Mass deviation
Figure 25.25 Stable (a) versus unstable (b) Jefferson’s fracture of 
C1. (c) Open mouth view of C1/2 demonstrating C1 lateral mass devi-
ation (arrows). Rupture of the transverse ligament is present when the 
combined lateral mass deviation exceeds 6.9 mm.
(c)
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   346 25/10/2017   08:17Specific spinal injuries 347
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Figure 25.26 (a) Atlantoaxial subluxation. (b) C1/2 posterior fusion 
using C1 lateral mass and C2 pedicle screws.
(a)
(b)
Traumatic spondylolisthesis of the axis 
(hangman’s fracture)
This is a traumatic spondylolisthesis of C2 on C3. There a 
four types with varying degrees of instability (Figure 25.29). 
Those with significant displacement or associated facet 
dislocation are treated operatively, usually with posterior 
stabilisation.
Type I
Type II
Type III
Figure 25.27 Types of odontoid fracture.
Figure 25.28 (a) Type II odontoid fracture (arrow); (b) treated with 
an anterior compression screw.
(a)
(b)
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   347 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA348
Fractures in patients with ankylosing 
spondylitis
Ankylosing spondylitis is a seronegative inflammatory disor ­
der that causes autofusion of the spine. These patients have 
a higher risk of spinal fractures and spinal cord injury than 
the normal population. Senior advice should be obtained, 
because application of a cervical collar may be contraindi­
cated, and patients should be managed instead in a position of 
comfort. Surgical stabilisation is commonly indicated.
Subaxial cervical spine (C3–C7)
The pattern of lower cervical spine injury depends on the 
mechanism of trauma. These include compression fractures 
(hyperflexion), burst fractures (axial compression) and facet 
subluxation/dislocation injuries (distraction–flexion), tear ­
drop fractures (hyperextension) and fracture of posterior ele ­
ments. The more severe injuries are accompanied by spinal 
cord injury (Figure 25.30a). Operative intervention may be 
required to decompress the spinal cord, and to stabilise the 
spine with internal fixation (Figure 25.30b).
Facet subluxation/dislocation ranges in severity from 
minor instability to complete dislocation with spinal cord 
injury (Figure 25.31).
Figure 25.30 (a) Cervical burst fracture with spinal cord contusion; 
(b) treated by anterior decompression and reconstruction.
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.29 (a) Hangman’s fractures of C2 with minimal forward 
translation (arrow). (b) C2/3 subluxation with spinal cord contusion.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   348 25/10/2017   08:17Specific spinal injuries 349
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Thoracic and thoracolumbar 
fractures
The system developed by the AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für 
Osteosynthesefragen) can be used to classify these fractures. 
There are three main injury types, A, B and C, with increas ­
ing instability and risk of neurological injury.
Type A fractures are vertebral body compression fractures. 
Type B injuries involve distraction of the anterior or posterior 
elements and type C injuries are rotational and often coexist 
with Type A or Type B injuries. The majority of type B and 
type C injuries require surgical stabilisation.
Thoracic spine (T1–T10)
Osteoporotic wedge compression fractures in the elderly are 
the commonest injury in this group. Most of these fractures 
heal, but symptomatic fractures can be treated with percuta ­
neous bone cement augmentation, known as vertebroplasty 
or kyphoplasty (Figure 25.32).
In trauma cases, unstable fractures are associated with sig­
nificant energy transfer to the patient and may be associated 
with major internal injuries, such as pulmonary contusion 
and spinal cord injury. The combination of thoracic spine 
disruption and a sternal fracture (Figure 25.33) also carries 
a significant risk of aortic rupture. Multiple posterior rib frac­
tures and rib dislocations above and below a thoracic spinal 
injury signify a major rotational injury to the chest and can 
be associated with vascular injury and significant pulmonary 
contusion (Figure 25.34). Multimodality diagnostic imag­
ing is recommended. Surgery is appropriate for most thoracic 
injuries if unstable.
Summary box 25.6
Cervical spine injuries
●● The majority of upper cervical spinal injuries are treated non-
operatively
●● Spinal cord injury is more commonly associated with subaxial 
cervical spinal injuries
Figure 25.31 C5/6 bifacetal dislocation (arrows).
AO , Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen, may be translated from the German as ‘Working Party on Problems of Bone Repair’.
(a)
(b)
80
67
Figure 25.32 (a) Lateral x-ray showing multiple osteoporotic com -
pression fractures. (b) Reduction in thoracic kyphotic deformity fol -
lowing four-level kyphoplasty.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   349 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA350
Thoracolumbar spinal fractures (T11–L2)
The thoracolumbar junction is especially prone to injury. 
This can vary from a from minor wedge fracture to spinal 
dislocation (Figure 25.35). Burst fractures are comminuted 
fractures of the vertebral body. They are characterised by wid­
ening of the distance between the pedicles, and can be associ­
ated with retropulsion of bone fragments into the spinal canal 
(Figure 25.36). Anterior surgery for this type of fracture is 
now very rarely used and the current treatment principles 
involve posterior fixation (Figure 25.37). Chance fractures 
Figure 25.33 Sagittal CT reconstruction showing an upper thoracic 
spine fracture dislocation (long arrow) and associated sternal fracture 
(short arrow).
A
Figure 25.34 Rotational (type C) injury at the thoracolumbar junc -
tion. Note rib fractures (long arrows) and dislocation (short arrow), and 
presence of chest tube.
Figure 25.35  Total spinal sagittal computed tomography recon -
struction demonstrating a thoracolumbar fracture dislocation (long 
arrow) and fracture of L5 (short arrow).
Figure 25.36 Lumbar burst frac -
ture with increase in interpedicu -
lar distance (a) (arrow) and spinal 
canal compromise (b).
(a) (b)
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   350 25/10/2017   08:17Specific spinal injuries 351
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Figure 25.37 Lumbar burst fracture at L2 (a), and posterior instrumentation with indirect reduction (b).
(a) (b)
Figure 25.38 A bony Chance fracture at the thoracolumbar junction 
(arrow) secondary to a lap-belt injury.
are flexion–distraction injuries of the thoracolumbar junction 
and are classically associated with the use of lap­belts (Figure 
25.38). Duodenal, pancreatic and/or aortic ruptures are also 
associated with these injuries.
Lumbar spinal fractures (L3–S1)
Most fractures of the lower lumbar spine can be treated 
non­surgically because the incidence of neurological injury 
is lower. The neural canal is more capacious at this level (the 
spinal cord terminates at L1/L2). Owing to the lumbar lor ­
dosis, patients with these injuries are less likely to develop a 
kyphotic deformity than those with injuries at the thoraco ­
lumbar junction.
Summary box 25.7
Thoracic and thoracolumbar fractures
●● Unstable thoracic spine fractures and thoracolumbar flexion–
distraction injuries are commonly associated with vascular 
and/or visceral injuries
George Quentin Chance , formerly Director of Diagnostic Radiology, The Derby Group of Hospitals, Derbyshire, UK.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   351 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA352
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF SPINAL 
CORD INJURY
The incidence and causation of spinal cord injury (SCI) vary 
globally and reflect the demographics and industrialisation of 
society. The worldwide annual incidence is 15–40 cases per 
million (according to the National Spinal Cord Injury Sta ­
tistical Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham: spinal 
cord injury facts and figures, April 2009). Road traffic acci ­
dents remain the leading cause of spinal cord injuries world­
wide. Males in the third decade of life are the most likely 
group to sustain serious spinal cord injury.
EVOLUTION OF THE 
MANAGEMENT OF SPINAL 
CORD INJURY
The development of specialised SCI centres has dramatically 
improved the survival rates, health and functional outcomes 
of individuals with SCI. The first SCI centre was estab­
lished in the USA in 1936 by Dr Donald Munro. In 1944 
The National Spinal Injuries Centre was established at Stoke 
Mandeville, England, by Sir Ludwig Guttmann.
Summary box 25.8
Spinal cord injury
●● The incidence of spinal cord injury remains constant
●● The outcome is improved in regional/national spinal cord 
injury centres
Identification of shock
Three categories of shock may occur in spinal trauma
 ● Hypovolaemic shock. Hypotension with tachycardia and 
cold clammy peripheries. This is most often due to haemor­
rhage. It should be treated with appropriate resuscitation.
 ● Neurogenic shock. This presents with hypotension, a 
normal heart rate or bradycardia and warm peripheries. 
This is due to unopposed vagal tone resulting from cervi ­
cal spinal cord injury at or above the level of sympathetic 
outflow (T1/T5). It should be treated with inotropic sup ­
port, and care should be taken to avoid fluid overload.
 ● Spinal shock. Spinal shock is a temporary physiological 
disorganisation of spinal cord function that starts within 
minutes following the injury. The length of effect is vari­
able, but it can last 6 weeks or longer. It is characterised 
by paralysis, decreased tone and hyporeflexia. Once it 
has resolved the bulbocavernosus reflex (Figure 25.39) 
returns.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SPINAL 
CORD INJURY
The primary injury
This is the direct insult to the neural elements and occurs at 
the time of the initial injury.
The secondary injury
Haemorrhage, oedema and ischaemia result in a biochemical 
cascade that causes the secondary injury. This may be accen­
tuated by hypotension, hypoxia, spinal instability and/or per­
sistent compression of the neural elements. Management of 
spinal cord injury must focus on minimising secondary injury.
Sir Ludwig Guttmann  is considered by many to be the father of spinal cord medicine. He was a leading neurosurgeon in Germany, working at the Jewish Hospital 
in Breslau. He fled to England in 1939.
Summary box 25.9
Pathophysiology of spinal cord injury
●● The spinal cord contains various tracts that are 
topographically arranged
●● Spinal cord injury involves both primary and secondary 
phases
●● Therapeutic strategies are directed at reducing the secondary 
injury
Figure 25.39 The bulbocavernosus reflex (this can be elicited in 
females by traction on the Foley catheter).
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   352 25/10/2017   08:17Rehabilitation and patient outcome 353
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Level of neurological injury
The level of neurological injury is simply the most caudal 
neurological level with normal neurological function.
Complete versus incomplete spinal 
cord injury
A spinal cord injury is incomplete when there is preservation 
of perianal sensation.
Types of incomplete spinal cord injury
There are several types of incomplete spinal cord injuries. 
These include:
 ● central cord syndrome;
 ● Brown­Séquard syndrome (hemisection);
 ● anterior spinal syndrome;
 ● posterior cord syndrome;
 ● cauda equina syndrome.
REHABILITATION AND PATIENT 
OUTCOME
The goal of spinal cord injury rehabilitation is based on a 
multidisciplinary approach. There is a focus on goal ­setting, 
maximising remaining neurological function and reintegra­
tion into employment and society. The level of neurological 
impairment determines the functional outcome (Table 25.1).
Prognosis of spinal cord injury
Despite continuing improvements in patient care, life 
 expectancy remains below normal following SCI. The 
median life expectancy is 33 years, but varies considerably 
(Table 25.2).
The prognosis for neurological recovery is strongly influ ­
enced by factors such as the level and completeness of the 
injury, ventilator dependence and the age at presentation.
Charles Edward Brown-Séquard , 1817–1894, physiologist and neurologist who held a number of academic posts, amongst them Physician, The National Hospital 
for Nervous Diseases, Queen’s Square, London, UK (1860–1864), Professor of Medicine at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA (1864–1878) and at the College 
de France, Paris, France (1878–1894). He described his syndrome in 1851.
TABLE 25.1 Expected functional outcome versus level of cervical spinal cord injury.
Level of injury Functional goal
C3–C4 Power wheelchair with mouth or chin control. Verbalise care, communicate through adaptive equipment. May be 
ventilator dependent
C5 Power wheelchair, dress upper body, self-feed with aids, wash face with assistance
C6 Propel power wheelchair, possibly push manual wheelchair, transfer with assistance, dress upper body (lower body 
with assistance), self-groom with aids, bladder/bowel care with assistance, self-feed with splints, able to drive
C7 Manual wheelchair, independent transfer, dressing (with aids), feeding, bathing, self-care. Bladder and bowel care 
with assistance
C8–T4 Independent with most activities of daily living, and bowel and bladder care
T5–T12 As above but with more ease. Independent with all self-care
L1–L5 Independent. Walk with short or long leg braces
S1–S5 Independent, able to walk if able to push off (S1) (may need brace). Bladder, bowel and sexual function may remain 
compromised
TABLE 25.2 Life expectancy (years) post injury by severity of injury and age at injury.
Age at injury No SCI Motor functional 
at any level Para Low tetra 
(C5–C8)
High tetra 
(C1–C4)
Ventilator-dependent 
at any level
(a) For people who survive the first 24 hours
20 58.4 52.8 45.6 40.6 36.1 16.6
40 39.5 34.3 28.0 23.8 20.2 7.1
60 22.2 17.9 13.1 10.2 7.9 1.4
(b) For people surviving at least 1 year post injury
20 58.4 53.3 46.3 41.7 37.9 23.3
40 39.5 34.8 28.6 24.7 21.6 11.1
60 22.2 18.3 13.5 10.8 8.8 3.1
SCI, spinal cord injury.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   353 25/10/2017   08:17CHAPTER 25  Neck and spine
PART 4 | TRAUMA354
Complications associated with 
spinal cord injury
Pressure ulcers
Many are preventable. Patients should be turned regularly on 
an appropriate mattress to minimise the risk of skin break ­
down
Pain and spasticity
Neurogenic pain is common. Once reflex activity returns 
following cord injury, spasticity may occur and can be prob ­
lematic. Intrathecal infusion of baclofen may be required in 
resistant cases.
Autonomic dysreflexia
This is a paroxysmal syndrome of hypertension, hyperhydrosis 
(above level of injury), bradycardia, flushing and headache 
in response to noxious visceral and other stimuli. It is most 
commonly triggered by bladder distension or rectal loading 
from faecal impaction.
Neurological deterioration
Post­traumatic syringomyelia (PTS) may occur in up to 28% 
of SCI patients up to 30 years following injury. Approximately 
30% of cases are symptomatic. Clinically, patients present 
with segmental pain at or above the level of injury, sensory 
loss, progressive asymmetrical weakness or increased spastic­
ity. This warrants early MRI assessment. Expanding cavities 
require neurosurgical intervention.
Thromboembolic events
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) occurs in 30% of patients with 
SCI. Fatal pulmonary embolus is reported in 1–2% of cases. 
Thomboprophylaxis with compression stockings and low 
molecular weight heparin is indicated, provided there are no 
contraindications.
Osteoporosis, heterotopic ossification and 
contractures
Disuse osteoporosis is an inevitable consequence of SCI 
and fragility fractures may occur. Heterotopic ossification 
may affect the hips, knees, shoulders and elbows. It occurs 
in 25% of spinal cord injured patients. Surgery is appropri ­
ate in selected cases. Soft tissue contractures around joints 
may occur due to spasticity but can be avoided by appropriate 
physical therapy, positioning and splinting.
FURTHER READING
Aebi M, Thalgott JS, Webb JK. AO ASIF principles in spine surgery. Ber­
lin, Heidelberg: Springer­Verlag, 1998.
Bridwell KH, DeWald RL (eds). The textbook of spinal surgery , 3rd edn. 
Philadelphia: Lipponcott, Williams and Wilkins, 2011, pp.1377–473.
British Orthopaedic Association. The initial care and transfer of patients 
with spinal cord injuries, 2006. Available from: www.sbns.org/rcsed/
RCSEdDocuments/DocumentsView.aspx?tabID=0&ItemID=31562
&MId=4607&wversion=Staging
Cotler JM, Simson MJ, An HS et al. (eds). Surgery of spinal trauma. Phil­
adelphia: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2000.
Denis F . The three column spine and its significance in the classification 
of acute thoracolumbar spinal injuries. Spine 1983; 8(8): 817–31.
Dimar JR. Early versus late stabilisation of the spine in the polytrauma 
patient. Spine 2010; 35(21S): S187–S192.
Fardon DF , Herzog RJ, Mink JH et al. (eds). Orthopaedic knowledge up -
date – spine. Rosemont, IL: American Academy of Orthopaedic Sur­
geons, 1997.
Fehlings MG. Essentials of spinal cord injury. Basic research to clinical 
practice. Stuttgart: Thieme, 2013. 
Focus issue. Spinal trauma. Spine 2006; 31(11S): S1–104.
Panjabi M, White A. Functional anatomy of the spine . Oxford: Butter ­
worth­Heinemann Ltd, 1990.
04_25-B&L27_Pt4_Ch25.indd   354 25/10/2017   08:17Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Maxillofacial trauma
Learning objectives
To be able to:
 • Identify and understand the significance of potentially 
life-threatening injuries to the face, head and neck
To have:
 • A systematic methodology for examining facial injuries
To know:
 • The classification of facial fractures
To understand:
 • The diagnosis and management of fractures of the 
middle third of the facial skeleton and the mandible
 • The principles of the diagnosis and management of 
facial soft tissue injuries
To appreciate:
 • The management of dental injuries
EMERGENCY ASSESSMENT AND 
TREATMENT
The management of a patient with facial trauma must begin 
with an immediate assessment of the airway, breathing and 
circulation in keeping with the advanced trauma life support 
(ATLS) principles (see Chapter 23). If the patient has facial 
or midface bleeding they may sit forward or be placed on their 
side (Figure 26.1) to minimise the risk of blood and/or dental 
fragments obstructing the airway. The use of good light and 
high volume suction is often helpful.
The midface, when fractured, is displaced downwards 
and backwards (Figure 26.2), and if this occurs in combi -
nation with a mandibular fracture, particularly if the ante -
rior mandible is comminuted, the tongue is also displaced 
downwards and backwards, adding to the airway compro-
mise and creating the risk of obstruction (Figure 26.3). In 
these circumstances intubation is indicated, but emergency 
procedures can be employed to buy time. In the obtunded or 
unconscious patient the maxilla can be grasped by hand, disi-
mpacted and pulled forwards. In addition, the tongue can be 
pulled forwards and held forwards, with a large suture or towel 
clip, to help clear the airway. If intubation is not possible a 
surgical airway is indicated.
Massive, life-threatening bleeding is usually only seen in 
the context of major trauma, lacerations, blast, ballistic, pen-
etrating or gunshot injuries. Significant bleeding, usually from 
the pterygoid venous plexus and/or the rich blood supply of 
the nose, can be seen in central midface injuries.
Management of massive midface bleeding may require 
intubation and the placement of anterior and or posterior 
nasal packs. There are specific inflatable nasal balloons that 
Figure 26.1 The patient should be nursed in the semiprone position 
to allow secretions, blood and foreign bodies to fall from the mouth.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 27.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 26.2 A blow from the front of the face may separate the facial 
skeleton from the base of the skull and thrust it downwards and back-
wards. 
26
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   355 25/10/2017   08:19CHAPTER 26  Maxillofacial trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA356
CLASSIFICATION OF FACIAL 
INJURIES
Bony injuries and fractures
The facial skeleton can be divided into thirds vertically:
 ● upper face (from level of canthi upwards);
 ● midface (from maxillary teeth to canthi);
 ● lower face (mandible and mandibular teeth).
In addition, the midface can be divided into central and 
lateral portions. The central midface is the naso-orbital– 
ethmoidal complex and the lateral portion comprises the 
cheekbones (Malar bones, zygomatic bones or zygomatic–
maxillary complex).
The eye socket can be considered as a separate entity, 
because orbital fractures can occur in isolation or as part of a 
constellation of multiple fractures. Orbital fractures can affect 
the orbital floor, medial and/or lateral walls and the roof of 
the orbit.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 27.3Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 26.3 Loss of nasopharyngeal space and oedema of the soft 
palate and tongue (arrows) may close off the airway in severe maxillo-
facial injuries, 2–3 hours after injury. 
Summary box 26.1
Emergency assessment
●● Airway, breathing, circulation with cervical spine control is the 
starting point
●● Do not let dramatic facial injuries distract from other 
potentially life-threatening injuries
Summary box 26.2
Classification of facial injuries
●● Divide the face into thirds
●● Assess orbit independently
●● Assess bony and soft tissue injuries
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT
History
As with all aspects of surgical diagnosis, the history is para -
mount. As much information as possible should be obtained 
about the mechanism of injury, the past medical history and 
the postinjury course. This will be directly from the patient, 
friends, family, witnesses and emergency services.
Knowledge of the mechanism of injury will often help to 
identify the potential occult injuries that are not obvious on 
first inspection. As the craniofacial region is so richly vascu -
larised, the often dramatic appearance seen in major facial 
trauma has the potential of distracting the unwary clinician 
from potentially more important injuries.
Examination
Primary survey
Initially, the primary survey is aimed at the airway: controlling 
bleeding, restoring and maintaining the circulation and 
Where skull fractures occur in combination with facial 
fractures or the fractures extend into the frontal or ethmoidal 
sinuses, they are classified as craniofacial, and a joint neuro -
surgical and maxillofacial approach is necessary.
If fractures occur at all levels of the face the term panfacial 
is utilised. This does not necessarily alter the management of 
the individual fracture components, however it does imply a 
significant degree of force and one must be suspicious of other 
injuries, especially head injuries. As with all trauma patients, 
associated injuries, including chest and abdominal trauma, 
must be actively excluded.
In considering the bony injuries, the fractures may be dis-
placed or undisplaced and comminuted or non-comminuted. 
In the past, and with particular reference to mandibular frac-
tures, stability was also considered, however with modern 
treatment methods this is a less important factor.
Soft tissue injuries and lacerations
Lacerations are crushing injuries where the soft tissues are 
compressed between the underlying bone and some form of 
blunt object. Incised wounds are caused by a cutting imple-
ment, such as a knife or glass. Often the injuries are a com -
bination of the two. Either type of wound can occur with or 
without tissue loss. Where the injury results in a communica-
tion between the skin and the mucosa of the oral cavity the 
wound is termed ‘through and through’.
can facilitate the immediate management, however Foley 
catheters may also be utilised.
Once the patient has been stabilised a more formal assess-
ment may be performed.
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   356 25/10/2017   08:19Clinical assessment 357
PART 4 | TRAUMA
assessing for neurological deficits, with cervical spine control. 
The more detailed secondary survey is aimed at a definitive 
examination, with the clear expectation that this will need to 
be repeated on several occasions.
The face, head and neck should be inspected and wounds 
cleaned and assessed for tissue loss, and then dressed to control 
any bleeding not addressed in the primary survey. Their size, 
location and depth should be carefully recorded in the case 
notes. Large and obvious foreign bo dies should be removed 
but care should be exercised with penetrating wounds involv-
ing large fragments or blades which potentially penetrate 
deep structures. These should be removed in the operating 
theatre, in more controlled conditions, after imaging (note 
also glass that may injure the assessing surgeon). On occasions 
it is helpful to administer local anaesthetic for the examina -
tion and (temporary) repair of facial lacerations, particularly 
if a single vessel continues to bleed. In these circumstances it 
is very helpful to perform a thorough examination of the key 
sensory and motor nerves that may have been injured, before 
the local anaesthetic makes this assessment meaningless.
This principle also applies to the management of those 
patients for whom intubation is imminent. While this 
may be difficult, a brief assessment of Glasgow Coma Scale 
(GCS) score, eye function (motility and acuity), facial and 
trigeminal nerves and cervical spine pain and function prior 
to the induction of anaesthesia can be very helpful in ongoing 
management.
Secondary survey
The secondary survey examination should be systematic 
because it is easy to be distracted and miss potentially import-
ant injuries that leave only a small external sign, e.g. a small 
entry wound from a stabbing to the back of the neck. The 
surface inspection should include the back of the neck, the 
whole scalp and then move to the frontal view. At this time 
it is helpful to perform a formal cranial nerve examination; 
of particular importance are cranial nerves II, III, IV , VI, V 
and VII.
Further examination
Examination of the eyes should then take place to exclude 
globe or retinal injury, as well as to assess acuity , test for dip-
lopia and assess motility. This is possible even in the most 
swollen of eyes because one can gently prise the eyelids apart 
with cotton wool buds (or microbiology swabs). These are 
held parallel to the eyelids and gently pushed into the oedem-
atous tissue close to the eyelashes, rotating the swabs to open 
the eye. A colleague can then examine the eye.
The position of the globe – whether there is proptosis or 
enophthalmos – and visual acuity (utilising a Snellin chart) 
in each eye, and whether there is diplopia in all nine positions 
of gaze, should be recorded.
The intraoral examination is facilitated by the use of good 
light (a headlight is helpful) and suction to allow removal of 
blood and saliva. The teeth should be examined and their 
presence or absence noted. Dental injuries should be classi -
fied. Teeth may be knocked out in an injury (termed avul -
sion), displaced but still attached to soft tissues and/or bone 
(termed subluxation) or fractured. If a tooth is mobile it may 
be subluxated or have a root fracture (detected on a radio-
graph). It is important to account for all missing teeth or 
tooth fragments as aspiration of an avulsed tooth or tooth 
fragment is a major risk. If there is any doubt about the loca -
tion of missing teeth a chest radiograph should be obtained.
If there is a fracture of the mandible, the overlying mucosa 
is often torn and there may be an associated haematoma in 
the floor of the mouth (Figure 26.4). A key assessment is 
that of the dental occlusion (the way in which the teeth bite 
together). Patients are able to discriminate tiny alterations in 
their occlusion. These occlusal changes may represent dental 
injuries or, more commonly, displaced fractures of the maxilla 
and/or mandible.
Palpation of the bony contours of the facial bones should 
identify sites of tenderness, steps and asymmetry. This can 
start at the supraorbital margins, move around the infraorbital 
margins and then along the zygomatic arches, moving onto 
the condylar heads of the mandible and then running along 
the lower border of the mandible.
Investigations
The investigations required fall into two major categories: 
first, those required to confirm the provisional and specific 
clinical diagnosis with regard to the facial injuries and, sec -
ond, those to assess and manage the systemic condition of 
the patient.
Systemic investigations will be governed by the general 
state of the patient and the past medical history. Typically, 
they will include routine laboratory (haematological and bio-
chemical) investigations and radiological (for example the 
cervical spine) and other imaging.
Specific head and neck investigations are utilised and the 
general trend is away from plain radiology towards computed 
tomography (CT) scanning. If the clinical picture suggests an 
isolated mandibular fracture, plain radiographs at right angles 
to each other (rotational tomograph, orthopantomogram 
(Figure 26.5) and a posteroanterior (PA) mandible) may 
suffice, but clinicians should have a low threshold for cross- 
sectional imaging, particularly if a head or cervical spine CT 
Figure 26.4 A fracture of the right parasymphysis of the mandible, 
demonstrating a tear of the gingivae in the lower right lateral incisor/
canine region.
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   357 25/10/2017   08:19CHAPTER 26  Maxillofacial trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA358
is indicated. The additional information from 1  mm imaging 
cuts through the facial skeleton is worth the additional radi-
ation dose, especially if plain radiography has been avoided.
SPECIFIC INJURIES
Mandibular fractures
Mandibular fractures typically occur at specific sites (Figure 
26.6). As with all fractures the principles of reduction, fix-
ation, immobilisation and then rehabilitation apply to facial 
fractures. In previous years the reduction and immobilisation 
was often achieved by wiring the teeth together, known as 
intermaxillary fixation (IMF). However, in recent years this 
technique has largely been superseded by the use of open 
reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) techniques (Figure 
26.7) utilising titanium fixation plates secured with screws. 
In general, the facial bones heal well and undisplaced frac-
tures or those treated with ORIF heal after about 4  weeks. 
If the patient has had IMF a liquid diet is required and those 
who have had an ORIF procedure must also remain on a very 
soft sloppy diet for the same period.
In general, straightforward mandibular fractures treated 
with ORIF techniques have 2 mm diameter screws engaging a 
single bone cortex (monocortical). These small plates are said 
to be load sharing, in that the fractures are reduced and load 
is shared between the native bone and the plate. With more 
complex or comminuted fractures, larger plates and screws 
(up to 2.7  mm diameter) may be utilised; these are termed 
fracture or reconstruction plates. They are regarded as load 
bearing, and bicortical fixation may also be utilised.
Figure 26.5 (a) Rotational tomogram showing a right mandibular 
body fracture. (b) Posterioanterior (PA) mandible showing the same 
mandibular body fracture.
(a)
(b)
Summary box 26.3
History, examination and investigation
●● The history, particularly the mechanism of injury, is vital
●● For simple injuries radiographs in two planes are required, but 
increasingly cross-sectional imaging is the norm: CT scanning
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 27.11Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
2 3
1
Figure 26.6 The patterns of fracture of the mandible. (1) The neck of 
the condyle is the most common site, followed by (2) the angle of the 
mandible through the last tooth. (3) The third point of weakness is in 
the region of the canine tooth.
Figure 26.7 Intraoperative photograph showing a comminuted man-
dibular fracture reduced and fixed with a combination of 2 mm mini 
plates (monocortical) and a larger fracture plate with bicortical screws.
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   358 25/10/2017   08:19Specific injuries 359
PART 4 | TRAUMA
With the exception of isolated zygomatic arch, isolated 
infraorbital rim and extensively comminuted fractures, if the 
ZMC is fractured then all four legs of the stool are fractured 
and displacement occurs about two axes, running vertically 
through the line from the FZ suture to the maxillary buttress 
or running anteroposteriorly along the zygomatic arch.
All ZMC fractures (with the exception of isolated zygo -
matic arch and isolated infraorbital rim fractures) involve 
the bony orbit, and careful assessment of ocular position and 
function is necessary.
On examination there is often periorbital bruising and 
swelling and subconjunctival haemorrhage with no posterior 
limit is often seen (Figure 26.9). On palpation (or inspec-
tion), bowing or depression of the zygomatic arch may be 
detected. Bony steps and tenderness at the frontozygomatic 
suture, the infraorbital rim or the zygomatic buttress may 
also be detected. Altered sensation over the distribution of 
the infraorbital nerve is common, as a result of either direct 
trauma or crushing of the nerve as it exits the maxilla or runs 
along the orbital floor.
As with mandibular fractures, the role of plain radiogra -
phy is diminishing and cross-sectional imaging utilising CT 
scanning is the standard investigation except for the simplest 
fractures.
In terms of management, the mainstay of treatment is  
ORIF with fixation at one of the four ‘legs of the stool’, namely 
the frontozygomatic suture, the buttress region, the infra -
orbital rim or the zygomatic arch. The necessity for single, 
double, triple or four-point fixation will depend on the stability 
of the fracture post reduction and the degree of comminution. 
Uncomplicated ZMC fractures are generally treated within 
10 days of injury.
The timing of the definitive treatment of mandibular frac-
tures is dependent on the general state of the patient; how -
ever, optimal timing is for treatment within 24–48 hours post 
injury.
Condylar neck fractures are increasingly being treated 
with open reduction and internal fixation techniques, with 
better technology and the use of endoscopically assisted sur -
gery. This can be done via intraoral approaches. Undisplaced 
or minimally displaced condylar neck fractures can be treated 
non-operatively or with elastic IMF .
Summary box 26.4
Mandibular fractures
●● Mandibular fractures are diagnosed clinically, often because 
of deranged dental occlusion
●● Numbness over the distribution of the mental nerve is 
common
●● Treatment is primarily with open reduction and internal fixation
Fractures of the zygomatico-orbito 
complex (ZMC)
ZMC (malar/cheekbone) fractures are the commonest facial 
fractures and have been classified in a variety of different 
ways. However, from a clinical perspective, considering the 
cheekbone as a four-legged stool is helpful – the four legs are 
comprised of the zygomatic arch running anteroposteriorly, 
the zygomatic process running vertically (to join the fronto-
zygomatic process of the frontal bone at the frontozygomatic 
(FZ) suture), the infraorbital rim running horizontally and 
the maxillary buttress running vertically (Figure 26.8).
Figure 26.8 The ‘four legs of the stool’. 
Figure 26.9 Fractures of the zygoma may often be associated with 
subconjunctival haemorrhage. This example shows no posterior bor -
der to the haemorrhage as the patient looks away fr om the side of 
the fracture. 
Summary box 26.5
Fractures of the ZMC
●● Fractures of the zygomatico-orbital complex are common
●● Eye injuries should be actively excluded
●● CT scanning is the investigation of choice
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   359 25/10/2017   08:19CHAPTER 26  Maxillofacial trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA360
Maxillary fractures
Maxillary fractures are traditionally classified after René Le 
Fort’s work, in which he recreated the maxillary fractures util-
ising cadavers and a sandbag. Interestingly, the numbering, in 
modern usage, has become reversed from the original: the Le 
Fort I fracture being inferior and the Le Fort III being superior 
(Figure 26.10). While the classification is simple, real life pre-
sentations are often not. CT scanning and the use of open sur-
gical techniques have demonstrated that the described patterns 
are not often adhered to and that comminution is the norm.
Midface fractures are often accompanied by significant 
facial swelling and this makes palpation of the skeleton dif-
ficult. The characteristic finding is of a mobile maxilla which 
tends to be displaced backwards and inferiorly. This can com-
promise the airway (see above) and results in an anterior 
open bite (inability to close the front teeth together). There 
is often infraorbital nerve injury resulting in altered sensation 
and, with upper level (Le Fort II and III) fractures, the orbit is 
involved to a greater or lesser degree.
The treatment of maxillary fractures, in all but the entirely 
undisplaced fractures, involves ORIF techniques utilising a 
variety of miniplates (1.5/1.7  mm diameter screws) and/or 
microplates (1.0/1.2 mm diameter screws). Fixation is usually 
placed along the main facial buttresses (the ‘four legs of the 
stool’) for optimal strength and bone quality to be able to 
hold the screws (Figure 26.11).
René Le Fort , 1869–1951, French surgeon, classified facial fractures after macabre research in which he dropped rocks and other heavy objects on the faces of 
cadavers.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 27.8aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 27.8bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 27.8cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(c)
Figure 26.10  Maxillary fractur es as classified by Le Fort. (a) 
Le Fort I; (b) Le Fort II; (c) Le Fort III.
 Figure 26.11 The buttresses of the face.
Summary box 26.6
Maxillary fractures
●● Maxillary fractures indicate significant force transfer – other 
associated injuries should be excluded
●● Bleeding from the pterygoid venous plexus may be occult
Orbital fractures
The bones that comprise the orbit can be fractured and, in 
order of frequency, the floor, medial wall, lateral wall and roof 
may be disrupted either in combination or as isolated inju-
ries. The mechanism of this is unclear and, particularly with 
isolated injuries, it may be that a rapid increase in pressure 
within the confined space of the orbit, typically, for exam -
ple, when a squash ball hits the eye, results in fracture of the 
very thin floor and/or medial wall. Alternatively, forces are 
transmitted from the outer bony orbital rim, which is possibly 
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   360 25/10/2017   08:19Specific injuries 361
PART 4 | TRAUMA
temporarily deformed, causing the buckling and fracturing of 
the thin, vulnerable walls. It is likely that both of these mech-
anisms have a role in the genesis of orbital fractures.
In any orbital injury the eye must be examined carefully, 
even if there is significant swelling. Pupillary response, visual 
acuity (utilising a pinhole to correct for missing glasses), 
ocular motility and the results of careful ophthalmoscopy 
(including the anterior chamber, lens and fundus) should be 
documented. Binocular diplopia indicates a motility issue; 
however, monocular diplopia suggests a problem within the 
globe such as a dislocated lens or retinal detachment.
In general, orbital floor fractures lead to ocular motility 
problems, primarily restriction of upgaze due to trapping of 
the orbital fat and associated fibrous septae. However, on 
occasion the inferior rectus or inferior oblique muscles may 
also be trapped. Inferior rectus entrapment is much more 
common in children and this needs to be treated as an 
emergency because muscle necrosis can occur, leading to 
irreversible damage. In these cases the orbital floor appears, 
on imaging, undisplaced, i.e. a trap door defect has opened 
and then closed again, entrapping the muscle. In addition to 
motility problems, orbital wall fractures can lead to changes 
in globe position, with dropping of the globe (hypoglobus) 
or sinking in of the globe (enophthalmos) (Figure 26.12). 
In many cases such changes in globe position are masked in 
the immediate postinjury phase by oedema and only become 
obvious as this resolves.
A retrobulbar haemorrhage is a surgical emergency 
because when left untreated it can lead to blindness. It pres -
ents with decreasing visual acuity, increasing pain, loss of 
pupillary response and a tense proptosis. Should this diagnosis 
be suspected medical management should be initiated with 
acetazolamide, mannitol and steroids; however, the main 
treatment is surgical, with lateral canthotomy and cantholy -
syis forming the initial intervention.
Investigation of orbital injuries requires CT scanning 
(Figure 26.13) but if a retrobulbar haemorrhage is suspected 
treatment should be given prior to scanning.
With the exception of retrobulbar haemorrhages and 
paediatric orbital fractures, the definitive treatment can be 
delayed for 7–10 days (Figure 26.14). This allows oedema 
to settle and globe motility and position to be assessed more 
accurately. Reconstruction of the orbital rim is usually accom-
plished with ORIF techniques and the orbital walls repaired 
with autologous materials such as cranial bone or rib grafts, 
but proving more popular are preformed titanium implants or 
patient-specific custom-made implants.
Figure 26.12 Previously undiagnosed left orbital blow-out fracture, 
presenting 3 months after the initial injury. Enophthalmos and lowered 
pupillary level are evident.
Figure 26.13 Coronal computed tomography scan showing a left 
orbital blow-out fracture, with evident soft tissue her niation into the 
maxillary antrum (arrrow).
Figure 26.14  Computed tomography scan showing r etrobulbar 
haemorrhage and severe proptosis.
Summary box 26.7
Orbital fractures
●● Visual acuity and motility must be assessed
●● In children, orbital floor injuries should be assessed and 
treated as emergencies because muscle injury may be 
permanent, resulting in reduced ocular motility
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   361 25/10/2017   08:19CHAPTER 26  Maxillofacial trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA362
Naso-orbito ethmoidal fractures
These central upper midface fractures can range from simple 
undisplaced nasal bone fractures to complex comminuted 
fractures, impacted into the anterior cranial fossa, in the 
region of the cribriform plate. Typically they are caused by 
a blow to the bridge of the nose. The more severe fractures 
present with periorbital ecchymosis, swelling and nasal bleed-
ing with the bridge of the nose depressed and the nasal tip 
rotated upwards, allowing the nostrils to be seen straight on 
(‘piggy nose’). The nasal septum is often disrupted and should 
be inspected for haematomas. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may 
be seen to be leaking. However, in the initial assessment it is 
often difficult to make this diagnosis with any certainty.
Disruption of the attachment of the medial canthal liga -
ments can result in traumatic telcanthus – this is due to trau-
matic detachment of the ligament from its bony insertion or, 
more commonly, comminution of the naso-orbital ethmoidal 
complex with the canthal insertion intact, but with a small 
fragment of displaced bone.
Investigation is necessary with CT scanning (Figure 
26.15) for all but the simplest nasal bone fractures. Treat -
ment is usually delayed for 7–10 days post injury and gen-
erally necessitates ORIF and repositioning of the fragments 
with the medial canthi attached. If a formal canthopexy is 
required, this can be achieved with stainless steel wires or spe-
cialised canthopexy wires.
Figure 26.15  Coronal computed tomography scan showing 
posteriosuperior impaction of the naso-orbito complex.
Summary box 26.8
Naso-orbito ethmoidal fractures
●● Naso-orbito ethmoidal injuries indicate significant force 
transfer
●● Other associated injuries should be excluded, particularly 
craniofacial/anterior cranial fossa injuries
Craniofacial fractures
These are fractures that involve the cranial cavity and the 
facial bones in continuity. In many cases they involve the 
frontal and ethmoidal sinuses, creating a communication 
between the cranial cavity and the nasal air sinuses. If this is 
combined with a dural tear , CSF will leak into the nose and 
is detected as CSF rhinorrhoea with or without a salty taste. 
In these circumstances antibiotics are not indicated and the 
threshold for surgical intervention is quite variable between 
surgeons. The most common site of injury is the posterior 
wall of the frontal sinus, however fractures of the ethmoid 
and sphenoid sinus can also cause CSF leaks.
Most surgeons would treat persistent leaks lasting 10 days 
with surgical intervention, and mostly this is done with an 
open anterior fossa repair (necessitating a frontal craniotomy). 
In a limited number of cases the CSF leak can be repaired 
endoscopically. In most patients the treatment involves crani-
alisation of the frontal sinus with obliteration of the frontona-
sal duct. Although some surgeons advocate reconstruction of 
the posterior sinus wall, others will obliterate the sinus with 
Summary box 26.9
Craniofacial fractures
●● Usually managed by a multispecialty team involving 
neurosurgery, ear, nose & throat (ENT) and oral & maxillofacial 
surgery
●● Significant head injuries are common
Panfacial fractures
In cases where there are fractures at all levels of the facial 
skeleton (upper, mid and lower face) the term panfacial frac-
ture is used, and these fractures can present particular man -
agement challenges. First, multiple-level fractures indicate 
a significant amount of force and therefore energy transfer, 
hence associated injuries to the brain, cervical spine and 
other organs are much more common. Second, reconstruc -
tion of the multiple fractures is much more difficult because 
there is little normal anatomy to act as a guide. Each com -
ponent of the panfacial fracture is treated in the same way 
as an isolated fracture would be, but sequencing the repair 
is challenging. The options are top down (craniofacial, zygo -
matico-orbital, maxillary and finally mandibular), bottom up, 
inside out (starting centrally and working laterally) or outside 
in. Most surgeons experienced in managing this type of injury 
would tailor the sequence to the particular fracture pattern to 
optimise the use of normal or near normal anatomy as a guide.
fat or bone. Unless there are other pressing imperatives treat-
ment is usually delayed for 7–14 days.
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   362 25/10/2017   08:19Further reading 363
PART 4 | TRAUMA
There are some particular pitfalls: obtaining adequate 
cheekbone projection anteroposteriorly while making the 
zygomatic arch too prominent, over -impacting the anterior 
maxilla, and an anterior mandibular fracture being fixed with 
the mandibular angles flared outwards.
Dental injuries
The primary (deciduous) dentition is usually fully erupted by 
2.5 years, and the first permanent teeth (lower incisors) usually 
erupt at about the age of 6. Between the ages of 5 and 13 the 
primary dentition is shed and replaced by the secondary teeth.
If an adult whole tooth is avulsed it should be cleaned gen-
tly in saline and reimplanted; the sooner that this can happen 
the better the prognosis (avulsed deciduous teeth are not reim-
planted). This is best achieved under local anaes  thesia and 
after irrigation and debridement of the socket. The patient 
should then be referred urgently to a dentist for ongoing care; 
in many cases the tooth may need to be splinted to immobilise 
it and ensure that it is protected from the dental occlusion.
Fractures of the teeth may involve the enamel only, the 
enamel and dentine or the enamel, dentine and pulp. Once 
the dentine is exposed the fractured tooth can be exquisitely 
painful and benefits from a simple dental dressing – in the first 
instance local anaesthetic infiltrated in the region of the apex 
of the root is helpful in reducing pain pending a specialist den-
tal assessment. If the pulp is exposed, local anaesthetic applied 
topically to the exposed pulp can also give some pain relief.
Wounds involving the eyelid margins and crossing the 
vermillion of the lip need special attention to detail and very 
careful approximation of all the involved layers such that 
referral to a specialist should be considered by the inexperi -
enced surgeon.
Where there has been skin loss the management depends 
on the size of the defect, the elasticity of the surrounding 
skin and the circumstances. Small defects can be closed with 
direct closure, but for larger defects the mobilisation of local 
skin flaps may be necessary. When there is greater tissue loss, 
skin grafting and/or free tissue transfer may be required.
Parotid duct
The parotid duct may be damaged as a result of an incised 
wound or a crushing injury. This is usually obvious as saliva 
leaking into the wound and should this be the case the buccal 
branch of the facial nerve is often injured at the same time. If 
the duct is transected or damaged this should be repaired over 
a cannula inserted into the parotid papilla. This is usually best 
achieved with magnification (loupes or microscope) under 
the controlled conditions of general anaesthetic.
Facial nerve
Facial nerve injuries are best repaired primarily, and the big -
gest challenge to achieving this is not identifying the motor 
deficit at presentation. In general, injuries that lie behind a 
line from lateral canthus or the eye to the angle of the mouth 
are repairable and this should be attempted. Again, this is best 
achieved under microscope magnification and a nerve stimu-
lator/monitor is very helpful in identifying the cut nerve ends.
Animal and human bites
Unlike those elsewhere on the body , facial bites should be 
closed primarily and not left open. The abundant blood supply 
renders this normal precaution unnecessary. All bites should 
be debrided carefully and closed in the usual way; however, 
antibiotics, in accordance with local protocols, should be pre-
scribed. If there is significant tissue loss consideration should 
be given to a staged reconstruction.
Summary box 26.10
Dental injuries
●● It is important to account for all missing teeth and/or dental 
fragments – a chest radiograph may be indicated
●● Exposed dentine and pulp can be exquisitely painful and 
referral for emergency dental treatment can be very helpful
●● Avulsed teeth should be reimplanted as soon as possible
Soft tissue injuries
Lacerations and wounds
Facial lacerations and incised wounds often bleed quite pro-
fusely as a result of the excellent blood supply. This has the 
benefit of excellent healing and therefore wounds should only 
be debrided of frankly necrotic tissue.
In assessing facial soft tissue wounds it is important to 
check the function of the facial nerve and the patency of the 
parotid duct because both of these structures require repair 
should they be involved in the injury.
Uncomplicated wounds with no tissue loss should be cleaned 
and closed in layers under either local or general anaesthesia. 
If the skin is contaminated with dirt it should be scrubbed 
clean with a brush to prevent dirt tattooing. Usually, absorb -
able sutures are utilised intraorally and for the deep layers. It is 
important for good closure that the muscle layers are accurately 
opposed. The final skin layer should be closed with a monofila-
ment suture (in children this can be absorbable). For some small 
linear incised wounds cyanoacrylate glue can be utilised.
Summary box 26.11
Soft tissue injuries
●● Examination of both motor and sensory nerve function should 
be conducted prior to the administration of local anaesthetic
●● Tissue loss can occur and usually warrants specialist referral
●● Careful cleaning (debridement) with removal of all dirt 
minimises the chances of wound tattooing
FURTHER READING
Brennan P , Schliephake H, Ghali GE, Cascarini L. Maxillofacial surgery, 
3rd edn. London: Churchill Livingstone, 2017.
Fonseca R, Barber HD, Powers M, Frost DE. Oral and maxillofacial trau-
ma, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2012.
Perry M, Holmes S. Atlas of operative maxillofacial trauma surgery: primary 
repair of facial injuries. Berlin: Springer, 2014.
04_26-B&L27_Pt4_Ch26.indd   363 25/10/2017   08:19Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • That the management of trauma is based on physiology 
as well as anatomy (as in general surgery)
 • The gross and surgical anatomy of the chest and 
abdomen
 • The pathophysiology of torso injury
 • The strength and weaknesses of clinical assessment in 
the injured patient
 • The use of special investigations and their limitations
 • The operative approaches to the thoracic cavity
 • The special features of an emergency room thoracotomy 
for haemorrhage control
 • The indications for and techniques of the trauma 
laparotomy
 • The philosophy of damage control surgery
 • The management of trauma to the pelvis
T orso trauma
INTRODUCTION
Because injury does not respect anatomical boundaries, divi ­
sion of the body into abdomen and thorax is artificial, and 
injury to the torso, with its associated physiological conse­
quences, is more appropriate. The torso is generally regarded 
as the main part of the human body, primarily made up of 
the chest, abdomen and pelvis, not including the head, neck, 
arms and legs. About 42% of all deaths are the result of brain 
injury, but some 39% of all trauma deaths are caused by major 
haemorrhage, usually from torso injury (Figure 27.1).
Although initially, injury was treated on an anatom­
ical basis, it has become clear that physiology should be the 
over­riding consideration, and the driver of successful resus ­
citation is therefore the preservation of normal physiology. 
Techniques such as ‘damage control resuscitation’ and ‘dam ­
age control surgery’ have dramatically improved survival 
through an understanding of the best techniques required to 
restore physiological stability (see Chapters 1, 22 and 23).
INJURY MECHANISMS 
ASSOCIATED WITH TORSO 
TRAUMA
Injury often traverses different anatomical zones of the body, 
affecting structures on both sides of traditional anatomical 
zones. These zones are known as junctional zones.
Junctional zones
The key junctional zones are:
 ● between the neck and the thorax;
 ● between the thorax and the abdomen;
 ● between the abdomen, the pelvic structures and the groin.
These zones represent surgical challenges in terms of both 
the diagnosis of the area of injury and the surgical approach, 
which have to be balanced against the physiological stability 
of the patient.
Root of the neck
Most injuries affecting the base of the neck also affect the 
upper mediastinum and thoracic inlet. Choice of access is 
determined by the need for surgical control of the vascular 
structures contained within.
CNS
42%
Bleeding 39% Bleeding + CNS
6%
MOF 7%
Other
4%
Unknown
2%
Figure 27.1 Causes of death in trauma. CNS, central nervous sys -
tem; MOF, multiple organ failure.
27
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   364 25/10/2017   08:20Thoracic injury 365
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
The mediastinum
The zone overlying the mediastinum with its major vessels 
and the heart is also an extremely high­risk area for penetrat­
ing wounds. Any wound in this region should immediately 
raise the suspicion of a major vascular or an associated cardiac 
injury, even in the absence of initial gross physical signs.
Diaphragm
The thorax and abdomen are separated by the diaphragm, 
which is mainly responsible for breathing, and moves during 
breathing between the fourth and eighth interspace. Any 
penetrating injury of the lower half of the chest may therefore 
have penetrated the diaphragm and entered the abdomen. 
Injuries in this junctional zone, therefore, should be investi ­
gated as if both cavities had been penetrated (Figure 27.2). 
In blunt trauma, rupture of the diaphragm can result in migra­
tion of abdominal viscera into the chest.
Pelvic structures
The pelvis contains a large plexus of vessels, both venous 
and arterial. Should injury occur, control of haemorrhage can 
prove to be exceptionally difficult and may require control of 
both arterial inflow and venous outflow. Angioembolisation 
can be a very useful adjunct to treatment, especially with deep 
pelvic injuries.
individual, bleeding may only produce subtle changes in vital 
measures and therefore be difficult to assess (Table 27.2). 
Although obvious injury may be present, traditional indica­
tors (such as pulse rate), in isolation, are unreliable.
Bleeding occurs from five major sites – ‘one on the floor 
and four more’:
 ● external – ‘floor’;
 ● chest;
 ● abdomen (including the retroperitoneum);
 ● pelvis;
 ● extremities.
THORACIC INJURY
Thoracic injury accounts for 25% of all severe injuries. In a 
further 25%, it may be a significant contributor to the sub ­
sequent death of the patient. In most of these patients, the 
cause of death is haemorrhage. About 80% of patients with 
chest injury can be managed non ­operatively. The key to a 
good outcome is early physiological resuscitation followed by 
a correct diagnosis.
Liver
Spleen
Kidney Figure 27.2 The anatomical extent of the 
abdomen.
Summary box 27.1
Junctional zones
●● Between neck and the thorax
●● Between thorax and the abdomen
●● Between the abdomen, the pelvic structures and the groin
CRITICAL PHYSIOLOGY
Resuscitation of all injuries to the chest and abdomen should 
follow traditional ATLS® principles (Table 27.1 and Chapters 
22 and 23).
Bleeding is the major problem. This may be obvious at 
the time of evaluation; however, in the young physically fit 
TABLE 27.1 ATLS® principles of resuscitation.
A Airway
B Breathing
C Circulation
D Disability (neurology)
E Environment and Exposure
TABLE 27.2 Clinical indicators of potential ongoing 
bleeding in torso trauma.
Physiological Increasing respiratory rate
Increasing pulse rate
Falling blood pressure
Rising serum lactate
Anatomical Visible bleeding
Injury in close proximity to major vessels
Penetrating injury with a retained missile
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   365 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA366
Investigation
Routine investigation in the emergency department of injury 
to the chest is based on clinical examination, supplemented 
by chest radiography.
Ultrasound – extended focused assessment 
with sonar for trauma
Ultrasound can be used to differentiate between contusion 
and the actual presence of blood. Extended focused assess ­
ment with sonar for trauma (eF AST) is becoming the most 
common investigation. The technique uses sonar assessment 
in the chest, looking for a cardiac tamponade or free blood 
and air in the hemithorax on each side, and assessment for 
blood in the abdominal cavity, in the paracolic gutters, sub­
diaphragmatic spaces and pelvis.
Underwater chest drain
In the physiologically grossly unstable patient, where physical 
examination is inconclusive and there is no time for radiolog­
ical investigations, insertion of an underwater chest drainage 
tube can be a diagnostic procedure as well as a therapeutic 
one, and the benefits of insertion often outweigh the risks.
Chest radiograph
In those cases where the patient is haemodynamically unsta ­
ble or the spine is at risk, an anteroposterior (AP) supine 
chest radiograph is usually the simplest initial investigation, 
and will provide goo d information regarding tracheal devia ­
tion, lung and mediastinal pathology, as well as skeletal injury.
In penetrating injury, it may be more helpful for the radio­
graph to be performed with the patient positioned erect, as 
this will best reveal a small pneumothorax, fluid meniscus, 
air–fluid level or the presence of free gas under the diaphragm, 
indicating the presence of a hollow abdominal viscus perfora­
tion. Note that up to 300  mL of blood may pool behind the 
domes of the diaphragm, and may not be visible even in the 
erect view.
The presence of thoracic skeletal injury should alert the 
clinician to the possibility of adjacent thoracic or abdominal 
visceral injury. Rupture of the thoracic aorta can be related to 
fractures of the first and second rib, bilateral clavicular frac ­
ture and fracture of the sternum, thoracic spine or scapula. 
Fracture of the lower ribs can be related to injury of liver or 
spleen. Fracture of ribs, irrespective of site, can be related to 
injury to the lung parenchyma or thoracic wall vasculature, 
causing pneumothorax, haemothorax or lung contusion.
Computed tomography scan
The computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast allows 
for three­dimensional reconstruction of the chest and abdo ­
men, as well as of the bony skeleton. It has become the princi­
pal and most reliable examination for major injury in thoracic 
trauma. In blunt chest trauma, the CT scan will allow the 
definition of fractures, as well as showing haematomas, pneu­
mothoraces and pulmonary contusion. In penetrating trauma, 
the scan may show the track or presence of the missile and 
allow the proper planning of definitive surgery. However, 
although the presence of an isolated rupture of the diaphragm 
with migration of abdominal contents into the chest can be 
detected by CT scan, in injury without migration the diagno­
sis will not be obvious. CT scanning has replaced angiography 
as the diagnostic modality of choice for the assessment of the 
thoracic aorta and mediastinal vessels.
The pitfalls of investigation are:
 ● failure to assess tracheal shift immediately above the 
sternal notch clinically (deviation of the trachea occurs 
away from the affected side in tension pneumothorax, and 
towards the affected side in lung collapse);
 ● failure to percuss and auscultate both front and back in a 
supine patient (an inflated lung will ‘float’ on a haemotho­
rax, so auscultation from the front may sound normal);
 ● failure to pass a nasogastric tube if rupture of the dia ­
phragm is suspected; a chest radiograph will show the 
nasogastric tube apparently within the chest cavity;
 ● a supine chest radiograph can show a haemothorax as a 
homogenous increase in opacity of the hemithorax; this 
can cause confusion between the darker side and the lighter 
side, as to which may be a haemothorax (less radiolucent), 
or a pneumothorax (more radiolucent). Look carefully for 
lung markings, and don’t drain the wrong side;
 ● pursuing radiological investigation (radiography or CT 
scan) instead of resuscitation in the unstable patient.
Summary box 27.2
Investigation of chest injuries
●● Directly or indirectly involved in >50% of trauma deaths
●● 80% can be managed non-operatively
●● A chest radiograph is the investigation of first choice
●● A chest drain can be diagnostic as well as therapeutic
●● A spiral CT scan provides rapid diagnoses in the chest and 
abdomen
Management
In penetrating injury, most patients who have suffered injury 
to the chest can be managed with appropriate resuscitation 
and insertion of an intercostal drain.
If a sucking chest wound is present, this should not be fully 
closed but should be covered with a piece of plastic, closed 
on three sides, to form a one­way valve, and thereafter an 
underwater chest drain should be inserted remote from the 
wound. No attempt should be made to close a sucking chest 
wound until controlled drainage has been achieved, in case a 
stable patient with an open pneumothorax is converted into 
an unstable patient with a tension pneumothorax.
In blunt injury, most bleeding occurs from the intercostal 
or internal mammary vessels and it is relatively rare for these 
to require surgery. If bleeding does not stop spontaneously, the 
vessels can be tied off or encircled. In blunt chest compressive 
injury, particularly in the presence of a flail chest, there can be 
an associated lung contusion.
The patient in extremis with exsanguinating chest haem ­
orrhage will be discussed in the section on Emergency depart­
ment thoracotomy (EDT) later in the chapter.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   366 25/10/2017   08:20Thoracic injury 367
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Life­threatening injuries can be remembered as the ‘deadly 
dozen’. Six are immediately life threatening and should be 
sought for and managed during the primary survey and six are 
potentially life threatening and should be detected during the 
secondary survey (Table 27.3). A high index of suspicion must 
be maintained thereafter to diagnose the potential threats to 
life, as their symptoms and signs can be very subtle. Early con­
sultation and referral to a trauma centre is advised in cases of 
doubt.
Immediate life-threatening injuries
Airway obstruction
Early intubation is very important, particularly in cases of 
neck haematoma or possible airway oedema. Airway distor ­
tion can be insidious and progressive and can make delayed 
intubation more difficult if not impossible.
Tension pneumothorax
A tension pneumothorax develops when a ‘one ­way valve’ 
air leak occurs either from the lung or through the chest wall. 
Air is sucked into the thoracic cavity without any means of 
escape, completely collapsing then compressing the affected 
lung. The mediastinum is displaced to the opposite side, 
decreasing venous return and compressing the opposite lung.
The most common causes are penetrating chest trauma, 
blunt chest trauma with a parenchymal lung injury and air 
leak that did not spontaneously close, iatrogenic lung injury 
(e.g. due to central venepuncture) and mechanical positive 
pressure ventilation.
The clinical presentation is dramatic. The patient is 
increasingly restless with tachypnoea, dyspnoea and distended 
neck veins (similar to pericardial tamponade). Clinical exam­
ination may reveal tracheal deviation; this is a late finding 
and is not necessary to clinically confirm diagnosis. There 
will also be hyper­resonance and decreased or absent breath 
sounds over the affected hemithorax. Tension pneumothorax 
is a clinical diagnosis and treatment should never be delayed 
by waiting for radiological confirmation (Figure 27.3).
Treatment consists of immediate decompression, initially 
by rapid insertion of a large ­bore cannula into the second 
intercostal space in the mid ­clavicular line of the affected 
side, then followed by insertion of a chest tube through the 
fifth intercostal space in the anterior axillary line.
Pericardial tamponade
Pericardial tamponade needs to be differentiated from a ten ­
sion pneumothorax in the shocked patient with distended 
neck veins. It is most commonly the result of penetrating 
trauma. Accumulation of a relatively small amount of blood 
into the non­distensible pericardial sac can produce compres­
sion of the heart and obstruction of the venous return, leading 
to decreased filling of the cardiac chambers during diastole. 
All patients with penetrating injury anywhere near the heart 
plus shock must be considered to have a cardiac injury until 
proven otherwise. Classically, the presentation consists of 
central venous pressure elevation, decline in arterial pres ­
sure with tachycardia and muffled heart sounds. However, 
in cases in which major bleeding from other sites has taken 
place, the neck veins may be flat. A central line should be 
inserted, checking for a rising central venous pressure. A high 
index of suspicion and further diagnostic investigations will 
be needed to make the diagnosis is those cases that are not 
clinically obvious. These include an eFAST showing fluid in 
the pericardial sac. This is the most expeditious and reliable 
diagnostic tool, or chest radiography looking for an enlarged 
heart shadow.
Summary box 27.3
Closed management of chest injuries
●● About 80% of chest injuries can be managed with the 
insertion of an intercostal drain only
●● Do not close a sucking chest wound until a drain is in place
●● If bleeding persists, the chest will need to be opened and 
direct haemostatic control is obtained
TABLE 27.3 The ‘deadly dozen’ threats to life from chest 
injury.
Immediately life threatening Airway obstruction
Tension pneumothorax
Pericardial tamponade
Open pneumothorax
Massive haemothorax
Flail chest
Potentially life threatening Aortic injuries
Tracheobronchial injuries
Myocardial contusion
Rupture of diaphragm
Oesophageal injuries
Pulmonary contusion
 Figure 27.3 Radiological appearance of a tension pneumothorax.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   367 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA368
preventing adequate ventilation. Presentation is with haem ­
orrhagic shock, flat neck veins, unilateral absence of breath 
sounds and dullness to percussion. The initial treatment con­
sists of correcting the hypovolaemic shock, insertion of an 
intercostal drain and, in some cases, intubation. Initial drain­
age of more than 1500 mL of blood or ongoing haemorrhage 
of more than 200 mL/h over 3–4 hours is generally considered 
an indication for urgent thoracotomy.
Blood in the pleural space should be removed as com ­
pletely and rapidly as possible to prevent ongoing bleeding, 
an empyema or fibrothorax later. Clamping a chest drain to 
tamponade a massive haemothorax is not helpful.
The following points are important in the management of 
an open pneumothorax/haemothorax:
 ● a common problem is using too small a tube – a 28FG or 
larger tube should be used in an adult;
 ● if the lung does not reinflate, the drain should be placed 
on low­pressure (5 cm water) suction;
 ● clot occlusion of a chest drainage tube may result in ‘no’ 
drainage, even in the presence of ongoing bleeding;
 ● a second drain is sometimes necessary (but see Tracheo ­
bronchial injuries);
 ● a chest radiograph can help identify the presence of blood;
 ● physiotherapy and active mobilisation should begin as 
soon as possible.
Flail chest
This condition usually results from blunt trauma associated 
with multiple rib fractures, and is defined as three or more 
ribs fractured in two or more places. The blunt force typically 
also produces an underlying pulmonary contusion. The diag ­
nosis is made clinically in patients who are not ventilated, 
not by radiography. To confirm the diagnosis the chest wall 
can be observed for paradoxical motion of a chest wall seg ­
ment. On inspiration, the loose segment of the chest wall is 
displaced inwards and therefore less air moves into the lungs. 
On expiration, the segment moves outwards (paradoxical 
respiration). Voluntary splinting of the chest wall occurs as 
a result of pain, so mechanically impaired chest wall move ­
ment and the associated lung contusion all contribute to the 
hypoxia. There is a high risk of developing a pneumothorax 
or haemothorax. The CT scan, with contrast to display the 
vascular structures and a 3­D reconstruction of the chest wall, 
is the gold standard for diagnosis of this condition.
Traditionally, mechanical ventilation was used to ‘inter ­
nally splint’ the chest, but had a price in terms of intensive 
care unit resources and ventilation ­dependent morbidity. 
Currently, treatment consists of oxygen administration, ade ­
quate analgesia (including opiates) and physiotherapy. If a 
chest tube is in situ, topical intrapleural local analgesia intro­
duced via the tube, can also be used. Ventilation is reserved 
for cases developing respiratory failure despite adequate anal­
gesia and oxygen. Surgery to stabilise the flail segment using 
internal fixation of the ribs may be useful in a selected group 
of patients with isolated or severe chest injury and pulmonary 
contusion.
Needle pericardiocentesis has been suggested. However, 
in penetrating injury to the heart there is usually a substantial 
clot in the pericardium, which may prevent aspiration. A dry 
pericardiocentesis proves only that there is a ‘clot’ on both 
ends of the needle! Pericardiocentesis has a high potential 
for iatrogenic injury to the heart and it should, at the most, 
be regarded as a desperate temporising measure in a transport 
situation (under electrocardiogram (ECG) control). The cor­
rect immediate treatment of tamponade is operative, either 
via a subxiphoid window, or by open surgery (sternotomy or 
left thoracotomy), with repair of the heart in the operating 
theatre if time allows or otherwise in the emergency room.
Summary box 27.4
Pericardial tamponade
●● The presentation is similar to a tension pneumothorax – 
deteriorating cyanosis, tachycardia and agitation
●● eFAST is diagnostic and may also detect free fluid in the 
abdomen or pericardium
●● The central venous pressure may not be elevated if the 
circulating volume is depleted, e.g. because of other injuries
●● Pericardiocentesis is a temporising measure only, with a 
high complication rate and is not a substitute for immediate 
operative intervention
Open pneumothorax (‘sucking chest 
wound’)
This is due to a large open defect in the chest (>3  cm), 
leading to immediate equilibration between intrathoracic 
and atmospheric pressure. If the opening in the chest wall 
exceeds about two­thirds of the diameter of the trachea, then 
with each inspiratory cycle, air will be preferentially drawn 
through the defect, rather than through the trachea. Air 
accumulates in the hemithorax (rather than in the lung) with 
each inspiration, leading to profound hypoventilation on the 
affected side and hypoxia. If there is a valvular effect, increas­
ing amounts of air in the pleura will result in a tension pneu­
mothorax (see above).
Initial management consists of promptly closing the defect 
with a sterile occlusive plastic dressing (e.g. Opsite ®), taped 
on three sides to act as a flutter ­type valve. A chest tube is 
inserted as soon as possible in a site remote from the injury 
site.
Massive haemothorax
The most common cause of massive haemothorax in blunt 
injury is continuing bleeding from torn intercostal vessels or 
occasionally from the internal mammary artery secondary to 
fractures of the ribs. In penetrating injury, a variety of viscera, 
both thoracic and abdominal (with blood leaking through a 
hole in the diaphragm from the positive pressure abdomen 
into the negative pressure thorax) may be involved.
Accumulation of blood in a haemothorax can significantly 
compromise respiratory efforts, compressing the lung and 
in situ  is Latin for ‘in place’.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   368 25/10/2017   08:20Thoracic injury 369
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Potentially life-threatening injuries
Thoracic aortic disruption
Traumatic aortic rupture is a common cause of sudden death 
after an automobile collision or fall from a great height. The 
vessel is relatively fixed distal to the ligamentum arteriosum, 
just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. The 
shear forces from a sudden impact disrupt the intima and 
media. If the adventitia is intact, the patient may remain 
haemodynamically stable. For this subgroup of immediate 
survivors, salvage is frequently possible if aortic rupture 
is identified and treated early. Aortic disruption should 
be clinically suspected in patients with gross asymmetry 
in systolic blood pressure (between the two upper limbs, 
or between upper and lower limbs), widened pulse pres­
sure and chest wall contusion. Erect chest radiography can 
also suggest thoracic aortic disruption, the most common 
radiological finding being a widened mediastinum (Figure 
27.4). The diagnosis is confirmed by a CT scan of the medi ­
astinum (Figure 27.5), or possibly by transoesophageal 
Widened
mediastinum
Depressed left
main bronchus
Figure 27.4 (a) Chest radiograph showing a widened mediastinum. 
(b) Aortogram showing aortic disruption.
2D reconstruction
showing aortic
disruption
3D reconstruction
showing aortic
disruption
(a) (b)
Figure 27.5  Computed tomography scans showing  
aortic disruption.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   369 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA370
echocardio graphy, in unstable patients who cannot be 
moved to the scanner.
Initially, management consists of control of the systolic 
arterial blood pressure (to less than 120 mmHg). There­
after, an endovascular intra­aortic stent (Figure 27.6) can be 
placed, or the tear can be operatively repaired by direct repair 
or excision and grafting using a Dacron graft.
Tracheobronchial injuries
Severe subcutaneous emphysema with respiratory compro­
mise can suggest tracheobronchial disruption. A chest drain 
placed on the affected side will reveal a large air leak and 
the collapsed lung may fail to re ­expand. Bronchoscopy is 
diagnostic. Treatment involves intubation of the unaffected 
bronchus followed by operative repair . Referral to a trauma 
centre is advised.
Blunt myocardial injury
Significant blunt cardiac injury that causes haemodynamic 
instability is rare. Blunt myocardial injury should be suspected 
in any patient sustaining blunt trauma who develops early 
ECG abnormalities.
T wo­dimensional echocardiography may show wall 
motion abnormalities. A transoesophageal echocardiogram 
may also be helpful. There is very little evidence that enzyme 
estimations have any place in diagnosis.
All patients with myocardial contusion diagnosed with 
conduction abnormalities are at risk of developing sudden 
dysrhythmias and should be closely monitored.
Diaphragmatic injuries
Any penetrating injury below the fifth intercostal space 
should raise suspicion of diaphragmatic penetration and, 
therefore, injury to abdominal contents.
Blunt injury to the diaphragm is usually caused by a com ­
pressive force applied to the pelvis and abdomen. The dia ­
phragmatic rupture is usually large, with herniation of the 
abdominal contents into the chest. Diagnosis of diaphrag ­
matic rupture can easily be missed in the acute phase, and 
may only be discovered at operation, or through the presenta­
tion of complications.
Most diaphragmatic injuries are silent and the presenting 
features are those of injury to the surrounding organs. There 
is no single standard investigation. Chest radiography after 
placement of a nasogastric tube may be helpful (as this may 
show the stomach herniated into the chest). Contrast studies 
of the upper or lower gastrointestinal tract, CT scan, ultra ­
sound and diagnostic peritoneal lavage all lack positive or 
negative predictive value. The most accurate evaluation is by 
video­assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) or laparoscopy, the latter 
offering the advantage of allowing the surgeon to proceed to 
a repair and additional evaluation of the abdominal organs.
The thorax is at negative pressure and the abdomen is 
at positive pressure. A complication of a breach of the dia ­
phragm is herniation of abdominal contents into the chest. 
This may present much later, and strangulation of any of the 
contents can then occur, with a high mortality rate.
Operative repair is recommended in all cases. All penetrating 
diaphragmatic injury must be repaired via the abdomen and 
not the chest, to rule out penetrating hollow viscus injury.
Oesophageal injury
Most oesophageal injuries result from penetrating trauma; 
blunt injury is rare. A high index of suspicion is required. The 
patient can present with odynophagia (pain on swallowing 
saliva, foods or fluids), subcutaneous or mediastinal emphy ­
sema, pleural effusion, air in the perioesophageal space and 
unexplained fever. Mediastinal and deep cervical emphysema 
are evidence of an aerodigestive injury until proven other ­
wise.
The mortality rate rises exponentially if treatment is 
delayed. A combination of oesophagogram in the decubitus 
position and oesophagoscopy confirm the diagnosis in the 
great majority of cases. The treatment is operative repair of 
any defect and drainage.
Pulmonary contusion
Pulmonary contusion occurs more frequently following blunt 
trauma, usually associated with a flail segment or fractured 
ribs. This is a very common, potentially lethal injury and the 
major cause of hypoxaemia after blunt trauma. Following 
gunshot wounds, there is an area of contusion from the shock 
wave of the bullet.
The natural progression of pulmonary contusion is worsen­
ing hypoxaemia for the first 24–48 hours. Chest radiographic 
Charles Thomas Stent , 1805–1885, dentist, Brighton, UK.
Figure 27.6 Aortic tear showing the presence of a stent.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   370 25/10/2017   08:20Emergency thoracic sur gery 371
PART 4 | TRAUMA
findings may be typically delayed. Contrast CT scanning can 
be confirmatory. Haemoptysis or blood in the endotracheal 
tube is a sign of pulmonary contusion.
In mild contusion, the treatment is oxygen administra­
tion, pulmonary toilet and adequate analgesia. In more severe 
cases mechanical ventilation is necessary. Normovolaemia is 
critical for adequate tissue perfusion and fluid restriction is 
not advised.
EMERGENCY THORACIC 
SURGERY
Emergency thoracic surgery is an essential part of the arma ­
mentarium of any surgeon dealing with major trauma. A 
timely surgical intervention for the correct indications can be 
the key step in saving an injured patient’s life.
It is important to make a distinction between:
 ● immediate thoracotomy in the ED for the control of hae ­
morrhage, cardiac tamponade or internal cardiac massage;
 ● emergency sternotomy for anterior mediastinal structures 
and heart;
 ● planned thoracotomy for definitive correction of the 
problem – this usually takes place in the more controlled 
envir onment of the operating theatre.
The clinical decision as to whether a patient requires 
ED surgery or can be transferred to the operating room can 
be complex. It is far better to perform a thoracotomy in the 
operating room, either through an anterolateral approach or 
a median sternotomy, with good light and assistance and the 
potential for autotransfusion or bypass, than it is to attempt 
heroic emergency surgery in the resuscitation area. However, 
if the patient is in extremis with a falling systolic blood pres ­
sure, there is no choice but to proceed immediately with a left 
anterolateral thoracotomy. In certain circumstances, when 
care is futile, it may not need to be performed at all. A resusci­
tation room thoracotomy following blunt trauma has limited 
indications and is rarely successful.
Emergency department 
thoracotomy or sternotomy
EDT should be reserved for those patients suffering penetrat-
ing injury in whom signs of life are still present . Patients 
who have received cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) in 
the prehospital phase of their care are unlikely to survive, and 
electrical activity must be present.
In certain situations, EDT is considered futile:
 ● CPR in the absence of endotracheal intubation for more 
than 5 minutes;
 ● CPR for more than 10 minutes (despite endotracheal 
intubation);
 ● blunt trauma when there have been no signs of life at the 
scene (see above).
The survival rates for EDT in patients with penetrating 
trauma in whom the blood pressure is falling despite adequate 
resuscitation are shown in Table 27.4.
The aim of EDT is to perform:
 ● internal cardiac massage;
 ● control of haemorrhage from injury to the heart or lung;
 ● control of intrathoracic haemorrhage from other sources;
 ● control of massive air leak;
 ● clamping of the thoracic aorta to preserve the blood sup ­
ply to the heart and brain, and cutting off the arterial 
supply distally, in a moribund patient with a major distal 
penetrating injury.
Planned emergency thoracotomy
Planned emergency thoracotomy implies an emergency tho ­
racotomy performed as a planned procedure in the operating 
room, directed at the management of a specific injury. As 
such, the approach chosen is dependent on the indication 
for surgery and the organ injured (Table 27.5). Some organs 
are best approached through a median sternotomy. Otherwise 
the thoracotomy may be right ­ or left ­sided, and these may 
be joined, pro ducing the so called ‘clamshell incision’. This 
gives excellent exposure for any surgeon who is not routinely 
entering the chest.
Posterolateral thoracotomy is not used in the emergency 
situation because of the difficulties in positioning of the 
patient, except for specific access to certain posterior medi ­
astinal organs.
TABLE 27.4 Survival rates for thoracotomy in patients 
with penetrating trauma.
Blood pressure despite resuscitation Survival (%)
>60 mmHg 60%
>40 mmHg 30%
<40 mmHg 3%
TABLE 27.5 Different approaches to the contents of the 
chest cavity.
Approach Best for
Left anterolateral 
thoracotomy
Left lung and lung hilum
Thoracic aorta
Origin of left subclavian artery
Left side of heart
Lower oesophagus
Right anterolateral 
thoracotomy
Right lung and lung hilum
Azygos veins
Superior vena cava
Infracardiac inferior vena cava
Upper oesophagus
Thoracic trachea
Median sternotomy Anterior aspect of heart
Anterior mediastinum
Ascending aorta and arch of aorta
Pulmonary arteries
Carina of the trachea
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   371 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA372
ABDOMINAL INJURY
Patients who have suffered abdominal trauma can generally 
be classified into the following categories based on their phys­
iological condition after initial resuscitation:
 ● haemodynamically ‘normal’ – investigation can be com ­
pleted before treatment is planned;
 ● haemodynamically ‘stable’ – investigation is more lim ­
ited. It is aimed at establishing whether the patient can 
be managed non ­operatively, whether angioembolisation 
can be used or whether surgery is required;
 ● haemodynamically ‘unstable’ – investigations need to be 
suspended as immediate surgical correction of the bleed ­
ing is required.
A trauma laparotomy is the final step in the pathway to 
delineate intra ­abdominal injury. Occasionally it is difficult 
to determine the source of bleeding in the shocked, multiple 
injured patient. If doubt still exists, especially in the presence 
of other injuries, a laparotomy may still be the safest option.
The patient’s physiology must be assessed at regular 
intervals and, if there is an indication that the patient is 
still actively bleeding, then the source must be identified, 
unless the patient is unstable, requiring immediate surgery. 
Blood loss into the abdomen can be subtle and there may be 
no clear clinical signs. Blood is not an irritant and does not 
initially cause any abdominal pain. Distension is subjective, 
and a drop in the blood pressure may be a very late sign in 
a young fit patient. Examination in unstable patients should 
take place either in the ED or in the operating theatre if the 
patient is deteriorating rapidly.
Investigation
Investigations are driven by the cardiovascular status of the 
patient. In torso trauma, the best and most sensitive modal ­
ity is a CT scan with intravenous contrast; however , in the 
unstable patient, this is generally not possible.
In patients with penetrating injury, metal markers (e.g. 
bent paper clips) should be placed on all external wounds 
before plain films are taken, irrespective of the area being 
radiographed, as this allows an assessment of the trajectory 
and helps to correlate the number of holes and the number 
of missiles that can be seen within the patient. This will help 
determine whether two holes are indicative of one missile 
passing through the patient, or two missiles, both retained 
internally (Figure 27.7). A single hole implies that the pro­
jectile has been retained.
Focused abdominal sonar for trauma and 
extended FAST
Focused abdominal sonar for trauma (FAST) is a technique 
whereby ultrasound (sonar) imaging is used to assess the 
torso for the presence of free fluid, either in the abdominal 
cavity, and is extended into the thoracic cavities and peri ­
cardium (eFAST). There should be no attempt to determine 
the nature or extent of the specific injury. eFAST is usually 
a rapid, reproducible, portable and non ­invasive bedside test 
and can be performed at the same time as resuscitation. eFAST 
is accurate at detecting >100 mL of free blood; however, it is 
very operator dependent and, especially if the patient is very 
obese or the bowel is full of gas, it may be unreliable. Hollow 
viscus injury and solid organ injury are difficult to diagnose, 
even in experienced hands, as small amounts of gas or fluid 
are difficult to assess, and eFAST a low sensitivity (29–35%) 
for organ injury without haemoperitoneum. eFAST is also 
unreliable for excluding injury in penetrating trauma. If there 
is doubt, the eFAST examination can be repeated.
Figure 27.7 (a) Chest radiograph showing a gunshot wound with 
bullet markers. (b) Abdominal radiograph of a gunshot wound show-
ing bullet markers.
(a)
(b)
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   372 25/10/2017   08:20Individual organ injury 373
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Laparoscopy
Laparoscopy or thoracoscopy may be a valuable screening 
investigation in stable patients with penetrating trauma, to 
detect or exclude peritoneal penetration and/or diaphrag­
matic injury.
Laparoscopy may be divided into:
 ● Screening: used to exclude a penetrating injury with 
breach of the peritoneum.
 ● Diagnostic: finding evidence of injury to viscera.
 ● Therapeutic: used to repair the injury.
In most institutions, evidence of penetration requires a lap ­
arotomy to evaluate organ injury, as it is difficult to exclude 
all intra ­abdominal injuries laparoscopically. When used in 
this role laparoscopy reduces the non­therapeutic laparotomy 
rate. There is no place for laparoscopy in the unstable patient.
INDIVIDUAL ORGAN INJURY
Liver
Blunt liver trauma occurs as a result of direct injury. The liver 
is a solid organ and compressive forces can easily burst the 
liver substance (Figure 27.8). The liver is usually compressed 
between the impacting object and the rib cage or vertebral 
column. Most injuries are relatively minor and can be man ­
aged non­operatively.
Penetrating trauma to the liver is relatively common. Bul­
lets have a shock wave and when they pass through a solid 
structure such as the liver they cause significant damage some 
distance from the actual track of the bullet. Not all pene ­
trating wounds require operative management and may stop 
bleeding spontaneously.
In the stable patient, CT is the investigation of choice. It 
provides information on the liver injury itself, as well as on 
injuries to the adjoining major vascular and biliary structures. 
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
Diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL) is a test used to assess the 
presence of blood or contaminants in the abdomen. A gastric 
tube is placed to empty the stomach and a urinary catheter is 
inserted to drain the bladder.
A cannula is inserted below the umbilicus, directed cau ­
dally and posteriorly. The cannula is aspirated for blood 
(>10 mL is deemed as positive) and, following this, 1000 mL 
of warmed Ringer’s lactate solution is allowed to run into the 
abdomen and is then drained out via the same route. The 
presence of >100  000 red cells/μL or >500 white cells/μL is 
deemed positive (this is equivalent to 20 mL of free bloo d in 
the abdominal cavity), as is the presence of vegetable fibre or 
a raised amylase level. In penetrating trauma, a minimum of 
one­tenth of the above would be regarded as evidence of peri­
toneal penetration or intraperitoneal injury. In the absence of 
laboratory facilities, a urine dipstick may be useful. Drainage 
of lavage fluid via a chest drain indicates penetration of the 
diaphragm.
Although DPL has largely been replaced by eF AST (see 
above), it remains the standard in many institutions where 
eFAST is not available or is unreliable. DPL is especially use­
ful in the hypotensive, unstable patient with multiple injuries 
as a means of excluding intra­abdominal bleeding.
Computed tomography scan
CT has become the ‘gold standard’ for the intra ­abdominal 
diagnosis of injury in the stable patient. The scan can be per­
formed using intravenous contrast. CT is sensitive for blood 
and individual organ injury, as well as for retroperitoneal 
injury. An entirely normal abdominal CT is usually sufficient 
to exclude intraperitoneal injury.
The following points are important when performing CT:
 ● it remains an inappropriate investigation for unstable 
patients;
 ● if duodenal injury is suspected from the mechanism of 
injury, oral contrast may be helpful;
 ● if rectal and distal colonic injury is suspected in the 
absence of blood on rectal examination, rectal contrast 
may be helpful.
Summary box 27.5
Utilisation of eFAST
●● Detects free fluid in the abdomen or pericardium
●● Will not reliably detect less than 100 mL of free blood
●● Does not directly identify injury to hollow viscus
●● Cannot reliably exclude injury in penetrating trauma
●● May need repeating or supplementing with other 
investigations
●● Is unreliable for assessment of the retroperitoneum
Sydney Ringer , 1835–1910, Professor of Clinical Medicine, University College Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 27.8 Compression injury to the liver , bursting the liver sub -
stance.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   373 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA374
Injury in which there is a suggestion of a vascular compo ­
nent should be reimaged, as there is a significant risk of the 
development of subsequent ischaemia, false aneurysms, arte ­
riovenous fistulae or haemobiliary fistula. It is advised that all 
patients should be rescanned prior to discharge.
Liver injury can be graded and managed using the Amer ­
ican Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) Organ 
Injury Scale (OIS) (www.aast.org/injury).
Management
The operative management of liver injuries can be sum ­
marised as ‘the four Ps’:
 ● push;
 ● Pringle;
 ● plug;
 ● pack.
At laparotomy the liver is reconstituted and bleeding 
is controlled by direct bimanual compression to achieve its 
normal architecture as best as possible (push). The inflow 
from the portal triad is controlled by a Pringle’s manoeuvre, 
with direct compression of the portal triad, either digitally or 
using a soft clamp (Figure 27.9). This has the effect of reduc­
ing arterial and portal venous inflow into the liver, although 
it does not control the backflow from the inferior vena cava 
and hepatic veins. Any holes due to penetrating injury can 
be plugged directly using silicone tubing or a Sengstaken–
Blakemore tube, and, after controlling any arterial bleeding, 
the liver can then be packed (see Damage control surgery, 
below).
Bleeding points should be controlled locally when possi ­
ble, and such patients if required, subsequently undergo subse­
quent angioembolisation. It is not usually necessary to suture 
penetrating injuries of the liver, unless haemostasis cannot be 
controlled by other means. If there has been direct damage to 
the hepatic artery, it can be tied off. Damage to the portal vein 
must be repaired, as tying off the portal vein carries a greater 
than 50% mortality rate. If it is not technically feasible to 
repair the vein at the time of surgery, it should be shunted and 
the patient referred to a specialist centre. A closed suction 
drainage system must be left in situ following hepatic surgery.
Finally, the liver can be definitively packed, restoring the 
anatomy as closely as possible. Placing omentum into cracks 
in the liver is not recommended.
Hepatic artery
Portal vein
Figure 27.9 The Pringle manoeuvre.
James Hogarth Pringle , 1863–1941 (Australian born), surgeon, The Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK.
Robert William Sengstaken , 1923–1978, surgeon, Garden City, NY, USA and Arthur Hendley Blakemore, 1897–1970, Associate Professor of Surgery, The 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, designed a tube with two in ­built balloons for the treatment of oesophageal 
varices. The tube was passed and the distal balloon inflated. The tube was drawn backwards until the distal balloon was held at the oesophageal hiatus. The  
proximal balloon was inflated, allowing the tamponade of any varices in the distal oesophagus.
Summary box 27.6
Liver trauma
●● Blunt trauma occurs as the result of direct compression
●● Penetrating trauma of the upper abdomen or lower thorax can 
damage the liver
●● CT scanning is the investigation of choice in the stable patient
●● Surgical management consists of push, Pringle, plug and 
pack
●● The hepatic artery can be tied off but not the portal vein 
(which should be stented)
●● Closed suction drainage should always be used
Biliary injuries
Isolated traumatic biliary injuries are rare and occur mainly 
from penetrating trauma, often in association with injuries to 
other structures that lie in close proximity. The common bile 
duct can be repaired over a T­tube or drained and referred to 
appropriate care as part of damage control, or even ligated.
Spleen
Splenic injury occurs from direct blunt trauma. Most iso ­
lated splenic injuries, especially in children, can be managed 
non­operatively. However, in adults, especially in the pres ­
ence of other injury or physiological instability, laparotomy 
should be considered. The spleen can be packed, repaired or 
placed in a mesh bag. Splenectomy may be a safer option, 
especially in the unstable patient with multiple potential sites 
of bleeding. In certain situations, selective angioembolisation 
of the spleen can play a role.
Following splenectomy there are significant, though tran­
sient, changes to blood physiology. The platelet and white 
count rise and may mimic sepsis. Innoculation against Pneu-
mococcus is advisable within 2–3 weeks, by which time the 
patient’s immune system has recovered.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   374 25/10/2017   08:20Individual organ injury 375
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Pancreas
Most pancreatic injury occurs as a result of blunt trauma. The 
major problem is that of diagnosis, because the pancreas is 
a retroperitoneal organ. CT remains the mainstay of accu ­
rate diagnosis. Amylase or lipase estimation is insensitive. In 
penetrating trauma, injury may only be detected during lap ­
arotomy.
Classically the pancreas should be treated with conserva­
tive surgery and closed suction drainage. Injuries are treated 
according to the OIS system of the AAST. Injuries to the 
pancreatic body to the left of the superior mesenteric vessels 
and to the tail are treated by closed suction drainage alone, 
with distal pancreatectomy if the duct is involved. Proximal 
injuries (to the right of the superior mesenteric artery) are 
treated as conservatively as possible, although partial pancre­
atectomy may be necessary. The pylorus can be temporarily 
closed (pyloric exclusion) in association with a gastric drain ­
age procedure, to minimise pancreatic enzyme stimulation by 
gastric juice or distension. A Whipple’s procedure (pancre ­
aticoduodenectomy) is rarely needed and should not be per ­
formed in the emergency situation because of the very high 
associated mortality rate. A damage control procedure with 
packing and drainage should be performed and the patient 
referred for definitive surgery once stabilised.
Stomach
Most stomach injuries are caused by penetrating trauma. 
Blood presence is diagnostic if found in the nasogastric tube, 
in the absence of bleeding from other sources.
Surgical repair is required but great care must be taken 
to examine the stomach fully, as an injury to the front of the 
stomach can be expected to have an ‘exit’ wound elsewhere 
on the organ.
Duodenum
Duodenal injury is frequently associated with injuries to the 
adjoining pancreas. Like the pancreas, the duodenum lies ret­
roperitoneally and so injuries are hidden, discovered late or at 
laparotomy performed for other reasons. CT is the diagnostic 
modality of choice. The only sign may be gas or a fluid collec­
tion in the periduodenal tissue, and leakage of oral contrast, 
administration of which may improve accuracy of diagnosis.
Smaller injuries can be repaired primarily. The first, third 
and fourth parts of the duodenum behave like small bowel, 
and can be repaired in the same fashion. The second part 
of the duodenum is fixed to the head of the pancreas with 
a common blood supply, and may have a poorer blood sup­
ply compared to the remainder. Major trauma, especially if 
the head of the pancreas is simultaneously injured, should be 
treated as part of a damage control procedure and be referred 
for definitive care.
Small bowel
The small bowel is frequently injured as a result of blunt 
trauma. The individual loops may be trapped, causing 
high­pressure rupture of a loop or tearing of the mesentery. 
Penetrating trauma is also a common cause of injury.
Small bowel injuries need urgent repair . Haemorrhage 
control takes priority and these wounds can be temporarily 
controlled with simple sutures. In blunt trauma with mesen­
teric vessel damage, the bowel ischaemia that results will 
dictate the extent of a resection. Resections should be care ­
fully planned to limit the loss of viable small bowel, but 
should be weighed against an excessive number of repairs 
or anastomoses. Haematomas in the small bowel mesenteric 
border need to be explored to rule out perforation. With low­ 
energy wounds, primary repair can be performed, whereas 
more destructive wounds associated with military type 
weapons require resection and anastomosis. Damage control 
‘clip and drop’ of damaged or resected bowel may be necessary.
Colon
Injuries to the colon from blunt injury are relatively infre ­
quent, and are more frequently a penetrating injury. If rel ­
atively little contamination is present and the viability is 
satisfactory, such wounds can be repaired primarily. If, how ­
ever, there is extensive contamination, the patient is physi ­
ologically unstable or the bowel is of doubtful viability, then 
the bowel can be closed off (‘clip and drop’). A defunctioning 
colostomy can be formed later or the bowel reanastomosed 
once the patient is stable.
Rectum
Only 5% of colon injuries involve the rectum. These are 
generally from a penetrating injury, although occasionally 
the rectum may be damaged following fracture of the pelvis. 
Digital rectal examination will reveal the presence of bloo d, 
which is evidence of intestinal or rectal injury. These inju ­
ries are often associated with bladder and proximal urethral 
injury.
With intraperitoneal injuries, the rectum is managed as 
for colonic injuries. Full­thickness extraperitoneal rectal inju­
ries should be managed with either a diverting end­colostomy 
and closure of the distal end (Hartmann’s procedure) or a 
loop colostomy. Presacral drainage is no longer used.
Renal and urological tract injury
In the stable patient, CT scanning with contrast is the inves­
tigation of choice.
For assessment of bladder injury a cystogram should be 
performed. A minimum of 300 mL of contrast is instilled 
into the bladder via a urethral catheter. The large volume is 
Allen Oldfather Whipple , 1881–1963, Valentine Mott Professor of Surgery, The College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
Henri Albert Charles Antoine Hartmann , 1860–1952, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Paris, Paris, France.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   375 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA376
essential because a small volume may not distend the bladder 
enough to produce a leak from a small bladder injury once the 
cystic muscle is contracted. It is important to assess the films 
as follows:
 ● two views – AP and lateral (and sometimes oblique);
 ● two occasions – full and postmicturition.
Generally, renal injury is managed non­operatively unless 
the patient is unstable. The kidney can be angioembolised if 
required.
Ureteric injury is rare and is generally due to penetrating 
trauma. Most ureters can be repaired or diverted if necessary, 
or may even be ligated as part of Damage control procedures.
Intraperitoneal rupture of the bladder, usually from direct 
blunt injury, will require surgical repair. Extraperitoneal rup­
ture is usually associated with a fracture of the pelvis and will 
heal with adequate urine drainage via the transurethral route. 
Suprapubic drainage is reserved for when this is not possible.
In penetrating trauma, every injury should be explored 
for damage to structures along the wound track (e.g. ureter), 
unless preoperative investigation allows non ­surgical man ­
agement of the injury.
THE PELVIS
Although mortality following severe pelvic fractures has 
decreased dramatically with better methods of controlling 
haemorrhage, these patients still represent a significant chal ­
lenge to every link of the treatment chain. Mortality rates 
exceeding 40% have recently been reported. Further , pel ­
vic bleeding as one of the ‘hidden bleeding sources’ is still 
underestimated or missed, as retrospective chart analyses of 
potentially preventable deaths have revealed. Extreme force 
is required to disrupt the pelvic ring, and associated injuries 
and extrapelvic bleeding sources are common (up to 50% of 
cases). The haemodynamically unstable patient with severe 
pelvic fracture has a 90% risk of associated injuries, and a 
30% risk of intra­abdominal bleeding.
To save these patients, three questions need to be 
addressed:
 ● Is the patient at high risk of massive bleeding?
 ● Where is the source of the bleeding?
 ● How to stop the bleeding?
Anatomy
The surgical anatomy of the pelvis is a key to the understand­
ing of pelvic injuries.
 ● The pelvic inlet is circular , a structure that is immensely 
strong, but routinely gives way at more than one point 
should sufficient force be applied to it. Therefore, iso ­
lated fractures of the anterior or posterior pelvic ring are 
uncommon.
 ● The forces required to fracture the pelvic ring do not 
respect the surrounding organ systems.
Summary box 27.7
Injuries to structures in the abdomen
●● In children, splenic injury can be managed non-operatively in 
most cases, but not if haemodynamically unstable
●● Duodenal injuries are often associated with pancreatic trauma
●● Bowel injuries need urgent definitive repair, or isolation using 
resection or by stapling
●● Rectal injuries may be best managed initially with a diverting 
colostomy
●● Kidney and urinary tract injury is best diagnosed with 
enhanced CT scanning
●● Intraperitoneal bladder tears need formal repair and drainage
Retroperitoneum
Injury to the retroperitoneum is often difficult to diagnose, 
especially in the presence of other injury, when the signs may 
be masked. Diagnostic tests (such as ultrasound and DPL) 
may be negative. The best diagnostic modality is CT, but this 
requires a physiologically stable patient. The retroperitoneum 
is divided into three zones (Figure 27.10) for the purposes of 
intraoperative management:
In blunt trauma:
 ● Zone 1 (central): central haematomas should always be 
explored, once proximal and distal vascular control has 
been obtained.
 ● Zone 2 (lateral): lateral haematomas should only be 
explored if they are expanding or pulsatile. They are usu ­
ally renal in origin and can be managed non ­operatively, 
though they may sometimes require angioembolisation.
 ● Zone 3 (pelvic): as with zone 2, these should only be 
explored if they are expanding or pulsatile. Pelvic haema­
tomas are exceptionally difficult to control and, whenever 
possible, should not be opened; they are best controlled 
with compression or extraperitonea packing, and if the 
bleeding is arterial in origin, with angioembolisation.
1
2
2
3
Figure 27.10 The zones of the retroperitoneum. Zone 1: central; 
zone 2: lateral; zone 3: pelvic.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   376 25/10/2017   08:20The pelvis 377
PART 4 | TRAUMA
 ● The pelvis has a rich collateral blood supply , especially 
across the sacrum and posterior part of the ileum. The 
cancellous bone of the pelvis also has an excellent blood 
supply. Most pelvic haemorrhage emanates from venous 
injury and fracture sites. However, in the haemodynam­
ically unstable patient with severe pelvic injury, arterial 
bleeding is more frequent. Important for the treatment is 
that the surgeon has to deal both with arterial and venous 
bleeding.
 ● Postmortem examination has shown that the extrapelvic 
peritoneal space can accommodate more than 3000 mL. 
However, in the case of a severe pelvic fracture where the 
retroperitoneal compartment is disrupted and the external 
bony barrier is not stable, haematoma may extend upwards 
towards the mediastinum (‘chimney effect’) or downwards 
into the medial thigh in case of rupture of the pelvic floor.
 ● All iliac vessels, the sciatic nerve roots (including the lum­
bosacral nerve) and the ureters cross the sacroiliac joint; 
disruption of this joint may cause severe haemorrhage and 
sometimes cause arterial obstruction of the internal iliac 
artery and sciatic nerve palsy. Injuries to the ureters are 
rare.
 ● The pelvic viscera are suspended from the bony pelvis 
by condensations of the endopelvic fascia. Shear forces 
acting on the pelvis will transmit these to pelvic viscera, 
leading to avulsion and shearing injuries.
 ● The pelvis also includes the acetabulum, a major structure 
in weight transfer to the leg. Inappropriate treatment will 
lead to severe disability.
Classification
Pelvic ring fractures can be classified into three types, using 
the Tile classification (for subtypes and other classifications 
see Further reading), based on the severity of the fracture 
(and reflecting the energy required to cause it) (Figure 
27.11). However, no fracture pattern can exclude significant 
haemorrhage.
Type A
Type A are the most common fractures and are completely 
stable. They result from lateral compression, which causes 
compression fractures of the pubic rami or compression frac ­
ture of the sacrum posteriorly. 
Type B
These fractures are partially stable, and there is disruption of 
the anterior pelvis and partial disruption of the posterior pel­
vis. The pelvis can open and close ‘like a book’, but because 
the sacroiliac ligaments remain intact, there is no vertical 
displacement. Internal or external stabilisation is required. 
Blood loss can be significant.
Type C
This fracture is completely unstable. Both anterior pelvis and 
the entire posterior pelvic complexes are disrupted and the 
disrupted pelvic bones are free to displace horizontally and 
vertically. In both type B and type C pelvic injuries, there is a 
high risk of associated abdominal injuries (bowel perforation 
or mesenteric laceration) and rupture of the diaphragm.
Clinical examination
Pelvic fractures should be easily identified if ATLS guidelines 
are followed (i.e. clinical palpation and compression of the 
pelvic brim from sacroiliac joint to pubic symphysis, and a 
routine chest and pelvic radiograph for any blunt injury in 
a patient unable to walk). Clinical examination may reveal 
instability. Any instability felt indicates the presence of major 
pelvic fracture, associated with life ­threatening blood loss, 
and requires appropriate measures. The absence of clinical 
instability does not, however, preclude an unstable pelvic 
fracture. One­third of such trauma victims with pelvic ring 
fractures present with circulatory instability on arrival.
Inspection of the skin may reveal lacerations in the groin, 
perineum or sacral area, indicating an open pelvic fracture, 
the result of gross deformation. Evidence of perineal injury or 
haematuria mandates radiological evaluation of the urinary 
tract from below upwards (retrograde urethrogram followed 
by cystogram or CT cystogram and an excretory urogram, as 
appropriate) when the physiology allows. Inspection of the 
urethral meatus may reveal a drop of blood, indicating ure ­
thral damage.
Marvin Tile , b.1933, orthopaedic surgeon, Sunnybrook Medical Centre, Toronto, Canada.
Figure 27.11 Tile classification of fractures of the pelvis.
Type A
Type B
Type C
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   377 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA378
Inspection of the anus may reveal lacerations to the sphinc­
ter mechanism. Rectal examination may reveal blood in the  
rectum and/or discontinuity of the rectal wall, indicating a 
rectal laceration. In male patients, the prostate is palpated; a 
high­riding prostate indicates a complete urethral avulsion. 
A full neurological examination is performed of the perineal 
area, sphincter mechanism and femoral and sciatic nerves.
Diagnosis
Radiograph
Examination of a plain radiograph of the pelvis requires an 
understanding of the mechanism of injury and a decision on 
the stability of the pelvic rim.
An open book type mechanism causes one or both ilea to 
rotate externally (opening, like a book). A lateral compres­
sion mechanism causes the pelvis to collapse. An ‘open­book 
fracture’ is seen as a widening of the pubic symphysis or wid ­
ening at the site of a fracture in the pubic ramus. Not only is 
there disruption of the bony pelvis, but also tearing of the pel­
vic floor and thus the pelvic venous plexus is at risk. The more 
unstable the pelvis, the more likely the structures are to be 
damaged. When the pelvis collapses from a lateral compres ­
sion injury, the pubic bones usually fracture. Displacement 
of the anterior pelvis by greater than 2  cm indicates at least 
partial instability. A vertical shear disruption of the sacroiliac 
joint, with apparent shortening of the limb on the affected 
side implies significant energy of injury.
FAST may be unreliable as it does not localise intra ­ 
abdominal bleeding in these patients.
CT is the diagnostic modality of choice in the haemo ­
dynamically stable patient, and CT angiography is particu ­
larly helpful to provide details of both the anatomy of the 
facture, as well as details of the origin of the bleeding (venous 
or arterial).
Management
The treatment of bleeding is to stop the bleeding!
The priorities for resuscitating patients with pelvic frac ­
tures are no different from the standard. These injuries can 
produce a real threat to the circulation, and management is 
geared toward controlling this threat. Initial management 
requires the use of a compression binder or a sheet, applied 
around the true pelvis at the level of the greater trochanters 
(‘reduce the pelvic volume’), a potentially lifesaving proce ­
dure that has to be done in the emergency room.
85% of bleeding originating from the pelvis is of venous ori­
gin and can be controlled by non ­operative means, including 
compression either by binding or external fixator, or by extra­
peritoneal packing (i.e. packing the loose space between the 
bony wall of the pelvis and the peritoneum) to compress the 
pelvic veins. If other sources of bleeding have been ruled out, 
the extraperitoneal pelvic packing is done without entering the 
peritoneal cavity. This may be combined with external fixation.
If the bleeding is of arterial origin, interventional angio ­
embolisation is the next choice for bleeding control. The 
techniques for bleeding control (compression, packing, fix­
ation and angioembolisation) do not exclude each other but 
rather may complement each other. Persistent bleeding after 
packing may require angioembolisation and vice versa.
Severe pelvic injuries require a multidisciplinary team 
approach. If adequate orthopaedic experience is unavailable, 
consideration should be given towards early transfer of this 
patient to an institution with the necessary expertise.
If the source of the bleeding is in doubt or FAST/CT 
results are positive, showing a significant amount of blood 
in the peritoneal cavity, concurrent intra ­abdominal injury 
cannot be excluded, and it is wise to perform an exploratory 
laparotomy to treat or rule out intra­abdominal bleeding.
Summary
In summary, a haemodynamically normal patient can be safely 
transferred for stabilisation of unstable fractures within hours 
after injury and following control of the associated damage.
Summary box 27.8
Pelvic injury
●● Associated injuries can only be managed once the patient is 
haemodynamically stable
●● Decision on the stability is of paramount importance
●● Procedures for damage control may be the only available 
option
●● External stabilisation of the pelvic ring is the basis of all 
treatment
●● If necessary, further bleeding control can be achieved either 
by angioembolisation or extraperitoneal packing
●● Most associated injuries can be managed once the patient is 
haemodynamically stable
DAMAGE CONTROL
Following major injury, protracted surgery in the physiologi ­
cally unstable patient can in itself prove fatal. Patients with 
the ‘deadly triad’ (hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy) 
are those at highest risk. ‘Damage control’ or ‘damage lim ­
itation surgery’ is a concept that originated from naval ship ­
building strategy, whereby ships were designed so that the 
damage was kept ‘local’ and which allowed only the minimal 
repairs needed to prevent it from sinking, while definitive 
repairs waited until it had reached port. The technique has 
been adopted following major trauma, and includes initial 
care and resuscitation (damage control resuscitation) and the 
surgical correction of the injury (damage control surgery).
The minimum amount of surgery needed to stabilise the 
patient’s condition may be the safest course until the physi ­
ological derangement can be corrected. Damage control sur ­
gery is restricted to only two goals:
 ● stopping any active surgical bleeding;
 ● controlling any contamination.
Once these goals have been achieved then the opera ­
tion is suspended and the abdomen temporarily closed. The 
patient’s resuscitation then continues in the intensive care 
unit, where other therapeutic interventions can take place. 
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   378 25/10/2017   08:20Damage control 379
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Outer layer
(Opsite®/Ioban®)
Inner layer
(Opsite®/Ioban®)
Abdominal
content
Suction drains
Abdominal swab/
cotton drape
Figure 27.12 (a) Diagram showing temporary skin closure in dam-
age control. (b) Abdominal closure following damage control surgery 
showing an Opsite® closure.
(a)
(b)
Once the physiology has been corrected, the patient warmed 
and the coagulopathy corrected, the patient is returned to the 
operating theatre for any definitive surgery.
Damage control resuscitation
The concept of damage control has been broadened to include 
the techniques used in resuscitation as well as in surgery. The 
time in the ED is minimised and the majority of resuscita ­
tion of the patient is carried out in the operating room and 
not in the resuscitation bay (Table 27.6). The resuscitation 
is individualised through repeated point of care testing, of 
haemoglobin, acidosis (pH and lactate) and clotting, and is 
therefore directed towards the early delivery of biologically 
active colloids, clotting products and whole blood in order to 
buy time. The physiological disturbances that are associated 
with the downward spiral of acidosis, coagulopathy and hypo­
thermia in these serious injuries are predicted and attempts 
are made to avoid them rather than react to them.
Damage control surgery
The decision whether damage control surgery is the appropriate 
course should be made early (Table 27.7) and allows the whole 
surgical and anaesthetic team to work together to limit the time 
in surgery and the earliest possible admission of the patient to 
the intensive care unit. Damage control is a staged process.
The initial focus is haemorrhage control, followed by con­
trol and limitation of contamination, achieved using a range 
of abbreviated techniques including simple ligation of bleed ­
ing vessels, shunting of major arteries and veins, drainage, 
temporary stapling of bowel and therapeutic packing.
Following the above, the abdomen is closed in a temporary 
fashion using a sheet of plastic (e.g. Opsite®) over the bowel, 
an intermediate pack to allow suction and a further sheet of 
adherent plastic drape to the skin to form a watertight and 
airtight seal. Suction is applied to the intermediate pack area 
to collect abdominal fluid. This technique is known as the 
‘Vacpac’ or ‘Opsite ® sandwich’ (Figure 27.12). As soon as 
control has been achieved the patient is transferred to the 
intensive care unit where resuscitation is continued.
The next stage following damage control surgery and 
physiological stabilisation is definitive surgery. The team 
should aim to perform definitive anastomoses, vascular recon­
struction and closure of the body cavity within 24–72 hours 
of injury. However, this must be individualised to the patient, 
the response to critical care resuscitation and the progression 
of injury complexes.
TABLE 27.6 The stages of damage control surgery.
Stage
I Patient selection
II Control of haemorrhage and control of contamination
III Resuscitation continued in the intensive care unit
IV Definitive surgery
V Abdominal closure
TABLE 27.7 Indications for damage control surgery.
Anatomical Inability to achieve haemostasis
Complex abdominal injury, e.g. liver and pancreas
Combined vascular, solid and hollow organ injury, 
e.g. aortic or caval injury
Inaccessible major venous injury, e.g. retrohepatic 
vena cava
Demand for non-operative control of other injuries, 
e.g. fractured pelvis
Anticipated need for a time-consuming procedure
Physiological
(decline of 
physiological 
reserve)
Temperature <34ºC
pH <7.2
Serum lactate >5 mmol/L (normal: <2.5 mmol/L)
Prothrombin time (PT) >16 s
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT) >60 s
>10 units blood transfused
Systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg for >60 min
Environmental Operating time >60 min (core temperature loss in 
usually 2°C/h)
Inability to approximate the abdominal incision
Desire to reassess the intra-abdominal contents 
(directed relook)
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   379 25/10/2017   08:20CHAPTER 27  Torso trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA380
NON-OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Non­operative management is generally preferred for the 
man agement of solid organ injury in haemodynamically stable 
children. Non ­operative management of solid abdominal 
organ injury has rapidly gained acceptance in the management 
of adults as well. A stable patient and accurate CT imaging 
are prerequisites for this approach. Failure of non ­operative 
management is uncommon and typically occurs within the 
first 12 hours after injury. Therefore, if correctly selected, the 
vast majority of these patients will avoid surgery, require less 
blood transfusion, and sustain fewer complications than oper­
ated patients.
ANTIBIOTICS IN TORSO TRAUMA
There is no level 1 evidence to recommend the use of antibi­
otics for the insertion of chest drains. However, prophylactic 
antibiotics prior to surgery should be used in all cases of pen ­
etrating abdominal trauma. Unless there is major contamina­
tion, a single dose is sufficient.
FURTHER READING
American Association for the Surgery of Trauma. Organ Injury Scaling 
System. Available online at: http://www.aast.org (accessed February 
2016).
American College of Surgeons. Advanced trauma life support course man-
ual for doctors, 9th edn. Chicago: American College of Surgeons, 
2015.
Boffard KD (ed). Definitive surgery of trauma care , 4th edn. London: 
Taylor and Francis, 2015.
Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. Guidelines for prac ­
tice management: evidence ­based guidelines. Available online at: 
http//:www.east.org (accessed February 2016).
Mattox LK, Moore EE, Feliciano DV (eds). Trauma, 7th edn. New York: 
McGraw Hill, 2013.
Tornetta P , Court­Brown CM, Heckman JD et al. Rockwood and Green’s 
fractures in adults, 8th edn. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2014.
World Society for Abdominal Compartment Syndrome. Abdominal 
compartment syndrome. Available online at: http//:www.wsacs.org 
(accessed February 2016).
Summary box 27.9
Damage control
●● Resuscitation is carried out in the operating room using 
biologically active fluids (i.e. blood) – damage control 
resuscitation (DCR)
●● The surgery performed is the minimum needed to stabilise the 
patient
●● The aims of surgery are to control haemorrhage and limit 
contamination
●● Secondary surgery is aimed at definitive repair
TABLE 27.8 Effect of raised intra-abdominal pressure on 
individual organ function.
Organ Effect
Renal Increase in renal vascular resistance leading 
to a reduction in glomerular filtration rate 
and impaired renal function
Cardiovascular Decrease in venous return resulting in 
decreased cardiac output because of both 
a reduction in preload and an increase in 
afterload
Respiratory Increased ventilation pressures because of 
splinting of the diaphragm, decreased lung 
compliance and increased airway pressures
Visceral perfusion Reduction in visceral perfusion
Intracranial effects Severe rises in intracranial pressures
ABDOMINAL COMPARTMENT 
SYNDROME AND THE OPEN 
ABDOMEN
Raised intra ­abdominal pressure has far­reaching conse ­
quences for the patient; the syndrome that results is known 
as ACS. ACS is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in 
the critically ill patient and its early recognition is essential 
(Table 27.8).
In all cases of abdominal trauma in which the develop ­
ment of ACS in the immediate postoperative phase is consid­
ered a risk, the abdomen should be left open and managed as 
for damage control surgery.
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY
Interventional radiology can be useful in the management of 
torso trauma as both an investigative and a therapeutic tool 
for patients with vascular injury. Angioembolisation follow ­
ing demonstration of ongoing bleeding in splenic and renal 
injury is a valuable technique.
The abdomen is closed as soon as possible, bearing in 
mind the risks of abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS). 
The closure is not without its own morbidity . Successful 
closure may require aggressive off ­loading of fluid and even 
haemofiltration to achieve this if the patient will tolerate it. 
The best situation is closure of the abdominal fascia, or, if 
this cannot be achieved, then skin closure only. Occasionally, 
mesh closure can be used, with skin grafting over the mesh 
and subsequent abdominal wall reconstruction.
Thoracic damage control is conceptually based on the same 
philosophy. This is that haemorrhage control and focused sur­
gical procedures minimise further surgical insult and lead to 
improved survival in the unstable trauma patient. The aim is 
to control bleeding and limit air leaks using the fastest pro ­
cedures available, such as staplers, to minimise the operative 
time. Often, damage control surgery is the definitive surgery.
The indications and techniques for emergency thoracic 
surgery have already been described.
Damage control applies equally to the extremities. In this 
case, it is shunting of blood vessels, identifying and marking 
damaged structures such as nerves, fasciotomy and removal 
of contaminated tissue that are the main tasks. Subsequent 
definitive management can be carried out at a later stage.
04_27-B&L27_Pt4_Ch27.indd   380 25/10/2017   08:20Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To gain an understanding of:
 • How to identify whether an injury exists
 • The important injuries not to miss
 • The principles of the description and classification of 
fractures
 • The range of available treatments
 • How to select an appropriate treatment
Chapter
Extremity trauma
28
INTRODUCTION
In several chapters the importance of life-threatening trauma 
is emphasised, but numerically for every patient that dies fol-
lowing a traumatic event, there are three that are left with a 
lifelong functional impairment.
Appropriate treatment of extremity trauma is important 
to return the patient to optimal function as quickly and as 
safely as possible. The management of extremity trauma is 
step-wise and involves initially saving the patient’s life by 
the identification and treatment of life and limb threatening 
injuries first, according to the Advanced Trauma Life Support 
(ATLS) principles.
Treatment depends on injury specific factors, patient fac -
tors and surgeon factors, including the resources available.
It is imperative for the clinician to involve the patient in 
the decision making process when it comes to the choice of 
treatment for that individual. Moreover, treatment priorities, 
functional demands and risk versus benefit vary from individ-
ual to individual.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of extremity trauma begins with the taking of 
a pertinent history followed by focussed physical examination 
and appropriate special tests.
History
It is important to ascertain the mechanism of injury and the 
amount of force involved in the injury. T ake time to gather 
sufficient detail in order to do this.  Certain injury mecha -
nisms result in classical injury patterns; for example, electro -
cution or seizure activity may lead to a posterior dislocation of 
the shoulder. In your mind translate the mechanism of injury 
into the common anatomical injury patterns. For example, a 
head on collision between two cars each travelling at 40 miles 
per hour coming to a dead stop should be interpreted by the 
history taker as a rapid deceleration injury, which then allows 
anticipation of likely injuries, such as rupture of the aortic 
arch. Similarly, a fall on the outstretched hand might be asso-
ciated with wrist, elbow, shoulder and clavicular injuries.
Following the history of the presenting complaint, it is 
important to collect information beyond that of the injury 
and the AMPLE mnemonic is an abbreviated system taught 
in ATLS.
A:  Allergies
M:  Medication – important to ask about anticoagulant and 
antiplatelet therapies, corticosteroid use and any possible 
immunosuppressive treatment
P:  Past medical and surgical history – has the patient had an 
anaesthetic in the past and were there any complications
L:  Last time – something to eat or drink
E:  Events – events that led to the injury
In the multiply injured patient or patients with altered 
levels of consciousness, gain as much collateral history as 
possible. Listen to the account of pre-hospital personnel; 
for example, the amount of cabin intrusion in a vehicle or 
whether a collision was head on or a side on.
Examination
An initial general examination, including vital signs and gen-
eral assessment, should be conducted. Is this an isolated injury 
or do you need to start right at the beginning, considering the 
A, B, C approach as advocated by ATLS? Examination of the 
individual extremity only begins once you are sure the patient 
is stable and life- and limb-threatening conditions have been 
excluded.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   381 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA382
It is crucial to undertake a thorough top to toe evaluation 
in the secondary survey. Often the minor extremity injuries 
are missed (Figure 28.1) and can cause significant long-term 
problems (Table 28.1).
A top to toe evaluation is is achieved by a systematic 
approach (see Chapter 31 and Apley’s system of orthopaedics 
and fractures [Further reading]) to the injured extremity:
 ● look;
 ● feel;
 ● move (active and passive);
 ● special tests;
 ● special investigations.
Ensure you examine the joint above and the joint below 
the site of injury. Consider the events and mechanism of 
injury and examine the areas that could possibly be affected. 
For example, a patient who falls from a height may fracture the 
calcaneus, which is an obvious diagnosis with a very swollen 
hindfoot and extremely tender heel. The concomitant lumbar 
spine fracture may not become evident until a few days later 
when the distracting pain in the heel starts to subside.
Look
It is important to look at the whole limb, back and front, noting 
any localised swelling, bruising and any obvious deformity. A 
shortened externally rotated leg in an older patient suggests a 
fracture of the proximal femur. A slightly flexed, adducted inter-
nally rotated leg might suggest a posterior dislocation of the hip.
Any break in the skin or abrasion needs to be noted and 
the treating orthopaedic surgeon informed, even if you do not 
think it communicates with the fracture. A graze over the 
knee in a closed tibial fracture may preclude intramedullary 
nailing until the wound has healed over, or perhaps an alter -
native treatment may have to be considered.
Ideally a photograph (with appropriate consent) should 
be taken to document the injury and obviate the need for 
repeated manipulation of the dressings (see Open fractures).
Note the colour of the limb and the degree of general swell-
ing. A compartment syndrome may still be present even when 
a limb does not appear to be very swollen (see Compartment 
syndrome), but if it is grossly swollen, note, document and pass 
on the information.
Look for pre-existing scars; a scar at the back of the elbow 
or over the cubital tunnel might signify an anterior transposi-
tion of the ulna nerve. Scars might signify previous metalwork 
that remains in situ or has been removed in the past.
Feel
Start gently examining the limb away from the zone of obvi-
ous injury, gaining the patients trust and gathering as much 
information as possible before and without causing the 
patient pain or discomfort. Feel for bony tenderness and note 
TABLE 28.1 Extremity injuries that are notorious for being 
missed.
Posterior dislocation of the shoulder
Lateral condylar mass fracture of the distal humerus
Perilunate dislocation
Scaphoid fracture
Tarsometatarsal fracture dislocation
Compartment syndrome
Vascular injury with knee dislocation
Talar neck fracture
Slipped upper femoral epiphysis
Achilles tendon rupture
Achilles , the Greek hero was the son of Peleus and Thetis. When he was a child, his mother dipped him in the Styx, one of the rivers of the Underworld so that 
he should be invulnerable in battle. The heel by which she held him did not get wet, and was, therefore, not protected. Achilles died from a wound in the heel 
received at the seige of Troy.
Figure 28.1  (a) Missed dislocation of metatarsophalangeal joint 
of the little toe, picked up at 8 weeks. (b) Initial trauma computed 
tomography angiogram. In retrospect, on close inspection the dislo -
cation is visible on the angiogram; do not be distracted by the obvious 
femoral shaft fracture.
(a)
(b)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   382 25/10/2017   08:21Diagnosis 383
PART 4 | TRAUMA
the degree of swelling and tenseness of the compartments. It 
should be noted that it is not possible to exclude a compart -
ment syndrome based on how tense the limb feels. The deep 
posterior compartment of the lower leg cannot be felt when 
palpating the skin.
The characteristic crepitus of subcutaneous air can be felt 
in the setting of open fractures, air jet injuries and around the 
chest in the presence of a pneumothorax.
The examiner should feel for pulses and assess capillary 
return (see Neurovascular examination) as well as feeling for 
temperature changes.
Move
Movement as part of the examination should once again be 
approached carefully and without causing the patient pain 
and discomfort. T wo types of movement can be assessed:
1 active – active movement is movement initiated and 
maintained by the patient;
2 passive – passive movement is when the examiner moves 
the limb.
Special tests
There are often special tests to detect injury in precise ana -
tomical locations and many are described elsewhere in the 
book; for example, looking for a ruptured Achilles tendon 
by placing the patient prone with the foot over the edge of 
the bed and squeezing the calf; plantarflexion of the foot and 
ankle then suggests the Achilles tendon is intact.
The examiner should be aware of gravity simulating active 
movements. For example, a leg lying flat, fully extended on 
the couch does not mean the extensor mechanism of the 
knee is intact. In all knee injuries make sure the patient can 
actively straight leg raise and get their leg off the couch.
Similar pitfalls exist in the upper limb with gravity 
straightening the elbow. In order to assess triceps function 
and elbow extension, ensure the patient can actively extend 
against resistance from the examiner or against gravity.
Beware of trick movements. Patients with a complete rup-
ture of the quadriceps can still walk with the leg locked in full 
to slight hyperextension by using the iliotibial band. Patients 
with complete rupture of the Achilles tendon can still actively 
plantar flex the foot and ankle using the long toe flexors.
Neurovascular examination
This is an important part of extremity examination and sum-
mary terms such as ‘neurovascularly intact’ are best avoided. It 
is preferable to clearly document the examination performed 
and its findings, along with a conclusion about the function 
of the particular neurological or vascular anatomy tested. On 
occasion you may not be able to examine all movements due 
to injury or casts.
It is important to examine and document findings before 
and after any manipulation or cast application, to ensure no 
change. A radial nerve palsy in association with a humeral 
shaft fracture that occurs at the time of injury may be treated 
expectantly. If, however, radial nerve function is lost after 
application of a cast or brace, the nerve should be explored. 
Most peripheral nerves have a motor and sensory component; 
document both sensibility and motor function.
Laceration or rupture of major vessels may result in life-
and limb-threatening injury and should be dealt with as an 
emergency (see ATLS guidelines). Complete laceration or 
occlusion of a major vessel is obvious and seldom missed. 
In contrast, occult vessel injuries must be considered and 
actively excluded. In 30% of knee dislocations (tibio–femoral 
dislocation) a vascular injury will occur (Figure 28.2).
The presence of palpable pulses does not exclude a signifi-
cant vascular injury and an intimal flap may develop, progress 
and thrombose over time. Repeated evaluation is necessary, 
before and after any intervention (manipulation/cast).
In injuries commonly associated with vascular injury, such 
as knee dislocations, occult injury should be actively excluded 
with an angiogram. If an angiogram is not performed, repeated 
thorough vascular evaluation of the limb should be under -
taken for the first 24–48 hours.
Figure 28.2 (a) Initial anterior tibio–femoral dislocation. (b) Post- 
reduction computed tomography angiogram showing complete 
blockage of the popliteal artery with r econstitution distally from a 
collateral blood supply.
(b)
(a)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   383 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA384
Investigations
The mainstay of extremity trauma investigation remains radi-
ography of the affected limb to see if there is a bony injury. 
However, this is not the sole investigation available.
Haematological investigations
Simple haematological investigations are seldom useful in the 
evaluation of single limb injury. In the polytrauma patient a 
full blood count, serum biochemistry, clotting factor and cre-
atinine kinase may be useful. A blood gas, including PH, base 
excess and lactate, can be useful to show the severity of the 
injury and the response to resuscitation.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is very useful to define soft tissue injuries. Frac-
tures of the bones can be visualised on ultrasound but gen-
erally it is reserved for the soft tissues. One limitation of 
ultrasound is the variability depending on the experience of 
the sonographer.
Radiography
Radiographs are the mainstay in the initial evaluation of sus-
pected extremity trauma. The rule of 2’s should be remem -
bered:
 ● 2 views – ensure acquisition of 2 views in orthogonal 
planes to avoid missing a fracture out of plane on the first 
radiograph view. For shoulder injuries ensure at least an 
AP and axillary or modified axillary view (Figure 28.3);
 ● 2 joints – radiographs are required of the joint above and 
the joint below the fracture;
 ● 2 occasions – sometimes the fracture may not be initially 
visible; a second series of radiographs should be under -
taken after 10–14 days if suspicion of bony injury persists. 
The classic injury here is a scaphoid fracture. If initial 
scaphoid views are normal, consider repeating them 
10–14 days later, if pain and tenderness in the anatomical 
snuff box persists;
 ● 2 sides – in paediatric injuries it can be useful to consider 
a radiograph from the opposite and uninjured side if doubt 
exists. With improved access to atlases of normal variants 
this is less important.
Computed axial tomography
Computed axial tomography (CT) is very good for charac -
terising the bony anatomy of injuries, allowing for multipla -
nar reconstruction of injury anatomy and providing other 3D 
information. It is very useful for periarticular injuries, where 
the exact characterisation of the bony injury is essential.
Surface volume rendering is a useful addition allowing for 
easier visualization of the injury (see Figure 28.1b). CT angi-
ography (see Figure 28.2b) may be added, providing informa-
tion on the vascular anatomy. One disadvantage of CT is the 
dose of radiation involved.
Figure 28.3 Radiographic series of the same patient demonstrating 
the value of 2 views in 2 planes and the true value of the axillary view 
in shoulder trauma. (a) Anteroposterior radiograph of the shoulder , 
initially reported as normal. (b) Lateral scapula radiograph, initially 
reported as normal; humeral head slightly posteriorly directed. (c) 
Axillary view – true value of axillary view shown with obvious posterior 
dislocation of the glenohumeral joint.
(a)
(b)
(c)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   384 25/10/2017   08:21Description and classification of the injury 385
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides 3D information 
without the radiation involved in CT. It provides useful infor-
mation, particularly about the soft tissues. MRI can provide 
information on the blood supply to the bone; for example, 
avascular necrosis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid.
One disadvantage of MRI is the time taken to acquire the 
image; patients suffering from claustrophobia find the experi-
ence traumatic. Another issue is that the magnetic field may 
be disrupted by non-ferrous metal and the presence of ferrous 
metal contraindicates an MRI.
MRI angiography can also be performed providing infor -
mation about the vascular anatomy.
Nuclear medicine scans
Technetium 99 nuclear medicine scans register osteoblastic 
activity and may be used to demonstrate occult fractures; for 
example, an undisplaced scaphoid fracture.
DESCRIPTION AND 
CLASSIFICATION OF THE 
INJURY
Soft tissue injury
There are several classification systems for soft tissue injuries, 
the Tscherne classification for closed injuries, the Gustilo and 
Anderson for open injuries (Table 28.2) and the Ganga clas-
sification of severe open injuries.
The first step of soft tissue injury characterisation is to 
decide if this is an open or closed fracture. An open fracture 
being any fracture where the fracture haematoma commu -
nicates with a breach in the epithelial lining, not just skin. 
For example, an open pelvic fracture may communicate with 
the vagina or rectum and a mandibular fracture through the 
mucosa of the mouth (see Open fractures).
Consider all the soft tissues crossing the zone of injury, 
as it is possible to get a closed rupture or avulsion of tendons 
without a break in the skin. Consider the possibility of a neu-
rovascular injury. (see Neurological injury). Severe soft tissue 
injury in the presence or absence of a fracture may still lead to 
compartment syndrome (see Compartment syndrome).
Neurological injury
Seddon classified nerve injuries into neurapraxia, axonotme -
sis and neurotmesis:
 ● neurapraxia – no loss of nerve sheath continuity or periph-
eral Wallerian degeneration. Recovery potential good may 
take months if the pressure is removed from the nerve;
 ● axonotmesis – nerve sheath remains intact, with inter -
nal nerve fibre damage with Wallerian degeneration. The 
neural tube (endoneurium) can guide the regenerating 
nerve fibres to their target. Goo d potential for recovery; 
nerve fibre regrowth is at 1 mm per day;
 ● neurotmesis – complete division of the nerve, nerve sheath 
and nerve fibre. Functionally poor outcome without surgi-
cal intervention to restore continuity of the nerve sheath.
Although the Seddon classification is useful in under -
standing the pathoanatomy, the critical discriminator in 
defining recovery, and need for possible surgical intervention, 
is the presence or lack of continuity of the enveloping nerve 
sheath.
Bony injury
Description
Describing the bony injury depends on several characteristics 
and includes the:
 ● name of the bone that has been injured;
 ● region of bone injured;
 ● pattern of fracture line: transverse, oblique, spiral, seg -
mental or multifragmentary (Figure 28.4);
Summary box 28.1
History, examination and investigations
●● Follow a systematic approach
●● History requires sufficient detail of injury
●● History can be organised in the AMPLE format
●● Examination follows look, feel, move, special tests approach
●● Investigations will include radiographs with rule of 2s 
observed
●● Selective use of special investigations can help diagnosis
TABLE 28.2 Gustilo and Anderson open fracture 
classification.
Type
I A low energy open fracture with a wound less than 1 cm 
long and clean
II An open fracture with a laceration more than 1 cm long 
without extensive soft tissue damage, flaps or avulsion
III Characterised by high energy injury irrespective of the size 
of the wound. Extensive damage to soft tissues, including 
muscles, skin, and neurovascular structures, and a high 
degree of contamination. Multifragmentary and unstable 
fractures
Subgroups of type III
A Adequate soft tissue cover of a fractured bone after 
stabilisation
B Inadequate soft tissue cover of a fractured bone after 
stabilisation (i.e. flap coverage required)
C Open fracture associated with an arterial injury requiring 
repair
Source: Gustilo RB, Mendoza RM, Williams DN. Problems in the management 
of type III (severe) open fractures: a new classification of type III open 
fractures. J Trauma 1984; 24: 742–6.
Ramon Balgoa Gustilo , surgeon, Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
John T Anderson , surgeon, Hennepin Medical Center, Minneapolis, MA, USA.
Sir Herbert J Seddon , trained at St Barts, London University, and the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, Stanmore, UK. He became the second Nuffield 
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery in Oxford.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   385 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA386
 ● presence of compression; compression fractures occur 
when cancellous bone collapses; vertebral wedge compres-
sion fracture;
 ● presence of displacement of the fracture fragments, undis-
placed or displaced;
 ● type and degree of displacement (Figure 28.4):
 ● angulation;
 ● translation;
 ● rotation (Figure 28.5);
 ● shortening;
 ● presence of pre-existing pathology;
 ● associated joint pathology, dislocation or subluxation.
In children and adolescents the fracture line may be 
incomplete due to the plastic, less brittle nature of their bones 
(Figure 28.6) These incomplete fractures are called green -
stick fractures, where one tension cortex fails. If the compres-
sion cortex buckles, they are called torus or buckle fractures. 
Paediatric bone may also simply undergo plastic deformation 
without a visible fracture line.
AO CLASSIFICATION
The AO ( Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthesefragen) system 
provides a comprehensive classification of all fractures 
(Figure 28.7). The first number defines the bone injured and 
the second number the segment of bone injured: proximal 
metaphysis, diaphysis, distal metaphysis. The letter and 
number that follows further defines the nature of the injury 
(Figure 28.8). For example, the previously described humeral 
fracture would be 12-A1 (1 humerus, 2 diaphysis, A simple, 
1 spiral). (For more detail see Further reading.)
Figure 28.5  Describing fractures: the importance of r otation. (a) 
Anteroposterior (AP) view of the knee seen at the top of the radio -
graph and lateral view of the ankle at the bottom, showing a spiral 
fracture at the junction of the middle and distal thirds of the tibia. (b) 
AP radiograph of the ankle on the same patient. Note the varied diam-
eter of the fracture fragments; this implies rotational deformity. The 
distal fragment has translated laterally by 50%. There is no significant 
angulation on this view.
(b)(a)
Summary box 28.2
Describing an injury
Use plain language to describe:
●● Location
●● Soft tissue component
●● Bony injury
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.4Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 28.6  Types of bony injury: (a) uninjured bone; (b) adult 
transverse fracture failure across the whole bone; (c) greenstick 
fracture; the bone has failed on the tension side; (d) torus or buckle 
fracture; the bone has failed on the compression side.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Spiral Oblique Transverse Segmental
RotationShorteningTranslationAngulation
Figure 28.4 Descriptive terms for fractures.
Classification
For each specific bony injury there may be several injury spe-
cific classification systems.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   386 25/10/2017   08:21Description and classification of the injury 387
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Robert Bruce Salter , 1924–2010, Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. A pioneer in the field of paediatric orthopaedic 
surgery, he received international awards for medical science and the Distinguished Achievement for Orthopaedic Research award.
W Robert Harris , 1922–2005, formerly Professor, University of Toronto, President Canadian Orthopaedic Foundation (1968) and President of the Canadian 
Orthopaedic Association (1975 and 1976).  
Humerus 1
1 Proximal 
metaphysis
2 Diaphysis
3 Distal 
metaphysis
3 Distal 
metaphysis
4 Malleolar 
segment
Radius
and ulna 2
Femur 3
Tibia 4
Figure 28.7  The AO classification system: the first two numbers 
specify the site of the fracture.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.6a_cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
A – After reduction
complete contact
between the two
main fragments
(>95%)
B – After reduction
partial contact
between the two
main fragments
(wedge fracture)
C – After reduction
no contact
between the two
main fragments
(segmental)
A – Extra-articular
B – Partial articular;
some part of the
joint remains in
continuity with
the diaphysis
C – Complete articular;
an intra-articular
fracture with none
of the joint
attached to the
diaphysis
Diaphyseal types Metaphyseal types
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 28.8  The AO classification system: the letter defines the 
nature of the fracture.
II II II
IV VV I
Figure 28.9 The Salter–Harris classification of growth plate injuries.
GROWTH PLATE INJURY CLASSIFICATION
In children and adolescent injuries involvement of the 
growth plate (physis) can lead to abnormal growth or growth 
arrest, either complete or partial. Complete growth arrest 
will result in length abnormalities and partial growth arrest 
might result in angular deformities. The severity of injury 
to the physis is classified in the Salter–Harris classification 
which considers whether the fracture line passes through the 
epiphysis, physis, metaphysis or combinations of all above. 
Salter–Harris described five and Mercer Rang added the sixth 
(Figure 28.9):
 ● Type I – simple fracture line just involving the physis.  
Seldom affects growth.
 ● Type II – fracture line through the physis exiting through 
the metaphysis, pro ducing a metaphyseal fragment. Sel -
dom affects growth.
 ● Type III – fracture line through the physis exiting through 
the epiphysis (intra-articular). Seldom affects growth, but 
intra articular affecting joint surface.
 ● Type IV – fracture line across epiphysis, cross physis and 
across metaphysis. This injury can cause focal fusion of the 
physis leading to abnormal growth.
 ● Type V – a crush injury of the physis. Growth disturbance 
is common and may be the first radiological sign of an 
injury.
 ● Type VI – injury to perichondral structures by direct 
trauma. Rare injury, high chance of abnormal growth.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   387 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA388
FRACTURE HEALING
It is useful to review fracture healing, as it relates to treat -
ment and outcome. Following a fracture, bone can heal in 
two different ways: direct (primary) bone healing or indirect 
(secondary) bone healing:
 ● Direct bone healing , as the name implies, heals directly 
with bone and without callus formation. It happens in an 
environment of cortical apposition and absolute stability 
with no movement or gap between the fracture fragments. 
The normal osteoclastic-mediated remodelling of bone is 
directed across the fracture interface. Osteoclastic cutting 
cones cut across the fracture line, with following osteo -
blasts laying down lamellar bone across the fracture.
 ● Indirect bone healing involves a transition from one 
tissue to another with callus formation. It is the most 
common form of bone healing. Following the injury, hae-
matoma fills the gap at the fracture site. In response to 
a varying strain and under the influence of bone stimu-
lating factors, the tissue undergoes differentiation, from 
haematoma to fibrous tissue and then to soft callus, fol -
lowed by mineralisation and formation of mature bone. 
The amount of strain determines the nature of tissue it 
differentiates into; under 100% leads to fibrous tissue, 
under 10% soft callus, less than 2% hard callus and pro -
gressive mineralisation. Hence a little movement is good, 
too much movement is bad.
Terminology of bone healing after 
fracture
Union
The fracture has healed sufficiently from a clinical perspec -
tive to withstand physiological loads, with very little pain and 
minimal tenderness at the fracture site. Radiologically a frac-
ture has united when the callus bridges the fracture site.
Delayed union
This description can be applied to a fracture that is slow to 
heal and which has not healed in the expected time frame.
Non-union
This description can be applied to a fracture that has not 
healed and shows no potential to heal without further inter -
vention. A non-union can also be defined as a fracture that 
fails to demonstrate clinical or radiological improvement over 
3 months. In general, you do not describe a fracture as ‘non-
union’ until 6 months after the injury.
There are a number of different types of non-union: atro -
phic, hypertrophic and infected. It is useful to consider cer -
tain factors with regard to the non-union; the biology of the 
fracture, the mechanical environment and the host (patient 
factors like diabetes and smoking).
In an atrophic non-union, the problem is generally a bio-
logical one, with a lack of stimulus or blood supply. A hyper -
trophic non-union generally occurs when there is too much 
movement at the fracture site.
Consolidation
Follows union and demonstrates that the bone has returned 
to normal strength. Radiologically it is demonstrated by the 
return of the normal cortical pattern.
Remodelling
In children, and to a lesser degree in adults, bone remodels 
based on the forces passing through it.
TREATMENT
The main principle of extremity fracture management builds 
on the classical concept of reduction and stabilisation of the 
fracture. Treatment can be considered under the following 
headings (see Apley’s system of orthopaedics and fractures [Fur -
ther reading]):
 ● reduce;
 ● hold;
 ● heal;
 ● rehabilitate.
The main objective of any treatment is to return the patient 
to normal function as soon and as safely as possible. Broadly 
speaking, treatment may be operative or non-operative, with 
differing risks and benefits (Table 28.3).
Reduce
The first thing to consider is the degree of displacement of the 
fracture fragments. It is useful to ask the following question: if 
the bone were to heal in this position, would it be compatible 
with optimum function in the short and long term?
In general, fractures involving the articular joint surface 
need to be reduced perfectly back to their original anatomical 
Summary box 28.3
Fracture healing
●● Direct - cortical apposition and absolute stability
●● Indirect – secondary bone healing, requires some movement
TABLE 28.3 Risks and benefits of fracture treatment.
Benefits Risks
Pain relief Anaesthesia
Prevention of infection Introduction of infection
Restoration of anatomy Damage to soft tissues and 
neurovascular structures
Early movement of the limb
Early movement of the patient Devitalising bone
Improved function Need for implant removal
Reduced risk of secondary 
arthritis
Financial cost (cost of 
treatment)
Financial cost (time off work)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   388 25/10/2017   08:21Treatment 389
PART 4 | TRAUMA
position, to restore normal joint movement in the short 
term and avoid degenerative joint disease in the long term – 
intra-articular fracture = anatomical reduction.
Fractures that do not involve the joint surface generally 
require restoration of mechanical alignment of the joints 
above and below. The fracture fragments do not need to be 
reduced perfectly. Focus on acceptable alignment, length and 
rotation – extra-articular fracture = mechanical alignment.
In children an extra articular fracture has the ability to 
remodel, and therefore an increased degree of displacement 
can be accepted.
If a fracture requires reduction, it can be reduced open or 
closed. A closed reduction is where the bones are manipu -
lated and moved without exposing the bone. Often the best 
way to reduce a fracture is to reverse the sequence of injury, 
without tearing or further damaging the intact soft tissues 
and periosteum. On occasion this may mean exaggerating the 
deformity (Figure 28.10).
Open reduction is utilised if an acceptable closed reduc -
tion is not achieved or likely to succeed. A combination of 
closed and open methods can be used to reduce a fracture. 
Care should be taken during an open reduction not to unduly 
devitalise the fracture fragments by stripping intact perios -
teum. A balance between maintaining a blood supply to the 
fracture fragments (biology) and achieving anatomical reduc-
tion needs to be maintained.
Adequacy of reduction is complex and depends on many 
factors. If intra-articular, the joint surface involved needs 
to be considered. By way of an example, 2 mm of residual 
displacement of the articular surface may be accepted in the 
patella and tibial plateau and may be acceptable in fractures 
involving the distal radius, but is not acceptable in the condy-
lar joints of the fingers. In general consider the relative thick-
ness of the articular surface involved.
On occasion consideration on how you intend to sub -
sequently hold the fracture may affect the primary form of 
reduction.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
Body
weight
Compression
surface
Tension
surfaceGround
reaction
Fig No: 29.9bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
Dorsal surface
periosteum hinges
Volar surface fails
in tension
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(c)
Maximum
displacement
(d)
With the injury force removed
the bones often recoil
to bayonet apposition
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9dTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9eTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(e)
Position at presentation
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9fTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(f)
Increase deformity and
restore soft-tissue hinge
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9gTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(g)
Close soft-tissue
hinge
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.9HTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Sur gery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(h)
Hold position with 
three point /f_ixation
Figure 28.10 (a–d) Representation of how the mechanism of injury 
causes the bony and soft-tissue injury . (e–h) Representation of how 
the residual mechanical properties of the tissues may be used to 
effect and hold a reduction.
Hold
If the fracture fragments are in an acceptable position, or have 
been reduced into an acceptable position, they then need to 
be held in that position until they heal. When choosing a 
method to hold a fracture the aim is to:
 ● optimise the biological and mechanical environment to 
create the most favourable conditions possible for fracture 
healing;
 ● minimise the period of disability by speeding up the heal-
ing process or providing enough stability to return to nor-
mal function while the fracture heals.
There are several metho ds of holding fracture fragments 
in place:
 ● plaster cast/ splints;
 ● traction;
 ● Kirschner (K-) wires;
 ● external fixation;
 ● plates and screws
 ● intramedullary nails.
Note: Arthroplasty may be used where fragments cannot 
be held together.
On occasion a combination of holding metho ds may be 
used; for example, K-wires and a moulded cast in the case of a 
simple extra-articular distal radial fracture. It is important to 
consider the way of holding the reduction in terms of outcome 
and ensure this is part of the overarching goal to optimise the 
patient’s return to function as safely and fast as possible.
Summary box 28.4
Reduction
●● Reduction has two components: reducing the fragments and 
assessing adequacy of reduction
●● Reduction can be performed open or closed
●● The principle is to reverse the movement which created the 
fracture
●● Over-angulation allows the intact periosteum to guide the 
fragments into position
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   389 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA390
For example, a displaced clavicle fracture in a 10 year 
old has a 99% chance of sound union within a few months 
if treated non-operatively. In contrast, a displaced multifrag -
mentary mid-third clavicle in a 35-year-old female will carry a 
35% chance of going on to a non-union at 6 months. There -
fore, even though this fracture may heal with non-operative 
treatment, with appropriate explanation and shared decision 
making, a patient may choose to have surgery early in order to 
get back to normal function as soon as possible.
Stability can be absolute or relative:
 ● Absolute stability. Implies no displacement or movement 
and is achieved by accurate anatomical reduction with 
compression across the fracture fragments to optimise the 
environment for direct bone healing. This is desirable in 
intra-articular fractures, where callus at the fracture site 
might inhibit movement. Intra-articular fractures require 
an anatomical reduction and absolute stability.
 ● Relative stability. Allows a little movement at the frac-
ture site, optimising the environment for callus formation 
and indirect bone healing.
Selected examples of achieving absolute and relative 
stability are shown in Figure 28.11.
Plaster cast and splints
Plaster casts and splints are generally used to hold stable frac-
tures or supplement the fixation of unstable fractures (e.g. 
below elbow cast applied to a distal radial fracture after K-wire 
fixation [see below]).
Plaster casts come in two forms: plaster of Paris and 
synthetic casting materials. Plaster of Paris is the preferred 
method in acute fractures and, where more support is needed, 
it is easier to mould plaster of Paris than a synthetic cast. In 
acute injuries, where there is a risk of swelling and compart -
ment syndrome, a backslab will often be applied. A backslab 
is not always positioned on the dorsal surface as the name 
suggests, but is a partial cast where a layer of plaster of Paris 
or synthetic cast is applied along roughly half the circumfer -
ence. An alternative to a backslab includes a full cast that 
is split along its full length to allow for swelling. The use of 
an incomplete cast does not remove the risk of swelling and 
compartment syndrome and must always be accompanied by 
close clinical observation.
Moulding of the cast is an art form requiring appropriate 
skill to achieve the desired effect. Three point moulding is 
used to control the position, often using the intact dorsal peri-
osteal hinge to mould against (see Figure 28.11). Often, a 
correctly moulded cast will look crooked, leading to the adage 
‘Bent casts make straight bones’ (Figure 28.12).
Commercially available upper limb and lower limb splints 
provide comfort, support and social protection to stable frac -
tures. Ease of application and the ability to remove make 
them very useful for patients to return to activities of daily 
living including bathing and showering.
The advantages and disadvantages of plaster cast and 
splint usage are described in Table 28.4.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.8aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
Lag screw
Absolute stability
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.8bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
Compression plating
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.8cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Compression with a ring /f_ixator
(c)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.8dTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(d)
Bridge plating
Relative stability
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.8eTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Intramedullary nail
(e)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.8fTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Bridging with a ring /f_ixator
(f)
Figure 28.11 (a–f) How absolute and relative stability can be achieved. The same implants may be used to achieve different mechanical effects.
Plaster of Paris  is a white crystalline powder, calcium sulphate hemihydrate CaSO4-0.5H 2O, which sets hard when water is added to it.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   390 25/10/2017   08:21Treatment 391
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Traction
Traction is defined as a stretching force on a limb to pull a 
fracture straight. After appropriate pain control, simply pull -
ing on the limb using manual traction will help realign frac -
ture fragments, returning overall length and alignment. If the 
fracture is simple and off ended, it may require more than sim-
ply pulling to reduce it (see reduction in Figure 28.10). Once 
reduced, however, continued longitudinal traction will often 
hold it reduced.
A traction force can be applied and maintained by a vari-
ety of systems and techniques. It is easy to apply traction to 
any extremity; however, it is cumbersome and requires a fixed 
point to pull on. This can require the patient to be fixed to 
one place and limit return to normal function. (See Table 
28.5 for advantages and disadvantages.)
Traction is often used in the treatment of femoral shaft 
fractures in adults as a temporary measure for comfort and to 
allow transfer of the patient, until definitive fixation can be 
undertaken. A Thomas splint is applied to the limb initially 
in a static fashion (Figure 28.13a) and then, once in bed, 
balanced traction is applied to help pull the leg out to length 
and pull the splint off the ischial tuberosity (Figure 28.13b).
The anchor point on the limb may be either skin, by 
applying an adhesive or non-adhesive bandage, or skeletal 
traction, where a pin is placed in the proximal tibia or distal 
femur.
A common everyday example of traction is the use of 
a collar and cuff in proximal humeral fractures. When the 
patient is upright, the lower part of the arm, under the action 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.10aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
Fig No: 29.10bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
Figure 28.12 (a) The position achieved at the end of the manipula -
tion described in Figure 28.10. (b) Demonstration of how by moulding 
the cast the intact periosteum is kept under tension and the bone 
under compression; thus, the remaining mechanical properties are 
used to achieve stability.
TABLE 28.4 Advantages and disadvantages of casting 
and splinting.
Advantages No wound
No interference with fracture site
Cheap
Adjustable
No implants to remove
Disadvantages Limited access to the soft tissues
Cumbersome (particularly in the elderly)
Interferes with function
Poor mechanical stability
‘Plaster disease’ – joint stiffness and muscle 
wasting
TABLE 28.5 Advantages and disadvantages of traction.
Advantages No wound in zone of injury
No interference with fracture site
Materials cheap
Adjustable
Disadvantages Restricts mobility of patient
Expensive in hospital time
Skin pressure complications
Pin site infection
Thromboembolic complications
(a)
(b)
Weight
Figure 28.13 (a) Static traction with a Thomas splint. The force and 
counterforce are contained within a static system. The load is applied 
to the patient through the tibial traction pin via a cord tightened with 
a Spanish windlass. The counterforce is applied through pressure by 
the splint on the ischial tuberosity. (b) A dynamic system in which 
the load is applied by weights suspended from the tibial pin and the 
counterforce is the patient’s own weight.
Hugh Owen Thomas , 1834–1891, general practitioner of Liverpool, UK, is regarded as the ‘founder of orthopaedic surgery’, although never holding a hospital 
appointment preferring to treat patients in their own homes. He introduced the Thomas splint in 1875.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   391 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA392
of gravity, provides longitudinal traction, thus aligning the 
fracture fragments.
Kirschner wires
Kirschner wires (also called K-wires) are smooth, non-
threaded, thin flexible wires often between 0.9 and 2.5 mm 
in diameter. They are used to hold small fragments in place. 
They may be used in a temporary fashion intraoperatively to 
hold fracture fragments in place until definitive fixation with 
plates and screws can be performed. They are inexpensive and 
simple to use. Moreover, they are extensively used for defini -
tive fixation of injuries around the hand and wrist. The flexi-
ble nature of the wires can often require supplementation, as 
a hybrid construct of K-wires and plaster cast fixation.
In distal radial fractures the wires are placed percutane-
ously after closed reduction, the trailing end of the wire is left 
proud of the skin and the end bent to limit wire migration. 
K-wires around the distal radius can be removed in the clinic 
setting 4–6 weeks after insertion. Complications of K-wires 
include pin site infection, wire breakage, loss of fixation and 
wire migration. Wire migration may be a potentially seri-
ous problem in certain locations. It is not advisable to use 
non-threaded K-wires around the shoulder girdle and clavi-
cle as migration into the thoracic cavity and heart has been 
reported (Table 28.6).
External fixation
External fixation involves percutaneous placement of metal 
rods or fine wires into bone to anchor a metal frame on the 
outside (Table 28.7). The frame construct itself may be com -
prised of tubular rods with connectors, or circular ring con-
structs ‘ilizarov’ type of frame. Hybrid variations are infinite, 
with combinations of anchor fixation modalities and frame 
constructs. The Taylor spatial frame allows for gradual correc-
tion of deformity (Figure 28.14).
The major drawback of external fixation is that they can 
be cumbersome to the patient and pin site infection can be a 
problem (Table 28.7).
Specific indications for external fixators include:
 ● emergency stabilisation of a long bone fracture in the pol-
ytrauma patient thought too unwell to have other inter -
ventions; ‘damage control orthopaedics’;
 ● stabilisation of a dislocated joint after reduction (e.g. a 
spanning fixator across the knee joint while the vascular 
surgeons repair an arterial injury with a knee dislocation);
 ● complex periarticular fractures to provide temporary stabi-
lisation and allow the soft tissue damage to recover before 
definitive fixation (e.g. a distal tibial [pilon] fracture);
 ● fractures associated with infection;
 ● treating fractures with bone loss.
Plates and screws
Plates and screws can be used in many different ways. A ‘lag 
screw’ can be used to generate compression across a fracture 
site, optimising the environment for direct bone healing. 
Similarly, compression can be achieved using a dynamic com-
pression plate. A plate might also be used simply to neutralise 
forces, buttress a fracture or work as an internal external fixa-
tor (see Figure 28.11).
In general, plates and screws are used where possible in 
articular and periarticular fractures where an anatomical 
reduction is required, often via open means, followed by the 
application of the plate and screws to achieve a rigid con -
struct. In extra-articular fractures, where mechanical align -
ment is required together with relative stability, one option 
is the use of locking plate technology. This allows a closed 
reduction and percutaneous placement of the plate with lock-
ing screws to create an internal construct, which behaves 
like an external fixator. Injury-specific plating systems have 
revolutionised the ability to treat certain injuries, with plates 
pre-bent and pre-shaped for specific anatomical regions and 
specific injury patterns. (See Table 28.8 for the advantages 
and disadvantages of plate fixation.)
Intramedullary nails
Diaphyseal fractures are best suited for intramedullary nail -
ing. Where mechanical alignment is required together with 
relative stability, they allow for indirect bone healing. After 
nail insertion, mechanical alignment is checked particularly 
for length, alignment and rotation. Locking screws are then 
placed proximally and distally to maintain length and align -
ment. Intramedullary nailing of metaphyseal and articular 
fractures is a challenge. However, with improved implant 
TABLE 28.6 Indications for K-wire insertion.
Temporary fixation
Definitive fixation – with small fracture fragments (e.g. wrist 
fractures and hand injuries)
Tension band wiring (fractures of the patella and olecranon)
Temporary immobilisation of a small joint
Martin Kirschner , 1879–1942, Professor of Surgery, Heidelberg, Germany, introduced the use of skeletal traction wires in 1909.
Gavriil Abramovich Ilizarov , 1921–1993, orthopaedic surgeon, Kurgan, Western Siberia, Russia. He did not attend school until he was 11 years old as his family 
was too poor to buy him shoes.
TABLE 28.7 Advantages and disadvantages of external 
fixation.
Advantages No interference with fracture site
Adjustable after application: alignment; 
biomechanics
Soft tissues accessible for plastic surgery
Rapid stabilisation of fracture
Hardware easy to remove
Disadvantages Pin site infection
Interferes with plastic surgical procedures
Soft-tissue tethering
Cumbersome for the patient
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   392 25/10/2017   08:21Treatment 393
PART 4 | TRAUMA
design and the ability to lock the nails very distally and in 
multiple directions, the indications for intramedullary nailing 
is expanding.
Intramedullary nails may be placed in an unreamed or 
reamed fashion. Reaming is the process whereby the intra-
medullary canal is widened slightly to allow passage of a larger 
diameter nail, relating to the last reamer size used. Table 28.9 
compares reamed to unreamed nails.
Intramedullary nailing can be a technically demanding 
procedure. The advantages and disadvantages are summarised 
in Table 28.10.
Arthroplasty
Arthroplasty is indicated in certain acute circumstances: 
articular fractures that are not reconstructible, or injuries 
where the vascularity of the articular segment is compromised 
(e.g. displaced intracapsular femoral neck fracture in an older 
patient).
Figure 28.14 (a) Monolateral tubular frame with metal rod (half pin anchorage to bone. (b) Circular ring fixator with fine wire anchorage to 
bone. (c) Hybrid circular/tubular rod frame construct with combination of half pin and fine wire anchorage to bone. (d) Taylor spatial frame; 
allows for gradual correction of deformity.
TABLE 28.8 Advantages and disadvantages of plate and 
screw fixation.
Advantages Can be used when anatomical reduction is 
required
Allows early mobilisation
Can provide absolute or relative stability
Disadvantages May interfere with fracture site
Periosteal/soft-tissue damage
Does not normally allow for immediate load-
bearing
Potential for infection
Metalwork complications
Possible need for plate removal
(a) (b) (c)
(d)
TABLE 28.9 A comparison of reamed versus unreamed 
nailing (an assumption is that nails used unreamed are 
usually thinner than those used reamed).
Reamed IMN Unreamed IMN
Insertion time Longer Quicker
Time to union Shorter Longer
Size of implant Larger Smaller
Reduction of distal fractures Easier More difficult
Strength of construct More Less
IMN, intramedullary nail.
TABLE 28.10 Advantages and disadvantages of 
intramedullary nailing.
Advantages Minimally invasive
Early weight-bearing
Less periosteal damage than open reduction 
and internal fixation
Seldom need removal
Disadvantages Increased risk of fat emboli/chest complications
Infection difficult to treat
Difficult to remove if broken
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   393 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA394
The patient demographics and functional demands need 
to be considered in choosing arthroplasty as a treatment 
option. Implant longevity and level of activities following 
implant insertion need to be matched. Traditionally , arthro-
plasty for trauma was limited to hip and shoulder hemi-  
arthroplasty.
Total hip replacement, acute distal femoral replacement, 
radial head replacement, total and hemi-elbow arthroplasty, 
and reverse polarity shoulder arthroplasty are current treat -
ment options for older patients with osteoporotic periarticular 
fractures. The selection of a particular technique will depend 
on clinical evidence and our previously stated aim to return 
patients to optimal function as soon as possible. It should be 
considered in the context that it can be expensive and require 
considerable other resources to make the procedure safe and 
long lasting.
Heal
Time to fracture healing depends on several factors: patient 
co-morbidities, the age of the patient, bone involved (upper 
limb or lower limb), patient factors (diabetes), choice of 
treatment. Well known factors that slow down bone healing 
include diabetes mellitus (doubles time to union), diminished 
blood supply (peripheral vascular disease, vascular injury at 
time of injury), smoking, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs and infection at the fracture site.
Several chemical and mechanical methods have been 
attempted to enhance fracture healing, including bone mar -
row injections into the fracture site and other orthobiolog -
ics such as bone morphogenic proteins. Mechanical methods 
include controlled axial micromotion (using an external fix -
ator), electromagnetic stimulation and low intensity pulsed 
ultrasound. There is good basic scientific evidence to support 
their theoretical benefit; however, to date there is little clin-
ical evidence for their use in the primary treatment of closed 
fractures.
Rehabilitate
The main aim of treatment is to return the patient to a similar 
level of pre-morbid function as quickly as possible. Rehabil -
itation begins as soon as feasible. It is often not necessary to 
wait until bone union before beginning rehabilitation. It is 
important to move the affected joints and the joints in close 
proximity to the fracture (e.g. elbow and shoulder exercise 
while in a cast for a distal radial fracture), limiting global stiff-
ness and wasting of the muscles on that limb.
TREATMENT BY FRACTURE 
LOCATION
In general, the principles of treatment described above are 
dependent on the fracture location: diaphyseal, metaphyseal 
and intra-articular.
Table 28.11 outlines some indications for operative stabi -
lisation.
Diaphyseal fractures
Extra articular fractures do not require an anatomical reduc-
tion, but rather a mechanical restoration by correction of 
length, alignment and rotation (Figure 28.15).
Angular malunion of a diaphyseal fracture of the 
weight-bearing long bones will lead to abnormal joint forces 
on the joint above and below, leading to pain and secondary 
degenerative joint disease.
Diaphyseal fractures are generally well suited to intramed-
ullary fixation techniques, as previously discussed.
TABLE 28.11 Indications for surgery in limb trauma. 
The main indication is that operation will produce a better 
outcome; the principles are given below.
A fracture requiring treatment that is unsuitable for non-operative 
measures
Open fractures
Failed non-operative management
Multiple injuries
Pathological or impending pathological fractures
Displaced intra-articular fractures
Fractures through the growth plate, where arrest is possible 
(Salter–Harris type III–V)
Avulsion fractures that compromise the functional integrity of a 
ligament/tendon around a joint (e.g. olecranon fracture)
Established non-unions or malunions
Summary box 28.5
Diaphyseal fractures
●● Restore length, alignment and rotation
●● Consider whether primary or secondary bone healing is the 
objective
●● Radius and ulna need precise reduction to function
Metaphyseal fractures
In the AO classification metaphyseal fractures are classified 
into A type – extra-articular, B type – partial articular, and C 
type – complete articular.
In A type fractures, joint congruity is not an issue and as 
such the principles of mechanical alignment, length and rota-
tion need to be considered. Fixation of metaphyseal fractures 
is less predictable with intramedullary nailing, therefore plate 
and screw fixation, external fixation or, in the smaller joints, 
K-wire fixation is used. Metaphyseal fractures are close to the 
joint and so consideration is given to stable fixation to allow 
early joint movement and rehabilitation.
Intra-articular fractures
AO type B and type C fractures are intra-articular and as such 
the principles of treating intra-articular fractures need to be 
respected; namely, anatomical reduction of the articular sur -
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   394 25/10/2017   08:21Treatment by fracture location 395
PART 4 | TRAUMA
face and rigid stabilisation to allow early joint movement and 
avoidance of degenerative joint disease (Figure 28.16). How-
ever, these principles have to be balanced with the increased 
wound complications of open surgery and devitalising bone 
fragments with excessive exposure of the bone.
Osteoporotic intra-articular fractures are a considerable 
challenge. Although anatomical reduction may be achieved, 
rigid fixation devices may cut out of soft bone. Injectable 
bone substitutes may be used to fill bone voids and augment 
fixation. If stable fixation is not possible, then consideration 
might be given to non-operative treatment and delayed joint 
replacement or, on occasion, primary joint replacement may 
be undertaken.
In type C fractures where the articular surface has sep -
arated from the metaphysis, the articular surface is initially 
anatomically reduced with temporary K-wires or lag screws 
and then the articular block is reattached to the shaft (Figure 
28.17).
Figure 28.15 (a) and (d) are C-type or segmental tibial fractures. Each was a high-energy injury; (b) and (e) show a temporary spanning 
external fixator applied in each case; (c) and (f) show definitive relative stability was achieved with different methods of bridging fixation. Heal-
ing was by indirect means in both cases. Despite irregularities at the fracture sites the overall position was satisfactory and function was good.
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   395 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA396
Figure 28.16 A B-type or partial articular fracture. (a) Plain radio -
graph; (b) computed tomography clarifies the injury; (c) fixation with 
plate and screws achieving compression across a previously reduced 
fracture.
AA
BB
Figure 28.17 (a) A C-type proximal tibial articular fracture (i.e. none 
of the joint remains attached to the diaphysis). (b) The small plate 
and screws (AA) are used to compress the joint fragments, aiming for 
absolute stability. The heavy duty fixed angled device (BB) spans the 
fracture and provides relative stability
(c)
(b)
(a)(a)
(b)
TREATMENT BY REGION (FROM 
TOP TO TOE)
Scaphoid fracture
The blood supply to the scaphoid enters distally and supplies 
the scaphoid in a retrograde fashion. As such, a displaced 
waist of scaphoid fracture interrupts the bloo d supply to the 
proximal pole, leading to avascular necrosis. An undisplaced 
fracture of the scaphoid may not be visible on the initial 
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   396 25/10/2017   08:21Treatment by region (from top to toe) 397
PART 4 | TRAUMA
radiographs. If a patient is tender in the anatomical snuff box 
following a fall on the outstretched hand, special scaphoid 
view radiographs should be requested (Figure 28.18).
If a fracture is not evident on the initial radiographs and 
the patient remains tender in the anatomical snuff box, then 
treat as a suspected scaphoid fracture until a fracture is actively 
excluded. The standard protocol of a suspected scaphoid frac-
ture is to immobilise the wrist and examine again 10–14 days 
later. If tenderness remains, repeat the scaphoid views. If facil-
ities and resources allow, an earlier diagnosis may be made 
with a bone scan, MRI or CT.
Undisplaced fractures can be treated non-operatively in 
a below elbow cast. It is not necessary to include the thumb 
as a routine. In displaced or unstable fractures (>1 mm) con-
sideration should be given to open reduction and rigid fix-
ation with a headless compression screw. Complications of 
scaphoid fractures include: non-union, avascular necrosis, 
malunion and carpal instability.
Carpal instability
The most commonly involved carpal bone is the lunate. A 
lunate dislocation is where the lunate bone dislocates out of 
the radiocarpal joint. In a perilunate dislocation the lunate 
remains in the radiocarpal joint and the rest of the carpus 
dislocates around the lunate. Lunate and perilunate disloca-
tions are easily missed unless careful attention is paid to carpal 
alignment on the lateral radiograph (Figure 28.19). Review 
of the radiographs should particularly ensure the anatomical 
location of the lunate in the radiocarpal fossa and that the 
capitate in the ‘cup’ of the lunate is maintained.
Cap
Rad
Lun
Figure 28.19 Perilunate dislocation. (a) A plain lateral radiograph of 
the wrist; (b) the outline of the perilunate dislocation is highlighted. 
Cap, capitate; Lun, lunate; Rad, radius.
(a)
(b)
(ai)
 (aii)
(b)
 (c)
Figure 28.18 Scaphoid fracture. (ai, aii) Anteroposterior and lateral 
views in which the injury is dif ficult to see; (b, c) oblique views with 
the fracture line highlighted; (d) in this case of a young patient, the 
fracture was treated with early fixation.
(d)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   397 25/10/2017   08:21CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA398
Acute injuries should be reduced closed initially to remove 
pressure from the median nerve. Anatomical carpal align-
ment is difficult to hold and therefore surgical reconstruction 
of damaged intrinsic ligaments, together with K-wire fixation 
of the carpal bones, is often undertaken. Ligamentous healing 
is slow and may be incomplete. K-wires are kept in place for 
8 weeks and the wrist casted or splinted for 3 months.
Thumb metacarpophalangeal ulnar 
collateral ligament.
Injury to the thumb metacarpal ulnar collateral ligament is 
a unique injury often termed ‘game keepers’ thumb or ‘ski -
ers’ thumb. Due to the unique anatomical arrangement of 
adductor policis, if the ligament undergoes complete rupture 
the aponeurosis may become interposed, inhibiting ligament 
to bone healing. A rupture of the ulnar collateral ligament 
should be suspected when an ulnar directed force is directed 
across the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint. A tender swell-
ing on the ulna side of the MCP joint may signify the ‘Stener’ 
lesion. Increased laxity may be clinically evident, and if there 
is uncertainty, stress radiographs can demonstrate the degree 
of injury. Complete ruptures with a Stener lesion (interposed 
aponeurosis) require open reduction of the ligament to restore 
bone contact, with a suture anchor repair of the associated 
ulnar collateral ligament.
Distal radial fractures
Extra-articular (type A) fractures of the distal radius may dis-
place in a volar or dorsal direction. It is possible to reduce 
volar displaced fractures (Smith’s fracture) of the distal radius 
with a closed technique. However they tend to be unstable 
and displace if held in a cast. Hence most volar displaced 
extra articular distal radial fractures are reduced and held with 
a volar buttress plate (Figure 28.20).
Most dorsally displaced fractures (Colles’ fracture) can be 
addressed with closed reduction and held in a cast. However, 
some will slip or collapse with cast treatment, and so close 
review for the first few weeks is advocated.
Fractures with significant initial displacement and dor -
sal comminution are at risk of early and late collapse. After 
thorough counselling the patient may choose to have the 
fracture reduced and then held surgically with K-wires, plate 
and screw fixation (volar or dorsal) or external fixation. The 
K-wires may be placed across the fracture fragments or intra -
focally, going through the fracture site. The latter can be used 
to help reduce the fracture and then used to lock the fracture 
fragments in place (Figure 28.21)
Treatment is individualised based on patient and fracture 
pattern factors. Intra-articular fractures (types B and C) of the 
distal radius require anatomical reduction of the joint surface; 
a gap or step of less than 2 mm can be accepted in the radius. 
The distal radius fails fairly predictably with splitting of the 
lunate fossa fragment in the coronal plane and separation of 
the radial styloid.
If a closed reduction can be achieved with manipulation, 
the fracture fragments can subsequently be held with K-wires, 
plate and screw fixation or external fixation. The most com -
mon form of treatment is closed reduction and percutaneous 
K-wire fixation, supplemented with a plaster cast for 4–6 weeks.
Forearm fractures (radius and ulna)
Fractures of the diaphyseal shaft of the radius and ulna 
are technically, in the anatomic sense of the word, extra-  
articular. However, the forearm bones work together, being 
coupled at the proximal and distal radioulnar joints to allow 
Figure 28.20 An A-type or extra-articular metaphyseal fracture. A 
plain lateral radiograph of this Smith-type fracture (a, b). Fracture 
fixed to a plate. There is no interfragmental compression. The plate is 
pushing against or buttressing the distal fragment (c, d).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Robert William Smith , 1807–1873, Professor of Surgery, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, described the reverse Colles fracture in 1847.
Abraham Colles , 1773–1843, President of the Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland (1802), Professor of Anatomy Physiology and Surgery (1804) and described 
distal radial fracture in 1814. 
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   398 25/10/2017   08:21Treatment by region (from top to toe) 399
PART 4 | TRAUMA
for forearm pronation and supination. Therefore, when con-
sidering treatment the principles that apply to intra-articular 
fractures need to be considered: anatomic reduction and rigid 
fixation to allow for early joint motion. Most fractures that 
involve both radius and ulna in adults require open reduction, 
anatomic alignment and rigid plate fixation.
Isolated fractures of the ulna, the so-called nightstick frac-
ture, are a little more controversial, as non-operative man -
agement is possible but in this location risks delayed union 
and non-union, hence treatment depends on patient factors. 
Operative fixation with plate and screw fixation is technically 
simple and allows early predictable return to function.
Olecranon fractures
Olecranon fractures may be displaced or undisplaced. Undis -
placed fractures <2 mm gap or step at the articular surface 
can be treated non-operatively . In displaced fractures the 
extensor mechanism is interrupted and the articular surface 
requires anatomical reduction and stable fixation to allow 
early movement. Fixation may comprise K-wire and figure-of-
eight tension band wiring or plate fixation. In multifragmen -
tary fractures or fractures associated with an elbow dislocation, 
increased stability is required with the use of a plate and screws.
Humeral fractures
Fractures of the diaphyseal portion of the humeral shaft are 
extra-articular fractures and as such require mechanical align-
ment. Non-operative treatment with functional bracing will 
achieve union in an acceptable position within 12 weeks in 
over 80% of cases. Gravity can provide traction on the arm 
and in conjunction with a humeral brace help to hold align -
ment and allow early range of motion of the elbow. Active 
shoulder abduction is avoided until fracture union, to prevent 
varus deformity.
Shoulder movement must not be absent during treatment 
and so gravity assisted pendulum exercises are instituted early 
on to prevent shoulder stiffness. As the fracture approaches 
the metaphyseal region of the humerus it becomes more diffi-
cult to control with humeral bracing. Distal third extra-artic-
ular fractures of the humerus can be treated non-operatively 
in a humeral brace but have a tendency to go into varus. 
Articular fractures of the distal humerus require anatomical 
reduction and stable fixation to allow early joint movement.
Internal fixation is indicated for displaced intra-articular 
fractures, non-union or delayed union, open fractures, mul -
tiple injuries and those fractures not held in an acceptable 
position with brace treatment. Fixation of diaphyseal frac -
tures can be achieved with intramedullary nailing or plate 
and screw fixation. Plate fixation is associated with higher 
union rates and lower rates of reintervention. (Figure 28.22).
Figure 28.21 (a) K-wires placed across fracture fragments;  
(b) intrafocal K-wire used to help reduce the fracture.
Figure 28.22 (a–c) A B-type humeral shaft 
fracture. This fractur e could not be controlled 
by non-operative means and was treated with 
lag screws protected by a plate.
(a) (b) (c)
(a)
(b)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   399 25/10/2017   08:22CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA400
The radial nerve is the most commonly injured nerve in 
humeral shaft fractures. Treatment of a humeral shaft frac-
ture with a concomitant radial nerve palsy remains topical. 
Most will recover spontaneously. In general, if the nerve 
injury occurs at the time of the original injury, non-operative 
treatment can be considered. If it occurs after the injury, for 
example at the time of brace application, then it should be 
explored. When exploring the radial nerve, plate and screw 
fixation is then undertaken to stabilise the humerus.
Fractures of the proximal humerus
In fractures of the proximal humerus consideration is given to 
the vascularity of the humeral head. The most common clas-
sification of the proximal humerus is the Neer classification 
looking at the four individual pieces of the proximal humerus 
(articular head fragment, lesser tuberosity, greater tuberosity 
and the shaft).
If a fragment is displaced by more than 1 cm or angulated 
by more than 45 degrees in respect of another fragment, it is 
considered a part. As such, based on the fracture pattern, it 
may be undisplaced, 2 part, 3 part or 4 part. Consideration is 
then given to potential joint dislocation, anterior or posterior. 
The greater the number of parts, the higher the chances of 
interruption of the vascularity to the humeral head and the 
more complex the injury.
Three factors can be used to predict avascularity of the 
humeral head:
 ● fracture through the anatomical neck;
 ● loss of the medial hinge;
 ● less than 8 mm of bone along the medial calcar.
With displaced fractures, where the head is avascular, 
occurring in older patients who may have osteoporosis and 
other co-morbidities, consideration may be given to replacing 
the humeral head. This may take the form of an anatomical 
hemi-arthroplasty. One of the limitations of trauma hemi-  
arthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures involves reliable 
healing of the tuberosities and the rotator cuff. Increasingly, 
a primary reverse polarity shoulder prosthesis is being used. 
This implant does not rely on tuberosity healing, as it func -
tions under the power of the deltoid muscle.
In younger patients reduction and fixation may be consid-
ered. A variety of fixation methods are available: percutane -
ous fixation, intramedullary nails and plate fixation.
Clavicle fractures
Diaphyseal fractures of the middle third of the clavicle have 
traditionally been treated non-operatively with a broad arm 
sling for comfort and social protection, followed by increasing 
use of the arm.
Most mid-third fractures of the clavicle will unite with 
non-operative treatment. There is, however, a subset of clav-
icle fractures that may be slow to heal and that do impact 
on shoulder girdle function. Displaced, comminuted fractures 
show a propensity to be slow to heal and increasing age and 
female gender further negatively impact on fracture healing. 
It has been shown that 2 cm of shortening of the clavicle 
impacts on shoulder girdle function, with weakness and fati -
gability when working above shoulder height.
Internal fixation with an intramedullary device or plate 
and screw construct can restore length, alignment and rota -
tion. This can improve the speed and amount of functional 
restoration, but carries all the risks of surgical treatment. 
Treatment is individualised to patient needs and expectations.
Proximal femoral fractures
The blood supply to the femoral head is a prime consideration 
in treating femoral neck fractures. The bloo d supply comes 
via the hip capsule. The joint capsule anteriorly inserts along 
the intertrochanteric line and posteriorly half way along the 
femoral neck. Fractures proximal to the hip capsule are intra-
capsular and those distal to the capsule are extracapsular frac-
tures.
Intracapsular femoral neck fractures
Intracapsular fractures are further broken down into whether 
they are displaced or undisplaced. Undisplaced intracapsular 
fractures are generally stable and interruption of the blood 
supply to the femoral head is rare. Therefore, treatment is 
aimed at ensuring the head fragment does not displace during 
rehabilitation. This can be achieved with cannulated screws 
inserted along the femoral neck into the head.
A displaced intracapsular fracture disrupts the blood sup-
ply to the femoral head and risks avascular necrosis. If the 
patient is physiologically young, reduction and internal fixa-
tion with cannulated screws or a dynamic hip screw might be 
attempted to preserve the native head.
If the patient is older and would benefit from a single 
operation, then the head may be sacrificed and replaced with 
a prosthetic head. Arthroplasty of the proximal femur may 
take the form of hemi-arthroplasty or total hip replacement, 
depending on patient’s functional demands and surgical 
expertise available.
Extracapsular femoral neck fractures
If the fracture is extracapsular, vascularity of the head is not 
an issue. Extracapsular femoral neck fractures are subdivided 
into stable or unstable. Unstable fractures include a reverse 
oblique pattern or where the medial calcar is comminuted 
(lesser trochanter) fracture. Stable extracapsular fractures 
simply require connection of the head to the shaft, often 
using a dynamic hip screw (Figure 28.23).
In unstable fractures a dynamic hip screw can also be used, 
but due to the unfavourable mechanical environment relating 
to the loss of the medial calcar or a reverse oblique pattern, an 
intramedullary device might be considered.
Femoral shaft fractures
It is possible to treat diaphyseal fractures of the femoral shaft 
non-operatively. The fracture can be reduced and held in posi-
tion until union with traction; however, it takes 3 months. 
This is a long time to be in hospital and carries all the poten-
tial risks of prolonged bed rest. Most femoral shaft fractures 
are treated with a locked intramedullary nail.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   400 25/10/2017   08:22Treatment by region (from top to toe) 401
PART 4 | TRAUMA
With modern locked intramedullary implants, the patient 
will be up and out bed the following day and, if it is an iso -
lated injury, home within a few days. Weight bearing depends 
on the fracture pattern and implant used. If there is a simple 
fracture pattern with cortical apposition, it will be possible 
to mobilise with crutches, weight bearing as comfort allows. 
Although it may still take 3 months or more for the fracture 
to unite, the implant will be able to carry the load until union, 
allowing earlier return to function out of the hospital.
Distal femoral fractures
Metaphyseal osteoporotic fractures of the distal femur are 
amenable to internal fixation with locked intramedullary 
nails or plate and screw fixation. If the fracture extends into 
the articular surface, reconstruction may be undertaken with 
cannulated screws augmented with intramedullary nailing 
or injury specific locking plates for the distal femur. More 
recently, arthroplasty has been considered in these situations, 
to allow early mobilisation.
Patellar fractures
Similar to olecranon fractures, undisplaced fractures where 
the extensor mechanism is intact can be treated non- 
operatively. Displaced fractures require anatomical reduction 
of the articular surface and reconstitution of the integrity of 
the extensor mechanism. The cartilage on the patella is very 
thick and as such increased amounts of displacement com -
pared with other joints may be accepted.
Surgical treatment of simple displaced fractures can be 
achieved with two K-wires and figure-of-eight tension band 
wiring.
Multifragmentary patellar fractures can be very challeng -
ing. Patellar excision is an option but significantly reduces the 
mechanical advantage of the extensor apparatus. A tension 
band construct may be augmented by using circumferential 
wiring of the patella.
Tibial plateau fractures
Intraarticular fractures of the tibial plateau are common. 
Injuries may involve the lateral or medial side, or both. The 
joint articular surface may be split, depressed or a combina -
tion of both. A CT scan should be performed to see the full 
extent of the injury. Undisplaced fractures may be treated 
non-operatively with a hinged knee brace and progressive 
protected weight bearing over 8–12 weeks.
Displaced fractures require reduction and stabilisation. 
The articular surface once reduced is often held with plate 
and screw fixation or fine wire external fixation.
Tibial shaft fractures
For an undisplaced non-comminuted fracture of the tibial 
shaft, closed reduction and above knee cast is a safe and inex-
pensive treatment. At 4–6 weeks this may be converted to 
a patellar tendon below knee cast to allow knee movement. 
Prolonged casting can lead to stiffness of the knee and the 
subtalar joint. Cast treatment requires close and constant 
monitoring of the position of the fracture site. To correct 
minor angular deformities the cast can be wedged.
A patient may choose to have an intramedullary nail 
to allow free knee and ankle movement. This, however , 
risks infection of the implant and anterior knee pain. This 
is another situation where information and shared decision 
making can allow the patient to select the most appropriate 
treatment option.
For comminuted and complex fractures of the tibial shaft, 
although cast treatment is possible, intramedullary nailing is 
preferred despite the potential complications of infection and 
anterior knee pain. Fractures at the diaphyseal metaphyseal 
junction at the knee and ankle are difficult to hold with an 
intramedullary nail and as such may be held with a plate and 
screws.
Tibial fractures are also very amenable to external fixa -
tion with either a monolateral frame or fine wire circular con-
struct, particularly where surgical skills and implants are not 
available for intramedullary nailing.
Ankle fractures
Ankle fractures are very common. As with all intra-articular 
fractures one should strive for an anatomical reduction. Due 
to the biconvex saddle shape of the articular surface, small 
amounts of talar shift significantly increase joint surface con-
tact pressures.
It is useful to think of the ankle mortise as having two 
columns, a medial and lateral. Each column has a bony and a 
soft tissue component. On the lateral side there are the lateral 
malleolus, lateral collateral ligament and syndesmotic liga -
ments. On the medial side there are the medial malleolus and 
medial collateral ligament (deltoid ligament).
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 29.22aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a) (b)
Dynamic hip
screw
Smooth barrel in which
screw can slide
Figure 28.23  (a) A dynamic hip screw for fixing a tr ochanteric 
proximal femoral fracture. This allows for compression at the fracture 
site on load-bearing and protects the femoral head from penetration 
by the screw when the osteoporotic bone settles; (b) insert to show 
the sliding screw in the barrel.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   401 25/10/2017   08:22CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA402
If only one column (either bony or soft tissue component) 
has been injured, then it is considered a stable injury and can 
be treated non-operatively with cast or splint protection for 
6–8 weeks.
If both columns are involved or there is evidence of talar 
shift, it is an unstable injury. Depending on patient age and 
risk factors for wound complications, in general unstable frac-
tures are treated with open reduction and rigid fixation to 
hold the fracture anatomically.
Non-operative treatment may be used for unstable 
fractures in elderly patients or patients with poor skin and 
unfavourable soft tissues, but this approach requires close 
observation and careful attention to casting technique.
Calcaneal fractures
The os calcis injury is most frequently caused by a fall from 
a height. It is important to exclude associated injuries to the 
lumbar spine that occur in 20% of cases. Most os calcis frac-
tures involve the posterior facet of the subtalar joint. The 
severity of the injury is often best appreciated with CT scans 
(Figure 28.24). Treatment depends on the severity of injury 
to the subtalar joint and widening of the heel leading to pero-
neal impingement. An os calcis fracture is a significant injury 
and outcomes following surgical or non-operative treatment 
are unpredictable. On occasion in severe injuries, primary 
fusion of the subtalar joint may be considered.
Talus fracture
The talus consists of a head, neck and body . The most com -
mon injury is a talar neck fracture. This is caused by forced 
dorsiflexion of the forefoot (aviator’s astralgus). The blood 
supply to the body of the talus is interrupted in displaced talar 
neck fractures. To optimise outcome and reduce the possibil-
ity of avascular necrosis, anatomical reduction and stable fix-
ation of the talar neck should be performed.
Tarsometatarsal (Lisfranc) joint 
injuries
Injuries to the mid-foot are associated with significant mor -
bidity ranging from a mid-foot sprain to complete rupture of 
the ligaments connecting the forefoot to the mid-foot. Injury 
Figure 28.24 Axial (a) and sagittal (b) views of a displaced intra-articular fracture of the os calcis. (c, d) Intraoperative views of the 
reconstruction. Both the overall shape and the articular surface have been restored.
Talus
Os 
calcis
Os 
calcis
Talus
Talus
Talus
(a) (c)
(d)
(b)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   402 25/10/2017   08:22Specific paediatric injuries 403
PART 4 | TRAUMA
classically follows forced plantar flexion of the mid-foot. An 
alternative mechanism of injury are crush injuries where the 
foot is forced flat by a heavy weight. Lisfranc’s ligament con -
nects the second metatarsal to the medial cuneiform. Poorly 
treated injuries to the mid-foot lead to significant morbid -
ity and if suspected, a CT of the foot should be undertaken. 
Treatment options range from closed reduction and plaster 
cast application to K-wire fixation. In severe cases primary 
tarsometatarsal fusion may be considered.
Achilles tendon rupture
Complete rupture of the tendo Achilles is a common injury; 
20% of acute injuries are missed. Active plantar flexion of the 
ankle is still possible, although weak, through the use of the 
toe plantar flexors.
A classic history is a feeling as if kicked in the heel and 
feeling something go. The most common activity leading to 
Achilles tendon rupture is badminton or squash following 
sudden forced contraction of the calf.
On examination a palpable gap may be felt. The diagnosis 
is confirmed by placing the patient prone on the examination 
couch, feet off the edge of the bed; squeezing the calf fails to 
elicit passive plantar flexion of the foot. If doubt exists, an 
ultrasound can confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment of acute Achilles tendon rupture involves sur-
gical repair or functional management. There is an increasing 
trend to functional management as opposed to direct surgical 
repair.
TREATMENT OF FRACTURES IN 
THE SKELETALL Y IMMATURE
The treatment principles that were described for the adult, 
are equally applicable to the child (i.e. reduce, hold, heal, 
rehabilitate).
A major difference to consider is that in extra-articu -
lar fractures there is a remodelling potential, which means 
increased degrees of deformity may be accepted. Remodelling 
happens best in the plane of the joint and the closer the injury 
to the growth plate. Rotational and joint surface remodelling 
are poor. Fractures occurring near the site of greatest longi -
tudinal growth will remodel the most (e.g. fractures around 
the distal femur have a greater remodelling potential than 
the proximal femur). The younger the patient the greater 
the remodelling potential. Significant remodelling essentially 
ceases when the growth plates have closed.
A further difference is that paediatric fractures heal more 
rapidly and as such do not need to be held as long as in the 
adult counterpart. Similarly, fixation does not need to be as 
rigid, as fracture union is more rapid.
Growth plate injuries require special mention (see Salter–
Harris classification, Figure 28.9). In general, growth plate 
injuries should be anatomically reduced to minimise the 
potential for growth disturbance. However, in the process 
of reducing the fracture, further injury to the growth plate 
should be avoided.
Repeated manipulation of physeal injuries should be 
avoided. Injury to the perichondral ring and placing metal 
work across the physis (where possible) should similarly be 
avoided. If fixation necessitates crossing the physis, consider 
limited damage by using the smallest smooth K-wires with a 
single pass in the middle of the physis if possible.
The paediatric periosteum is often thick and very strong; 
this needs to be considered when reducing the fracture, 
requiring an exaggeration of the deformity and pushing the 
fracture back into place instead of just applying longitudinal 
traction. The perisosteal hinge should be preserved as it also 
allows for better holding of the fracture if it remains intact as 
previously described (see Figure 28.9).
Always consider the possibility of non-accidental injury, 
as discussed in Chapters 22 and 39.
SPECIFIC PAEDIATRIC INJURIES
Distal radial fractures
Fractures of the distal radius are very common in children. 
The bone either fails at the physis, leading to Salter–Harris 
type 2 fractures of the distal radius, or the metaphysis fails. 
The treatment principle of physeal fractures is to achieve an 
anatomical reduction. This can often be achieved with closed 
manipulation and the fracture held in position until healing 
with a below elbow plaster cast. Growth arrest is rare after 
physeal fractures of the distal radius.
Complete metaphyseal fractures of the distal radius require 
close attention (Figure 28.25). In most cases an acceptable 
closed reduction can be achieved, but holding the distal frag-
ment in an acceptable position can be challenging with cast 
immobilisation. Brachioradialis, which is attached to the 
radial styloid, is a continual deforming force. If non-operative 
treatment using a cast application is chosen, the position 
should be checked with radiographs weekly for the first 3 
weeks, and if re-displacement occurs, then repeat manipula -
tion and K-wire fixation may be required.
Distal humerus (supracondylar 
fracture)
Supracondylar humeral fractures are very common injuries in 
children. The distal humerus may go into flexion or exten -
sion, extension being by far the most common. Treatment 
depends on the degree of displacement. Undisplaced fractures 
may be protected in a collar and cuff or backslab for 3 weeks 
and then progressive mobilisation.
If displaced, the fracture can often be reduced with closed 
manipulation. If the dorsal periosteal hinge is intact, then 
above elbow cast immobilisation is often sufficient to hold 
the fracture until union in 4–6 weeks. If the periosteal hinge 
is broken, then percutaneous K-wires are used to hold the 
fracture, supplemented with an above elbow cast.
Jacques Lisfranc de St Martin , 1790–1847, Professor of Surgery and Operative Medicine, Paris, France.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   403 25/10/2017   08:22CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA404
A very rare but feared complication of paediatric supra -
condylar fractures is Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture. This 
is due to excessive swelling and missed compartment syn-
drome in the forearm. It is particularly important not to put 
the elbow into deep flexion if there is a lot of swelling. If deep 
flexion is the only way to hold the fracture, then K-wire fixa-
tion should be considered.
Neurovascular injury at the time of a supracondylar frac -
ture is not uncommon. Careful attention should be paid to 
the neurovascular status of the limb. The white pulseless hand 
is a surgical emergency and requires emergent reduction. If 
the pulse does not return with reduction, then the vessels 
should be explored by appropriately trained surgeons.
The pink pulseless hand is more controversial and requires 
early senior decision making. If there is satisfactory perfusion 
of the limb, no suggestion of compartment syndrome and 
no neurological injury, then reduction and stabilisation of 
the fracture is warranted and a more expectant approach to 
the vascular injury can be taken. Often the pulse will return 
within 24–48 hours.
Neurological injury is common, most often a neuropraxia. 
They often resolve on fracture reduction, stabilisation and 
resolution of the swelling.
Malunion in varus or valgus remains a problem. Often the 
elbow will remodel the deformity in the anteroposterior flex-
ion extension plane, but varus and valgus malunion remodels 
less. Careful attention needs to be paid to the adequacy of the 
reduction and K-wire placement to hold the fracture to avoid 
angular malunion.
Lateral condylar mass fracture of the 
elbow
Lateral condylar mass fractures of the elbow are easily missed 
and often considered benign as there is often only a small 
flake of bone visible. This thin sliver of metaphyseal bone on 
the lateral side of the elbow is very deceptive. Do not under -
estimate the significance of this injury (Figure 28.26).
Treatment depends on the stability of the lateral mass 
fragment. If stable, non operative treatment is acceptable. 
If unstable, anatomical reduction and fixation should be 
attempted to avoid complications.
Unstable fractures are suggested by significant soft tissue 
swelling, by fracture displacement of more than 2 mm or by 
the fracture being visible on both anteroposterior and lateral 
views of the elbow.
Unstable fractures require anatomical reduction and rigid 
fixation with K-wires or screw fixation to avoid displacement 
and complications. Avascular necrosis of the capitellum and 
non-union of the lateral condyle lead to the so- called ‘fish 
tail’ deformity.
Slipped upper femoral epiphysis
A slipped upper femoral epiphysis classically occurs in a child 
approaching puberty. It is easily missed as symptoms may 
be mild and the predominant symptom may be knee pain 
referred from the hip. A history of trauma may be offered and 
the child may limp.
Figure 28.25 (a) AP and lateral radiographs of a 10-year-old 
showing a dorsally angulated metaphyseal fracture of the radius 
and undisplaced fracture of the ulna. (b) Injury treated with closed 
manipulation and cast application. Eight weeks’ post-injury radio-
graph out of cast. Fracture is united, with residual 11 degree dorsal 
angulation. (c) Radiograph of the wrist following repeat injury 2 
years later at age 12, showing complete remodelling. No residual 
deformity.
(a)
(b)
(c)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   404 25/10/2017   08:22Specific paediatric injuries 405
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Examination of the limb reveals a hip that flexes into 
external rotation. Radiographs should include a good lat -
eral view of the femoral head and neck (Figure 28.27). If 
the radiographs are normal, consider MRI, looking for a pre-
slip, and prophylactic fixation. If treated in the early stages, 
the prognosis is very good. A severely displaced slipped upper 
femoral epiphysis might lead to avascular necrosis of the fem-
oral head and chondrolysis. This is a very difficult condition 
to treat effectively in young patients.
Femoral shaft fractures
Femoral shaft fractures in children are treated based on the 
age and size of the child:
 ● infants (0–18 months);
 ● toddlers and small children (18 months–4 years);
 ● children (4–12 years);
 ● older children/adolescents.
In infants (0–18 months), ensure there is no evidence 
of non-accidental injury. In infants under 12–15 kg, gallows 
traction is acceptable. This traction involves suspension of 
the legs vertically with the buttocks just off the bed. In to d-
dlers and small children treatment is by traction initially fol-
lowed by hip spica application. Shortening of up to 1 cm and 
angulation of 15–20 degrees can be accepted depending on 
the age of the child due to extensive remodelling potential.
As the child gets older and time to union increases, so 
the non-operative measures of traction and hip spica become 
more cumbersome.
In children from 4 to 12 years several treatment options 
exist from traction and hip spica, elastic stable intramedullary 
nailing (ESIN), external fixation or plate fixation. Definitive 
treatment depends on surgeon skills, facilities and patient and 
parent needs.
In older children and adolescents, non-operative treat -
ment with traction and hip spica cast application becomes 
less tolerable. Depending on patient size and build, opera -
tive treatment may include ESIN (Figure 28.28), external 
fixation or plate fixation. In larger overweight adolescents, 
Figure 28.26  Lateral condylar mass 
fracture. (a) Plain radiograph showing 
the metaphyseal fracture. (b) The yellow 
shows the shape of the distal humerus 
including the cartilaginous analogue, 
and the red shows the true extent of 
the injury (i.e. a significant intra-articular 
fracture).
(a)
 (b)
Figure 28.27 Slipped left upper femoral epiphysis. (a) Plain radio -
graph; (b) the injury highlighted.
(a)
(b)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   405 25/10/2017   08:22CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA406
titanium elastic nails may not be strong enough to resist bend-
ing forces and locked intramedullary nailing may be consid -
ered.
It is important, however, to remember that there is a 1–2% 
chance of avascular necrosis of the femoral head if an ante -
grade intramedullary nail is used prior to or just after physeal 
closure. This is a rare but devastating complication in this age 
group. Far lateral entry point nails on the greater trochanter 
have been developed to limit the effect on the blood supply 
to the femoral head; however, the risk of avascular necrosis 
persists.
Tibial shaft fractures
Tibial fractures in children are often very amenable to non-  
operative treatment, starting with an above knee cast, fol -
lowed by conversion to a Sarmiento patellar tendon below 
knee cast at 4–6 weeks. Remodelling in the tibia is somewhat 
limited and as such less angular deformity can be accepted, no 
rotational deformity and only 10–15 degrees of angular defor-
mity. Some shortening of the tibia can be accepted as the tibia 
is expected to overgrow by 0.5 cm in response to injury. If it 
is not possible to hold the fracture in an acceptable position 
with a cast, then external fixation, ESIN TENS or plating is 
an option.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Special consideration needs to be given to osteoporotic and 
pathological fractures, for example the ability to hold the frac-
ture until union. Furthermore, open fractures require urgent 
appropriate treatment to ensure bone healing in the absence 
of infection.
Osteoporotic fractures
Osteoporosis is a condition characterised by low bone min-
eral density and reduced strength. Osteoporotic bone is liable 
to fracture with low energy injuries (e.g. a fall from stand -
ing height). Treatment of lower limb osteoporotic fractures 
in older patients are challenging. As there may be additional 
and pre-existing mobility problems, such patients are unable 
to partially weight bear and so fixation should be strong 
enough to allow immediate weight bearing and to hold the 
position until union. Locking plate technology improves fixa-
tion in osteoporotic bone, and bone void fillers can be utilised 
(Figure 28.29).
Pathological fractures
When abnormal bone fails under normal load this is referred 
to as a pathological fracture. Depending on the cause of the 
pathological fracture the bone may not heal and consider -
ation should be given to a load-bearing device not load shar -
ing. If involving the joint surface or close to the joint surface, 
the affected area may be excised en bloc and a joint replace -
ment performed.
The bone may be weakened by a primary bone tumour, 
secondary metastatic deposits, haematological malignancy 
Figure 28.28 (a–c) Femoral shaft fracture in a child, which has been 
stabilised with elastic nails.
(a) (b) (c)
Summary box 28.6
Fractures in the skeletally immature
●● Do not forget non-accidental injury
●● Be reluctant to remanipulate a physeal injury
●● Elastic nails are a significant step forward in fracture treatment 
in children
●● Not many fractures require operative intervention in children
Figure 28.29 Variations in fixation technique suited to osteoporotic 
bone. (a) Norian bone substitute has been injected to support the 
lateral tibial plateau in the partial articular fracture. (b) A locking plate 
in a proximal humerus. The screws are threaded into the plate to make 
a fixed-angle device.
(a)
 (b)
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   406 25/10/2017   08:22Special considerations 407
PART 4 | TRAUMA
(myeloma, lymphoma, leukaemia), osteomyelitis and meta -
bolic bone disease (osteomalacia, Paget’s disease, osteoporo -
sis).
A pathological fracture should be suspected if the history 
is not consistent with the severity of the injury. The patient 
may give a history of low energy injury that normally would 
not cause a fracture. If a pathological fracture is suspected, 
the cause should be actively sought. Where a primary bone 
tumour is suspected, treatment should be planned to prevent 
disseminating the disease (see Chapter 37).
In patients with metastatic bone disease, the primary 
source should be sought if multiple metastatic deposits are 
identified. If life expectancy is poor, then stabilisation with a 
load bearing device may be considered. If an isolated metasta-
sis is identified and an overall good prognosis is offered by the 
oncologists, then a more aggressive curative approach may be 
taken with en-bloc excision of the primary and the isolated 
secondary deposit.
If a metastatic deposit is identified prior to fracture, pro -
phylactic fixation should be considered if impending fracture 
is likely. Prophylactic stabilisation with a load-bearing device 
is once again advocated. If life expectancy is good and the 
deposit periarticular, an en-bloc excision and joint arthro-
plasty may be considered to optimise return to near normal 
function as soon as possible.
Open fractures
Any fracture with an overlying wound should be considered 
an open fracture. The term previously used was a compound 
fracture. Open fractures require particular mention because 
adequate stabilisation of the bony injury and appropriate 
management of the soft tissue injury is paramount to ensure 
a good outcome with a low complication rate. The treat -
ment of bone and joint infection is expensive, laborious and 
time-consuming for the professional as well as the patient. 
An infected femoral shaft fracture following intramedullary 
nailing will typically take 3 years and five operations to clear 
the infection and achieve union.
The Gustilo and Anderson classification of open fractures 
is the most frequently used classification (see Table 28.2). The 
definitive grade is determined intraoperatively after thorough 
debridement. It is not based on size of wound alone but takes 
into account several factors; a farmyard or heavily contami -
nated wound of under 1 cm may still be considered a grade 
III injury.
The aim of open fracture management is to achieve bony 
union, optimum function and avoid infection. The treat -
ment of open fractures should be considered in two phases: 
the emergency department pre-surgical phase and the surgical 
phase.
Pre-surgical phase
1 Take a photograph to document the severity of the injury 
and limit the need for repeated opening of dressings. (Do 
not delay steps below unduly.)
2 Assess neurovascular status and if compromised and the 
fracture displaced, quickly remove any macroscopic dirt 
and reduce the fracture/dislocation. It is not essential to 
achieve an anatomical reduction; simply remove the pres-
sure from the soft tissues (make a leg look like a leg and 
an arm look like an arm). If the bone was out of the skin 
and is reduced under the skin, then document clearly and 
inform the surgical team.
3 Once overall alignment is achieved, splint the affected 
limb; treatment of an open fracture is treatment of the 
soft tissues.
4 Apply a moist saline dressing to the wound. It is accept -
able to irrigate the wound with saline in the emergency 
department to remove any macroscopic dirt, but definitive 
debridement and wash out of the wound should be under-
taken in a theatre environment.
5 Administer intravenous antibiotics according to local 
protocols. It has been shown that early administration of 
intravenous antibiotics is one of the most important steps. 
A broad-spectrum antibiotic should be chosen covering 
gram-positive, gram-negative and if severe contamina -
tion, anaerobic organisms.
6 Obtain a tetanus immunisation history and treat accord-
ingly.
7 Inform senior orthopaedic surgeon of the injury as soon as 
possible and make preparations for surgical phase.
Surgical phase
In the past an open fracture was considered a contraindica -
tion to internal fixation. It is increasingly evident that stable 
fixation of the bony injury is very important to prevent dete -
rioration of the soft tissues, allowing recovery and healing.
Fracture stabilisation may come in the form of external 
fixation, internal fixation with screws/plates/intramedullary 
nails – depending on the setting.
Management of the soft tissues is critical to prevent the 
zone of injury spreading. Thorough debridement of any con -
taminated or non-vital soft tissue is important. Any loose or 
devitalised bone fragments should be discarded. Bone defects 
are easier to deal with than an infected non-union.
Sir James Paget , 1814–1899, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.
Summary box 28.7
Special considerations
●● Osteoporotic fractures in the older patients may require 
specialised fixation techniques with locking screw/plate 
technology and injectable bone cement augmentation
●● Pathological fractures may not heal and require load-bearing 
not load-sharing implants
●● Arthroplasty in suitable patients bypasses the problems of 
blood supply, weak bone and allows early full weight bearing 
and return to function
●● Open fractures require prompt debridement, stabilisation and 
adequate soft tissue cover to prevent infection.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   407 25/10/2017   08:22CHAPTER 28  Extremity trauma
PART 4 | TRAUMA408
Soft tissue reconstruction may involve primary or delayed 
primary closure of the wound, or more sophisticated soft tis -
sue reconstruction options including microvascular free tissue 
transfer.
Continue intravenous antibiotics until 48 hours after 
definitive wound closure.
COMPARTMENT SYNDROME
Compartment syndrome is raised pressure in an osseofascial 
compartment to a level that compromises tissue perfusion. 
There are several causes of compartment syndrome, fractures 
being the most common (70%), followed by soft tissue contu-
sions (23%). Rarer causes include: bleeding disorders includ -
ing anticoagulation, burns (particularly circumferential 3rd 
degree burns); post-ischaemic swelling (reperfusion injury); 
tight casts/dressings; and extravasation of intravenous infu -
sions (contrast under pressure).
The pathophysiology involves increased tissue pressure, 
which leads to reduced microperfusion resulting in tissue isch-
aemia and irreversible muscle damage from cellular anoxia.
Compartment syndrome is a clinical diagnosis character -
ised by pain out of proportion, increasing pain and pain on 
passive stretch. Paralysis, paraesthesia and pallor are late signs 
and pulselessness is an extremely late sign.
Compartment pressure monitoring may be useful in cases 
of diagnostic uncertainty and in patients with altered levels of 
consciousness (intubated, head injury).
Measure multiple sites near but not in the fracture site, in 
all the compartments of the affected limb. Generally accepted 
pressure thresholds include an absolute pressure greater than 
or equal to 30 mmHg or pressure difference (diastolic pressure 
– compartment pressure) less than or equal to 30 mmHg.
Emergency treatment involves splitting casts and or dress-
ings to the skin and elevating the extremity. Senior input 
should be sought and arrangements put in place to perform 
definitive treatment with fasciotomies.
There are some common pitfalls to remember. The inci-
dence of compartment syndrome associated with high and 
low energy injuries is nearly equal. Compartment syndrome 
can occur in open fractures. Have a high index of suspicion 
and be particularly vigilant in patients with an altered level 
of consciousness.
CONCLUSION
The correct identification of extremity trauma, combined 
with timely and appropriate treatment, is essential to return 
patients to normal function as safely and as quickly as possi -
ble. The same injury may be treated in different ways based on 
patient factors, age, functional demands and co-morbidities. 
Surgeon and resource based factors also need to be considered.
Summary box 28.8
Summary of extremity trauma
●● Realise that an injury exists
●● Find the characteristics of the injury, describe and classify it
●● Consider the natural history of the injury
●● Treatment is guided by outcome if known or by principle if not
●● Beware of injuries that are ‘easily missed’
FURTHER READING
Bone LR, Johnson KD, Weight J, Scheinberg RJ. Early versus delayed 
stabilization of femoral fractures. J Bone Joint Surg 1989; 71A: 336–
40.
Charnley J. The closed treatment of common fractures . Edinburgh: E&S 
Livingstone, 1950.
Court-Brown CM, Heckman JD, McQueen MM et al. (eds). Rockwood 
and Green’s fractures in adults, 8th edn. Wolters Kluwer, 2014.
Gustilo RB, Anderson JT. Prevention of infection in the treatment of 
1025 open fractures of long bones. J Bone Joint Surg 1976; 8A: 453–8.
Mast J, Jakob R, Ganz R. Planning and reduction technique in fracture sur-
gery. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1989.
Muller ME, Nazarian S, Koch P . The AO classification of fractures . 
Schatzker J (trans). Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1988.
Solomon L, Warwick D, Nayagam S. Apley’s system of orthopaedics and 
fractures, 9th edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2010.
04_28-B&L27_Pt4_Ch28.indd   408 25/10/2017   08:22Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To recognise and understand:
 • The common features of various disasters
 • The principles behind the organisation of the relief effort 
and of triage in treatment and evacuation
 • The role and limitations of field hospitals in disaster
 • The features of conditions peculiar to disaster situations 
and their treatment
Chapter
Disaster surgery
29
INTRODUCTION
Natural disasters provide a constant reminder of the power 
and capricious nature of our planet. The depletion of the 
ozone layer and global warming mean that the future may 
hold in store calamitous events with even greater magni -
tude than those experienced before. National conflicts and 
ideological differences have not lessened and the resultant 
‘unnatural disasters’ have the potential to rival the natural 
ones in enormity (see Chapter 30). Disasters by their very 
nature are unpredictable and no two are alike. Nevertheless, 
there are numerous common elements and it has been shown 
that countries that invest in disaster preparedness are better 
equipped to cope with such catastrophes. Recent wars and 
disasters have highlighted the increasingly crucial role of sur-
geons in these scenarios.
COMMON FEATURES OF MAJOR 
DISASTERS
Any event that results in the loss of human life is disastrous, 
but most accidents, such as aeroplane and train crashes, 
are limited in the number of people involved. Conversely, 
natural disasters, such as earthquakes and tsunamis, leave 
in their wake massive destruction over large areas that can 
transcend national boundaries. All the apparatus of a soci-
ety that responds to such disasters (the civil administration, 
emergency services, fire brigades and hospitals) may itself be 
involved and unable to respond (Figure 29.1). Large num-
bers of people may require immediate shelter, clean water and 
food, in addition to any medical needs.
A breakdown of communication is inevitable and can be 
accompanied by widespread panic and a disruption of civil 
order. Access to the disaster area may be limited because of 
the destruction of bridges, affecting road and rail links.
FACTORS INFLUENCING RELIEF 
EFFORTS AND PROVISION OF 
MEDICAL AID
Good communication is critical for the authorities to respond 
quickly to a disaster. Wireless technology and satellite imag-
Summary box 29.1
Common features of major disasters
●● Massive casualties
●● Damage to infrastructure
●● A large number of people requiring shelter
●● Panic and uncertainty among the population
●● Limited access to the area
●● Breakdown of communication
Figure 29.1 Damage to emergency medical services.
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   409 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA410
ery have revolutionised the way in which real-time informa-
tion can be obtained (Figure 29.2). Nonetheless, there is an 
inevitable lag period between the occurrence of the disaster 
and the response from the establishment.
The location of the disaster area has a bearing on relief 
efforts. In large cities emergency and medical services are 
better developed. However, these areas are densely populated 
and may have limited access by road and air. Disasters in 
remote areas can be particularly difficult to manage because 
relief efforts are hampered by geographical isolation and the 
lack of infrastructure.
The time-frame in which a disaster occurs also impacts 
on the relief efforts. Earthquakes can unleash havoc in sec -
onds but floods and hurricanes may continue for several days. 
Another important factor is the state of resources of the coun-
try; disasters in poorer countries can seldom be managed with-
out significant outside assistance.
SEQUENCE OF RELIEF EFFORTS 
AFTER A DISASTER
Establishing a chain of command
Many countries have dedicated organisations that deal with 
disasters. In others, an administrative hierarchy is established 
to coordinate the efforts of the teams participating in relief 
efforts (Figure 29.3).
Damage assessment
The first objective in disaster management is an assessment 
of the damage and the number of casualties. All sources of 
information must be employed. The 24-hour news services 
Summary box 29.2
Factors influencing rescue and relief efforts
●● Status of communications
●● Location, whether rural or urban
●● Accessibility of the location
●● Time-frame in which disaster occurs
●● Economic state of development of the area
Figure 29.2 Satellite image showing destruction of a bridge as a 
result of flooding.
Immediate
treatment
Urgent
treatment
Minor
treatment
Coordination
T riage teams Ambulance
Helicopter Security
Search/
rescue
Chief of
operations
Communications
Management
leader T riage leader Evacuation Communications
Morgue
Medical
services
Transport
Figure 29.3 Organisation chart for 
disaster management.
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   410 25/10/2017   08:23Sequence of relief efforts aft er a disaster 411
PART 4 | TRAUMA
are frequently the first on the scene and can be an important 
source of information.
Mobilising resources
The next step is mobilisation of human and material resources 
appropriate to the extent of the disaster. Although all mo des 
of transport need to be considered, helicopters provide the 
quickest access for the first responders (Figure 29.4). The 
teams who make up the initial response must include expe -
rienced staff who can assess the situation and who have the 
authority to take immediate decisions.
Rescue operation
Early coordination of the rescue effort allows optimal use 
of resources. The first priority is to prevent further damage 
from occurring, both to people and to the infrastructure. The 
types of injuries encountered by rescue workers depends on 
the delay between the onset of the disaster and their arrival. 
Patients with head injuries and abdominal and thoracic 
trauma will either have been treated or have succumbed to 
their injuries within 48–72 hours of a disaster. After the first 
week, the only casualties requiring treatment are those with 
complex limb trauma and infected wounds (Figure 29.5).
Coordination with relief agencies
A laudable aspect of globalisation is the outpouring of help 
from governments and non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs) in response to a disaster. Some, like Rescue and 
Preparedness in Disasters (RAPID), deal with search and res-
cue whereas others, like the International Committee of the 
Red Cross (ICRC) and Oxfam, provide general disaster-re-
lated relief (Figure 29.6). The various United Nations (UN) 
agencies deal with medical care, food provision and refugees. 
Coordinating the efforts of these organisations is essential for 
optimal results, as medical aid in isolation is inadequate with-
out the simultaneous provision of safe drinking water, food, 
clothing and shelter.
100
90
80
70
60Percentage
50
40
30
20
10
0
12 hours
10
10 10
85
95 95 100
15
65
5 5 55
20
15
55
24 hours 48 hours 1 week 1 month2 weeks
Limb injuries
Head injury
Facial trauma
Abdominal and
chest trauma
Figure 29.4 Heli-evacuation.
Figure 29.5 Time-line showing the type of injuries encountered at different times in a disaster.
Summary box 29.3
Sequence of the relief effort in major disasters
●● Establish chain of command
●● Set up lines of communication
●● Carry out damage assessment
●● Mobilise resources
●● Initiate rescue operation
●● Triage casualties
●● Start emergency treatment
●● Arrange evacuation
●● Start definitive management
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   411 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA412
Dealing with the media
Disasters act like a magnet for the media which, in today’ s 
world of 24-hour news coverage, plays an important part in 
shaping public opinion. It is essential to establish a working 
relationship between the media and the rescue teams. With 
careful handling the media can become a powerful ally and 
play a constructive role in identifying problems, galvanising 
aid and keeping the public informed.
Triage
Derived from the French verb ‘trier’, triage means ‘to sort’ 
and is the cornerstone of the management of mass casualties. 
It aims to identify the patients who will benefit the most by 
being treated the earliest, ensuring ‘the greatest good for the 
greatest number’. Numerous studies show that only 10–15% 
of disaster casualties are serious enough to require hospital-
isation. By sorting out the minor injuries, triage lessens the 
immediate burden on medical facilities. Deciding who receives 
priority when faced with hundreds of seriously injured victims 
is a daunting prospect. Triage should be undertaken by some-
one senior, who has the experience and authority to make 
these critical decisions. To keep pace with the changing clini-
cal picture of an injured person, triage needs to be undertaken 
in the field, before evacuation and at the hospital.
Triage areas
For efficient triage the injured need to be brought together 
into any undamaged structures that can shelter a large num -
ber of wounded. A good water supply, lighting and ease of 
access are useful. Separate areas should be reserved for patient 
holding, emergency treatment and decontamination (in the 
event of discharge of hazardous materials).
Practical triage
Emergency life-saving measures should proceed alongside tri-
age and can actually help the decision-making process. The 
assessment and restoration of airway , breathing and circula -
tion are critical and are discussed in Chapter 23. Vital signs 
and a general physical examination should be combined with 
a brief history taken by a paramedic or by a volunteer worker 
if one is available.
Documentation for triage
Accurate documentation is an inseparable part of triage and 
should include basic patient data, vital signs with timing, 
brief details of injuries (preferably on a diagram) and treat -
ment given. A system of colour-co ded tags attached to the 
patient’s wrist or around the neck should be employed by the 
emergency medical services. The colour denotes the degree 
of urgency with which a patient requires treatment (Figure 
29.7).
Triage categories
All methods of triage use simple criteria based on vital signs. 
A rapid clinical assessment should be made taking into 
account the patient’s ability to walk, their mental status and 
the presence or absence of ventilation or capillary perfusion. 
A commonly used four-tier system is presented in Table 29.1.
Figure 29.6  Oxfam and the International Committee of the Red 
Cross provide generalised relief.
Triage  is the earliest example of clinical risk management. This is done on the basis of need so that resources can be allocated by good prioritisation. The process 
was first used in 1792 by Baron Dominique Jean Larrey, Surgeon in Chief to Napoleon’s Imperial Guard. The concept of triage emerged from the French Service 
de Sante so that resources could be used to the optimum – “most for the most”.
TABLE 29.1 Triage categories.
Priority Colour Medical need Clinical status Examples
First (I) Red Immediate Critical, but likely to survive if treatment 
given early
Severe facial trauma, tension pneumothorax, 
profuse external bleeding, haemothorax, flail 
chest, major intra-abdominal bleed, extradural 
haematomas
Second (II) Yellow Urgent Critical, likely to survive if treatment given 
within hours
Compound fractures, degloving injuries, 
ruptured abdominal viscus, pelvic fractures, 
spinal injuries
Third (III) Green Non-urgent Stable, likely to survive even if treatment 
is delayed for hours to days
Simple fractures, sprains, minor lacerations
Last (0) Black Unsalvageable Not breathing, pulseless, so severely 
injured that no medical care is likely to 
help
Severe brain damage, very extensive burns, 
major disruption/loss of chest or abdominal 
wall structures
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   412 25/10/2017   08:23Sequence of relief efforts aft er a disaster 413
PART 4 | TRAUMA
evacuation can be organised (Figure 29.8). Whether the 
traditional tented structure or the modular type housed in 
containers is employed, the facility must be equipped with 
radiograph capability, operating rooms, vital signs monitors, 
sterilising equipment, a blood bank, ventilators and basic lab-
oratory facilities.
Management in the field
Field hospitals principally function in three main areas (Table 
29.2).
First aid
Care for patients with minor injuries involves cleaning and 
dressing wounds, suturing lacerations and splinting simple 
fractures. Most of these ‘walking wounded’ can be sent away 
with antibiotics and simple pain relief.
DAMAGE CONTROL SURGERY
Damage control surgery (DCS) is the concept that only life- 
and limb-saving surgery be performed in field hospitals to 
allow safe transfer of a patient to a definitive treating facility. 
This will include ensuring that the airway is secure, haemor -
rhage is under control and compartments are decompressed 
in the chest, skull, abdomen and the limbs. Devitalised tissue 
should be removed and any contamination prevented from 
SAMPLE SAMPLE
1-800-425-5897
FRONT
0
I
II
III
www.mettag.com
X
BACK
0 0
I
II
III
I
II
III
imiv
,
(a)
BACKFRONT
RESPIRATIONS PERFUSION MENTAL STATUS
Yes
No
/H11001 2 Sec.
/H11002 2 Sec.
Can Do
Can’t DoR PM
Move the Walking Wounded
No Respirations After Head Tilt
Respirations - Over 30
Perfusion - Capillary Refill
Over 2 Seconds
Mental Status - Unable to 
Follow Simple Commands
Otherwise
DMS-CFCA rev 2/24/2006
MINOR
MORGUE
IMMEDIATE
IMMEDIATE
IMMEDIATE
DELAYED
PERSONAL INFORMATION
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY                                      ST                ZIP
PHONE
COMMENTS RELIGIOUS PREF.
MOR GUE
Pulseless/
Non-Br ea thing
IMMEDIATE
Life Threatening
Injury
DELAYED
Serious
Non Life Threatening
MINOR
Walking Wounded
©1996 Disaster Management Systems, Inc. ¥ Pomona, CA
(909) 594-9596 ¥ www.TriageTags.com
MOR GUE
Pulseless/
Non-Br ea thing
IMMEDIATE
Life Threatening
Injury
DELAYED
Serious
Non Life Threatening
MINOR
Walking Wounded
Comments/Information
Patient’s Name
TRIAGE 
TAG
123 45
(b)
Figure 29.7 Triage tags. (a) Courtesy of TACDA & METTAG 
products, American Civil Defense Association. (b) Courtesy 
of Disaster Management Systems.
(a)
(b)
Evacuation of casualties
Decisions regarding the best destination for each patient need 
to be based on how far it is safe for them to travel and whether 
the facilities that they need for definitive treatment will be 
available. A quick retriage is very useful in this situation. The 
paramedics accompanying the casualties should be resolved to 
prevent the ‘second accident’ (damage caused inadvertently 
by transport and treatment). An adequate supply of essentials 
such as intravenous fluids, dressings, pain medication, and 
oxygen must be arranged (see Chapter 30).
Field hospitals
The decision to deploy field hospitals depends on the loca -
tion, the number of casualties and the speed with which 
Summary box 29.4
Essentials of casualty evacuation
●● Retriage to upgrade priorities amongst the injured
●● Select appropriate medical facilities for transfer
●● Choose appropriate means of transport
●● Prevent the ‘second accident’ during transfer
●● Ensure an adequate supply of materials to accompany the 
patient
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   413 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA414
developing into infection. DCS is explained in more detail, in 
the context of early management and other settings, through-
out the chapters in the trauma section (see Part 4: Trauma).
Emergency care for immediate life-
threatening injuries
There are many patients who may be saved by relatively sim-
ple measures, provided that these are taken urgently. Endotra-
cheal intubation and tracheotomy may be needed to provide 
a secure airway. A needle thoracocentesis will relieve a ten -
sion pneumothorax and a chest drain will be needed before a 
patient with a significant chest injury is transferred by air. An 
open pneumothorax should be closed. Damaged major vessels 
to limbs should be repaired if possible. Fasciotomies will be 
TABLE 29.2 Type of treatment given in field hospitals.
Examples Further
First aid Suturing cuts and lacerations, splinting simple 
fractures
Review at local hospital
Emergency care for life-
threatening injuries
Endotracheal intubation, tracheotomy, relieving 
tension pneumothorax, stopping external 
haemorrhage, relieving an extradural haematoma, 
emergency thoracotomy/laparotomy for internal 
haemorrhage
After damage control surgery, transfer patients to 
base hospitals once stable
Initial care for non-life-
threatening injuries
Debridement of contaminated wounds, reduction of 
fractures and dislocations, application of external 
fixators, vascular repairs
Transfer patients to base hospitals for definitive 
management
Figure 29.8 Field hospitals: (a, b) modular type; (c) tented struc -
ture; (d) interior of a tented field hospital.
(a) (b)
(d)
(c)
Summary box 29.5
Principles of damage control surgery
●● Do the minimum needed to allow safe transfer to a definitive 
facility
●● Take actions that prevent deterioration of that patient during 
transfer
●● Secure the airway – may require tracheostomy
●● Control bleeding – may require craniotomy, laparotomy, 
thoracotomy, repair of major limb vessels
●● Prevent pressure build up – may require burr holes, chest 
drain, laparotomy, fasciotomy
●● Prevent infection by extensile exposure and removing dead 
and contaminated tissue
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   414 25/10/2017   08:23Sequence of relief efforts aft er a disaster 415
PART 4 | TRAUMA
needed for muscle compartments that are swelling from injury 
or from reperfusion. Amputation for clearly devitalised limbs 
and gas gangrene should be undertaken at field hospitals as 
delay will be fatal.
Specific aspects of care are discussed in the relevant chap-
ters elsewhere in this book.
Initial care for non-life-threatening injuries
Many patients sustain serious injuries that require prolonged 
care. These include compound limb fractures, degloving inju-
ries, dislocations of major joints, major facial injuries and com-
plex hand injuries. These patients will need specialised care 
requiring transfer to the appropriate facility. Replantations of 
amputated limbs and other extensive procedures should not 
be attempted in field hospitals as they are time-consuming 
and divert resources and personnel to the treatment of a few 
patients.
Debridement
Taken from the French, meaning to ‘unleash or cut open’, 
debridement plays a crucial part in the management of 
trauma. Wounds sustained in disasters are often heavily con -
taminated, containing foreign bodies and non-viable tissues 
(Figure 29.9). Debridement reduces the chances of anaer -
obic and necrotising infections and can prevent systemic 
sepsis. The following principles of debridement apply to all 
contaminated wounds:
 ● After the administration of anaesthesia, the injured area 
is copiously irrigated with normal saline. Lavage using a 
pressurised system is controversial, with concerns over 
tissue trauma and spread of debris (Figure 29.10). The 
wound is palpated and all foreign matter removed. Dirt 
and debris enmeshed in soft tissues can only be removed 
by excision of those tissues. Open joints should be thor -
oughly irrigated and all foreign material removed.
 ● Wounds with extensive cavitation should be enlarged 
longitudinally to gain better access and allow full decom -
pression of the underlying muscles. This should be carried 
out under tourniquet. This helps to visualise the damaged 
structures, and allow the surgeon to gain proximal and 
distal control of vascular injuries, and to identify severed 
ends of major nerves and tendons.
 ● The next step is excision of all dead and devitalised tissue. 
At this stage the tourniquet is let down to check the vas -
cularity of the tissues. Skin excision is kept to a minimum 
and only the margins of the wound need be trimmed back 
to healthy bleeding edges. Excision of devitalised muscle 
should be undertaken generously. Muscle that is pale or 
dark in colour , does not contract on pinching and does 
not bleed on cutting must be removed. In patients with 
traumatic amputations, the bone ends are tidied, the skin 
and muscle edges trimmed to the lowest level possible and 
the wound left open.
 ● In patients with associated fractures, skeletal stabilisa -
tion should be obtained before embarking on any repairs. 
External fixators are invaluable for this and make wound 
management much easier (Figure 29.11).
Figure 29.9 (a, b) Gr oss contamination typically seen in wounds 
sustained in disasters. The radiograph shows numerous radiopaque 
foreign bodies in the soft tissues.
Figure 29.10 Lavage with normal saline to decontaminate a wound.
Figure 29.11  External fixators pr ovide skeletal stabilisation and 
allow easy management of the soft tissues.
(a)
(b)
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   415 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA416
 ● In the acute setting, only vascular repairs are justified. For 
lacerated vessels the ends are trimmed and an anastomosis 
performed. In the case of loss of substance of the vessel 
wall, a vein patch or reversed vein graft may be employed. 
Silicone tubing may be used as a temporary bypass (stent) 
while vascular repair is being carried out in patients with 
critically compromised distal circulation.
 ● Nerves and tendons should not be dissected out nor 
should any attempt be made at definitive repair in wounds 
with tissue devitalisation, as this leads to poor results. The 
key structures should be identified and the edges trimmed 
and tagged with non-absorbable sutures to facilitate repair 
during subsequent exploration.
 ● Wounds sustained in disasters are heavily contaminated 
and are not suitable for primary closure. However, blood 
vessels and exposed joint surfaces need to be covered. This 
can be achieved by loosely tacking adjoining muscle over 
the exposed area. The wound is then covered with fluffed 
gauze and sterile cotton and the extremity splinted with 
a plaster of Paris slab. For extremity injuries, elevation is 
critical to reduce oedema.
 ● Broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as third-generation 
cephalosporins, are started prophylactically and contin -
ued for 5–7 days.
 ● The wound is reinspected at 24–48 hours to assess the 
viability of the tissues. Wounds are closed between the 
fourth and sixth day if there is no infection. Tension 
should be avoided and one should not hesitate to use skin 
grafts to obtain cover.
 ● In wounds with gross infection no attempt at closure is 
made until infection is eradicated. These wounds are 
re-explored to make sure that there are no residual for -
eign bodies or devitalised tissue. Tissue should be taken 
for microbiological culture. Vacuum-assisted closure (Vac-
Pac) has emerged as a very useful tool for deeply cavitating 
wounds. It utilises low-pressure suction to evacuate exu-
date, promote granulation tissue and reduce the size of the 
wound (Figure 29.12). Once the wounds are free from 
infection secondary closure can be undertaken.
DEFINITIVE MANAGEMENT
The hospitals designated to undertake definitive management 
should be selected on the basis of the facilities available and 
the number of injured that they can handle. The resources 
required for trauma patients are more than the typical case 
mix of a hospital. A rule of thumb is that only half the bed 
strength of a hospital can be utilised to provide optimum 
trauma care in an emergency situation.
Hospital reorganisation
In hospitals receiving mass casualties some reorganisation of 
services is unavoidable. This includes transferring patients 
with non-urgent conditions to other facilities, augmenting 
surgical services, reorganising the specialist rota and redes -
ignating medical wards as surgical care areas. An appeal for 
blood donations should be broadcast.
SPECIFIC ISSUES
There is no injury that is peculiar to disasters and the whole 
spectrum of external injuries from minor cuts, compound 
fractures and amputations is seen. Internal organ damage 
is frequent and, unless immediate help is available, this 
accounts for the majority of early mortality figures. People 
trapped under fallen buildings may suffer crush injuries and 
crush syndrome if the duration is prolonged. Crush injuries 
and missile injuries cause extensive tissue damage and gross 
contamination, both favourable conditions for anaerobic and 
micro-aerophilic infections.
Limb salvage
The Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS) and its mod-
ifications are useful in deciding about limb salvage. Extensive 
tissue loss, neurovascular damage and loss of long fragments of 
bone are traditionally indications for amputation. Currently, 
wounds of any dimension can be covered with microvascu -
lar flaps and distraction osteogenesis and vascularised bone 
Figure 29.12 (a, b) Use of low-pressure vacuum therapy in prepar-
ing a wound for secondary closure.
Summary box 29.6
Principles of debridement and initial wound care
●● Obtain generous exposure through skin and fascia
●● Identify neurovascular bundles
●● Excise devitalised tissue
●● Remove foreign bodies
●● Repair major vessels
●● Obtain skeletal stabilisation with external fixators
●● Only tag tendons and nerves that have been cut
●● Leave the wound open and delay primary closure
●● Avoid tight dressings
●● Elevate the injured limb
(a)
(b)
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   416 25/10/2017   08:23Specific issues 417
PART 4 | TRAUMA
can be used to restore bony continuity. If performed in time, 
vascular repairs can salvage most acutely ischaemic limbs. 
Because of these developments the indications for amputation 
in trauma have undergone a paradigm shift and the majority 
of patients who reach a tertiary-care facility within 24 hours 
are candidates for limb salvage (Figure 29.13). This assumes 
that debridement and, if required, vascular repairs have been 
performed in a field medical facility. A limb is unlikely to 
survive if the vascular repair of major limb vessels has been 
delayed for more than 4–6 hours.
Facial injuries
The management of facial injuries follows the same general 
principles of debridement and delayed closure as already out-
lined. Because of the functional and cosmetic importance of 
facial structures, skin and soft-tissue excisions are kept to a 
minimum. The face has a robust vascularity and a high ability 
to counter infection. Even in patients who present late with 
gross contamination, careful debridement followed by delayed 
primary closure can lead to good results (Figure 29.14).
Tetanus
This potentially fatal condition, also called ‘lockjaw’, is caused 
by Clostridium tetani , a gram-positive spore-forming bacillus 
occurring naturally in the intestines of humans and in the 
soil. It enters the body through a wound and replicates, thriv-
ing on the anaerobic conditions present in devitalised tissues. 
It produces tetanospasmin, an exotoxin that binds to the neu-
romuscular junctions of the central nervous system neurones, 
rendering them incapable of neurotransmitter release. This 
leads to failure of inhibition of motor reflex responses to sen-
sory stimulation and generalised contractions of agonist and 
antagonist muscles produce tetanic spasms. The median incu-
bation period is 7 days, ranging from 4–14 days.
Early symptoms are painful spasms of the facial muscles 
resulting in risus sardonicus (Figure 29.15). The spasms 
spread to involve the respiratory and laryngeal muscula -
ture. Spasms of the paravertebral and extensor limb muscu -
lature produce opisthotonus, an arching of the whole body. 
Laryngeal muscle spasm leads to apnoea and, if prolonged, to 
asphyxia and respiratory arrest. The spasms can be brought on 
by the slightest of sensory stimulus.
The diagnosis is obvious once it is fully manifest. There 
are three aspects of management:
 ● Prevention. Wounds contaminated with soil can harbour 
tetanus spores, and active immunisation is indicated by 
administering 0.5 mL of tetanus toxoid intramuscularly . 
Patients with gross contamination of cavitating wounds 
should also receive 250–500 U of human anti-tetanus 
globulin (ATG) intramuscularly to provide passive immu-
nisation and to neutralise the circulating toxin. In full-
Figure 29.13 (a–d) Badly traumatised lower limb. Reconstruction has been performed using a micr ovascular rectus abdominis flap covered 
with a skin graft.
(a) (b)
(d)(c)
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   417 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA418
blown clinical tetanus, 3000–10 000 U of ATG should be 
administered. Wound manipulation should be avoided for 
2–3 hours after ATG administration to minimise tetano-
spasmin release.
 ● Local wound care.  This includes a thorough wound 
debridement to eliminate the anaerobic environment. 
Intravenous administration of 10–24 × 10 6 U per day of 
penicillin G should be continued for 10–14 days. The 
wound should be closed using the delayed primary or sec-
ondary closure techniques.
 ● Supportive care for established disease.  These patients 
are nursed in an intensive care unit (ICU) environment, 
free from strong sensory stimuli. Diazepam is useful in pre-
venting the onset of spasms but if these become sustained, 
the patient is paralysed, intubated and placed on a venti -
lator. The patient is then gradually weaned off the ventila-
tor under cover of anticonvulsants. The overall mortality 
rate is around 45%, prognosis being determined by the 
(a) (b)
(d)
Figure 29.14 (a–d) Late-presenting facial injury with gross contam-
ination. A thorough debridement followed by delayed primary closure 
has yielded good results.
Figure 29.15 Risus sardonicus of ‘lockjaw’ (courtesy of Dr Samira 
Ajmal, FRCS).
(c)
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   418 25/10/2017   08:23Specific issues 419
PART 4 | TRAUMA
incubation period and the time from the first symptom to 
the first tetanic spasm. In general, shorter intervals indi -
cate a poorer prognosis.
Necrotising fasciitis
Necrotising fasciitisis is a rapidly spreading infection that pro-
duces necrosis of the subcutaneous tissues and overlying skin. 
It is caused by β-haemolytic streptococci and, occasionally, 
Staphylococcus aureus but may take the form of a polymicro -
bial infection associated with other aerobic and anaerobic 
pathogens, including Bacteroides, Clostridium, Proteus, Pseu -
domonas and Klebsiella. It is termed Fournier’s gangrene when 
it affects the perineal area and Meleney’s gangrene when 
it involves the abdominal wall. The underlying pathology 
includes acute inflammatory infiltrate, extensive necrosis, 
oedema and thrombosis of the microvasculature. The area 
becomes oedematous, painful and very tender. The skin turns 
dusky blue and black secondary to the progressive underly -
ing thrombosis and necrosis (Figure 29.16). The area may 
develop bullae and progress to overt cutaneous gangrene. It 
spreads contiguously but occasionally produces skip lesions 
that later coalesce. It is accompanied by fever and severe tox-
icity. Renal failure may occur as a result of hypovolaemia and 
cardiovascular collapse caused by septic shock. The rate of 
progression is dramatic and unless aggressively treated it leads 
to serious consequences with mortality approaching 70%.
The diagnosis is made on clinical grounds. Creatinine 
kinase levels may show enormous elevation and biopsy of the 
fascial layers will confirm the diagnosis. Patients should be 
admitted to the ICU and treated with careful monitoring of 
volume derangements and cardiac status. Oxygen supplemen-
tation is beneficial and endotracheal intubation is required in 
patients unable to maintain their airway.
High-dose penicillin G along with broad-spectrum anti -
biotics, such as third-generation cephalosporins and met -
ronidazole, are given intravenously. The cornerstone of 
management is surgical excision of the necrotic tissue. The 
devitalised tissue is removed generously, going beyond the 
area of induration. The wound is lightly packed with gauze 
and dressed. This process is repeated daily as the necrosis is 
prone to spread beyond the edges of the excised wound. In 
patients who survive, this results in a large wound, which will 
require skin grafting or flap coverage.
Summary box 29.7
Tetanus
●● Caused by Clostridium tetani
●● Spores are present in the soil
●● Thrives in dead or contaminated tissue
●● Produce tetanospasmin an exotoxin
●● Produces spasm of muscles
●● Make sure patients are immunised
●● For heavily contaminated wounds give anti-tetanus globulin
Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs , 1834–1913, Professor of Bacteriology successively at Prague, Czechoslovakia, Zurich, Switzerland and then the Rush Medical 
College, Chicago, USA.
Jean Alfred Fournier , 1832–1915, syphilologist, the Founder of the Venereal and Dermatological Clinic, Hospital St. Louis, Paris, France.
Frank Lamont Meleney , 1889–1963, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Coumbia University, New York, USA.
(a)
(b)
Figure 29.16 (a) Necrotising fasciitis at pr esentation and (b) rapid 
progression seen after 24 hours. (c) Typical bullae and induration.
(c)
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   419 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA420
Recently, the role of hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) has 
become more established with a reduction in mortality in 
patients treated with HBO (9–20%) compared with patients 
who did not receive HBO (30–50%).
Gas gangrene
Gas gangrene is a dreaded consequence of late presenting mis-
sile wounds and crushing injuries. It is a rapidly progressive, 
potentially fatal condition characterised by widespread necro-
sis of the muscles and soft-tissue destruction. The common 
causative organism is Clostridium perfringens, a spore-forming, 
gram-positive saprophyte that flourishes in anaerobic condi-
tions. Other organisms implicated in gas gangrene include C. 
bifermentans, C. septicum and C. sporogenes. Non-clostridial 
gas-producing organisms such as coliforms have also been iso-
lated in 60–85% of cases of gas gangrene.
C. perfringens produces many exotoxins but their exact 
role is unclear. Alpha-toxin, the most important, is a leci -
thinase, which destroys red and white blood cells, platelets, 
fibroblasts and muscle cells. The phi-toxin produces myocar -
dial suppression while the kappa-toxin is responsible for the 
destruction of connective tissue and blood vessels.
Devitalised tissue or premature wound closure provides 
the anaerobic conditions necessary for spore germination. 
The usual incubation period is <24 hours but ranges from 1 
hour to 6 weeks. A vicious cycle of tissue destruction is ini -
tiated by rapidly multiplying bacteria and locally and sys -
temically acting exotoxins. This causes spreading necrosis of 
muscle and thrombosis of blood vessels. The typical feature 
of this condition is the production of gas that spreads along 
the muscle planes. Systemically, the exotoxins causes severe 
haemolysis and, combined with the local effects, this leads 
to the rapid progression of the disease, hypotension, shock, 
acute kidney injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Pain that rapidly increases in severity is the earliest symp-
tom. The limb swells up and the wound exudes a serosan -
guineous discharge. The skin is involved secondary to muscle 
necrosis, turning brown and progressing to a blue–black 
colour with haemorrhagic bullae (Figure 29.17). The char -
acteristic sickly sweet odour and soft tissue crepitus appear 
with established infection but their absence does not exclude 
the diagnosis. These local signs are accompanied by pyrexia, 
tachycardia, tachypnoea and altered mental status.
The diagnosis is made on the basis of history and clinical 
features: a peripheral blood smear may suggest haemolysis; a 
Gram stain of the exudate reveals large gram-positive bacilli 
without neutrophils; and the biochemical profile may show 
metabolic acidosis and renal failure. Radiography can visual -
ise gas in the soft tissues and is particularly useful in patients 
with chest and abdominal involvement.
Patients should be admitted to the ICU and treated 
aggressively with careful monitoring. High-dose penicillin G 
and clindamycin, along with third-generation cephalospo -
rins, should be given intravenously. Surgical treatment is the 
same as for necrotising fasciitis (see above). In established gas 
gangrene with systemic toxicity, amputation of the involved 
extremity is life saving and should not be delayed. No attempt 
is made at closure, amputation stumps are left open and the 
wound is lightly packed with saline-soaked gauze and then 
dressed.
The role of HBO is not as clear as in necrotising fasci -
itis, but it is recommended in severe cases if the facilities are 
available.
Crush injury and syndrome
A crush injury occurs when a bo dy part is subjected to a 
high degree of force or pressure, usually after being squeezed 
between two heavy or immobile objects. Damage related to a 
Summary box 29.8
Necrotising fasciitis
●● Caused by β-haemolytic strep or is polymicrobial
●● Also called Fournier’s or Meleney’s gangrene
●● Progress is rapid and renal failure is an early complication
●● Treat with radical surgical excision repeated every 24 hours
●● Give oxygen and penicillin
Figure 29.17 Typical picture of spreading gas gangrene caused by 
a crush injury.
Hans Christian Joachim Gram  , 1853–1938, Professor of Pharmacology (1891–1900) and of Medicine (1900–1923), Copenhagen, Denmark, described this  
method of staining bacteria in 1884.
Summary box 29.9
Gas gangrene
●● Caused by Clostridium perfringens
●● Spores are present in the soil
●● Thrives in anaerobic conditions and produces many exotoxins
●● Treat with radical and regular surgical excision
●● Give oxygen and penicillin
●● Early amputation may be life-saving
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   420 25/10/2017   08:23Specific issues 421
PART 4 | TRAUMA
crush injury includes lacerations, fractures, bleeding, bruising, 
compartment syndrome and crush syndrome (Figure 29.18).
Crush syndrome
The association between crush injury, rhabdomyolysis and 
acute kidney injury  was first reported in victims trapped 
during the ‘London Blitz’. It is seen in earthquake and min -
ing accident survivors and in battlefield casualties. Prolonged 
crushing of muscle leads to a reperfusion injury when the 
casualty is rescued. This releases myoglobin and vasoactive 
mediators into the circulation. It also sequesters many litres of 
fluid, reducing the intravascular volume and resulting in renal 
vasoconstriction and ischaemia. The myoglobinuria leads to 
renal failure from tubular obstruction.
The treatment of crushed casualties should begin as soon 
as they are discovered. Rescuers must be alert to the pres -
ence of associated injuries (Figure 29.19). Aggressive vol-
ume-loading of patients, preferably before extrication, is the 
best treatment. After provision of first aid and starting intra-
venous fluids the patient should be catheterised to measure 
urine output. In adults, a saline infusion of 1000–1500  mL 
per hour should be initiated. This should be continued until 
myoglobin is no longer detectable in the urine. Mannitol 
administration can reduce the reperfusion component of this 
injury. Once a flow of urine is observed, a mannitol–alkaline 
diuresis of up to 8 litres per day should be maintained, keep -
ing the urinary pH greater than 6.5. A late fasciotomy, when 
it is obvious that the muscles of that compartment must be 
dead, is only likely to cause a massive release of myoglobin, 
as well as potentially introducing infection into dead tissue. 
It therefore best not to perform a fasciotomy in cases where 
entrapment has been for over 12 hours.
Figure 29.18 (a–c)  Extensive crush injury in a man trapped in a 
fallen house. The depth to which the soft tissues have been devital -
ised is seen clearly.
(a)
(b)
(c)
The London Blitz  is the name given to the German air raids on London between the 7th of September 1940 and the 17th of May 1941, during which it is esti-
mated that more than 15 000 people were killed. Blitz is short for Blitzkrieg, the German for ‘lightning war’.
Figure 29.19 Rescuers must be prepar ed for injuries to the spine. 
Treatment of crush syndrome should start before extrication.
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   421 25/10/2017   08:23CHAPTER 29  Disaster surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA422
Intensive care is required with close attention to fluid bal-
ance and renal dialysis if required.
Compartment syndrome
A compartment syndrome develops when the pressure within 
a muscle compartment starts to rise as a result of trauma (see 
Chapter 28). This occurs in muscles enclosed in a fascia such 
as the calf and forearm muscles and the intrinsic muscles of 
the hand and foot. A tight bandage or plaster, haemorrhage 
from a fracture or severe blunt trauma leads to a rise in pres -
sure in the compartment until it exceeds venous drainage 
pressure. If the pressure rises further, it will cut off perfusion 
of the muscle. Passive stretching of the affected muscle will 
cause extreme pain and this is diagnostic of the condition. If 
the condition is left unrelieved, then nerves passing through 
the compartment will cease to function and the muscle will 
die and then undergo fibrosis and shortening, producing a 
Volkmann’s ischaemic contracture. Removal of any constrict-
ing agent and, if necessary, a fasciotomy will relieve the pres-
sure and muscle perfusion will restart. Pressure studies are not 
reliable and if in doubt, perform a fasciotomy.
of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen are 
beneficial. Demarcation will occur between dead and viable 
tissue and at this stage no surgery should be undertaken as 
there is often considerable deep recovery. The injured area 
should be kept clean and dry and efforts made to prevent fur-
ther injury, as well as to prevent infection. Definitive surgery 
to excise dead tissue can be left for many months. Recent 
developments, such as the use of tissue plasminogen activator 
(TPA) and nerve blocks, show promising results in reducing 
amputations, but have to be started within 24 hours and are 
seldom possible in the field.
Summary box 29.10
Crush syndrome
●● Arises as a result of reperfusion
●● Acute kidney injury and renal failure from myoglobinuria is a 
complication
●● A late fasciotomy may make things worse not better
Summary box 29.11
Compartment syndrome
●● Commonest in a closed fracture or soft-tissue crush injury
●● Pain on passive extension of the muscles is diagnostic
●● Intra-compartmental pressure studies are not reliable
●● If there is any suspicion, then fasciotomy must be performed 
early
Summary box 29.12
Frostbite
●● Can be superficial or deep like a burn
●● Rewarm gently
●● Allow demarcation to occur naturally
●● Protect against further trauma and infection
Frost bite and immersion injuries 
(trench foot)
Frost bite occurs when a part of the body freezes. The cells are 
disrupted and the tissue dies. It is in effect a ‘cold’ burn and 
can be categorised according to the depth that it affects in the 
same way as a conventional burn. Other mechanisms at play 
include vasoconstriction caused by cold, capillary sludging 
and reperfusion injury with the release of free radicals, which 
occurs on rewarming the part. It commonly involves the fin -
gers, toes, cheeks, the tip of the nose and the ears. When fro-
zen the tissue feels hard and cannot be indented. Immersion 
injury is a cold injury, which does not involve actual freezing 
of the tissue and is commonly caused by prolonged immersion 
in cold water (hence trench foot). The patient may also be 
hypothermic. Warming should be gentle as the heat used may 
actually cause a burn! Rehydration with warm fluids and use 
HANDING OVER
Follow-up and secondary 
problems
The medical aspect of disaster management does not involve 
a single short-term effort. It requires a long-term commitment 
and involvement of various disciplines. Because of the large 
numbers of casualties, the initial treatment is directed towards 
the anatomical restoration of damaged structures. There are 
therefore numerous patients who will need secondary proce -
dures for functional restoration. This second wave of patients 
is encountered 3–6 months following a major catastrophe and 
arrangements should be made to deal with this.
Designated centres
Initially, the casualties may be scattered amongst many hos -
pitals. After the first few weeks most of the acute problems 
have been dealt with and only those patients who require 
longer-term treatment remain. At this point it is advisable to 
designate a particular hospital as a centre for these patients. 
It concentrates resources and expertise and makes to follow 
up easier.
DISASTER PLANS
Disasters are unforeseen events and planning for them may 
seem paradoxical. It has, however, been shown that disaster 
planning not only works but also saves lives. Disaster planning 
is a wide field but a résumé of the important aspects follows.
Establishment of a national disaster 
management organisation
This is the first step in the planning for disasters. Most 
resource-rich countries already have such an agency , which 
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   422 25/10/2017   08:23Further reading 423
PART 4 | TRAUMA
can formulate policy at the national level and has the infra-
structure to react quickly when the need arises.
Anticipating disasters
Areas near active volcanoes and geological fault lines are at 
risk from seismic disturbances, whereas regions along major 
rivers are liable to flooding. The urban centres of all countries 
are now potential targets for terrorist attacks. It is important 
to not only carry out threat assessments but also, if possible, 
set up an early warning system.
Evacuation planning
Evacuation of large population centres as a prelude to, or in 
the wake of, an impending disaster is a complex exercise. Yet 
it may be the most prudent course of action to remove as 
many people as possible from harm’s way. Clear identification 
of exit routes must be determined and communicated to the 
populations at risk.
Organisation of emergency services
Emergency services such as the fire brigade, police and ambu-
lance service must have defined roles and areas of responsibil-
ity to ensure a coordinated response during a crisis. Members 
of these teams must be included in the planning phase to 
ensure that the final plan is practicable and reflects the situa-
tion on the ground.
Medical planning
Identification of hospitals able to take large numbers of casu -
alties and the location of areas that can be used for patient 
holding and triage in case of mass casualties is important. 
Hospitals that offer specialised services should be identified 
and their role during a major crisis defined. Suitable hospitals 
in the surrounding areas must be designated as overflow hos -
pitals in the eventuality of a very large volume of patients.
FURTHER READING
Ciottone GR, Biddinger PD, Darling RG et al. Ciottone’s disaster medicine, 
2nd edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016.
Hogan DE, Burstein JL. Disaster medicine , 2nd edn. Philadelphia: 
Lipincot Wiliams & Wilkins, 2007.
Partridge RA, Proano L, Marcozzi D et al. American handbook of disaster 
medicine. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
World Health Organisation. Emergency surgical care in disaster situations . 
WHO Integrated Management on Emergency and Essential Surgical 
Care (IMEESC) tool kit. ( CD)
Summary box 29.13
Disaster planning
●● Disaster can be anticipated and should be prepared for
●● Evacuation of a whole population may be a best option
●● Coordination between military, police,fire, ambulance and 
medical services is important
04_29-B&L27_Pt4_Ch29.indd   423 25/10/2017   08:23Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand and appreciate:
 • Fundamental differences of war surgery
 • Injury patterns of modern warfare
 • Principles of war surgical management
 • Blast and ballistic injury
Conflict surgery
30
INTRODUCTION
‘He who wishes to be a surgeon must first go to war.’ 
Hippocrates, (c. 460–377 BC)
The treatment of war wounds is as ancient as warfare itself. 
The Edwin Smith papyrus has been dated to between 1600 bc 
and is the oldest known treatise on trauma surgery and anat -
omy.1 The history of battlefield surgery is the history of surgi -
cal advancement and the importance of the medical lessons 
learned from war have long been recognised.
While almost every conflict has served to increase our 
knowledge of the treatment of war injuries, and many individ-
uals have played significant parts is the development of war 
surgery, Dominque Jean Larrey is considered by many to be 
the first modern military surgeon. Larrey, a French battlefield 
surgeon and favourite of Napoleon, devised some of the first 
systems of triage and casualty care that still form the funda -
mentals of modern military medicine.
HOW IS WAR SURGERY 
DIFFERENT?
While civilian trauma surgery bears some of the hallmarks of 
the battlefield, there are fundamental contrasts in environ-
ment and injury pattern that must be appreciated:
 ● The environment of war is likely to be austere. While 
recent long-term deployment has led to the establishment 
of some well-equipped field hospitals, logistical and per -
sonnel restrictions mean that sophisticated diagnostic and 
therapeutic techniques may not be available.
 ● War is hostile and potentially dangerous. Necessary work-
force protection must be considered to ensure safety of 
medical personnel and patients alike. Mo dern fighting 
forces employ physician-led resuscitation, along with for -
ward surgical teams. Moving medical personal closer to 
the fighting may increase their personnel risk.
 ● War injuries are different to civilian trauma. Mo dern 
weapons may deliver such amounts of energy that the tis-
sue destruction and patterns of injury seen are unlike all 
but the most extreme of civilian trauma practice.
 ● War is a mass casualty situation. Although casualty num -
bers vary between treatment facilities, triage is an import-
ant aspect of military surgery. The dictum ‘do the best for 
the most, not everything for everyone’ is important and 
may require a change in thinking for many used to civilian 
practice.
 ● War surgery is usually delivered in stages. The principles 
of damage control are often applied to allow transfer of 
patients between echelons of care. Careful planning, 
co ordination and communication is essential.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
International Humanitarian Law (IHL) regulates humanitar-
ian issues during armed conflict. Modern IHL is derived from 
a variety of sources, notably the Geneva Conventions and 
its additional protocols, along with further specific regula-
tions from the United Nations and The Hague. IHL provides 
medical personnel with rights in times of armed war, but also 
assigns duties to them surrounding the rights of protected per-
sonnel under their care.
The papyrus  is named after Edwin Smith, the Egyptologist who discovered it in 1866 and held at the New York Academy of Medicine.
Dominique Jean Larrey , 1766–1842, French surgeon in Napoleon’s Grand Armée.
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   424 25/10/2017   08:24Patterns of modern war sur gery 425
PART 4 | TRAUMA
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Importantly, medical personnel are bound by medical eth-
ics and IHL to treat patients solely based on need and without 
regard for their nationality, race and class, religious or polit -
ical beliefs.
Along with providing medical support to deployed forces, 
treatment is offered to both home nation and enemy combat-
ants. The treatment of such patients may require a change in 
the approach to the definitive care. Evacuation of these per -
sonnel to certain categories of subsequent facility (see below) 
may not be possible and the staged approach to care may need 
modification. Transfer to host nation medical facilities may be 
possible but dependent on local capability.
This scenario may require an adaption to clinical thinking. 
As an example, consider the ethical and logistical dilemma in 
performing revascularisation and orthoplastic procedures for 
a local patient in a country without rehabilitation facilities.
Medical personnel and facilities are protected under IHL 
and should not be attacked. However, the nature of modern 
conflict is unconventional; guerrilla warfare and the inability 
of deployed forces to define the enemy combatant requires 
security of facilities and personnel to be of the highest 
priority.
MEDICAL SUPPORT ROLES
The term ‘role’ is used to designate the tiers of medical sup -
port that integrate into a modern military operation. An 
appreciation of the capabilities and limitations of these roles 
is essential to improving the care of casualties at each stage. 
Different nations and forces will have medical support config-
ured with some variability but overall, systems are similar in 
order to ensure those basic treatment, supply and evacuation 
needs that are essential for a military operation.
 ● Role 1 medical support provides for routine primary health 
care, specialised first aid, triage, resuscitation and stabili-
sation. It is integrated within a small unit. The capabilities 
of role 1 care will depend greatly on the size of the unit 
and the training of the personnel within it.
 ● Role 2 provides an intermediate capability for the recep -
tion and triage of casualties, as well as being able to per -
form resuscitation and treatment of shock to a higher 
technical level than role 1. It is prepared to provide evac-
uation from role 1 facilities. It has capability for damage 
control surgery (DCS) and may include a limited holding 
facility for the short-term holding of casualties until they 
can return to duty or evacuated.
 ● Role 3 medical support is deployed hospital care and 
the elements required to support it. This includes a mis-
sion-tailored variety of clinical specialties including pri-
mary surgery and diagnostic support. In recent conflicts 
role 3 facilities grew and evolved into sophisticated hard-
built hospitals.
 ● Role 4 provides the full spectrum of definitive medical 
care that cannot be deployed to theatre or is too time-  
consuming to be conducted there. It is normally provided 
in the country of origin or an allied nation depending on 
the location of deployment and time-lines of transfer.
It is important to appreciate that these roles are highly 
variable both within and between different nations. The size 
and scale of the operations as a whole, along with predictions 
of both civilian and military medical requirements, will dic -
tate the structure of the medical support.
MEDICAL EVACUATION
Medical evacuation refers to the movement and en-route 
care of casualties within a conflict zone. The evacuation may 
be the initial movement from a battlefield or between other 
more sophisticated echelons of care, up to and including 
repatriation to a home nation.
Aeromedical evacuation using either fixed or rotary wing 
aircraft has had a major impact on the evacuation timelines. 
Certain considerations must be made prior to and during 
aeromedical evacuation:
 ● the patient should be sufficiently stabilised for the antici -
pated mode and duration of travel;
 ● the patient’s airway and breathing are adequate for move-
ment;
 ● intravenous access, surgical drains, urinary catheters and 
any other tubes should be firmly secured;
 ● patients at high risk for thoracic barotrauma should be 
considered for prophylactic chest tube placement before 
prolonged aeromedical evacuation;
 ● blankets and/or warmers should cover the patient securely 
to mitigate against hypothermia.
The capability of different evacuation platforms may vary 
from highly sophisticated mobile critical care units to the 
simple transportation of casualties by non-medical personnel. 
These capabilities, along with the time-lines and distances 
involved in casualty movement should be major consider -
ations for the planning of medical support operations.
PATTERNS OF MODERN WAR 
SURGERY
Modern warfare has changed over recent decades. Cause of 
injury is particular to individual conflict, nation and armed 
service.2 Historically, the predominance of penetrating 
trauma was sustained by combat infantry, while naval and air 
personnel sustained more blunt injuries (Table 30.1).
Improvements in trauma scoring systems and the devel -
opment of a concise system for the recording of injuries and 
casualty care have increased the ability of modern armed 
Summary box 30.1
Medical support roles
●● R1– unit level medical care including first aid and primary 
health care
●● R2 – intermediate unit for resuscitation, damage control and 
stabilisation
●● R3 – deployed hospital care with multi-speciality capability
●● R4 – definitive hospital care within home or allied nation
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   425 25/10/2017   08:24CHAPTER 30  Conflict surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA426
services to analyse the injury patterns of their deployed 
personnel.
A cohort analysis of combat injuries sustained by US 
forces3 showed significant differences in injury patterns sus -
tained in the most recent Afghanistan and Iraq conflicts 
compared with World War 2, Korea and Vietnam. Head and 
neck injuries were far more common in recent conflict while 
thoracic and extremity injuries were less so. This is probably 
due to increased use of body armour and similar personnel 
protective equipment.
Mechanism of injury has also changed. While ballis-
tic injuries remain an important contributor to battlefield 
trauma, injuries due to explosions (which includes impro -
vised explosive devices [IEDs], landmines, mortars, grenades 
and rockets) have become increasingly common and are now 
the predominant mode of wounding and fatality. The relative 
proportions of injuries caused by explosive and ballistic weap-
ons is shown in Table 30.2.
The emergence of explosive patterns of injury is due to 
the increasing use of IEDs within conflict. IEDs have been the 
signature weapon within operations in Afghanistan and Iraq; 
however, their use has not been limited to these regions. The 
relative low cost, ease of production and widespread expertise 
means that IEDs will likely play significant roles in most con-
temporary and future conflicts.
PRINCIPLES OF WAR SURGERY
Battlefield death occurs early (or immediately) due to dev -
astating central nervous system injury and haemorrhage, or 
late due to infection. Some of the injuries causing immedi -
ate death (including brain, heart and great vessel injury) are 
non-survivable4 and may only be managed with prevention.
Treatment of haemorrhage is therefore the mainstay of 
military trauma medicine. Bleeding should be recognised 
and managed from point of wounding. 5 T ourniquets are 
indicated for the control of catastrophic extremity bleeding. 
Non-compressible torso haemorrhage carries a poor progno -
sis,6 although it may be amenable to methods of endovascular 
control not yet commonly used.7
An approach to surgery must be employed to stop bleed -
ing, to remove necrotic tissue and foreign material and to 
reduce contamination. In addition to life-saving surgery, pro-
cedures to salvage limbs, including revascularisation (or tem-
porary shunting) and fasciotomy, should be considered early, 
when physiology allows.
DAMAGE CONTROL SURGERY
DCS was first formerly described by Rotondo et al8, although 
the idea of an abbreviated laparotomy for the unwell patient 
was not totally novel. The concepts of DCS were initially 
applied to complex trauma patients with combined vascular 
and visceral injuries. Improved outcomes were seen follow -
ing DCS principles compared with conventional definitive 
surgery.
The DCS approach is to restore physiology over anatomy 
and is typically divided into several phases:
 ● Phase 1. Recognition of injury severity and need for dam-
age control principles, both surgical and resuscitative. 
Features of phase 1 include rapid-sequence induction of 
anaesthesia and intubation, early rewarming and prompt 
movement to the operating theatre.
 ● Phase 2. Immediate laparotomy with rapid control of 
bleeding and contamination, abdominal packing and tem-
porary wound closure.
 ● Phase 3. Movement to the intensive care unit (ICU) for 
ongoing resuscitation with normalisation of biochemical 
and physiological parameters.
 ● Phase 4. Re-exploration in theatre to perform definitive 
repair of all injuries. Multiple procedures on mul  tiple 
occasions may be required. Even at this stage, non-  
essential procedures may be truncated or delayed if 
physiology deteriorates.
Selection of patients for damage control management 
may not be straightforward. While various physiological and 
biochemical markers of injury have been suggested, there is 
no validated threshold. Hypothermia, coagulopathy, acidosis, 
TABLE 30.1 Historical causes of injury amongst US service personnel. Adapted from Champion et al.2
Service
Mechanism Infantry (%) Armoured (%) Sea (%) Air (%)
Ballistic 90 50 25   5
Blunt 2–3  5 10  50
Blast 2–3  5 10 <10
Thermal 2–3 25 30  25
Combined <5 15 25  10
TABLE 30.2 Relative proportion of injuries caused by 
gunshot wounds and explosions amongst US personnel. 
Adapted from Owens et al.3
Gunshot wound Explosion
US Civil War 91  9
World War I 65 35
World War II 27 73
Korea 31 69
Vietnam 35 65
Iraq/Afghanistan 19 81
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   426 25/10/2017   08:24Weapon effects 427
PART 4 | TRAUMA
blood loss and anticipated operative time should all be con -
sidered (see Chapters 22 and 23).
The benefits of a DCS approach to those patients that 
need it has been repeatedly shown, but liberal, and perhaps 
overzealous use of DCS is unlikely to be beneficial to those 
who would tolerate definitive repair. DCS puts a heavy toll 
on theatre and ICU resources. In addition, multiple trips to 
theatre may increase the likelihood of morbidity including 
abdominal wall hernias, fistulae and infection.
Damage control resuscitation (DCR) should be concur -
rent with DCS. The principles of DCR include permissive 
hypotension, avoidance of crystalloid with haemostatic resus-
citation, and recognition and management of acute traumatic 
coagulopathy (ATC). The application of these principles to 
military patients is uncertain because of longer time-lines. 
Prolonged periods of permissive hypotension are likely to be 
harmful9 while haemostatic resuscitation and management of 
ACT is ineffectual in the absence of haemorrhage control.10
MASSIVE TRANSFUSION
While haemorrhage control prior to the need for massive 
transfusion is ideal, this is often not the case. The degree of 
injury and associated massive blood loss associated with war 
injuries may necessitate large volume transfusion. The use of 
crystalloids to resuscitate exsanguinating patients is strongly 
discouraged, but the optimal ratio of blood products has not 
yet been ascertained. Massive Transfusion Protocols exist 
within most deployed units. Use of such a protocol at a UK 
role 3 facility, along with aggressive resuscitation and use of 
blood products, has been associated with improved trauma 
outcomes.11 The success of such a protocol is highly depen -
dent on a steady stream of blood pro ducts and reflects the 
sophisticated transfusion infrastructure that should be woven 
into a deployed capability,
Blood transfusion is increasingly administered in a more 
forward location (within both role 1 and role 2 environ -
ments) with limited volumes of blood transported to the point 
of wounding by aeromedical response teams. The future will 
almost certainly include more alternatives to conventional 
blood components, which can combine adequate oxygen car-
riage with positive or neutral effects on patient coagulation.
DECISION-MAKING WITHIN THE 
DEPLOYED ENVIRONMENT
The damage control approach is vital in a proportion of war 
injuries, but thought must be given to available resources. 
Within a well-established role 3 unit, both DCS and defini -
tive procedures are likely to be possible. Blood and bloo d 
products are also likely to be available and restocked regularly. 
In this scenario, patient physiology is the major determinant 
of mode of care.
In contrast, decision-making becomes more crucial within 
the austere environment. Theatre space, intensive care beds, 
equipment and blood products may be limited. Long evacua -
tion times may contraindicate permissive hypotension.
Limited resources, such as blood, may need to be divided 
between casualties. Within a role 1 or role 2 facility, imme -
diate evacuation may be undertaken in preference to a more 
thorough stabilisation.
Decision-making of this nature is complex and difficult 
and requires practice in the context of simulation, exercises 
and courses.
WEAPON EFFECTS
Ballistics
The ability to manage conflict injuries relies on an under -
standing of the underlying mechanism of wounding, which is 
likely to be different to civilian trauma. As stated, while bal -
listic injuries are no longer the most common cause of battle-
field injury, firearms remain a common element in all conflict. 
Civilian trauma practice, depending on local firearm laws, 
may well encompass a significant volume of gunshot wounds, 
although patterns of injury with war wounds may well differ 
due to the weapons used. An understanding of the mecha -
nism of ballistic wounding is required to treat these wounds 
effectively.
The earliest recorded depiction of a firearm is from 1326, 
but firearms became ubiquitous on the battlefield during the 
17th century.12 Ballistic weapons all work with the same prin-
ciples – an explosion is used to propel a projectile along and 
out of a straight tube – but have evolved considerably from 
rudimentary cannons to sophisticated modern day firearms. 
The explosive force within a modern firearm comes from pro-
pellant encased within a cartridge. The basic design of a car -
tridge is shown in Figure 30.1.
Internal ballistics describes the characteristics of a pro -
jectile, while inside the hammer mechanism of the weapon 
strikes a primer at the base of the cartridge, which ignites the 
propellant. Hot gas produced by the explosion expands and 
forces the bullet away from the cartridge and along the barrel. 
Spiral grooves, or rifling, imparts spin on the bullet, which 
aids in accuracy and stabilisation.
While the basic principles apply to nearly all firearms, 
advances in firearm design have served predominantly to 
improve accuracy, reliability and rate of fire. Ammunition is 
normally held within a magazine or belt that loads directly 
into the chamber of the weapon. The loading mechanism 
determines the rate of fire. In a semi-automatic or fully auto -
matic system, the recoil forces of the spent cartridge eject the 
Bullet
Casting
Propellant
Primer
Figure 30.1 Diagram of basic cartridge structure.
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   427 25/10/2017   08:24CHAPTER 30  Conflict surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA428
sectional area of the projectile and may lead to a larger and 
less regular permanent wound cavity.
In contrast, the temporary wound cavity is created by lat-
eral displacement of tissue that has not been in direct contact 
with the bullet. The degree of damage in this area is depen -
dent on the amount of energy transferred by the bullet and 
the material properties of the tissue itself. Individual tissues 
have an elastic strength that resists the stretching caused by 
a projectile. As the energy increases, the tissue is no longer 
able to rebound and above certain thresholds, contusion, 
laceration and permanent damage may occur. Skin, muscle, 
lung and bowel wall tissues have good elastic strength and 
may rebound well following stretch, with minimal damage 
within the temporary wound cavity. In contrast, liver, brain 
and spleen have poor elasticity and are more likely to shat-
ter when stretched. Incompressibility of fluids within hollow 
organs (bowel and bladder) means that they are vulnerable to 
stretch despite favourable properties of the tissue wall itself.
cartridge while resetting the chamber and accepting a new 
cartridge from the magazine, such that the process may be 
repeated rapidly.
Shotguns utilise a similar mechanism except that a collec-
tion of smaller projectiles – ‘shot’ – are expelled rather than 
a single bullet. These smaller projectiles disperse away from 
one another after leaving the barrel. The degree of dispersal is 
dependent on the relative length of the barrel.
External ballistics describe the characteristics of a projec-
tile in free flight. It may be influenced by ammunition type 
and ambient conditions. Ammunition differs widely with the 
most pronounced difference between pistol and rifle ammu-
nition. Rifles are expected to be accurate at ranges up to and 
beyond 1000 metres, while pistols are intended for far shorter 
ranges. Rifle cartridges are longer and typically have a greater 
proportion of propellant to projectile. The characteristics 
of ammunition that determine wound effects are the size or 
calibre (which describes the internal diameter of the weapon 
barrel) and the material components of the bullet:
 ● full metal jacket ammunition has an outer coating of 
harder metal around a softer core. This reduces breakdown 
of the bullet along the barrel and improves accuracy, reli-
ability and target penetration;
 ● soft tip and hollow point ammunition have a degree of 
exposed lead that flattens and deforms on impact. These 
bullets have less penetrating ability but rapidly transfer 
energy to the impacted tissue and cause large wounds.
Ballistic injuries
Terminal ballistics (or wound ballistics) describes the inter -
action between projectiles and target tissue. This interaction 
and subsequent transfer of energy cause injury . The kinetic 
energy of the bullet is related to the mass and velocity of the 
impacting projectile. Both the mass and velocity of military 
firearms may be considerably greater than those commonly 
seen in civilian trauma, leading to higher energies and more 
severe wounds. While the weapon and ammunition type may 
be a determinant in the potential injury caused, many other 
factors, including range, angle, clothing, armour and ana-
tomical variation, will determine the actual wound pattern. 
Although an understanding of ballistic science may allow a 
surgeon to anticipate possible injuries, each should be evalu -
ated and managed individually.
In consideration of the damage done, tissue may be 
described by the areas of disruption caused by the projectile – 
the permanent and temporary wound cavity, which are illus-
trated in Figure 30.2.
The permanent cavity is the localised area of definitive 
tissue injury caused by contact with the projectile. This area 
of cell necrosis is the result of direct contact, crushing and 
laceration of tissues in the path of the projectile. The size and 
trajectory of the projectile determines the cavity size. This 
type of cavity is the predominant wound effect of pistol bul -
lets that have relatively low energy. Higher energy projec -
tiles, including military rifle and machine gun bullets, may 
be subject to greater degrees of deformation and tumbling as 
they travel through tissue. This increases the effective cross- 
A
B
Figure 30.2 Diagram showing permanent wound cavity (A) and tem-
porary wound cavity (B). This relatively lar ge temporary cavity would 
be more typical of a higher-energy weapon.
Summary box 30.2
Ballistics
●● Internal ballistics – characterise projectile within weapon 
during firing
●● External ballistics – characterise projectile in free flight
●● Terminal ballistics – characterise projectile/tissue interaction
MANAGEMENT OF GUNSHOT 
WOUNDS
The management of gunshot wounds in a conflict setting may 
differ to civilian practice. The typical low energy wounds 
caused by pistols are sometimes managed conservatively in 
civilian trauma centres with adequate wound care, cleaning 
and antibiotics. Military wounds are associated with higher 
energies, higher rates of infection and more severe injury. The 
extent of these injuries, including the size of the wound cav -
ities, may not be adequately assessed without thorough sur -
gical examination (Figure 30.3). As such, most penetrating 
wounds in the military setting are explored under anaesthetic. 
The extent and capacity for recovery of the temporary wound 
cavity may not be appreciated at the time of the first oper -
ation. A damage control approach should be adopted if the 
physiology of the patient dictates so. An interval period may 
also allow for adequate appreciation of the permanent wound 
cavity, along with response of the surrounding structures and 
demarcation of non-viable tissue.
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   428 25/10/2017   08:24Blast 429
PART 4 | TRAUMA
BLAST
As previously discussed, blast has become the predominant 
mechanism of injury in recent conflict. Unfortunately, terror-
ist attacks within urban centres mean that these injuries are 
increasingly encountered within civilian practice.
While explosives come in many forms and their effects 
vary as a result, fundamental principles underlie all blast 
events.
An explosive may be defined as ‘a  substance that can be 
made to undergo a rapid chemical reaction that will trans -
form a liquid or solid into gas, liberating a large amount of 
energy’.13 The explosive properties of such a material are 
determined by the chemical composition of the material 
and the speed at which energy is expelled. Low explosives 
react by a process called deflagration whereby the reaction 
is propagated by flame passing through the material at a rate 
significantly slower than the speed of sound. They are made 
up of a combustible material and an accompanying oxidant. 
Low explosives include gunpowder, gasoline and pyrotechnics 
such as fireworks and flares. Low explosives more commonly 
cause burns than typical blast injuries and will not be dis -
cussed further.
In contrast, high explosives degrade via detonation. 
Shockwaves are passed through the material at supersonic 
speeds and the resultant energy is expelled at very high rates. 
High explosives include plastic explosive and trinitrotolu -
ene (TNT). The input of a relatively small amount of energy 
results in the production of a very large volume of gas, at high 
speed and pressure. The outward expansion causes a wave of 
compressed air that moves away from the point of detonation 
at supersonic speeds and in a uniform sphere (within a free 
field).
The change in surrounding pressure is described as the 
blast overpressure. Following detonation within a free field, 
there is a near instantaneous pressure rise, which falls expo-
nentially. This is classically described by the Friedlander 
curve (Figure 30.4).
This characteristic pressure peak is only seen during a 
truly free (almost theoretical) scenario. Enclosure of the blast 
or reflection of blast waves by people, vehicles or buildings is 
likely to change the overpressure profile such that high pres -
sures may be sustained for longer periods and have a greater 
propensity to cause injury. For this reason, blasts within 
enclosed spaces are notable for causing a greater range and 
severity of injury.
In addition to expanding gases, detonation of explosives 
may result in the expulsion of fragments. These fragments 
may be part of a device casing, separate material deliberately 
added with the intention of fragmentation, or environmental 
material flung by the blast.
Blast winds are generated by the displacement of sur -
rounding air. The direction of these winds may change as the 
blast overpressure drops transiently beneath ambient pressure 
and creates a partial vacuum.
Figure 30.3 Entry wound to the right shoulder (a) with the wound 
extended in order to assess adequately (b).
(a)
(b)
Pressure
Time
Blast overpressure
Quasi-instantaneous
pressure rise
Positive pressure phase
Negative pressure phase
Atmospheric
pressure
Figure 30.4  Theoretical blast overpr essure changes within a free 
field.
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   429 25/10/2017   08:24CHAPTER 30  Conflict surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA430
Improvised explosive devices
The characteristic weapon of modern warfare has been the 
IED, which was the leading cause of death amongst coalition 
troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. 14 These devices may range 
from rudimentary homemade explosives to sophisticated 
devices containing high explosives. Within this broad range 
of devices are further categories including roadside explo -
sives and blast mines, suicide bombers, and explosive formed 
projectiles (EFPs). EFPs are a particular form of device with 
a deformable plate on the uppermost surface. The detona -
tion of the device and expansion of the explosive products 
deforms this plate into a missile shape, while simultaneously 
accelerating it upwards to very high velocities. Alterna -
tively, copper plates may melt to create a high-speed molten 
jet (a shaped charge). Upon contact with a target (typi -
cally a vehicle), the missile impacts the hull of the vehicle 
with a degree of penetration dependent on the device and 
vehicle armour. Huge amounts of kinetic energy are dis-
persed through the vehicle and occupants. Injuries may be 
caused by both direct impact of the deforming hull and gross 
upwards acceleration, followed by downwards deceleration of 
the whole vehicle.
BLAST INJURIES
Blast injuries are classified by the blast mechanism (Table 
30.3).
Primary blast injury
Primary blast injuries result from the overpressure and are, as 
such, unique to blast. The effect of blast overpressure is most 
marked at the interface between air and tissue or liquid.
Tympanic membrane (TM) rupture is the most common 
primary blast injury. Patients may be asymptomatic or have a 
degree of transient hearing loss and otorrhoea. Previously, the 
presence of TM rupture was used as a marker for other occult 
blast injuries. This has been challenged recently by findings 
that show TM injury is not ubiquitous in the presence of more 
severe primary blast injury. The blast environment and orien-
tation of the ear canal to the shockwave are likely to deter -
mine the chance of injury.
Primary blast lung injury, or blast lung, is the most widely 
researched blast phenomenon. The exact mechanism of blast 
lung remains contested but it depends on the propagation 
of energy from the shockwave into the lung tissue, where 
it causes disruption. Proposed mechanisms of injury include 
spalling (disruption of tissues at air–liquid interfaces), implo-
sion (compression and re-expansion of air-filled structures) 
and rapid acceleration of tissues of different densities. Large 
animal models have demonstrated that the level of injury is 
related to the rate of chest wall displacement, rather than the 
maximal depth of deflection.15 Severity of injury is dependent 
on strength of the blast, range from detonation and surround-
ing environment.
Those working closely with explosives may wear personal 
armour that assists in decoupling the effect of primary blast. 
Current examples of such armour tend to be cumbersome. 
More common varieties of torso body armour provide protec-
tion against penetrating injury but probably do little to miti -
gate the effects of primary blast.
The pathophysiology of blast lung includes both immedi -
ate and delayed responses. There is an immediate bradycardia 
and apnoea of variable length, which is a likely to be a vagally 
mediated reflex.16 The lung injury itself is typified by alveo -
lar capillary rupture with subsequent intrapulmonary bleed -
ing and oedema. The extent of this injury is proportional to 
the blast exposure and may range from microscopic petechial 
injury to areas of frank haemorrhage.
While rarely seen in isolation, primary blast may leave lit-
tle external evidence of injury since the skin itself is rarely 
affected. Clinical features of blast lung include progressive 
hypoxia, which may not be apparent at time of injury and is 
related to the inflammatory response to intrapulmonary hae -
morrhage and worsening oedema.
Other structural lung injuries are associated with primary 
blast, although the prediction of these injuries by blast con -
ditions is not consistent and likely complicated by tertiary 
impact. Pneumothoraces may occur due to pleural rupture in 
the absence of penetrating injury. Injury to the larger vessels 
may lead to haemothoraces and the formation of alveolar- 
venous or bronco-venous fistulae. Air embolism due to such 
fistulae may cause acute hypoxia with cardiovascular collapse 
and is a leading cause of death in those who do not survive 
until treatment.
Diagnosis of blast lung is clinical with findings of hypoxia 
following blast exposure. Typical ‘bat-wing’ pulmonary infil -
trates are seen on chest radiograph and computed tomogra -
phy may discriminate these injuries from the more peripheral 
contusions seen in blunt trauma. Imaging may be useful in 
detecting associated structural lung injuries.
Treatment of blast lung is largely supportive. Mechani -
cal ventilation may be required but consideration should be 
given to the possibility of air embolism and pneumothorax 
that may be exacerbated. Some centres advocate the use of 
prophylactic bilateral pleural decompression, although there 
is little evidence to suggest an effect on outcomes. Patients 
with significant blast lung injury are highly likely to have sus-
tained other blast related injuries and any management plan 
should consider their overall condition.
TABLE 30.3 Classification of blast injuries.
Classification Injury type Examples
Primary blast Overpressure Tympanic membrane 
injury, blast lung, 
intestinal blast injury
Secondary blast Penetrating/
fragmentation
All penetrating injuries
Tertiary blast Blunt Blunt and crush injuries. 
Traumatic amputation.
Quaternary blast Miscellaneous Burns, inhalation injury
Quinary blast Effect of device 
additions
Radiation sickness, 
infection
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   430 25/10/2017   08:24Blast injuries 431
PART 4 | TRAUMA
The abdomen may also be subject to primary blast. The 
incidence of abdominal injury due to air blast has not been 
extensively examined, although a recent review of multiple 
incidents, including a variety of blast conditions, showed 
that abdominal injury is not common – seen in around 3% 
of incidents.17
Damage is dependent on coupling of the blast overpres -
sure and shockwave to a stress wave that travels through the 
abdomen. The effect of shockwave dispersal is most marked 
at tissue–air interfaces. As such, the hollow organs are those 
most commonly injured. The caecum segment is probably 
most sensitive to intestinal blast injury. Conversely, the small 
bowel and its extensive mesentery may be more susceptible to 
large shear waves causing mesenteric tearing.
Presentation of primary blast injury to the bowel may be 
delayed relative to the acute onset of blast lung. Abdominal 
symptoms may be absent initially with progression to pain and 
frank peritonitis should perforation and contamination occur. 
Given the lack of external injury, indications for operative 
intervention are largely clinical, as with conventional blunt 
abdominal trauma. The patient should be assessed anaestheti-
cally with particular consideration to the effect of anaesthesia 
and ventilation on any concomitant blast lung injury.
The most common operative findings of intestinal blast 
are subserosal haemorrhage.17 Tearing of the mucosal surface 
with bleeding into the lumen of the tract may occur following 
repeated exposure to relatively lower blast overpressures. As 
in blunt injury, there is a propensity for mural haematomata 
to progress to perforation due to tissue necrosis. Full-thickness 
injuries to the bowel with immediate perforation can occur 
with a greater exposure to blast overpressure.
The surgical management of blast bowel injury is that 
of any penetrating and blunt trauma, with primary repair 
or resection as indicated. Surgical judgment is essential 
regarding the findings of non-perforated but contused bowel. 
A damage control approach to such injuries may allow for 
repeat assessment later, but in a physiologically well patient, 
in whom a relook would not be justified, the surgeon must 
decide to resect a segment or risk future progression of these 
lesions to perforation.
The solid organs are more resistant to primary blast. Paren-
chymal disruption due to the shockwave has been described 
at very high levels of overpressure, although the experimen -
tal data for these injuries are sparse. Injury, with subsequent 
bleeding, may result from rapid distractions of organ attach -
ments and mesenteries. These blast conditions are more likely 
encountered in enclosed conditions and differentiation of pri-
mary from tertiary injuries is difficult.
Secondary blast injury
Secondary blast injury refers to the effect of fragments that 
are accelerated away from the device following detonation. 
Sources of fragments include:
 ● the casing of the device;
 ● purposefully placed fragments within the device. These 
may include nails, bolts or ball bearings and are embedded 
within the device or adherent to the exterior;
 ● nearby objects including glass and stones;
 ● biological material including bone may be expelled, par -
ticularly following a suicide bomb or anti-personnel mine 
attack.
Shrapnel is often used to describe explosive fragments, 
although the term more strictly applied to a specific from of 
artillery shell.
The energy of a primary blast wave disperses quickly in 
proportion to the distance from the blast; it is subject to the 
inverse cube law. As such, only those within a reasonably 
small radius of the blast are affected. Conversely, the velocity 
and wounding potential of an energised fragment is subject to 
the inverse square law. Secondary blast injuries may occur at 
long range from the detonation. Fragments may be acceler -
ated up to very high velocities. As with ballistics, injuries are 
dependent on the range and energy of the fragment.
In contrast to bullet wounds, the variability of fragments 
produces a wide range of wounds and no two wounds will be 
the same (Figure 30.5). The irregular surfaces of fragments 
cause complex patterns of yaw and tumble. Both permanent 
and temporary wound cavities may be unpredictable and 
irregular.
The management of fragment wounds is similar to ballis -
tic and conventional penetrating trauma. Wounds should be 
adequately debrided. Fragment wounds should be considered 
dirty and principles of septic surgery applied. Where poss ible, 
serial debridement and delayed primary closure should be 
attempted.
The fragments should be removed at time of surgery if 
easily accessible. Other indications for early removal include 
fragments within joint spaces or adjacent to structures with 
danger of erosion and further injuries. Late indications for 
fragment removal include ongoing sepsis, pain or lack of 
function.
Tertiary blast injury
Tertiary blast injury is the result of gross movement of per -
sonnel, objects or infrastructure by blast wind. Tertiary injury 
is analogous to conventional blunt trauma and may cause a 
Figure 30.5 Large anterior fragmentation injury.
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   431 25/10/2017   08:24CHAPTER 30  Conflict surgery
PART 4 | TRAUMA432
wide variety of injuries to all organ systems. Traumatic ampu-
tation is typically included within this category, although pri-
mary blast and the shattering or ‘brissiance’ effect on bone 
may play a part.
Quaternary and quinary injury
Quaternary blast injury refers to a miscellaneous group of 
injuries that do not fall within other categories. These include 
burns, inhalational injuries and late-onset respiratory prob-
lems. Quinary injury, a more novel concept, refers to injury 
caused by the intentional addition of either biologically or 
radioactively active material to an explosive device.
Environmental effects
As already alluded to, the shockwave of blast overpressure 
is modified by an enclosed or partially enclosed space. Envi -
ronmental differences may make marked differences to injury 
rates and clinical presentations following blast. Higher rates 
of blast lung and TM rupture are seen following enclosed 
blast (in which both casualty and blast are enclosed). In 
contrast, secondary blast injuries may be lower in number as 
more people are protected from energised fragments. Tertiary 
injury is difficult to predict based on blast characteristics but a 
higher proportion of blunt injuries have been seen following 
enclosed blast.
A distinct pattern of injury has been described following 
underbody blast against military vehicles. Underbody blast 
casualties have a greater range of injuries and are overall more 
severely injured.18 In addition to blunt injury sustained from 
displacement within the vehicle, the effect of blast is mani -
fested both by propagation of the shockwave through a solid, 
with upwards deformation of the floor and a rapid upwards 
acceleration of the whole vehicle and subsequent decelera -
tion following impact with the ground. The solid blast injury 
burden includes severe foot and ankle 19 and pelvic injury.20 
Mortality from underbody blast is most commonly caused by 
head injury and non-compressible torso haemorrhage includ-
ing aortic disruption and liver laceration.
In contrast, the dismounted IED casualty may sustain a 
characteristic pattern of injuries including lower limb ampu-
tation, pelvic fracture and genital, perineal and rectal injuries 
(Figure 30.6).
INFECTION
Battlefield wounds are by their very nature grossly contami -
nated and the treatment and prevention of infection is one of 
the basic functions of war surgery. Wounds sustained during 
warfare are high-energy wounds with large areas of devitalised 
tissue. Wounding agents are all non-sterile and highly likely 
to be contaminated by bacteria. Both large calibre ballistic 
wounds and blast wounds may contain dirty clothing or con -
taminated fragments. Multiple steps in casualty evacuation 
and substantial delays before treatment may allow progression 
of contamination to clinically significant infection.
Specific organism patterns will depend on endemic flora, 
but commonly seen bacteria include:21
 ● Gram-positive cocci including staphylococci, streptococci 
and enterococci;
 ● Gram-negative rods including Escherichia coli, Proteus and 
Klebsiella;
Figure 30.6 Blast injuries including bilateral lower limb amputation 
(a), buttock and thigh soft tissue injury (b) and complex hind foot 
injury (c). The need for extensive debridement is evident from the 
level of wound contamination and non-viable tissue.
(a)
(b)
(c)
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   432 25/10/2017   08:24References 433
PART 4 | TRAUMA
4 Eastridge BJ, Hardin M, Cantrell J, Oetjen-Gerdes L, Zubko T et al. 
Died of wounds on the battlefield: causation and implications for 
improving combat casualty care. J Trauma (other) 2011; 71(1 sup-
plement): S4–8.
5 Hodgetts TJ. ABC to <C>ABC: redefining the military trauma par-
adigm. Emerg Med J 2006; 23(10): 745–46.
6 Morrison JJ, Stannard A, Rasmussen TE, Jansen JO, Tai NRM et al. 
Injury pattern and mortality of noncompressible torso hemorrhage 
in UK combat casualties. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2013; 75(2 Sup-
pl 2): S263–68.
7 Morrison JJ, Ross JD, Rasmussen TE, Midwinter MJ, Jansen JO. Re-
suscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta: a gap anal-
ysis of severely injured UK combat casualties. Shock 2014; 41(5): 
388–93.
8 Rotondo MF , Schwab CW . ‘Damage control’: an approach for im -
proved survival in exsanguinating penetrating abdominal injury. J 
Trauma 1993; 35(3): 375–82.
9 Garner J, Watts S, Parry C, Bird J, Cooper G et al. Prolonged per -
missive hypotensive resuscitation is associated with poor outcome 
in primary blast injury with controlled hemorrhage. Ann Surg 2010; 
251(6): 1131–39.
10 Khan S, Brohi K, Chana M, Raza I, Stanworth S et al. Hemostatic 
resuscitation is neither hemostatic nor resuscitative in trauma hem-
orrhage. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2014; 76(3): 561–67; discussion 
567–68.
11 Jansen JO, Morrison JJ, Midwinter MJ, Doughty H. Changes in 
blood transfusion practices in the UK role 3 medical treatment facil-
ity in Afghanistan, 2008–2011. Transfus Med 2014; 24(3): 154–61. 
12 Brooks AJ, Clasper J, Midwinter M, Hodgetts TJ, Mahoney PF . 
(eds.) Ryan’s ballistic trauma. London: Springer London, 2011. 
13 Stuhmiller J, Phillips Y, Richmond DR. The physics and mecha -
nisms of primary blast injury. In: Bellamy RF , Zajtchuk R (eds) 
Conventional warfare ballistic, blast and burn injuries . Washington 
DC: Department of the Army, Office of the Surgeon General, 1991, 
pp. 241–70.
14 Ramasamy A, Hill AM, Clasper JC. Improvised explosive devices: 
pathophysiology, injury profiles and current medical management. 
J R Army Med Corps 2009; 155(4): 265–72.
15 Cooper GJ, Taylor DE. Biophysics of impact injury to the chest and 
abdomen. J R Army Med Corps 1989; 135(2): 58–67.
16 Guy RJ, Kirkman E, Watkins PE, Cooper GJ. Physiologic responses 
to primary blast. J Trauma 1998; 45(6): 983–87.
17 Owers C, Morgan JL, Garner JP . Abdominal trauma in primary blast 
injury. Br J Surg 2011; 98(2): 168–79.
18 Singleton JA, Gibb IE, Hunt NC, Bull AM, Clasper JC. Identifying 
future ‘unexpected’ survivors: a retrospective cohort study of fatal in-
jury patterns in victims of improvised explosive devices. BMJ Open 
2013; 3(8): e003130–e003130.
19 Ramasamy A, Hill AM, Masouros S, Gibb I, Bull AMJ et al. Blast- 
related fracture patterns: a forensic biomechanical approach. J R Soc 
Interface 2011; 8(58): 689–98.
20 Webster C, Masouros S, Gibb I, Clasper JC. Fracture patterns in pel-
vic blast injury: a retrospective analysis and implications for future 
preventative strategies. Bone Joint J 2015; 97-B(Supp 8): 14. 
21 Cubano, MA, and MK Lenhart. ‘Emergency war surgery.’ 2014.  
https://scholar.google.co.uk/scholar?q=emergency+war+surgery+  
2014&btnG=&hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5#2.
 ● Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, Acinetobacter and Serratia are 
common nosocomial pathogens usually expected among 
casualties following long periods of hospitalisation;
 ● Salmonella, Shigella and Vibrio should be suspected in cases 
of bacterial dysentery.
Fungal infection including Candida should be considered 
in casualties hospitalised for prolonged periods, those mal -
nourished or immunosuppressed, or those who have received 
broad-spectrum antibiotics, adrenocortical steroids or paren -
teral nutrition.
Techniques to reduce the infectious burden are part of 
every aspect of war surgery. At point of wounding, sterile 
dressings should be applied. Antibiotics, if available, should 
be administered if evacuation and further treatment is likely 
to be delayed.
Empirical antibiotic therapy should be commenced or 
continued following movement to a medical facility. The 
mainstay of treatment is prompt surgical control of the infec-
tious cause with adequate debridement of non-viable tis -
sue and drainage of infective material. Extensive irrigation 
should be employed to remove dead tissue and foreign bodies. 
High-pressure wound lavage has been shown to increase bac-
terial propagation into soft tissue and is not indicated.
With few exceptions (such as facial wounds), closure of 
contaminated war wounds should not be performed at time 
of first operation. The open wound should be left with clean, 
moist dressings. Negative pressure wound therapy should be 
considered for larger wounds.
Antibiotic therapy should be tailored to specific wounds 
with empirical antibiotic choice dependant on the injured 
body region or cavity. Microbial culture will aid the guidance 
of therapy for more established infection. Contaminated war 
wounds should be considered tetanus prone and appropriate 
tetanus prophylaxis administered.
Clinical experience and judgement are essential in the 
assessment of war wounds. Adequate exposure, often with 
extension of the wound, is mandated to ensure debridement 
of all devitalised tissue. Serial operations may be required. 
Early consideration should be given to soft tissue coverage. 
The skin is often remarkably resilient to injury and con-
servative debridement of it may facilitate more successful 
reconstruction.
REFERENCES
1 Atta HM. Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus: the oldest known surgical 
treatise. Am Surg 1999; 65(12): 1190–2. 
2 Champion HR, Bellamy RF , Roberts P , Leppaniemi A. A profile of 
combat injury. J Trauma 2003; 54(5 Suppl): S13–19.
3 Owens BD, Kragh JF , Wenke JC, Macaitis J, Wade CE et al. Combat 
wounds in operation Iraqi Freedom and operation Enduring Free-
dom. J Trauma 2008; 64(2): 295–99.
04_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   433 25/10/2017   08:2404_30-B&L27_Pt4_Ch30.indd   434 25/10/2017   08:24
PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
31 History taking and clinical examination in musculoskeletal  
disease .......................................................................................................... 436
32 Sports medicine and sports injuries ................................................... 463
33 The spine ...................................................................................................... 471
34 Upper limb ................................................................................................... 488
35 Hip and knee ............................................................................................... 511
36 Foot and ankle............................................................................................ 524
37 Musculoskeletal tumours ....................................................................... 534
38 Infection of the bones and joints ......................................................... 549
39 Paediatric orthopaedics.......................................................................... 561
Elective orthopaedics
5
05_31A-B&L27_Pt5.indd   435 25/10/2017   08:25Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand how to: 
 • Take a comprehensive musculoskeletal history
 • Perform a structured and systematic musculoskeletal 
examination
 • Use and interpret special tests
 • Use findings to understand the impact on a patient’s 
pain and function
History taking and clinical examination 
in musculoskeletal disease
31
INTRODUCTION
The components of the musculoskeletal (MSK) system 
include the bones, joints, ligaments, muscles and tendons as 
well as the neurological and vascular structures. A simple sys-
tem allows a concise yet comprehensive history to be taken 
and a reliable examination to be performed. This will permit 
diagnosis of the common, the rare and the clinically urgent 
musculoskeletal problems that are likely to be encountered in 
clinical practice.
HISTORY
Introduction 
 ● Introduce yourself and check the patient’s name and date 
of birth.
 ● Explain what you are going to do, obtain verbal consent 
and ensure that the patient is comfortable.
Take a history
 ● Presenting complaint. Start with an open-ended ques -
tion. Ask the patient to ‘explain what the problem is’ in 
their own words, and ask the patient what their hopes and 
expectations are from the interview.
 ● History of the presenting complaint  (‘the three Ws’). 
When did you first notice the problem? What were you 
doing when it started? Was the onset sudden or did it 
develop gradually?
 ● Associated symptoms. Ask about the following: pain; 
swelling; instability – ‘giving way’; mechanical symptoms 
(e.g. locking, clicking, clunking); loss of power; altered 
sensation.
 ● Functional impairment. Ask whether the patient is hav -
ing difficulties performing activities of daily living: upper 
limb, e.g. personal hygiene, feeding; lower limb, e.g. put -
ting on shoes and socks, standing, walking and climbing 
stairs.
 ● Past medical history (PMH). Check for comorbid con-
ditions which may contribute to the presenting problem 
or affect the patient’s fitness for an anaesthetic, e.g. diabe-
tes, asthma, previous heart attack or stroke. Check for any 
previous problems with anaesthetics.
 ● Past surgical history: relevant surgical procedures.
 ● Drug history. Ask about all medication and the following 
in particular: anticoagulants, steroids, aspirin, immuno-
suppressant therapy, oral contraceptive pill and hormone 
replacement therapy.
 ● Social history. Tailor questions to the patient’s condition: 
patient’s age; hand dominance; employment status; depen-
dents; alcohol; smoking; hobbies; home help; accommo -
dation – own house, residential or nursing home; use of 
walking aids; mental test score assessment. 
 ● Family history. This may reveal a history of MSK disease.
Summary box 31.1
Taking a history
●● Introduce yourself and put the patient at ease
●● Explain what you are doing and ensure that the patient agrees
●● Start with an open question to understand the presenting 
complaint 
●● Check for history of presenting complaint and associated 
symptoms
●● Ask about functional impairment
●● Check past medical history and relevant surgical and family 
history
●● Check drug and social history
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   436 25/10/2017   08:26Musculoskeletal e xamination 437
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
MUSCULOSKELETAL 
EXAMINATION 
General principles 
Apley described a useful and systematic approach to clinical 
examination. This approach is divided into three parts:
1 look;
2 feel;
3 move.
Look
The inspection begins as soon as you enter the examina -
tion room. Look for any walking aids. Remember to look at 
the whole patient and not just at the joint of interest. For 
example:
 ● look at the hands for rheumatoid arthritis;
 ● look at the eyes for Horner’s syndrome;
 ● look for any obvious upper or lower limb or spinal 
deformity.
Gait
The gait cycle is all of the activity between the initial contact 
of the foot with the ground and the succeeding initial con -
tact of the same limb. There are two main stages: the stance 
phase (60%) and the swing phase (40%). Ask the patient to 
stand, and inspect from the front, side and back. Then, ask 
the patient to walk using any walking aids. Some of the types 
of limp that might be present are described in Table 31.1.
Focused inspection 
Adequately expose the joint above and below. Expose the 
opposite limb for comparison. Make sure that the patient is 
comfortable. It may be easier for you and the patient if they 
remain standing for the first part of the examination. When 
a couch is used, make sure that it is in the centre of the room 
(not against the wall) so that you can work on both sides of 
the patient. Remember that all joints are covered by an enve-
lope of soft tissues and skin. Look at the skin for:  
 ● surgical scars (arthroscopy scars may be difficult to see);
 ● bruising (may indicate recent injury or a bleeding disorder);
 ● erythema (e.g. cellulitis);
 ● ulcers (e.g. arterial, vascular or neuropathic);
 ● rashes;
 ● sinuses (e.g. secondary to osteomyelitis);
 ● hair loss and the presence or absence of sweating;
 ● pigmentations or raised lesion (e.g. café-au-lait spots or 
neurofibromas).
Look at the soft tissues for:
 ● swelling (e.g. may indicate a joint effusion);
 ● lumps (consider which tissue layer they are arising from);
 ● muscle wasting (e.g. may be secondary to disuse atrophy, 
neuropathy);
 ● muscle fasciculation (lower motor neurone pathology).
Look at the bones for:
 ● abnormal limb alignment – comparison with the other 
side may be helpful;
 ● deformity.
Alan Graham Apley , 1914–1996, Director of Orthopaedic Surgery, St Thomas’ Hospital, London, UK.  As a consultant also at Rowley Bristow Orthopaedic 
Hospital, he conducted the most popular orthopaedic postgraduate course for the FRCS examination in Pyrford, Surrey, which became internationally known as 
the ‘Pyrford Orthopaedic Course’.
Johann Friedrich Horner , 1831–1886, Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, Switzerland, described this syndrome in 1869.
Friedrich Trendelenburg , 1844–1924, Professor of Surgery successively at Rostock (1875–1882), Bonn (1882–1895), Leipzig (1895–1911), Germany. The Tren-
delenburg position was first described in 1885.
TABLE 31.1 Types of limp.
Cause Pathogenesis Presentation
Long Osteoarthritis (in other leg) Head dips. Cadence dash/dash
Incoordinated Cerebral palsy Head movement lacks coordination. No regular cadence
Muscle weakness Osteoarthritis hip Head moves from side to side (windscreen wiper)
Pain Osteoarthritis hip Head dips. Cadence dot/dash
Stiff Arthrodesis hip Head rocks too and fro
Limp Pathology 
Antalgic Hip joint arthritis 
Trendelenburg Weakness of hip abductors
High-stepping gait Foot drop secondary to common peroneal nerve palsy
Spastic Cerebral palsy 
Ataxic Cerebellar pathology 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   437 25/10/2017   08:26CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS438
Feel 
Ask the patient if they have any areas of tenderness. Ensure 
that you do not cause the patient pain – watch their face as 
you feel. It may be easier (especially with children) to feel the 
normal side first. 
Skin
The aim of sensory testing is to establish a pattern of sen -
sory loss. Look for a dermatomal (may indicate spinal root 
or peripheral nerve pathology) or glove and stocking distri -
bution (may indicate a neuropathy, e.g. diabetes). Perform a 
screening test by lightly stroking both limbs. Record whether 
the patient feels a difference. If none is noticed there is no 
need to spend more time on the neurological examination. 
If there is a difference, then a full neurological examination 
should now be performed.
Soft tissues
 ● Tenderness. Try to determine the actual anatomical struc-
ture from which the pain arises (e.g. subcutaneous fat, bur-
sae, nerves, arteries).
 ● Lumps and effusions. Determine the characteristics of 
any lump or effusion using Table 31.2 as a guide.
 ● Pulses. Palpate the distal pulses (or capillary return) of 
the limb. Recording distal neurovascular status both 
before and after surgery is important. Absence of distal 
pulses is an absolute contraindication to elective surgery 
in that limb. Acute loss of circulation to a limb is a surgi -
cal emergency.
Bone
Palpate the contours of the joint and assess for tenderness. For 
superficial joints, such as the knee, the joint line can be felt 
and checked for lumps and tenderness. 
Move
There are three stages to assessing movement. The words used 
to describe a particular movement are shown in Table 31.3.
 ● Active. Ask the patient to move the joint within the lim-
its of their pain.
 ● Passive. Move the limb or joint yourself. Record the range 
of movement in ‘degrees’ (a goniometer may be helpful). 
Comparison of active and passive range allows the three 
causes of loss of range of movement to be distinguished. 
In limitation caused by pain or stiffness the ranges are 
the same but one is painful. In weakness passive range is 
greater than active. 
 ● Stability. Stability has a static and a dynamic component: 
static tests assess the integrity of the ligaments and joint 
(bone) surfaces; dynamic tests assess the integrity and 
functions of the muscles and tendons. Ask the patient to 
move the joint actively through its range of motion while 
you try to stop the movement. Record power using the 
Medical Research Council (MRC) grading system as illus-
trated in Table 31.4. Consider the muscles that drive each 
movement, the peripheral nerves that supply them and 
the nerve root values (Table 31.5). 
TABLE 31.2 Swelling – an acronym for history and 
examination of a lump.
Start Did it appear after trauma or gradually on its 
own?
Where Anatomical site and layer (skin, fat, muscle);  
does it move in relation to these?
External features Size, surface and definition of margins
Lymph nodes Are the local ones enlarged?
Liquid Is it fluctuant? Can it be transilluminated?
Internal features Is it hard? Is it tender?
Noise Is there a thrill? Is there a bruit?
General Examination of the whole patient for general 
lumps
TABLE 31.3 Terminology used to describe the direction of 
movement.
Flexion Forward or anterior movement of the trunk or 
limb
Lateral flexion Bending of the forward-facing head and trunk 
to either side
Extension Backward or posterior movement
Abduction A movement away from the midline of the 
body
Adduction A movement towards the midline of the body
Internal rotation Rotation towards the midline of the body
External rotation Rotation away from the midline
Supination Movement of the forearm so that the palm 
faces anteriorly
Pronation Movement of the forearm so that the palm 
faces posteriorly
Circumduction A combination of flexion, abduction, extension 
and adduction without rotation
Inversion Movement of the foot that directs the sole of 
the foot medially
Eversion Movement of the foot that directs the sole of 
the foot laterally
Retraction Backwards movement of the head, jaw or 
shoulders
TABLE 31.4 The Medical Research Council grading 
 system of muscle power.
Grade Description
0 No movement
1 Flicker of movement
2 Active movement with gravity elimination
3 Active movement against gravity
4 Active movement against resistance but power less than 
full
5 Normal power
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   438 25/10/2017   08:26Clinical examination of the  spine 439
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
In the following sections, in addition to the approach of 
‘Look, Feel, Move’, we have included details of special tests 
for each joint as well as neurological examination of the limb. 
The peripheral nerve examination comprises sensory and 
motor testing, reflexes, tone and coordination and proprio -
ception. 
TABLE 31.5 Peripheral nerves.
Root level Sensation Motor Reflex
C5 Lateral upper arm Deltoid Biceps
C6 Lateral forearm Wrist extension Brachioradialis
C7 Middle finger Triceps Triceps
C8 Little finger Finger flexors –
T1 Medial forearm Interossei –
L1 Anterior thigh Psoas –
L2 Anterior thigh/groin Quadriceps –
L3 Anterior and lateral thigh Quadriceps –
L4 Medial leg and foot Tibialis anterior Knee jerk
L5 Lateral leg and first dorsal web space Extensor hallucis longus –
S1 Lateral and plantar foot Gastrocnemius/perineals Achilles
S2–S4 Perianal Bladder and foot intrinsics –
Summary box 31.2
Musculoskeletal examination
●● Introduce yourself and put the patient at ease
●● Assess the gait
●● Look
●● Feel
●● Move
●● Special tests
●● Neurological examination
●● Pulses
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF 
THE SPINE 
The spinal column consists of 33 vertebrae with 23 inter -
vertebral discs. This is supported by numerous ligaments and 
paraspinal muscles.
When observed from the front (coronal plane) with the 
patient standing and the hips and knees fully extended, the 
head should be centred over the sacrum. A ‘plumb line’ 
dropped from the spinous process of C7 should fall through 
the gluteal crease (Figure 31.1). If it falls to either side of 
the cleft, lateral tilt of the spine is present. The ear, shoul-
der and greater trochanter of the hip should lie in the same 
vertical plane. When the patient is observed from the side, 
assess the four physiological sagittal plane curves (cervical 
and lumbar lordosis, and thoracic and sacral kyphosis) (Fig-
ure 31.2).
Figure 31.1 Plumb line.
Cervical spine
Look 
Ensure that the shoulders, back muscles and scapulae can be 
seen. Look for muscle wasting and asymmetry of the neck 
creases and check that the shoulders are level and that there 
is a normal cervical lordosis (range 20–40°).
Feel 
Stand behind the patient and support the patient’s chin.
 ● Soft tissues. Feel for spasm of the paraspinal muscles.
 ● Bone. Palpate the spinous processes (tenderness and 
alignment); the spinous processes of C7 (vertebra prom -
inens) and T1 are usually large and are easily palpable at 
the base of the neck. 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   439 25/10/2017   08:26CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS440
Move
Motion occurs in three planes: flexion/extension, bending 
and rotation (Figure 31.3).
 ● Flexion (45°)/extension (55°). Ask the patient to bend 
their neck forwards – place the chin on the chest. Mea -
sure the distance from the chin to the sternum. Ask the 
patient to extend their neck by looking up at the ceiling.
 ● Right/left rotation (70°). Ask the patient to look over 
each shoulder while not moving the chest wall. 
 ● Right/left bending (40°). Ask the patient to lay their ear 
on their ipsilateral shoulder.
Neurological 
Focus your examination on the C5 to T1 nerve roots. These 
supply the upper extremities (Figure 31.4). 
Thoracic spine 
Pathology commonly presents with pain and deformity. The 
thoracic spine is normally convex with a gentle kyphosis 
(normal range 20–45°).
Figure 31.2 Standing sagittal profile of cervical and lumbar lor dosis (a), and thoracic (b) 
and sacral (c) kyphosis.
(a) (b) (c)
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 31.3 Cervical spine flexion/extension (a, b), rotation (c) and bending (d).
Figure 31.4 Spurling’s test for cervical spine nerve root entrapment. 
Extend the cervical spine and rotate the head to each shoulder in turn. 
The presence of a shooting pain down the arm may indicate cervical 
nerve root compression.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   440 25/10/2017   08:26Clinical examination of the  spine 441
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Look 
Ensure that the front and the back from the neck to the glu -
teal cleft can be visualised. Note skin markings (e.g. café-au-
lait spots, hairy patches). These may suggest occult neurology 
or bony pathology.
 ● Front. Check for asymmetry of the shoulder and rib cage 
suggesting scoliosis.
 ● Back. Look for a difference in the height of the iliac crests 
(pelvic tilt). Assess for coronal plane deformity, such as sco-
liosis (lateral curvature of the thoracic spine with rotation). 
A rib hump suggesting a structural scoliosis may be visible.
 ● Side. Assess for sagittal plane deformity, such as an 
increased kyphosis. 
Feel
Palpate, with one hand supporting the patient’s pelvis. 
Move
Range of motion is limited in the thoracic spine:
 ● Forward bending test (Figure 31.5). Ask the patient to 
bend forwards to touch their toes:
 ● structural scoliosis: a rib hump will increase in size 
(bulge posteriorly on the thoracic convex side) as the 
patient bends forwards; this is diagnostic of idiopathic 
thoracic scoliosis (rotatory deformity);
 ● functional scoliosis: the spine straightens as the patient 
bends forwards and no rib hump is visible; this flexible 
deformity is secondary to other abnormalities such as 
abnormal leg lengths and muscle spasm in the lumbar 
region.
 ● Lateral bending. This can be used to assess the flexibility 
of a scoliosis. Radiographs are taken in this position to 
supplement the assessment.
Lumbar spine
Examination should include the pelvis, hips, lower limbs, gait 
and peripheral vascular system as well as the lumbar region. 
Irritation of nerves in the lumbar spine can mimic problems 
in the lower limb. Always consider referred pain. 
Look
 ● Back. Check the skin at the base of the spine for hairy 
tufts and dimples (underlying spina bifida). Prominence of 
the spinal muscles on one side may be the result of muscle 
spasm secondary to pain.
 ● Side. The lumbar spine has a smooth concavity known 
as the lumbar lordosis (normal range is 40–60°). Muscle 
spasm is a cause of loss of the normal lordosis.
Feel
Feel for any ‘step-off’ in the spinous processes. This may indi-
cate forward slippage of one of the vertebrae on another.
Move
Movement occurs in flexion, extension, lateral bending and 
rotation (Figure 31.6). Record the motion in each plane in 
degrees. Remember that a significant portion of lumbar flex -
ion is achieved through the hip joint.
 ● Forward flexion. This is a measure of lumbar flexibility. 
The skin of the lumbar spine stretches as the patient bends 
forwards. To measure flexion, place the tip of your thumb 
over the T12–L1 junction and the tip of your index finger 
of the same hand over the lumbosacral junction. Ask the 
patient to bend forwards and touch the toes (normal range 
40–60°). Measure the distance by which your thumb and 
the tip of your index finger separate.
 ● Lateral bending. Ask the patient to slide their right hand 
down the outer side of their right leg and then their left 
hand down the outside of their left leg. Note the distance 
that each hand moves down that side of the thigh.
 ● Rotation. Stand behind the patient and hold their pelvis 
still with both hands. Ask the patient to twist around and 
Look over their shoulder. Note the angle that the shoulder 
girdle forms with the pelvis (range 3–18°).
Special tests
 ● Lasègue’s straight leg raise test (Figure 31.7). This test 
increases tension along the sciatic nerve (L5 and S1 nerve 
roots). With the patient supine, elevate the leg with the 
knee bent to check pain-free movement of the hip. Then, 
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 31.5 (a–c) Forward bending test.
Charles Ernest Lasègue , 1816–1863, Professor of Medicine, The University of Paris, and Physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France. This test was described by  
Lasègue’s student, who named it after his teacher.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   441 25/10/2017   08:26CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS442
Summary box 31.3
Spine examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● From the front and back (coronal plane)
●● From the side (saggittal plane)
●● Palpation
●● Palpation of the posterior bony elements and the paraspinal 
muscles 
●● Move
●● Assess flexion, extension, lateral rotation and bending
Neurological
●● Assess sensation, tone, power, reflexes, proprioception and 
coordination
Special tests
●● Spurling’s test
●● Forward bending test
●● Lasègue’s straight leg test
●● Contralateral stretch test
(a) (b)
Figure 31.6 Lumbar flexion/extension, lateral bending (a) and rotation (b).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 31.7(a–c) Lasègue’s straight leg test.
straighten the knee and note the angle at which the 
hamstrings allow the hip to flex. Finally, allow the hip to 
extend until tension is removed from the hamstring mus -
cles and then the ankle is dorsiflexed firmly (but without 
excessive force), which in turn pulls on the sciatic nerve. 
If the patient experiences pain running down the leg, then 
the test is positive.
 ● Contralateral stretch test. Elevate the asymptomatic leg; 
if pain is reproduced in the other leg the test is considered 
positive. 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
HAND AND WRIST
The hand and wrist should be thought of as one functional 
unit. The muscles may be divided into extrinsic (the muscle 
bellies in the forearm) and intrinsic (origins and insertions 
within the hand alone). The ‘flexors’ (volar side) flex the 
wrist and fingers and the ‘extensors’ (dorsal surface) extend 
the digits and fingers. 
Look
Inspect the posture of both hands. A nerve lesion will pro -
duce a specific resting position (e.g. an ulnar nerve lesion will 
produce clawing of the little and ring fingers). 
 ● Skin. Assess for scars, discolouration (café-au-lait spots, 
erythema) and loss of hair. The nails may reveal systemic 
disease (e.g. psoriatic pitting). Look for tight bands in the 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   442 25/10/2017   08:26Clinical examination of the hand and wrist 443
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
palm (Dupuytren’s contracture). Loss of sweating is seen 
in complex regional pain syndrome.
 ● Soft tissue. Centrally located swellings at the wrist may 
indicate a ganglion arising from the wrist joint itself; de 
Quervain’s tenosynovitis may present with a swelling 
around the radial styloid.
 ● Muscle wasting. Check for thenar, hypothenar (Fig-
ure 31.8) and intrinsic muscle wasting. To assess thenar 
eminence wasting, place the hands side by side with the 
thumbs upwards and look down and compare the thenar 
regions. Patterns of muscle wasting are shown in Table 
31.6.
 ● Bones. Look for bony deformity (dinner fork deformity, 
Colles’ fracture). T ypical bony deformities are described 
in Table 31.7.
TABLE 31.6 Patterns of muscle wasting in the hand.
Thenar wasting Median nerve palsy (C8)
Hypothenar wasting Ulnar nerve palsy (T1)
Intrinsic wasting Ulnar nerve palsy (T1)
TABLE 31.7 Bony deformities of the hand.
Anatomical site Name Association
Distal interphalangeal joint (DIPJ) Heberden’s 
nodes
Osteoarthritis
Proximal interphalangeal joint 
(PIPJ)
Bouchard’s 
node
Osteoarthritis
Hyperextension of the 
metacarpophalangeal joint 
(MCPJ), flexion of the PIPJ and 
hyperextension of the DIPJ
Boutonnière 
deformity
Rheumatoid 
arthritis
Hyperextension of the MCPJ and 
PIPJ and flexion of the DIPJ
Swan neck 
deformity
Rheumatoid 
arthritis
Flexion of the MCPJ with 
hyperextension of the 
interphalangeal joint
Z deformity 
of the thumb
Rheumatoid 
arthritis
Subluxation of the MCPJ Ulnar drift Rheumatoid 
arthritis
Feel
 ● Skin. If there is any question of abnormal sensation on a 
simple stroke test comparing both sides, proceed to the 
two-point discrimination test using the sharp ends of a 
paper clip. Record the minimum distance between the tips 
of the paper clip at which the patient is able to recognise 
two points. Table 31.8  describes the anatomical regions 
supplied by the median, ulnar and radial nerves.
 ● Pen sliding test . To assess the absence or presence of 
sweating, slide a pen along the radial border of the 
index finger. If the pen slides smoothly, this may indi-
cate loss of sweating. 
 ● Soft tissue. Feel for muscle bulk and tendon thicken -
ing. Feel bony prominences, radial styloid, ulnar styloid, 
anatomical snuff box. Feel for sensation using two-point 
discrimination of medial nerve (radial aspect of index 
finger), radial nerve (in anatomical snuff box) and ulnar 
nerve (ulnar aspect of little finger).
 ● Blood vessels: check the radial and ulnar artery pulses; 
assess the capillary refill time, which is normally less 
than 2 seconds; Allen’s test should also be performed 
before surgery (Table 31.9 and Figure 31.9).
 ● Nerves: compressive neuropathies are most commonly 
seen affecting the median nerve (see Tinel’ s (Figure 
31.10a) and Phalen’s (Figure 31.10b) tests in Table 31.9).
Baron Guillaume Dupuytren , 1777–1835, surgeon, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France, described the condition in 1831.
Friedrich Joseph de Quervain , 1868–1940, Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland, described this form of tenosynovitis in 1895.
William Heberden (Snr.) , 1710–1801, physician, practised first in Cambridge and later in London, UK.
Charles Jacques Bouchard , 1837–1915, physician, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France.
Boutonnière  is French for ‘button-hole’.
Figure 31.8 Thenar (a) and hypothenar (b) wasting.
(a)
(b)
TABLE 31.8 Sensory distribution of the nerve supply to 
the hand.
Nerve Sensory distribution
Ulnar Little finger and ulnar half of the ring finger
Median Thumb, index, middle and radial half of the ring finger
Radial Base of the thumb on the dorsum of the hand
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   443 25/10/2017   08:26CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS444
 ● Palmar fascia: feel for palmar thickening and skin pits; 
long finger-like structures (cords), most commonly 
affecting the ring and little fingers, are suggestive of 
Dupuytren’s disease.
 ● Bones. Palpate from the radial to the ulnar side of the 
wrist joint. In the trauma setting, palpate the anatomical 
snuff box (Figure 31.11). A fracture of the scaphoid may 
cause tenderness. The scaphoid tubercle, pisiform and the 
hook of hamate are all palpable on the volar aspect of the 
wrist.
Move
The wrist can be moved into flexion and extension, and ulnar 
and radial deviation.
 ● Wrist. Extension is tested by asking the patient to push the 
hands together into a ‘prayer’ position (Figure 31.12a). If 
TABLE 31.9 Special hand tests.
Test Technique Significance
Allen’s test Elevate the hand and apply digital pressure on the radial and 
ulnar arteries to occlude them. Ask the patient to make a fist 
several times. The tips of the finger should go pale. Release 
each artery in turn and observe the return of colour
Tests the adequacy of the blood supply to the hand from 
the radial and ulnar arteries and the arcade between them
Tinel’s test Tap over the nerve of interest. Tingling may indicate nerve 
compression
Identifies compression of a peripheral nerve
Phalen’s test Place the wrist in maximum flexion with the elbows extended Compression of the medial nerve causes paraesthesia
Froment’s sign Ask the patient to grip a sheet of paper between the index 
finger and thumb of both hands. Grip the paper yourself 
similarly. Ask the patient to resist as you attempt to pull the 
paper away
A positive test indicated by flexion of the thumb 
interphalangeal joint suggests weakness of the adductor 
pollicis muscle supplied by the ulnar nerve. Recruitment of 
the median nerve-innervated flexor pollicis brevis explains 
the thumb posture
Figure 31.9 (a–c) Performing Allen’s test.
(a) (b) (c)
Edgar van Nuys Allen , 1900–1961, Professor of Medicine, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Jules Tinel , 1879–1952, Physician, Hôpital Beaujon, Paris, France.
George S Phalen , contemporary orthopaedic surgeon and Chief of Hand Surgery, The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. He helped to establish the Amer-
ican Society for Surgery of the Hand.
Jules Froment , 1878–1946, Professor of Clinical Medicine, Lyons, France.
there is loss of extension, the palms will not meet and/or 
one forearm will be dropped. Palmar flexion is tested in a 
similar fashion but with the hands pointing down and the 
back of the hands in contact (Figure 31.12b). Ulnar and 
radial deviation are tested by taking the patient’s hand in 
your own and moving the hand into these directions. 
 ● Hand. A general screening assessment is to ask the patient 
to roll up their fingers from full extension to full flexion. 
This will reveal a trigger finger. 
Extensors and flexors 
Asking the patient to grip two of your fingers in their fist tests 
the power of the extensors of the wrist (radial nerve) because 
they are needed to brace the wrist. It also tests the power of the 
flexors in the forearm (median nerve). Asking the patient then 
to extend and spread their fingers apart against resistance tests 
the intrinsic muscles of the hand (mainly the ulnar nerve). 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   444 25/10/2017   08:26Clinical examination of the hand and wrist 445
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Finger flexors
 ● Superficialis tendon test. The flexor digitorum profundus 
(FDP) usually has one muscle belly from which tendons 
to all of the fingers arise. The FDP can be immobilised by 
holding all of the fingers (except the one being examined) 
in extension; this allows the superficialis tendon to be 
tested in isolation. If the test finger is able to flex, despite 
profundus being immobilised, then the superficialis ten-
don to that finger is working. Repeat the test for the other 
fingers individually (Figure 31.13). 
(a)
(b)
Figure 31.10 (a) Tinel’s test; (b) Phalen’s test.
Figure 31.11 Palpating the anatomical snuff box between the ten -
dons of extensor pollicis longus and abductor pollicis brevis.
(a)
(b)
Figure 31.12  Testing the range of (a) wrist extension; (b) wrist 
flexion.
(a)
(b)
Figure 31.13 Testing the (a) flexor digitorum superficialis; (b) flexor 
digitorum profundus.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   445 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS446
Summary box 31.4
Hand and wrist examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● Dorsum and palm – asymmetry, deformity, muscle wasting
●● Inspection of the supine patient
●● Skin, scars, soft tissues
●● Palpation of bony structures and joints of the hand
Movements
●● Wrist – flexion and extension, ulnar and radial deviation
●● Hand – thumb movements, metatarsophalangeal joints and 
small joints of the hand
Special tests
●● Allen’s test
●● Tinel’s and Phalen’s tests for the median nerve
●● Froment’s sign
●● Finkelstein’s test
Figure 31.14 Test for flexor pollicis longus supplied by the anterior 
interosseus nerve.
Figure 31.16 Froment’s sign; the arrow illustrates the flexed posture 
of the thumb interphalangeal joint, indicating weakness of the ulnar 
nerve-innervated adductor pollicis muscle.
Figure 31.17 Testing the power of the abductor pollicis brevis sup-
plied by the median nerve.
Figure 31.15 Testing the integrity of extensor pollicis longus.
Thumb and thenar eminence
 ● Abductor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis and flexor 
pollicis brevis can be tested together by opposing the 
thumb to the little finger.
 ● Flexor pollicis longus. The muscle is supplied by the ante-
rior interosseus nerve (branch of the median nerve) and 
can be tested by asking the patient to bring the tips of the 
thumb and index finger together (the ‘OK’ sign – Figure 
31.14).
 ● Extensor pollicis longus. The integrity of the tendon is 
tested by asking the patient to lift the thumb off a table 
with the palm flat on the table (Figure 31.15).
 ● Adductor pollicis. Test using Froment’ s sign (see Table 
31.9 and Figure 31.16). 
 ● Abductor pollicis brevis . This muscle is supplied by the 
median nerve. With the hand lying flat on a table with the 
palm facing upwards, ask the patient to raise the thumb 
towards the ceiling. Ask the patient to resist as you push 
the thumb back towards the palm (Figure 31.17) . 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   446 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the elbow  447
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
ELBOW 
The elbow is a hinge joint formed by the articulation of the 
ulna and radius with the humerus.
Look
 ● Skin. Check the extensor surface for signs of psoriasis.
 ● Soft tissues. Look for any swellings, e.g. olecranon bursa, 
rheumatoid nodules, gouty tophi.
 ● Muscle wasting. Examine the biceps and triceps muscle 
bulk. Note that compression of the ulnar nerve at the 
elbow leads to wasting distally in the hypothenar emi -
nence and intrinsic muscles of the hand – assess the hand 
for the presence of clawing and wasting.
 ● Bone. W ith the elbow in extension, look at the axis 
between the upper arm and forearm. There is a physio -
logical valgus (‘carrying angle’) of 9–14° (2–3° greater in 
women) (Figure 31.18). This angle allows the elbow to 
be tucked into the waist depression above the iliac crest:
 ● cubitus varus (gun-stock deformity): the carrying angle 
is reversed, secondary to a malunited supracondylar 
fracture;
 ● cubitus valgus: the carrying angle is increased, caused 
by malunion of a distal humeral fracture;
 ● hyperextension: there is normally a physiological hyper-
extension of the elbow (5°). 
Move
 ● Flexion–extension. The normal range is from −5° (slight 
hyperextension) to 150°. Ask the patient to bend the 
elbow from the fully straight position (Figure 31.19).
 ● Pronation and supination. W ith the elbows at 90° and 
the palms facing upwards (full supination), ask the patient 
to turn the forearm so that the dorsum of the hand faces 
upwards (full pronation) (Figure 31.20). The normal val-
ues are 70° pronation and 90° supination.
Figure 31.18  Carrying angle of the elbow illustrating the normal 
cubitus valgus.
Feel
 ● Soft tissues. An effusion may be detected by performing a 
cross fluctuation test. The ulnar nerve can be rolled under 
your fingers placed between the medial epicondyle and 
the olecranon. Test the distal sensation in the hand (espe-
cially in the distribution of the ulnar nerve) and assess the 
vascular status.
 ● Bones. The three palpation landmarks are the medial and 
lateral epicondyles and the apex of the olecranon. These 
form an equilateral triangle when the elbow is flexed 
to 90°. The radial head is palpated with the examiner’s 
thumb while the other hand pronates and supinates the 
forearm. On the medial side, palpate the medial epicon -
dyle. Posteriorly, palpate the olecranon fossa. 
Figure 31.19 (a) Elbow flexion; (b) elbow extension.
Figure 31.20 Testing forearm rotation: (a) mid-prone position; (b) 
full supination; (c) full pronation.
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   447 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS448
Special tests and diagnoses
Tennis elbow and golfer’s elbow
Both conditions are inflammatory processes of the tendons 
that attach the large muscle mass of the forearm to the lateral 
or medial epicondyle.
 ● Medial epicondylitis (synonym = golfer’s elbow). The 
medial epicondyle is the common origin of the forearm 
flexors and the pronator muscle. Palpate the medial epi -
condyle for tenderness. The diagnostic test is resisted wrist 
flexion, which reproduces the pain over the medial epi -
condyle.
 ● Lateral epicondylitis (synonym = tennis elbow). The 
lateral epicondyle is the common origin of the forearm 
extensors. Palpate for tenderness – usually just distal 
(5–10 mm) to the epicondyle near the origin of the exten-
sor carpi radialis brevis muscle. Wrist extension against 
resistance with the elbow extended should provoke the 
patient’s symptoms. 
 ● Bone. Look for any obvious deformity or prominence. A 
fracture of the middle third clavicle is the most common 
cause. A dislocation may be suspected by a loss of normal 
shoulder contour. The more common anterior dislocation 
often presents with an anterior bulge and a squared-off 
shoulder.
Feel
Generalised pain in the shoulder may arise from the neck or 
the shoulder joint itself. More localised pain is often indica -
tive of acromioclavicular joint pathology.
 ● Skin. Test sensation in the upper part of the lateral aspect 
of the arm (‘regimental badge area’) (Figure 31.21). Loss 
may indicate damage to the axillary nerve (following 
shoulder dislocation).
 ● Bones. Palpate the acromioclavicular and sternoclavicu -
lar joints and the clavicle. 
Figure 31.21 The area of skin supplied by the axillary nerve – the 
‘regimental badge area’.
Summary box 31.5
Elbow examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● Front – asymmetry, carrying angle, deformity
●● Back – olecranon fossa
Inspection of the supine patient
●● Skin, scars, soft tissues, deformity
●● Palpation of bony structures
Movements
●● Flexion and extension, pronation and supination
Special tests
●● Tennis and golfer’s elbow
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
SHOULDER
Pain arising from the shoulder joint may be felt anterolater -
ally. Referred pain may present from the cervical spine, heart, 
mediastinum and the diaphragm.
Look 
Assess the attitude of the limb.
 ● Skin. Check for surgical scars. An anterior scar is used 
for the deltopectoral approach. At the side, the deltoid 
splitting approach and lateral arthroscopic portals may be 
seen. Posteriorly, arthroscopic portal sites can be seen.
 ● Soft tissues. Wasting of the deltoid muscle is commonly 
seen after shoulder dislocation when there is a temporary 
loss of function of the axillary nerve that supplies it. The 
rotator cuff comprises four muscles: supraspinatus, infra -
spinatus, subscapularis and teres minor. Wasting of these 
muscles may occur following a rotator cuff problem.
Move
Differentiate between movements of the shoulder joint and 
scapulothoracic movement of the scapula on the chest wall. 
Patients with a painful shoulder will commonly move from 
the scapulothoracic joint. Stabilise the scapula by placing 
the thumb over the coracoid process and the fingers of the 
same hand over the spine of the scapula. Start in the ‘neutral 
position’ with the arms by the sides, elbows extended and the 
palms facing forwards. Note any pain throughout the range of 
movement (Figure 31.22).
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   448 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the shoulder 449
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
 ● Forward flexion. Ask the patient to raise their hands 
in front to touch the ceiling while keeping the elbows 
extended (0–180°).
 ● Extension. Ask the patient to extend both arms behind 
(0–30°).
 ● Abduction. Shoulder abduction involves the glenohu -
meral joint and scapulothoracic movement. The first 60° 
of movement is mainly at the glenohumeral joint. Beyond 
this the scapula begins to rotate on the thorax and final 
movements are almost entirely scapulothoracic. Raise the 
arms sideways until the fingers point to the ceiling (180°).
 ● Adduction. Ask the patient to touch their other shoulder 
tip.
 ● Internal rotation. Ask the patient to touch their back 
with the dorsum of the hand and to raise their hand up the 
back as high as possible (normal range is thoracic spine 
level T7–9).
 ● External rotation. With the arms by the sides, bend the 
elbows to 90° and rotate the forearms to the mid-prone 
position. Ask the patient to separate their hands as much 
as possible (0–40°). 
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
Figure 31.22 Movements of 
the shoulder: (a) forward flex-
ion; (b) extension; (c) adduc-
tion; (d) internal rotation; (e) 
external rotation.
Special tests and diagnoses 
Impingement syndrome
This is impairment of rotator cuff function within the sub -
acromial bursa. It may lead to inflammation (tendinitis) or a 
partial or full-thickness tear. Impingement is characterised by 
pain and weakness on abduction and internal rotation.
 ● Painful arc test (Figure 31.23). Ask the patient to abduct 
their arms from their sides. The presence of pain from 60° 
to 120° is positive.
 ● Jobe’s test (empty can) (Figure 31.24). Ask the patient 
to abduct the arm to 90° elevation in the scapular plane 
with full internal rotation (empty can position). Ask the 
patient to resist downward pressure. The presence of pain 
is a positive test.
Shoulder instability
Instability may be defined as a shoulder that slips in and out 
of joint (dislocation) more than once or twice, or frequently 
slips partially out of joint and then returns on its own. Insta-
bility can be anterior, posterior, inferior or multidirectional.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   449 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS450
Figure 31.23 (a–c) Painful arc test for rotator cuff impingement.
Figure 31.24 Jobe’s test for rotator cuff impingement.
Figure 31.25 Anterior apprehension test for anterior shoulder insta-
bility.
(a)
(b)
(c)
 ● Apprehension test (Figure 31.25). With the patient 
supine or standing, flex the elbow to 90° and abduct 
the shoulder to 90°. Now externally rotate the shoulder. 
Apprehension indicates anterior instability. 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   450 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the hip joint  451
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
HIP JOINT 
The hip is a synovium-lined ball and socket joint. Typical 
clinical diseases of the hip that may be encountered in chil-
dren and adults are shown in Table 31.10. A patient com-
plaining of hip pain should undergo a careful examination 
of the spine, abdomen, pelvis, groin and thigh. In addition, 
consider a gynaecological examination in women.
TABLE 31.10 Common clinical diseases of the hip in 
children and adults.
Children Adults
Developmental dysplasia of the hip Primary osteoarthritis
Transient synovitis of the hip Secondary osteoarthritis
Perthe’s disease Inflammatory arthritis
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis Avascular necrosis
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis Labral tears
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis Referred pain
Look
With the patient standing, look at the front, side and back 
of the hip. Look around the room for walking aids and heel 
raises in the shoes.
 ● Skin. Look for scars and sinuses.
 ● Soft tissues. Muscle wasting may be present as a conse -
quence of hip arthritis or primary muscle or neurological 
disease.
 ● Bone. Look at the posture of the limb and assess for adduc-
tion deformity; fixed adduction may be present in severe 
osteoarthritis and cerebral palsy, and makes the leg appear 
short because the pelvis is tilted (apparent shortening).
Feel
 ● Soft tissues. Tenderness overlying the greater trochanter 
may suggest trochanteric bursitis or an abductor enthesop-
athy.
 ● Bone. Bony landmarks can be palpated; these include the 
anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS), iliac crest and the 
greater trochanter of the femur.
Other areas for palpation include the inguinal ligament, 
which may have a local hernia or lymphadenopathy. The 
femoral artery can be palpated as it passes under the inguinal 
ligament at its midpoint halfway between the ASIS and the 
pubic tubercle.
Move
The hip joint can be moved into flexion, extension, abduc -
tion and adduction, and internal and external rotation (Fig-
ure 31.26). True hip movement ends when the pelvis begins 
to move. To detect true hip movement, simultaneously place 
a finger/hand on the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) con-
tralateral to the hip being examined. Remember to compare 
both sides.
Passive movement
HIP FLEXION (120–0°) WHEN L YING SUPINE
The patient is asked to lie on their back and then roll them -
selves into a ball, flexing the hips and the spine fully. A com-
parison of the flexion of the two hips can be made in this 
position. The patient is then asked to hold onto the knee of 
the ‘bad’ leg with both hands (thereby fixing the pelvis in 
flexion) and the other leg is allowed to extend down onto the 
couch. A note is made of any fixed flexion deformity (inabil -
ity of the thigh to come down onto the couch). This ‘good’ 
hip is then returned to full flexion and the patient grasps that 
knee while dropping the other, ‘bad’, hip into extension. This 
modified Thomas’s test is the most comfortable and accurate 
way of measuring flexion and extension of the hip, minimis -
ing movement of the painful hip (Figure 31.27). 
HIP EXTENSION (0–10°) WHEN L YING IN A PRONE 
POSITION
Hip extension can be measured by asking the patient to roll 
onto their front and extend the hip.
ROTATION
 ● Internal rotation (45°) . With the hip flexed to 45° and 
the knee in 90° of flexion, hold the front of the knee with 
one hand and the foot with the other . Internally rotate 
the hip (the foot goes outwards), then externally rotate 
Summary box 31.6
Shoulder examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● Front – asymmetry, deformity
●● Side – muscle wasting
●● Back – muscle wasting, scapula
Inspection of the supine patient
●● Skin, scars, soft tissues, deformity
●● Palpation of shoulder girdle (sternum to scapula)
Movements
●● Flexion and extension, abduction and adduction, internal and 
external rotation
Special tests
●● Impingement syndrome – painful arc, Jobe’s test, Hawkins’ 
test (see also Chapter 34)
●● Shoulder instability – apprehension, relocation test, sulcus 
sign
●● Rotator cuff assessment
●● Acromioclavicular joint pathology
●● Frozen shoulder versus glenohumeral osteoarthritis
Hugh Owen Thomas , 1834–1891, general practitioner, Liverpool, UK. He is regarded as the founder of orthopaedic surgery although never holding a hospital 
appointment, preferring to treat patients in their own homes. He introduced the Thomas splint in 1875.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   451 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS452
Summary box 31.7
Common causes of limb length inequality in the hip 
●● Osteoarthritis
●● Hip fracture
●● Hip dislocation
●● Hip dysplasia
●● Avascular necrosis
●● Fixed flexion deformity
(a) (b)
(d)(c)
Figure 31.26  Hip movements: (a) internal r otation; (b) external 
rotation; (c) adduction; (d) abduction.
Figure 31.27 Modified Thomas’s test for assessing a fixed flexion 
deformity. A fixed flexion deformity of the right hip is indicated by an 
inability to fully straighten the right leg (arrow).
the hip (the foot goes in). The angle that the tibia makes 
with the vertical indicates the range of movement. Pain 
at the extremes of movement suggests inflammation in the 
hip.
 ● Abduction (40°). The hip should be abducted by moving 
the leg away from the midline with the other hand on the 
patient’s pelvis to detect any tilt in the pelvis.
Special tests
 ● Trendelenburg test (Figure 31.28). Face the patient and 
ask them to place their hands on the palm of your hands 
for support. Then ask them to stand first on one leg, then 
the other. Increased pressure from the opposite hand as 
they take weight through the weak hip indicates a positive 
Trendelenburg test.
 ● Leg length discrepancy (LLD). The inequality may be in 
the hip joint, femur, tibia, ankle or foot or a combination 
of these. The pathology may be from the bone being too 
short or too long. When assessing LLD, square the pelvis. 
If that is not possible then place both legs in the same 
position. For example, if there is an adduction deformity 
present in the affected leg, place the good leg in the same 
degree of adduction. LLD can be caused by a real differ -
ence in the leg lengths (the bones are different lengths) or 
by a deformity that makes the leg appear short because the 
pelvis must be tilted to get the leg onto the ground. The 
first is called ‘real’ LLD, measured ASIS to medial malle-
olus. The second is called ‘apparent’ LLD, measured mid -
line, e.g. xiphisternum to medial malleolus. Each differs in 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   452 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the knee 453
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
cause and therefore treatment. The LLD apparent to the 
patient can also be measured using wooden blocks placed 
under the patient’s ‘short’ leg until the patient feels level.
 ● Gait. Hip disease can present with an altered gait pattern. 
The common types of abnormal gait are described in Table 
31.11 (also see Summary box 31.8).
 ● Impingement test. To assess for femoroacetabular impinge-
ment, perform two tests: first, hip flexion at greater than 
90° combined with some adduction and internal rotation 
(FADIR test). The second test is placing the hip into flex-
ion, full adduction and internal rotation. A positive test is 
indicated by pain.
Figure 31.28  (a, b) Tr endelen-
burg test.
(a) (b)
Summary box 31.8
Hip examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● Front – pelvic tilt, rotational deformity
●● Side – lumbar lordosis
●● Back – pelvic tilt, scoliosis, gluteal wasting
●● Gait – Trendelenburg, antalgic
Inspection of the supine patient
●● Skin, scars, soft tissues, deformity
●● Palpation of the anterior joint line, adductor origin, greater 
trochanter, ischial tuberosity
Movements
●● Flexion and extension
●● Abduction and adduction
●● Internal and external rotation
Special tests
●● Thomas’s test
●● Leg length assessment – real/apparent
●● Trendelenburg test
●● Snapping hip
●● Impingement tests
TABLE 31.11 Common limps observed in hip disease.
Gait pattern Description
Weak: Trendelenburg May lead to pelvic sway or tilt. The patient 
swings the body over the weak hip to stay 
in balance when it is weight bearing
Painful: antalgic The rhythm is dot–dash, with a short 
period spent on the painful limb
Unbalanced: broad-
based
May be caused by ataxia, e.g. cerebellar 
pathology. The rhythm also tends to be 
disordered
Loss of muscle 
control: high-
stepping
May be due to loss of proprioception or a 
drop foot. This leads to difficulty in clearing 
the toes during the swing phase: the 
patient compensates by externally rotating 
the leg and flexing the hip and knee
Deformity: in-toeing Can be caused by persistent femoral 
anteversion. The foot may catch on the 
back of the calf of the weight-bearing leg, 
tripping the patient
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
KNEE
The knee is a synovial hinged joint. There are three compart-
ments: medial, lateral and patellofemoral. The quadriceps, 
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   453 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS454
quadriceps tendon, patella, patellar tendon and tibial tuber -
osity comprise the extensor mechanism of the knee. 
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) provides primary 
restraint to anterior displacement of the tibia. The posterior 
cruciate ligament (PCL) provides posterior restraint of the 
tibia. The medial collateral ligament (MCL) resists valgus 
and external rotation forces whereas the lateral collateral lig-
ament (LCL) resists varus forces.
Look
Look at the front, sides and back of both knees and for any 
walking or mobility aids or external appliances.
 ● Skin. Check for scars.
 ● Soft tissues. Look for wasting of the quadriceps and swell-
ing in front of and behind the knee.
 ● Bone. Look for overall alignment (varus or valgus defor -
mity). Measure the intermalleolar distance if a valgus 
deformity is present. With varus deformity , measure the 
distance between the medial aspects of the knees. From 
the side of the knee, look for fixed flexion or recurvatum 
hyperextension).
Gait
Look for antalgic gait (osteoarthritis) and varus thrust (col-
lapse of the knee into more varus as weight is taken on that 
leg). 
Feel
 ● Soft tissue. Feel the tendons for quadriceps and patellar 
tendon rupture.
 ● Fluid displacement or stroke test. First empty the medial 
side of the knee by stroking any fluid up from the medial 
side into the suprapatellar pouch. Then place your hand 
on the superior aspect of the suprapatellar pouch and 
move it inferiorly, attempting to displace any fluid into 
the knee joint. Maintain your hand at the level of the 
superior pole of the patella. Now look to see whether the 
normal gutters on either side of the knee are less notice -
able because of fluid distension. Stroke the back of your 
hand over each gutter in turn. Look at the opposite gutter 
to see if there is cross-filling.
 ● Patellar tap test. This test is used when a large effusion is 
present. Place one hand on either side of the patella and, 
with the other hand, push down on the patella. With an 
effusion, fluctuance is present as the patella moves towards 
the joint.
 ● Bone. Feel the tibial tuberosity, inferior pole of the patella, 
patellar facets, origin and insertion of the knee ligaments 
and joint line (medial and lateral). Remember to palpate 
for any popliteal swellings. Note the height of the patella. 
Move
The knee moves principally in flexion (0–135°) and exten -
sion (from 0 to −10°) (Figure 31.29). Assess hyperextension 
by placing one of your hands on the anterior aspect of the 
distal femur. Now lift the distal tibia with the other hand. 
Measure the angle or the height that the heel can be lifted off 
the couch before the knee starts to move. 
Perform a lag test to assess the integrity of the extensor 
mechanism. The patient is asked to lift the whole leg up off 
the bed (10°) with the knee straight. They are then asked to 
bend the knee and then try to straighten it again with the 
leg still held in the air. If they are unable to re-straighten the 
knee they have a positive lag. This indicates significant weak-
ness of the quadriceps mechanism. 
In the presence of an apparent fixed flexion deformity of 
the knee (seen in osteoarthritis), decide whether this is aris -
ing from the knee or the hip joint. To differentiate, sit the 
patient up with the knees hanging over the edge of the couch; 
this obliterates the effect of any hip flexion deformity. Pas -
sively try to extend the knee fully. With a flexion deformity of 
the knee, this is not possible. 
Special tests
Collateral ligaments
To assess the ligaments, place the leg under your arm. Flex 
the knee to 10° (not more) to relax the posterior capsule (the 
MCL and LCL are taut in full extension and lax in flexion). 
Stress each ligament in turn by applying a valgus or varus 
force. W ith your index fingers simultaneously palpate over 
the collateral ligaments. Assess for signs of instability (exces-
sive opening of the joint). The quality of the end point should 
be noted (is it firm or spongy?). Compare both sides (Figure 
31.30). 
Figure 31.29 (a) Knee flexion and (b) extension.
(b)
(a)
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   454 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the knee 455
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
 ● Medial collateral ligament. A lax MCL or deficient lateral 
compartment may cause knee instability when applying a 
valgus stress. It is important to note that the valgus stress 
test should be applied with the knee in 30° of flexion. Val-
gus instability in full extension (0°) should alert you to a 
possible posterior structure injury (e.g. posterior capsule, 
posterior cruciate ligament).  
 ● Lateral collateral ligament. A lax LCL or deficient medial 
compartment may cause knee instability when applying 
a varus stress in 10° of flexion. Instability in full exten -
sion (0°) suggests injury to the posterior structures. In a 
suspected lateral injury, evaluation of the peroneal nerve 
must be performed. 
Anterior cruciate ligament
The most sensitive test for evaluation of the ACL is the Lach-
mann test.
 ● The Lachmann test  (Figure 31.31). Flex the knee 
to 15–30° and pull the proximal tibia gently forwards. 
Excessive laxity may indicate rupture of the ACL. Ante-
rior translation of the tibia associated with a soft or no 
end point is a positive test. The test may be negative in 
chronic ruptures because the ACL stump can scar to the 
PCL.
 ● Anterior draw test (Figure 31.32a). Flex both knees to 
90° and look for a posterior sag (compare the height of 
the tibial tuberosities looking from the side). This may 
indicate an injury to the PCL. Stabilise the feet by sitting 
on them. Now place your hands around the proximal and 
posterior aspect of the tibia. With your index fingers, push 
up the hamstrings to encourage them to relax. Now draw 
the tibia gently forwards and measure any laxity, compar-
ing it with the other knee. The degree of laxity can be 
graded: grade I (0–5 mm), grade II (5–10 mm) and grade 
III (>10 mm). 
Posterior cruciate ligament
The PCL is the primary restraint to posterior tibial translation 
between 30 and 90° of knee flexion. At 90°, the PCL accepts 
95% by the degree of posterior translation of the tibia with 
the knee in 90° of flexion. Look for a posterior sag with the 
knees flexed to 90°. The posterior draw test is the most reli -
able clinical test for a PCL injury.
 ● Posterior draw test  (Figure 31.32b). Perform the test 
with the knee flexed to 90°. Push the anterior aspect of 
Figure 31.30 Assessing the medial (a, b) and lateral (c, d) collateral ligaments.
Figure 31.31 Lachmann’s test: flex the knee to 15–30° and pull the 
proximal tibia forwards.
(b)
(d)
(a)
(c)
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   455 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS456
the proximal tibia posteriorly and compare any laxity 
with the other side. If more than 10 mm of posterior tib -
ial translation is noted at 30 and/or 90° of knee flexion, 
a combined PCL and posterolateral corner injury may be 
present. An evaluation of the competency of the postero-
lateral corner is necessary. 
Menisci
The presence of palpable joint line tenderness is the most 
sensitive clinical examination test for a meniscal tear. Flex 
the knee to 90° and palpate the joint line using your thumb 
and index finger. Note any areas of tenderness. Tests for 
meniscal damage are not very reliable but, combined with 
a history of mechanical symptoms, locking, catching and 
pain, may be helpful. With posterior medial meniscal tears 
patients suffer pain on high flexion or squatting. The well-
known test for meniscal tears is McMurray’s test. The patient 
lies supine with their knee flexed to 45° and hip flexed to 45°. 
The examiner braces the lower leg: one hand holds the ankle; 
the other hand holds the knee. For assessment of the medial 
meniscus, palpate the medial joint line with knee flexed. A 
‘click’ may be felt suggesting meniscus relocation. A valgus 
stress is applied to the flexed knee. Externally rotate the leg 
(toes point outward), and slowly extend the knee while it is 
still in valgus.
Patellofemoral joint
The patella normally enters the trochlea from a lateral posi -
tion and becomes centralised with increasing knee flexion, 
travelling in a ‘J’ pattern.
 ● Patellar tracking (Figure 31.33). Sit the patient and ask 
them to let their legs hang off the end of the couch with 
the knees flexed to 90°. Ask the patient to extend the 
knee slowly to full extension. Towards the end of exten-
sion, look for lateral subluxation of the patella (‘J’ sign). 
This indicates maltracking.
 ● Patellar apprehension  (Fairbank’s) test (for instability). 
Attempt to displace the patella laterally with the knee in 
(b)
(a)
Figure 31.32 (a) Anterior draw test for anterior cruciate ligament 
stability; (b) posterior draw test for posterior cruciate ligament sta -
bility.
Thomas Porter McMurray , 1887–1949, Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Liverpool University, Liverpool, UK.
Sir Harold Arthur Thomas Fairbank , 1876–1961, orthopaedic surgeon, King’s College Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 31.33 (a, b) Patellar tracking.
(a)
(b)
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   456 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the foot and ankle 457
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
extension. Patients with instability contract their quadri-
ceps muscle or complain of pain. With the patient supine 
and the quadriceps relaxed, flex the knee to 30° while 
trying to push the patella laterally. With instability the 
patient may react with apprehension. In addition, the 
quadriceps muscle may contract in an attempt to realign 
the patella. 
Patellar tendon
The patellar tendon serves as the distal limit of the exten -
sor mechanism. Rupture usually occurs at the osseotendinous 
junction. This results in an inability actively to perform and 
maintain full knee extension. A rupture presents with diffuse 
swelling in the anterior knee. A high-riding patella (patella 
alta) is present secondary to the unopposed pull of the quadri-
ceps muscle. A defect in the tendon is usually palpable. When 
the rupture extends through the medial and lateral retinacu -
lae, active extension is lost.
 ● Foot shape. Assess the overall shape of the forefoot from 
the front. From the side, look for the normal medial arch 
(Figure 31.34a). The hindfoot is best appreciated from 
behind. Now look at the vertical relationship between the 
Achilles tendon and the calcaneus (normal heel valgus of 
5–7°). Look from behind and count the number of toes 
that can be seen. The ‘too many toes’ sign demonstrates 
increased forefoot abduction (pes planus (flat foot)) and 
a splayed forefoot. Foot shapes that may be encountered 
include neutral foot (no overall deformity), skew foot 
(hindfoot valgus and forefoot adduction), metatarsus 
adductus (neutral hindfoot and adduction of the meta -
tarsus), pes planus (collapse of the medial arch) and pes 
cavus or high arch (increased medial arch). The possible 
causes of pes planus and pes cavus are shown in Summary 
boxes 31.10 and 31.11, respectively. 
Summary box 31.9
Knee examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● Front – alignment (varus/valgus/rotational deformity), muscle 
bulk
●● Side – fixed flexion deformity
●● Back – popliteal swellings, hamstrings
●● Gait – antalgic, high stepping gait (foot drop), varus thrust 
Inspection of the supine patient
●● Skin, scars, soft tissues, deformity
●● Palpation of the extensor mechanism, medial and lateral joint 
lines and collateral ligaments, hamstrings, tibial tuberosity, 
fibular head
Movements
●● Flexion and extension
Special tests
●● Patellar apprehension test and extensor mechanism
●● Cruciate ligaments
●● Collateral ligaments
●● Menisci
CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF THE 
FOOT AND ANKLE
The foot can be divided into three parts: the hindfoot (calca-
neus, talus), the midfoot (navicular, cuboids, cuneiforms) and 
the forefoot (metatarsals and phalanges).
Look
Ask the patient to stand, and assess the overall limb align -
ment. Assess pelvic obliquity, limb length discrepancy (and 
its level), valgus/varus deformities of the knee and rotational 
alignment. Check for contractures of the hips and knees. 
Now focus your attention on the foot itself:
Figure 31.34 (a) Normal medial longitudinal ar ch of the foot. (b) 
Clinical and radiological appearance of pes cavus.
(a)
(b)
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   457 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS458
 ● Skin. A bunion or red swelling on the medial aspect of 
the metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ) is common. This 
is an area of inflamed skin with an underlying subcuta-
neous bursa and a joint osteophyte. Systemic manifes -
tations include gouty tophi and thin fat pads under the 
metatarsal heads as seen in rheumatoid arthritis. Corns 
are callosities which form where toes rub against the 
inside of shoes. Remember to assess the appearance of 
the nails.
 ● Soft tissues . Swelling may indicate soft tissue or joint 
pathology. Muscle wasting is most commonly seen on the 
dorsum of the foot and in the clefts between the metatar -
sals. If this is present, a full neurological examination of 
the upper and lower limbs should be performed, including 
the spine.
 ● Bones. Look for any bony prominences or exostoses. 
Common forefoot deformities are shown in Table 31.12. 
Gait
Look for a high stepping gait (foot drop), painful (antalgic) 
gait (ankle and foot joint pain) and a short propulsive phase 
(forefoot pain). 
Footwear
Inspect the footwear. This may reveal areas of abnormal 
weight bearing. With normal wear of the sole, a corner is 
typically worn off the posterolateral aspect of the heel (heel 
strike). In addition, there may be a circular wear pattern 
under the ball of the big toe (toe-off phase).
 ● External appearance. Look at the materials used, the 
metal supports and heel raise, depth and width.
 ● Internal appearance. Look at the insoles, arch supports 
and heel cups.
Feel
 ● Skin. Reduced sensation in a glove and stocking distribu-
tion is seen with diabetes.
 ● Soft tissues. The posterior tibial and the dorsal pedis 
pulses should be identified (Figure 31.35). Palpate the 
tibialis anterior tendon and the long extensor tendons on 
the dorsum of the foot. From the back, palpate the Achil-
les tendon. Palpate the peroneal tendons from the lateral 
side and the tibialis posterior tendon from the medial side. 
The sinus tarsi can be assessed. This is an anatomical space 
bounded by the talus and calcaneus and is recognisable as 
a soft-tissue depression anterior to the lateral malleolus. It 
is filled with fat and the extensor digitorum brevis muscle. 
Sinus tarsi syndrome may occur. This may be caused by 
injury to the interosseous talocalcaneal ligament or the 
subtalar joint. There is pain and tenderness over the sinus 
tarsi with subjective hindfoot instability. The pain is char-
acteristically relieved by local anaesthetic injection.
 ● Bones. Feel for deformity, bony prominences and loose 
bodies:
 ● ankle joint: the medial and lateral malleoli, anterior 
and posterior joint line, lateral gutter and ligament 
complex, the syndesmosis (front of the ankle), medial 
gutter and medial ligament complex;
 ● subtalar joint: palpate each facet;
 ● midtarsal joints: the talonavicular and calcaneocuboid 
joints;
 ● tarsometatarsal joints (TMTJ): note that the second 
TMTJ is several millimetres proximal to the others; 
movement is minimal in the second ray, limited in the 
Summary box 31.10 
Causes of pes planus
●● Normal variant
●● Hyperlaxity syndrome, e.g. Marfan’s syndrome 
●● Tarsal coalition – rigid and painful flat foot (see Figure 31.39a) 
●● Tibial posterior dysfunction
Summary box 31.11 
Causes of pes cavus (Figure 31.34b)
●● Spinal anomalies, e.g. spina bifida 
●● Hereditary sensorimotor neuropathies, such as Charcot–
Marie–Tooth disease 
●● Charcot foot (e.g. neuropathic foot) 
●● Post-compartment syndrome (e.g. Volkmann’s ischaemic 
contracture)
Antoine Bernard-Jean Marfan , 1858–1942, physician, Hôpital des Infants-Malades, Paris, France, described this syndrome in 1896.
Jean Martin Charcot , 1825–1893, physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Pierre Marie , 1853–1940, neurologist, Hospice de Bicêtre, Paris, France, later became Professor of Pathological Anatomy in the Faculty of Medicine, and finally, 
in 1918, Professor of Neurology.
Howard Henry Tooth , 1856–1925, physician, St Bartholomew’s Hospital and the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen’s Square, London, UK, described 
peroneal muscular atrophy in 1886, independently of Charcot and Marie.
TABLE 31.12 Common forefoot deformities.
Deformity Metatarsophalangeal joint Proximal interphalangeal joint Distal interphalangeal joint
Claw toe Hyperextension Flexion Flexion
Hammer toe Normal Flexion Flexion
Mallet toe Normal Normal Flexion
Hallux valgus or varus Valgus or varus position Normal –
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   458 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the foot and ankle 459
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
third ray, moderate in the fourth and fifth rays and very 
variable in the first ray.
 ● Specific structures to palpate:
 ● calcaneus (heel bone): the most common cause of 
pain is plantar fasciitis; this may present with numb -
ness, burning and electric shock sensations, which are 
worse in the morning and improve as the day goes on; 
identify the exact point of tenderness;
 ● tendons: examine for contracture of the Achilles ten -
don insertion and the peroneal or tibialis posterior 
tendons;
 ● head of talus: invert and evert the patient’s foot;
 ● sustentaculum tali: palpate one fingerbreadth below 
the medial malleolus; this important structure serves 
as an attachment for the spring ligament;
 ● cuneiforms (medial, middle and lateral), MTPJs, web 
spaces and all the forefoot bones. 
Move
The movements of the foot and ankle are linked via the ankle, 
subtalar and midfoot joints. Remember the acronyms PAED 
– pronation, abduction, eversion and dorsiflexion – and SAPI 
– supination, adduction, plantarflexion and inversion. These 
are the two common general foot deformities. 
Ankle (Figure 31.36)
 ● Dorsiflexion. Test dorsiflexion with the knee both flexed 
and extended. If restriction is greater with the knee 
extended than flexed, the contracture is principally in the 
gastrocnemius. Restriction that is equal in all knee posi -
tions is caused by a contracture principally of the soleus.
 ● Plantarflexion. Ask the patient to touch the floor with 
their foot (15°). Weakness suggests injury to the Achilles 
tendon or pathology affecting the S1 nerve root. 
Subtalar joint (Figures 31.37 and 31.38) 
Hold the talar neck and ask the patient to move their heel 
from side to side. Repeat using a hand on the heel to move 
the joint and apply a varus and valgus stress while feeling for 
movements of the talus. Holding the talus as opposed to the 
tibia isolates subtalar from ankle motion. (Normal range is 5° 
in each direction.) 
(a)
(b)
Figure 31.35 (a) Palpation of the posterior tibial pulse. (b) Palpa-
tion of the dorsalis pedis pulse.
Figure 31.36 (a) Ankle dorsiflexion and (b) ankle plantarflexion.
(a)
(b)
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   459 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS460
Midtarsal joint
Hold the heel with one hand and move the forefoot medially 
(adduction = 20°) and laterally (abduction = 10°) with the 
other hand. 
Tarsometatarsal joint 
Hold the midfoot and manipulate each metatarsal up and 
down to estimate the passive range of movement. 
Metatarsophalangeal joint 
Test extension (70–90°) by asking the patient to lift the toes 
to the ceiling and test flexion (45°) by pointing the toes to 
the floor. Normal toe-off requires 35–40° of dorsiflexion. 
Special tests 
Achilles tendon
Feel the gastrocnemius and soleus bellies and the whole 
length of the tendon for gaps (rupture), tenderness or swell -
ing. Also identify the posterolateral (Haglund’s) prominence 
of the calcaneus and palpate the retro-Achilles bursa. 
The test for integrity of the tendon is the Thompson’ s or 
Simmonds’ test. Do not be misled by the patient’s ability to 
stand on tiptoes – some people can do this using their long toe 
flexors alone. Lie the patient prone and allow their calves to 
rest on your forearms. Squeeze each calf in turn and watch for 
movement at the ankle joint. Lack of movement may indicate 
a rupture. 
Subtalar joint flexibility 
Ask the patient to stand on their toes and observe the heel 
from behind; the heel moves normally from valgus to varus, 
indicating flexibility. The Coleman’ s block test is used to 
assess the flexibility of the subtalar joint. Ask the patient 
to stand on a 2-cm block with the great toe over the medial 
edge, resting on the floor. Now look from behind. If the hind-
foot varus remains, the subtalar joint is fixed. If it corrects to 
valgus, the joint is mobile (Figure 31.38). 
Flat foot flexibility 
Use the Windlass and Jack’s tests to distinguish a flexible from 
a fixed flat foot (Figure 31.39).
 ● Windlass test. Ask the patient to stand on their toes, and 
observe the arch of the foot on the medial aspect. As soon 
as the patient stands on their toes, the arch forms. Failure 
of this indicates a fixed flat foot.
 ● Jack’s test. With the patient standing, lift up the great 
toe. The arch should form in the flexible flat foot. 
Ankle stability
Trauma to the ankle is a common cause of instability. Accu-
rate assessment may be difficult in the acute setting because 
of pain.
Figure 31.37 Testing subtalar joint motion.
Figure 31.38 (a, b) Testing subtalar joint flexibility.
(a)
(b)
 ● Inversion. Ask the patient to move their foot in towards 
them.
 ● Eversion. Ask the patient to move their foot out to the 
side.
Patrik Haglund , 1870–1937, Swedish orthopaedic surgeon.
Frankin Adin Simmonds , 1911–1983, orthopaedic surgeon, The Rowley Bristow Hospital, Pyrford, Surrey, UK.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   460 25/10/2017   08:27Clinical examination of the foot and ankle 461
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
 ● Anterior draw test . With the foot resting over the bed, 
hold the heel with one hand and the front of the tibia 
with the other. Move the heel forwards on the fixed tibia. 
Compare with the other side. Instability of the syndesmo-
sis may be palpable (Figure 31.40).
 ● Squeeze test for distal tibiofibular stability . Compress 
the proximal calf. Pain at the ankle may indicate separa -
tion of the distal fibula from the tibia.
 ● Tilt test. Hold the talus at the neck rather than the heel 
so that you can be sure that any tilt is in the ankle and not 
the subtalar joint. 
Tarsometatarsal joint stability 
Stability can be assessed by pushing each joint up and down. 
Standing lateral radiographs may be used in addition.
Tibialis anterior
Ask the patient to walk on their heels with their feet inverted; 
the tibialis anterior tendon can be seen. With the patient’s feet 
resting over the edge of the couch, ask the patient actively to 
dorsiflex and invert their foot to reach your hand. Palpate the 
tibialis anterior muscle.
Tibialis posterior 
Pathology of the tibialis posterior typically presents with pos-
teromedial ankle pain, swelling and gradual onset of a flat 
foot. When assessing the tendon, look for swelling along its 
course, a flat foot with heel valgus, the ‘too many toes’ sign 
and prominence of the talar head. Palpate for tenderness, 
swelling or gaps in the tendon.
 ● To test integrity, ask the patient to perform a single foot 
tiptoe test on both sides. The inability to lift the affected 
heel off the ground is suggestive of a tibialis posterior ten-
don injury or insufficiency.
 ● To test strength , position the foot in the plantarflexed 
and inverted position. Ask the patient to hold this posi -
tion while you push against their foot. 
Dorsiflexors
Tendinitis of the long toe dorsiflexors usually presents in ath-
letes. Pain affects gait in the early contact phase. Palpate for 
swelling, gaps or any tenderness. Ask the patient to move the 
foot into dorsiflexion and to hold this position while you push 
the foot down. 
Inability to dorsiflex the foot is referred to as foot drop. 
Causes include stroke, spinal injury , spinal stenosis or disc 
prolapse, peripheral nerve injury (e.g. sciatic, common and 
deep peroneal) or a peripheral neuropathy. 
Peroneal tendons
Peroneal tendon pathology presents with swelling and/or pain 
of the lateral hindfoot or midfoot. There may be a history 
of the ankle ‘giving way’. Presentations of peroneal tendon 
pathology include:
 ● ‘peroneal spasm’: may be seen in tarsal coalition; here, 
the muscles are usually contracted secondary to the hind-
foot valgus;
 ● peroneal tendon dislocation: attempt to dislocate the ten-
dons by dorsiflexing and everting the foot. 
The peroneus longus may be palpated just before it crosses 
under the foot to insert onto the base of the first metatar -
sal. Ask the patient to plantarflex the first metatarsal. Test 
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 31.39 (a) Flat foot appearance with a reduced medial longi-
tudinal arch; (b) Windlass test; (c) Jack’s test.
Figure 31.40 Anterior draw test.
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   461 25/10/2017   08:27CHAPTER 31  History taking and clinical e xamination in musculoskeletal disease
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS462
strength and integrity by active and resisted eversion while 
you palpate the tendons for swelling, tenderness or gaps.
Morton’s neuroma
This condition represents thickening of the tissue that sur -
rounds the digital nerve leading to the toes as the nerve passes 
under the ligament connecting the metatarsals in the fore -
foot. It is most frequent between the third and fourth toes. 
A neuroma presents with burning pain in the ball of the foot 
that radiates to the involved toes. The condition is difficult 
to diagnose and requires a high index of suspicion. Palpate 
in the web space between the symptomatic toes for a mass. 
Compression of the metatarsals may elicit a ‘click’ between 
the bones (Molders’ click).
FURTHER READING
Ellenbecker TS, Nirschl R, Renstrom P . Current concepts in examina-
tion and treatment of elbow tendon injury. Sports Health 2013; 5(2): 
186–94.
Guosheng Y, Chongxi R, Guoqing C, Junling X, Hailong J. The diagnos-
tic value of a modified Neer test in identifying subacromial impinge-
ment syndrome. Eur J Orthop Surg Traumatol  2017. (Epub ahead of 
print.)
Martin HD, Palmer IJ. History and physical examination of the hip: the 
basics. Curr Rev Musculoskelet Med 2013; 6(3): 219–25.
Rossi R, Dettoni F , Bruzzone M, Cottino U, D’Elicio DG, Bonasia DE. 
Clinical examination of the knee: know your tools for diagnosis of 
knee injuries. Sports Med Arthrosc Rehabil Ther Technol 2011; 3: 25.
Thomas George Morton , 1835–1903, surgeon, The Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Summary box 31.12
Ankle and foot examination
Inspection of the standing patient
●● Front – alignment, foot shape and deformity
●● Side – medial arch
●● Back – heel position
●● Gait – antalgic, high stepping gait (foot drop)
Inspection of the supine patient
●● Skin, scars, soft tissues, bony deformity
●● Palpation of the ankle, subtalar, midfoot and forefoot joints
Movements
●● Dorsiflexion, plantarflexion, inversion, eversion
Special tests
●● Flexibility of the subtalar joint and a flat foot
●● Joint stability, Morton’s neuroma
●● Tendons – tibialis posterior and anterior, Achilles tendon, 
peroneals and dorsiflexors
05_31B-B&L27_Pt5_Ch31.indd   462 25/10/2017   08:27Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives:
 • To understand the important issues behind a patient’s 
sporting injury in the context of taking a history
 • To know the common sports injuries
 • To know the appropriate ways of imaging to confirm or 
refute a diagnosis
 • To assess the patient and offer treatment and 
rehabilitation plans
Chapter
Sports medicine and sports injuries
32 
INTRODUCTION
Regular physical exercise is integral to the body staying 
healthy. However, stressing the human body to its limits may 
lead to injury. Sports medicine is the science of understand -
ing how these injuries can be avoided, recognised when they 
do occur, and then treated appropriately. Sports injuries are, 
in principle, the same as other injuries. The major difference 
can be in the expectations of the patients. The injuries can be 
classified into three broad groups. Acute extrinsic injuries are 
those which arise from a direct external blow. These are com-
monly wounds, bruises and fractures. Acute intrinsic injuries 
result from failure of the patient’s anatomical structures as 
a result of excessive loading. Examples are tendon ruptures, 
avulsion fractures and ligament injuries. Chronic injuries are 
those with an insidious or unknown onset and commonly 
involve degeneration or failure secondary to repetitive load -
ing. Examples are tendinosis of the Achilles tendon and stress 
fractures.
1 How was the injury sustained? 
2 What type of training are they undertaking: mixed train -
ing or only one type of sport? 
3 How many hours of training are they doing and has this 
changed recently?
4 Have they had previous injury? When did they sustain the 
injury and what rehabilitation have they had? 
5 What are they aiming for in the way of competitions or 
level of sport that they perform?
6 Do they want to compete again or are they worried about 
competing?
The examination should follow the system described in 
Chapter 31.
TENDON DISEASE
Tendons can become weak and/or painful because of physical 
damage or as a result of inflammation of the tendon sheath 
around them (peritendonitis). Tendon injury is either due to 
overload (the strength of the tendon being exceeded by the 
force applied) or to overuse, where there is repetitive load 
leading to fatigue and failure. In this case the patient may 
present with tendinosis rather than rupture.
Current opinion now accepts that both tendinopathy and 
tenosynovitis are predominantly degenerative but do contain 
an inflammatory response on histology so the word ‘tendinitis’ 
can still be used.
Overuse injuries
Internal factors
Overuse injury can be precipitated in a tendon by decreased 
oxygen supply , decreased nutrition, hormonal changes, 
chronic inflammation and ageing. 
Summary box 32.1 
Types of sports injury
●● Acute extrinsic – caused by direct external blow (bruises)
●● Acute intrinsic – internal failure secondary to excessive 
external force (ligament tear)
●● Chronic – repetitive and stress injuries
DIAGNOSIS OF SPORTS 
INJURIES
There are some additional questions that need to be asked in 
the history when treating a patient with a sports injury:
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   463 25/10/2017   08:28CHAPTER 32   Sports medicine and sports injuries
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS464
External factors
A change in the environment (new running surface) or worn 
out equipment (old running shoes) may both bring about an 
overuse injury, as can excessive training when the patient is 
not fit enough to tolerate it.
In younger patients, the weakest area of a tendon is the 
apophyseal attachment. In adults, the musculotendinous 
junction is more liable to injury. In adolescents, the common 
sites of injury are tendon insertions. Examples are the anterior 
superior iliac spine (origin of sartorius), the anterior inferior 
iliac spine (rectus femoris), the lesser trochanter of the femur 
(iliopsoas), and the ischial tuberosity (hamstrings). 
nostic. However, the laxity of ligaments varies dramatically 
between patients and with age so absolute measurements are 
not reliable. When the diagnosis remains in doubt, imag-
ing can be useful, for example ultrasound or magnetic reso -
nance imaging (MRI). Grade 1 and 2 ligament injuries can 
be treated with pain relief, splinting and gentle mobilisation 
to avoid stiffness. Grade 3 injuries may require surgical repair 
to bring together the torn ends of the ligament, or another 
reconstructive procedure. The treatment depends on the 
site of the ligament and joint stability. For example, in ankle 
inversion injuries, the patient will recover without anterior 
talofibular ligament reconstruction.
Summary box 32.2 
Problems with tendons
●● Rupture due to excessive loads and internal delamination
●● Pain and degeneration due to repetitive or abnormal loading
MUSCLE INJURY
Muscle injuries or strains can be classified into a sprain, partial 
tear, complete tear or re-tear (if there has been previous injury). 
Most will heal spontaneously but may leave a painless defect in 
the muscle belly (Table 32.1). Muscle injuries leave an area of 
weakness that can re-tear in 30% of athletes. Despite extensive 
research we cannot predict the return to sport after such an 
injury but if the injury is large and involves the myotendinous 
junction it is more significant and likely to take longer.
TABLE 32.1 Muscle injuries graded according to severity.
Grade Description
0 Normal muscle
1 Subtle muscle abnormality/sprain
2 Definite muscle disruption without muscle retraction
3 Complete muscle tear with retraction
LIGAMENTS
Ligament injuries are acute intrinsic injuries and can be 
graded according to their severity (Table 32.2). 
Summary box 32.3
Ligament injuries
●● Difficult to assess clinically in the acute phase
●● Use the opposite side for comparison
●● If doubt, use imaging (ultrasound or MRI) to assess further
●● Surgical repair may be needed for complete disruption, in a 
small percentage
●● The stability of the joint is the most important factor in making 
this decision
BURSAE
Bursae are found between the joints and overlying tissues or 
muscles and tendons and are small fluid-filled endothelium-  
lined sacks. They decrease frictional forces between struc -
tures, but can become inflamed. The most commonly affected 
sites are over the first metatarsophalangeal joint (bunion), 
in front of the patella (housemaid’s knee), behind the elbow 
(olecranon bursa) and the shoulder (subdeltoid subacromial 
bursitis). They can become inflamed or even infected. On the 
rare occasion that they fail to settle with appropriate treat -
ment, they can be surgically excised. 
BONE FRACTURES AND STRESS 
FRACTURES
True fractures can be encountered in any sport, but the frac -
ture type found more commonly in sportsmen and -women is 
a stress fracture. This is caused by multiple repetitions of mod-
erate loads that would not be expected to cause fracture in a 
single application. Clinically these lesions give poorly local -
ised pain, which is worse on exercise. They are more common 
in runners, especially women who may have reduced bone 
density. The most common sites for stress fractures are the 
metatarsals and the tibia. 
INJURIES ASSOCIATED WITH 
INDIVIDUAL SPORTS 
Golf 
The shoulder and the back are the commonest site of over -
use injuries. Golfer’s elbow or medial epicondylitis is due to 
TABLE 32.2 Ligament injuries graded according to severity.
Grade Description
0 Normal ligament
1 No increase in joint laxity but there is tenderness around 
the injured ligament
2 Partial disruption of the ligament fibres with increased 
joint laxity, and a soft end point
3 Complete disruption of the ligament; there is a marked 
increase in joint laxity with no end point clinically
In the acute phase it may be difficult to assess the liga -
ment injury thoroughly. Once the acute injury has settled, 
 any  difference in laxity when comparing the two sides is diag-
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   464 25/10/2017   08:28Injuries associated with individual sports  465
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
a common flexor origin tendinosis. It does not just occur in 
golfers. Tennis elbow is, however , more common in golfers 
than golfer’s elbow.
Tennis
Tennis elbow is tendinosis of the common extensor origin. It 
occurs in novice tennis players but not the elite.
Partial ruptures of the calf muscles, especially the medial 
head of the gastrocnemius, are also found in tennis play -
ers (called tennis leg), and in other sports requiring sudden 
extreme acceleration. 
Rowing 
The common problems with rowing (Figure 32.1) are rib 
fractures and intercostal muscle tears (Figure 32.2), and 
tendon problems such as tenosynovitis at the wrist, which 
is more common than intersection syndrome (a tendinosis 
where the first and second extensor tendon compartments of 
the forearm cross) 
Football 
The main injuries are fractures, groin injuries, muscle tears 
and twisting injuries to the knees and ankles leading to lig -
ament tears (Figures 32.3 and 32.4). Injuries specific to 
football include turf toe and neuromas to the deep peroneal 
nerve on the dorsum of the foot due to repetitive trauma from 
kicking the football. Goalkeepers get wrist and hand injuries, 
including occult scaphoid fractures. 
Figure 32.1  Rowers in action at an English regatta (© Vladislav 
Gagic–Fotolia).
Figure 32.2 Coronal magnetic resonance imaging scan of the chest 
showing an intercostal muscle injury in a rower.
Figure 32.3 A footballer in action (© lilufoto–Fotolia).
Figure 32.4 Ultrasound showing a patellar tendinosis with neovas -
cularisation in a footballer (arrow).
Rugby
This is a high intensity contact sport so injuries include con-
cussion due to head trauma, neck injuries including fractures 
to the cervical spine, muscle tears, shoulder, acromioclavic-
ular joint and finger injuries, including dislocation of the 
phalanges, and tendon injuries e.g. rugger jersey finger where 
there is injury to the flexor profundus tendon. 
Javelin
Javelin throwers get injuries due to abnormal stresses on the 
elbow similar to those seen in baseball. This causes abnormal-
ities of the ulnar collateral ligament and capitellum. 
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   465 25/10/2017   08:28CHAPTER 32   Sports medicine and sports injuries
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS466
Swimming
Shoulder injuries are more common in swimmers, especially 
in those performing the crawl or the butterfly stroke because 
these can lead to impingement syndromes (rotator cuff tendi-
nosis and tears).
Volleyball, netball and basketball 
Hand injuries are common, as is patellar tendinopathy and 
internal derangements of the ankle and knee. 
Ballet dancing
Ballet dancers (Figure 32.5) have problems with posterior 
impingement of the ankle and tendinopathy of the flexor hal-
lucis longus tendon when working on pointe (tip-toe). Stress 
fractures are also found in female dancers due to the abnormal 
stresses (Figure 32.6). Male ballet dancers are prone to back 
and shoulder injuries due to carrying ballerinas. Young danc -
ers often complain of clicking and pain around the hip which 
may be due to iliopsoas tendinopathy.
Snowboarding and skiing 
Participants in both sports (Figure 32.7) have the full range 
of injuries associated with a high-speed sport. The rigid 
high boots used by skiers protect the ankle, but increase the 
loads transmitted up the limb, risking fracture of the tibia 
and  ligament disruption of the knee (especially the anterior 
 cruciate) (Figure 32.8 ). Novice snowboarders tend to get 
wrist fractures, whilst all levels of snowboarder can injure the 
acromioclavicular joint. 
Figure 32.5 Ballet dancer on pointe (© Zoja–Fotolia).
Figure 32.6 Magnetic resonance imaging short T1 inversion recov -
ery (MRI STIR) sequence showing a stress injury to a metatarsal.
Figure 32.7 Skiers in action (©Alexander Rochau–Fotolia).
Anterior 
cruciate 
ligament
Medial 
collateral 
ligament
Lateral
collateral 
ligament
Figure 32.8 A knee magnetic resonance imaging scan showing a 
significant skiing injury with tears of the anterior cruciate ligament, 
medial collateral ligament and lateral collateral ligament.
Martial arts: judo, karate and 
taekwondo
All are associated with acute extrinsic injuries (direct blows) 
and acute intrinsic injuries (failure of ligaments and other 
structures due to sudden excessive loads).
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   466 25/10/2017   08:28Injuries according t o region of symptoms 467
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Weight training
Weight training tends to produce the third type of sports injury 
(chronic), for example problems with the shoulders, including 
pectoralis major tears, carpal tunnel syndrome and the spine.
Kayaking
This causes problems with the forearm, including posterior 
interosseous nerve compression at the level of the elbow. 
Marathon running
Problems include iliotibial band syndrome and stress fractures 
in the feet and shins.
INJURIES ACCORDING TO 
REGION OF SYMPTOMS
Pelvis, hip and thigh injuries 
 ● Thigh bruise  (Charley Horse, corked thigh or helmet 
thigh): These occur in all contact sports and can be both 
large and painful. They require prolonged rest as they 
are slow to settle and can rebleed. A pseudo-tumour may 
develop. Surgical drainage should be avoided if possible as 
it can lead to infection of the haematoma. Percutaneous 
aspiration of the liquefied haematoma under antibiotic 
cover is being performed by some groups to speed recovery 
with good results.
 ● Quadriceps tears : these most commonly occur in the 
rectus femoris muscle. They may be due to a direct blow, 
but more commonly they are due to twisting injury and 
occur along the aponeurosis of the rectus femoris, which is 
a weak point where the two muscle bellies join. 
 ● Complete quadriceps rupture: this is less common, but 
may occur when kicking balls or in older patients. The 
patient can often perform a straight leg raise due to trick 
manoeuvres. However, they cannot restraighten the raised 
leg (quadriceps lag). Surgical repair is not usually needed 
in the elderly but is necessary in athletes.
 ● Hamstring injury : this commonly occurs due to twist -
ing injuries following sudden and maximal muscle con-
traction. The injuries most commonly occur in the biceps 
femoris tendon, but can occur in the semimembranosus 
and to a lesser degree semitendinosus. 
Groin pain
This is a very difficult area to assess as referred pain to the 
groin can come from many sources. 
These include:
 ● the hip (labral tears and osteoarthritis);
 ● adductor tendon injuries;
 ● stress fractures of the femur, especially femoral neck and 
pubis; 
 ● hernias (these may be small and include femoral and obtu-
rator hernias); 
 ● tumours;
 ● sexually transmitted diseases;
 ● gynaecological and urinary problems;
 ● referred pain from the lumbar spine. 
Adductor tendon injuries produce localised tenderness 
over the adductor origin. 
A labral tear of the hip may cause clicking and pain; char-
acteristically, on examination this occurs in internal  rotation 
and adduction – the impingement sign (see Chapter 31).
Knee injury 
Acute
Knee injuries are common in contact sports because of studded 
boots applying excessive loads to the knee in rapid turning. It 
is also a common site of injury in skiers. If the patient cannot 
play on and the knee swells immediately then there is likely 
to be blood in the knee (haemarthrosis). The most likely 
causes are a tear of the anterior cruciate ligament, dislocation 
of the patella (which usually relocates again immediately), 
and an intra-articular fracture (when there will be marrow fat 
globules visible in the aspirate). 
If the patient plays on and the knee swells later then the 
diagnosis is more likely to be a tear of a meniscus and the fluid 
aspirated will be clear. The early diagnosis of a knee injury is 
very difficult as the knee is too painful to examine. Aspira -
tion of any effusion, using full sterile precautions, followed 
by early physiotherapy to maintain quadriceps strength, will 
allow most acute injuries to settle. 
Patellar dislocation is more common in the hypermobile 
patient and in contact sports. If it has not already relocated, 
straightening the knee allows it to relocate. 
Subsequent diagnosis
Patients who have had a patellar dislocation will have a 
patellar apprehension sign (see Chapter 31). True locking is 
caused by a loose bo dy in the knee (osteochondritis disse -
cans), or a torn meniscus. The patient will be moving nor -
mally at the time (unlike pseudo-locking) and will suddenly 
find that they are unable to straighten or even bend the 
knee. After a period of ‘jiggling’ the knee they may be able 
to release the block and move normally again. Thessaly’s 
test is said to have high sensitivity and specificity for this 
condition. Imaging should be performed on locked knees 
because clinical assessment is difficult and an arthroscopy 
may not be needed. 
If a meniscal tear is diagnosed but is peripheral (where 
there is a blood supply providing an environment for healing) 
then meniscal repair should be undertaken. 
Giving way can be caused by weakness, pain or instabil-
ity. Weakness will usually be the result of quadriceps wasting 
secondary to the injury and is best treated with physiotherapy. 
Patellofemoral pain can arise spontaneously in adoles -
cents, but can also arise after a knee injury when the vastus 
medialis wastes rapidly, and the patella starts to mal-track. 
Clinically the patient will give a history of finding it difficult 
to descend stairs and experience severe pain and giving way 
when trying to move the knee after a period when it has been 
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   467 25/10/2017   08:28CHAPTER 32   Sports medicine and sports injuries
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS468
held still (pseudo-locking). Once again physiotherapy is the 
treatment of choice.
Instability may be the result of disruption of the anterior 
cruciate ligament with or without medial collateral ligament 
damage. The knee will give way on twisting or turning, and 
on examination the Lachmann test (see also anterior draw 
test) may be positive (see Chapter 31).
If physiotherapy fails to build the patient’s muscles enough 
to stabilise the knee (it often does) then reconstruc tion of the 
cruciate ligament must be considered, using a synthetic graft 
or a length of tendon transferred from elsewhere.
If there is a posterolateral corner ligamentous injury in 
addition to the anterior cruciate ligament rupture, then sur -
gery is mandatory to regain stability.
Iliotibial band syndrome is due to a friction injury of the 
iliotibial band both proximally over the greater trochanter 
and distally over the tibia. It occurs most commonly in long 
distance runners, such as marathon runners, and occurs proxi-
mally in females and distally as it extends over the lateral fem-
oral epicondyle in males. If it does not respond to stretching 
and rest then sometimes a steroid injection in the adjacent 
bursae can help. 
Sprains of the ankle should be treated with analgesia (but 
not non-steroidal anti-inflammatories because they decrease 
soft tissue healing) and PRICE (protection, rest, ice, compres-
sion and elevation) until the swelling has subsided, and then 
a physiotherapy programme should be started to reintroduce 
proprioception to the ankle. If this is not done, repeat injuries 
are more likely. 
If there is diastasis of the distal tibiofibular joint then sur-
gery may be required to regain stability of the ankle.
In adolescents, the peroneal tendon retinaculum can 
be torn. This leads to a subluxating peroneal tendon, with 
a painful flicking sensation over the lateral malleolus. In 
younger patients, this is best treated by immobilisation for a 
month, but if this does not resolve the problem then surgical 
intervention may be needed. 
The Achilles tendon is a common site for tendinosis due 
to repetitive trauma. There is a fusiform swelling of the cen -
tral tendon. 
Tendon rupture classically occurs in middle-aged squash 
and badminton players. Simmonds or Thompson test is usu-
ally diagnostic (see Chapter 31). If there is the classic history 
of a feeling of a ‘kick to the calf’ and Simmonds test is nega -
tive, then ultrasound or MRI examination is mandatory as the 
Achilles rupture may be masked by the presence of a plantaris 
tendon. The Achilles tendon (see Chapter 36) can be allowed 
to heal in plaster with the foot plantar flexed to bring the 
tendon ends into contact. This takes several months. Alter -
natively, a surgical repair can be attempted. This opposes the 
ends and so should speed return to function, but risks com-
promising the blood supply to the tendon ends and so delays 
healing if the incision for access is large. In small-incision sur-
gery, the risks are markedly reduced.
Summary box 32.4 
Knee injuries
●● Very difficult to examine in the acute stage clinically
●● Effusions should be aspirated and early physiotherapy started
●● Patellar dislocations will have a positive apprehension sign
●● Anterior cruciate reconstruction should only be undertaken 
once the patient has been given a trial of physiotherapy in 
non-complex injuries (i.e. when there is an isolated anterior 
cruciate ligament rupture)
Ankle injury
Ankle sprains are a common cause of morbidity. Most occur 
due to a predominant inversion when the lateral ligament 
complex and the fibula and lateral talus can be injured. There 
is usually an eversion component to this injury. Isolated ever-
sion or abduction injuries are much less common and will 
cause trauma to the medial ligament complex. 
The ankle should only have radiographs taken if the 
Ottawa ankle rules are fulfilled (Table 32.3) as otherwise the 
likelihood of a fracture is very low.
Ankle dislocations should be reduced immediately as 
otherwise necrosis of the tented skin will occur, and ischaemia 
of the foot.
TABLE 32.3 Ottawa ankle rules.
●● Bone tenderness along the distal 6 cm of the posterior margin 
or at the tip of the lateral malleolus
●● Bone tenderness along the distal 6 cm of the posterior margin 
or at the tip of the medial malleolus
●● Inability to bear weight at the time of the accident or at the time 
of examination
Summary box 32.5
Ankle injuries
●● Dislocated ankles should be reduced immediately
●● Radiographs should only be performed if the Ottawa ankle 
rules are fulfilled
●● Physiotherapy to rebuild proprioception reduces the risk of 
recurrence of ankle sprains
●● In Achilles tendon rupture, Simmonds–Thompson test is often 
positive (when there is no movement of the foot on squeezing 
the calf)
Foot injuries
Turf toe is pain, swelling and stiffness in the first metatarso -
phalangeal joint due to rupture of the plantar plate and injury 
to the joint capsule following hyperextension of the toe. 
Treatment is symptomatic.
Stress fractures are a common source of pain in mara-
thon runners. These cause localised pain over a metatarsal 
on pressure and running. They can be identified by MRI or 
ultrasound. Navicular stress fractures are difficult to detect 
clinically and MRI should be performed if there is unex -
plained pain. Prolonged rest is the best treatment. 
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   468 25/10/2017   08:28Injuries according t o region of symptoms 469
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Shoulder and upper limb injuries
Shoulder dislocations occur in contact sports such as rugby. 
Almost all are anterior. Those who dislocate for the first time 
should be treated with intensive physiotherapy and rehabil -
itation. However, over half will have significant anatomical 
damage (tear of the labrum) (Figure 32.9) and 60% will go 
on to become recurrent dislocators. In these cases, surgical 
stabilisation (either open or arthroscopic) is the only treat -
ment. 
Biceps injuries can occur in the long head of biceps prox -
imally and the distal biceps tendon in weightlifters, wrestlers 
and gym users on anabolic steroids, but can also occur as part 
of a significant rotator cuff injury proximally where the rota -
tor cuff can be torn from the supraspinatus across the anterior 
interval and into the subscapularis tendon. There is no treat-
ment needed in proximal injuries. 
Arm and hand injuries
Medial and lateral epicondylitis are discussed above (Figure 
32.10). Treatment should commence with physio therapy and 
an epicondyle support. Percutaneous interventions should 
then be tried before surgical treatment.
SLAP
tear
Shoulder instability can also result from overuse. This 
happens with throwing sports and also during sports such as 
gymnastics, and while serving in tennis and squash. 
Tendinosis of the rotator cuff can also occur with overuse 
in patients who perform overhead sports repetitively, such as 
tennis players and cricket bowlers. Overload leads to impinge-
ment and then inflammation and tendinosis. Subacromial 
subdeltoid bursitis will cause pain radiating down the arm and 
to the wrist. This can be worse at night. Impingement can be 
significant in the overhead position and the patient may have 
difficulty combing their hair. The supraspinatus tendon can 
also tear, either secondary to impingement or after an acute 
injury. In the younger athlete this should be repaired surgically. 
The acromioclavicular joint can be injured by direct 
impact in wrestlers, rugby players and cyclists. Treatment is 
usually symptomatic as surgical repair is not easy. If osteoar -
thritis develops in the joint, the distal end of the clavicle can 
be excised.
Summary box 32.6
Shoulder injuries
●● Anterior dislocations are initially treated with physiotherapy
●● Recurrent dislocations will require surgical stabilisation
●● Overuse injuries are common in throwing sports
●● Rotator cuff impingement is common
●● Torn rotator cuffs should be repaired in young patients
Figure 32.9  A magnetic resonance arthr ogram of the shoulder 
showing a labral (superior labrum anterior posterior; SLAP) tear in a 
rugby player.
Lateral condyte
Figure 32.10 An ultrasound scan of the common extensor origin at 
the elbow showing a tendinosis with neovascularisation.
De Quervain’s tenosynovitis occurs in repetitive inju  ries 
involving the fingers. This can be treated effectively with 
physiotherapy and steroid injections into the tendon sheath.
Skiers (or gamekeeper’s) thumb occurs where the proxi -
mal phalanx of the thumb is forced radially in a fall. The ulnar 
collateral ligament of the thumb at the level of the metacar -
pophalangeal joint is damaged. If it is avulsed, the aponeuro -
sis of the abductor pollicis brevis can become interposed (a 
Stener lesion) and so surgical intervention in this scenario is 
the only option if this lesion is to repair. 
Mallet fingers or baseball fingers occur when there is a 
rupture of the distal insertion of the extensor tendon into 
the distal phalanx. This can be treated conservatively with 
a mallet splint.
The radial slips of the extensor tendon can be torn at the 
level of the metacarpophalangeal joints in boxing injuries and 
here the retinaculum needs reattaching surgically. 
Disruption of the flexor tendon pulleys in the hand occurs 
in climbers, and leads to bow stringing of the flexor tendons. 
If this occurs, surgical intervention is needed. 
All of these hand injuries can be assessed by the use of 
ultrasound examination using dynamic stress, which is better 
in resolution and specificity than MRI.
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   469 25/10/2017   08:28CHAPTER 32   Sports medicine and sports injuries
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS470
TREATMENT OF INJURIES
Initial care
In the acute phases of a sports injury PRICE describes the 
treatment plan (Table 32.4). 
TABLE 32.4 PRICE for the nonoperative management of 
the acute sports injury.
●● Protection
●● Rest
●● Ice
●● Compression
●● Elevation
Analgesia
In the initial phase of an injury, non-steroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drugs are thought to slow healing, but may reduce pain 
and oedema. This is especially true for fracture healing. Para-
cetamol and codeine have less of an effect on injury healing 
and can also help with pain relief. 
When prescribing any drugs it is important to be aware of 
the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) guidelines on dop-
ing for athletes as some substances are banned in competition 
and training. Spot checks are performed on athletes so they 
need to adhere to this throughout the year. A prohibited list is 
available on their website (http://www.wada-ama.org).
If steroids are needed to help with continued rehabilita -
tion, then a TUE or temporary use exemption certificate needs 
to be given to the athlete so that if they are spot checked for 
drugs they will not be disqualified. 
Rehabilitation
After an initial period of rest, passive movements should be 
started, followed by more active movements as healing occurs. 
Physiotherapy is an essential part of rehabilitation and close 
liaison between the sports doctor and the coach are needed 
in getting an athlete back to their sport. Steroid treatment 
should not be used around the Achilles tendon (according 
to advice from the National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence and the British National Formulary). 
Some patients develop myositis ossificans after a muscle 
haematoma. This presents itself as increasing swelling and 
pain. It can be treated with indomethacin, which helps pre -
vent further formation, but it will resolve naturally. 
FURTHER READING
Brukner P, Clarsen B, Cook J et al. Brukner & Khan’s clinical sports medi-
cine, vol 1, 5th edn. McGraw-Hill, New York, 2017.
MacAuley D. Oxford handbook of sport and exercise medicine , 2nd edn. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Summary box 32.7
Arm and hand injuries
●● Medial and lateral epicondylitis should be treated 
symptomatically
●● Ulnar collateral ligament injuries of the thumb may require 
surgical repair if a Stener lesion is present
●● Flexor tendon pulley injuries require surgical repair
05_32-B&L27_Pt5_Ch32.indd   470 25/10/2017   08:28Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To learn:
 • The salient features relating to the history and 
examination of the spine
 • The investigations commonly used in the field of spinal 
disorders
 • The treatment principles for common conditions 
affecting the spine
 • The global issues in spinal surgery
Chapter
The spine
33
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The lifetime prevalence of low back pain has been reported at 
between 60 and 80%. By contrast, the lifetime prevalence of 
true sciatica is between 2 and 4%. It is generally accepted that 
90% of acute low back pain episodes settle, allowing return to 
work within 6 weeks. However, some 5–7% of the population 
aged between 45 and 64 years will report back problems as 
a ‘chronic sickness’. Up to 70% of acute episodes of sciatica 
resolve within 3 months. 
For an energy efficient posture, cervical and lumbar lordosis 
will balance thoracic kyphosis.
The spinal canal is formed behind the articulated verte -
bral body by the posterior elements of the vertebral column 
and can be divided into a central portion and two lateral 
portions. The central portion is occupied by the thecal sac 
containing the spinal cord which terminates behind the body 
of L1. The lateral portions contain the nerve roots. 
The spinal nerve roots comprise 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 
lumbar, 5 sacral and 1 coccygeal. Dorsal and ventral roots join 
to form spinal nerves. The ventral root and the dorsal root 
ganglion lie within the intervertebral foramen. This foramen 
is bounded superiorly and inferiorly by pedicles, anteriorly 
by the disc and posteriorly by the facet joint. Degenerative 
changes in these structures may lead to neural compromise. 
Laminar overlap within the lumbar spine decreases from L1 
to S1 so that, at the L5–S1 level, access to the intervertebral 
disc requires less bone removal than at a more proximal level. 
The blood supply of the spinal cord is derived from the 
vertebral, deep cervical, intercostal and lumbar arteries. The 
arteries of the spinal cord include the anterior spinal artery 
and two posterior spinal arteries, with the anterior spinal 
artery supplying the majority of the vascular supply to the spi-
nal cord. The radicular artery of Adamkiewicz makes a major 
contribution to the anterior spinal artery, supplying the lower 
spinal cord. It originates on the left in 80% of people, usually 
accompanying the ventral root of T9, T10 or T11, but can 
originate anywhere from T5 to L5. Ligation of this important 
artery may lead to critical ischaemia of the spinal cord. Ligat-
ing segmental vessels over the midpoint of the vertebral body 
will minimise the risk of injury to this important artery during 
anterior approaches to the spine.
Summary box 33.1 
Epidemiology 
●● Low back pain is extremely common 
●● 90% of acute low back pain episodes settle within 6 weeks
●● Sciatica is much less frequent 
●● 70% of acute sciatic episodes settle within 3 months 
CLINICAL ANATOMY
The normal cervical lordosis measures between 35° and 45°. 
The normal lumbar lordosis is between 40° and 80° (mean 
60°) and decreases with age. Most lumbar lordosis occurs 
between L4 and S1. The normal thoracic kyphosis is between 
20° and 50° (mean 35°) and increases with age. When stand-
ing, the normal sagittal vertical axis (sagittal plumb-line) falls 
from the odontoid process through the C7–T1 disc space and 
crosses the spinal column at the T12–L1 disc space, before 
reaching the posterosuperior corner of the S1 vertebral body. 
Albert Adamkiewicz , 1850–1921, Professor of Pathology, the University of Krakow (Cracow), Poland, described the arterial supply to the spinal cord in 1882. 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   471 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS472
PATIENT HISTORY
The commonest reasons for referral to a spinal clinic include 
pain and spinal deformity . A detailed history of the pain 
including site, type, severity, duration, frequency and aggra -
vating factors should be sought. Has there been any history 
of trauma? Is the pain present at night? Is there associated 
pain in the upper limbs (brachalgia) or lower limbs (sciatica)? 
Is there associated numbness, tingling, weakness or difficulty 
with gait? Is there a family history of ankylosing spondylitis 
or rheumatoid arthritis? Are there concurrent medical con -
ditions such as diabetes, peripheral vascular diseases, osteoar-
thritis of the hip or previous malignancies? Are there systemic 
symptoms such as unexplained weight loss, chills or fever? 
Table 33.1 lists the commonly accepted ‘red flags’ that allow 
diagnostic triage into those with serious pathology of the 
spine (such as fractures, tumours, infection or cauda equina 
syndrome) and those without serious pathology. 
tomatic in adult life. How quickly has the spinal deformity 
progressed? It is important to assess skeletal maturity and 
whether the child has gone through a recent growth spurt. 
Has menstruation commenced in the female or has the voice 
dropped in the male, indicating the onset of puberty? 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION 
The patient should be undressed and posture should be evalu-
ated in both the frontal and sagittal planes. Shoulder or waist 
asymmetry suggests the presence of scoliosis. The Adam’s for-
ward bend test will accentuate trunk asymmetry and allow 
appreciation of rib or loin prominence on the convex side 
of each curve. The skin should be examined for cutaneous 
neurofibromata, café-au-lait patches or axillary freckling 
commonly present in neurofibromatosis. Neurological exam -
ination should include abdominal reflexes. Leg lengths should 
be measured. In the case of kyphosis, the sagittal alignment 
and forward gaze should be assessed.
William Adams described the forward bending test for 
scoliosis in 1865. His understanding of the nature of the rota-
tional element of scoliosis was given by a postmortem exam -
ination he performed on an eminent surgeon and geologist, 
Gideon Mantell. The clinical history of Dr Mantell is well 
documented.
Palpation is useful to locate specific areas of tenderness. 
Ranges of motion should be assessed. The normal range of 
motion in the cervical spine is 45° of flexion, 55° of extension, 
70° of rotation and 40° of lateral bend. The normal range of 
motion in the lumbar spine is 40–60° of flexion, 20–35° of 
extension, 15–20° of lateral bending and 3–18° of rotation. 
Schober’s test is a simple clinical test to evaluate spinal mobil-
ity. A tape measure is used to mark the skin midway between 
the posterior superior iliac spines and at points 10  cm proxi-
mal and 5 cm distal to this mark while the patient is standing. 
The patient is then asked to bend forward as far as possible 
and the distance between the two points is measured with 
the patient in the flexed position. Normally one would expect 
to see an increase of at least 5  cm between the two points in 
the erect and flexed positions. A distance of less than 5  cm 
between these points may indicate ankylosing spondylitis. 
Neurological examination of the upper and lower limbs 
will focus on tone, power, coordination, reflexes, sensation 
and gait (Tables 33.4 and 33.5). A rectal examination should 
be performed if there is any concern about cauda equina integ-
rity. The superficial abdominal reflex is an upper motor neu -
rone reflex. It is performed by stroking one of four abdominal 
quandrants in succession. The umbilicus should move toward 
the quandrant that was stroked. The reflex should be sym -
metrical from side to side. Absent or asymmetrical abdominal 
TABLE 33.1 ‘Red flags’: when present in patients with 
back pain, red flags suggest the likelihood of serious 
underlying pathology. 
●● Age <20 years or >50 years  
●● Recent significant trauma 
●● History of malignant disease 
●● Unexplained weight loss
●● Constitutional symptoms (fever, chills) 
●● Immunosuppression (intravenous drug abuse, prolonged 
corticosteroid use)
●● Severe or progressive sensory alteration or motor weakness 
●● Acute difficulty with micturition (painless retention) 
●● Numbness in perineum or buttocks and/or faecal incontinence
Pain may arise from the spine, but non-spinal causes of 
pain must also be considered (Table 33.2). Patients should 
always be asked about the presence of perineal numbness 
(saddle area) and/or difficulties passing urine or faeces, as 
these symptoms may indicate a cauda equina syndrome (Table 
33.3). 
TABLE 33.2 Non-spinal causes of low back pain: referred 
pain.
●● Respiratory, e.g. mesothelioma 
●● Vascular, e.g. abdominal aortic aneurysm
●● Renal, e.g. pyelonephritis 
●● Gastrointestinal, e.g. peptic ulcer, pancreatitis
●● Urogenital, e.g. testicular, ovarian or prostatic cancinoma
Patients should be asked whether the pain is interfering 
with their ability to work. What treatment has the patient 
already tried and how effective were these treatments (e.g. 
analgesics, exercise, physiotherapy or spinal injections)? 
Pending litigation or worker’s compensation claims may have 
a negative prognostic effect on future treatments and there -
fore should be enquired about. 
Spinal deformities, e.g. scoliosis and excessive kyphosis 
(>50°), are generally painless in children, but may be symp -
TABLE 33.3 Cauda equina syndrome presentation. 
●● Low back pain
●● Uni- or bilateral sciatica
●● Saddle anaesthesia
●● Motor weakness in the lower extremities
●● Variable rectal and urinary symptoms
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   472 25/10/2017   08:29Physical examination  473
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
reflexes may indicate intraspinal pathology such as syringo -
myelia or spinal cord injury. 
Myelopathy or upper motor neurone (UMN) lesions are 
suggested by spasticity, motor weakness, hyper-reflexia, pos -
itive Hoffmann’s sign (forceful flexion of the distal phalanx 
of the middle finger results in flexion of the thumb and index 
finger), upgoing Babinski response, and patellar and ankle 
clonus. 
The femoral nerve stretch test is performed with the 
patient in the prone position by extending the hip and flex -
ing the knee. This creates tension on the L2, L3 and L4 nerve 
roots. The femoral nerve stretch test is considered positive if 
radicular pain occurs in the anterior thigh region during the 
test.
The examination should include, where appropriate, 
examination of the shoulder, hip, knee, sacroiliac joint and 
vascular system, as dual pathology is common in the ageing 
community.
In 1979, Waddell and colleagues developed and validated 
a series of signs and tests that have proved helpful in identi -
fying individuals who are magnifying or exaggerating symp-
toms, possibly for secondary gain (Table 33.6).
TABLE 33.4 Neurological evaluation of the upper limb.
Neurological level Motor Sensation Reflexes
C5 Deltoid Lateral arm Biceps (C5–C6) 
C6 Wrist extensors Lateral forearm Brachioradialis (C5–C6)
C7 Triceps Middle finger Triceps (C7–C8)
C8 Long finger flexors Medial forearm No reflex
T1 Interosseus muscles Medial arm No reflex
TABLE 33.5 Neurological evaluation of the lower limb.
Neurological level Motor Sensation Reflex
L2 Hip flexion Anterior thigh, groin No reflex
L3 Knee extension Anterior and lateral thigh Patellar (L3–L4)
L4 Ankle dorsiflexion Medial leg and foot Patellar (L3–L4)
L5 Extensor hallucis longus Lateral leg and foot No reflex
S1 Ankle plantarflexion Lateral foot and little toe Achilles (S1–S2)
Summary box 33.2
Upper motor neurone lesions are characterised by:
●● Increased tone – spastic 
●● Hyper-reflexia 
●● Muscle spasms
●● Motor weakness
●● Disuse atrophy
●● Positive Hoffman’s sign 
●● Ankle and patellar clonus 
●● Upgoing plantar response
Typical signs of radiculopathy (lower motor neurone 
(LMN) lesion) include sensory loss, motor weakness, flaccid 
paralysis, muscle atrophy, loss of reflexes and muscle fascicu -
lation. 
The straight leg raise (SLR) test is performed with the 
patient in the supine position. The leg is elevated with the 
knee straight to increase tension along the L5 and S1 nerve 
roots. The test is positive if the leg elevation provokes radic -
ular pain. The crossed SLR test is carried out by elevating 
the asymptomatic leg, and produces sciatic symptoms in the 
opposite leg. A positive test is associated with a herniated 
disc in 97% of patients. Lasègue’s sign denotes radicular pain 
aggravated by ankle dorsiflexion. 
Summary box 33.3 
Lower motor neurone lesions are characterised by:
●● Decreased tone – flaccid
●● Hyporeflexia
●● Denervation fasciculations 
●● Motor weakness
●● Sensory loss 
●● Severe atrophy
●● Downgoing plantar response
TABLE 33.6 Non-organic physical signs in low back pain.
●● Tenderness: superficial or non-anatomical
●● Simulation tests: axial loading or rotation
●● Distraction tests: variable straight leg raises
●● Regional disturbances: non-anatomical sensory or motor loss
●● Over-reaction: grimacing, muscle tremor, etc.
Johann Hoffmann , 1857–1919, Professor of Neurology, Heidelberg, Germany. 
Joseph Francis Felix Babinski , 1857–1932, neurologist, Hôpital de la Pitie, Paris, France. 
Charles Ernest Lasègue , 1816–1863, Professor of Medicine, University of Paris, and physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   473 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS474
Provocative discography
This investigation involves the placement of a 24-gauge 
needle into the centre of the intervertebral disc in a con -
scious patient. One to 3.5  mL of radio-opaque contrast agent 
is then injected into the disc. The contrast pattern will allow 
the discrimination of different degrees of disc degeneration; 
cottonball or lobular would be considered normal whereas 
irregular, fissured or ruptured would be considered degenerate 
(Figure 33.1). The patient is asked if they are experiencing 
their ‘usual type of back pain’. To diagnose discogenic low 
back pain one must document evidence of disc degeneration 
and concordant pain during the injection. Treatment options 
may include spinal fusion or disc replacement 
Facet joint injections
For patients with facet joint arthropathy, x-ray-guided local 
anaesthetic and steroid injections may be both diagnostic and 
therapeutic for 4–6 weeks. Longer-term relief may be obtained 
by facet joint rhizolysis. This percutaneous procedure dener -
vates the facet joint using heat.
Foraminal epidural steroid injections
For patients with radiculopathy due to a prolapsed interver -
tebral disc or lateral recess stenosis, a targeted foraminal epi-
dural steroid injection of local anaesthetic and steroid may 
provide important diagnostic information and have a lasting 
therapeutic effect. 
Spinal biopsy
Either CT-guided or open biopsy is often performed to obtain 
tissue for diagnostic study in cases of suspected tumour and/
or infection.
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS 
OF THE SPINE
Cervical radiculopathy
Patients present with neck and arm pain (brachalgia), paraes-
thesia and motor weakness in the distribution of the compro-
mised nerve root (radiculopathy). This may be caused by disc 
herniation or degenerative stenosis. Symptoms often respond 
to conservative treatment including physiotherapy and med -
ication for neuropathic pain (amitriptyline, gabapentin or 
pregabalin) or CT-guided foraminal epidural steroid injec -
tions of local anaesthetic and steroid. Intractable pain and/
or functional neurological deficit are indications for surgi -
cal intervention. Surgical options include anterior cervical 
discectomy and fusion (using a cage packed with bone graft 
and plate), cervical total disc replacement (Figure 33.2) or 
posterior laminoforaminotomy. Randomised controlled trials 
have compared anterior cervical discectomy and fusion to 
cervical disc replacement. Similar clinical outcomes have 
been observed in both groups. However, cervical disc replace-
ments preserve motion in the operated level, and may protect 
against adjacent segment disease in the longer term.
INVESTIGATIONS
The most common diagnostic imaging tests used to evaluate 
spinal disorders include plain radiographs, computed tomog-
raphy (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), CT myelog-
raphy and isotope bone scanning. These investigations are 
extremely sensitive, but relatively non-specific. For example, 
at least one-third of asymptomatic patients have been noted 
to have ‘abnormalities’ on MRI scans. All investigations must 
therefore be carefully correlated with the clinical findings.
Plain radiographs
It is not appropriate to order spine radiographs for every 
patient presenting with neck or low back pain. Patients with 
red flag signs or symptoms and those who have not responded 
to conservative treatment require imaging, with most units in 
resource-rich countries utilising MRI (no radiation penalty) 
in this situation. Standing radiographs of the whole spine are 
important for the assessment of scoliosis. Radiographs cannot 
diagnose early-stage tumour or infection, because significant 
bone destruction (between 40% and 60% of bone mass) must 
occur before a radiographic abnormality is detected 
Computed tomography
This investigation is the best test for assessing bone anat-
omy. Three-dimensional reconstructions are often useful for 
the assessment of congenital spinal deformity . However, one 
should remember that a typical CT of the lumbar spine will 
expose the patient to an effective dose of 5–10 milliseiverts 
(mSv), which would be equivalent to 2.5–5 years of back -
ground radiation. 
Magnetic resonance imaging
This allows detailed visualisation of the spinal cord, thecal 
sac, epidural space, intervertebral discs, nerve roots, paraspi -
nal soft tissues and bone marrow. It is contraindicated for 
patients with certain pacemakers and coronary stents, intra -
cranial metal clips, metallic bo dies in the eye, spinal cord 
stimulators and certain drug pumps.
Bone scintigraphy
Isotope bone scans are highly sensitive, but non-specific, 
tests useful for screening the skeletal system for metastatic 
disease, discitis or vertebral body osteomyelitis, or to assess 
the relative activity of bone lesions such as osteoid oste -
oma, osteoblastoma, defects in the pars interarticulares or a 
pseudarthrosis (incomplete fusion). In the case of multiple 
myeloma or purely lytic metastases, the bone scan may not 
show increased activity as these tumours may not stimulate a 
significant osteoblastic response. 
Bone densitometry
Bone density and osteoporosis can be measured using dual-  
energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) of the hip, wrist and spine. 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   474 25/10/2017   08:29Degenerative conditions of the spine 475
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Figure 33.1  Lumbar discography. Anter o-
posterior (a) and lateral (b) radiographs fol -
lowing injection of contrast media into the 
lower three lumbar discs. Morphology: L3/4 
cottonball, L4/5 fissured, L5/S1 ruptured. 
Concordant low back pain was reproduced 
when injecting the L4/5 and L5/S1 discs. No 
pain was experienced when the L3/4 disc was 
injected. The patient underwent a posterolat -
eral fusion L4 to S1. 
(a) (b)
Figure 33.2  Cervical total disc replacement. The 
patient presented with sever e left-sided C6 radicu -
lopathy. MRI scan confirmed a left C5/6 disc hernia-
tion. The patient underwent a C5/6 discectomy and 
decompression of the left C6 nerve root, followed 
by insertion of a cervical disc replacement. Lateral 
radiographs in flexion (a) and extension (b) show 
restored motion to the C5/6 level.
(a) (b)
Cervical myelopathy
Degenerative change in the cervical spine leading to spinal 
cord compression is the commonest cause of cervical myelo -
pathy in patients over 55 years of age. Lower motor neurone 
changes occur at the level of the lesion, with atrophy of the 
upper extremity muscles, particularly the intrinsic muscles of 
the hands. Upper motor neurone findings are noted below 
the level of the lesion and may involve both upper and lower 
extremities. If surgery is considered appropriate then an ante-
rior or posterior decompression may be required. 
Thoracic disc herniation
Thoracic disc herniations that require surgical intervention 
are rare, accounting for less than 2% of all discectomy proce-
dures. Typically, the patient presents with axial pain, radic -
ulopathy or myelopathy. Conservative treatment including 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, physiotherapy and 
general fitness improvement should be considered initially. 
If required, thoracic discectomy may be performed via a 
thoracotomy or, for a soft disc prolapse, via a thoracoscopic 
approach. 
Cauda equina syndrome
Cauda equina syndrome (CES) is rare, accounting for only 
2–6% of all lumbar disc herniations. It presents most com -
monly in the 20–45-year age group, with some or all of the 
following symptoms: low back pain, unilateral or bilateral 
sciatica, lower limb motor weakness, sensory abnormalities 
including saddle anaesthesia, bladder dysfunction (pain -
less retention in early stages, overflow incontinence in later 
stages), sexual and bowel dysfunction. CES may result from 
acute or chronic compression of the cauda equina nerve roots. 
The most frequent cause is a massive central lumbar disc pro-
trusion at L4/5; other causes include lumbar fractures, postop-
erative epidural haematoma, spinal stenosis, spinal tumours 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   475 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS476
Discogenic low back pain
Discogenic low back pain has been defined as a continuum of 
diagnostic categories (internal disc disruption, degenerative 
disc disease, segmental instability) reflecting various stages 
of degenerative pathology affecting the intervertebral disc. 
Not all degenerate discs are painful. Patients typically present 
with chronic relapsing episodes of low back pain between the 
ages of 40 and 60 years. 
A recent study has compared rehabilitation with spinal 
fusion for discogenic pain. Both groups reported reductions in 
disability, with the authors strongly recommending a course of 
rehabilitation before surgical intervention. For those who fail 
to improve with conservative measures, provocative lumbar 
discography (see Figure 33.1) may help to identify the source 
of pain, and surgery in the form of a lumbar spinal fusion (Fig-
ure 33.3) or lumbar disc replacement (Figure 33.4) may be 
considered.  
SPONDYLOL YSIS AND 
SPONDYLOLISTHESIS
Spondylolysis
This is a unilateral or bilateral defect in the pars interarticu-
laris without vertebral slippage. The incidence is reported 
at approximately 6% by the age of 14 years, but is much 
higher in the young athletic population. Many cases remain 
and occlusion of the lumbar arteries by dissection or aneurysm 
of the abdominal aorta.
Cauda equina nerve roots lack epineurium and perineu-
rium, and only have a thin endoneurium root sheath, making 
them more susceptible to compression forces when compared 
with peripheral nerves. The syndrome can result in perma-
nent motor deficit, and bladder, bowel and sexual dysfunction. 
It represents a true spinal emergency and requires urgent sur -
gical decompression. The outcome for patients who undergo 
surgical decompression within 24 hours of the onset of loss of 
bladder or bowel control is significantly better than that of 
those who undergo surgery beyond this 24-hour period.
Summary box 33.4
Cauda equina syndrome
●● Commonest presenting symptoms: perineal numbness, 
painless urinary retention and faecal incontinence
●● Urgent investigation with MRI is required for all suspected 
cases
●● Confirmed CES requires surgical decompression within 24 
hours to achieve optimum outcomes Summary box 33.5
Spinal stenosis
●● Extremely common condition in the 50–70-year age group
●● Classic symptoms: back, buttock, thigh and calf pain
●● Provoked by walking and extended posture 
●● Relieved by flexed posture
●● Symptoms progress in up to one-third of untreated patients
Lumbar disc herniation
Symptomatic lumbar disc herniation occurs during the life -
time of approximately 2–4% of the population. Risk factors 
include family history, male gender, age (30–50 years), heavy 
lifting or twisting, stressful occupation, lower income and cig-
arette smoking.
Over 90% of lumbar disc herniations occur at the L4/5 or 
L5/S1 levels. A posterolateral disc protrusion will affect the 
traversing root, e.g. an L4/5 disc protrusion will affect the 
L5 nerve root. A far-lateral disc protrusion (extraforaminal) 
will affect the exiting nerve root, e.g. a far-lateral L5/S1 disc 
protrusion will affect the L5 nerve root. Symptoms typically 
commence with a perio d of back pain followed by sciatica. 
There may be paraesthesia, motor weakness, loss of reflexes 
and a reduction in straight leg raise.
For simple sciatica, a period of 6–12 weeks of conservative 
treatment is advised. Up to 70% of patients will settle within 
this period. A trial of pregabalin (GABA analogue) and/or 
a transforaminal epidural steroid injection maybe helpful. 
Microdiscectomy is the standard surgical intervention for 
those in whom conservative treatment has failed. The pro-
cedure is carried out in the prone position with radiographic 
confirmation of the correct level. Loupes with a headlight or 
use of the operating microscope greatly facilitate the proce -
dure. A 3–5 cm incision is made with a unilateral take down 
of the multifidus. The spinal canal is entered via removal of 
the ligamentum flavum under the lamina. The thecal sac and 
traversing nerve root are identified. The dura and nerve root 
are retracted medially and the offending disc prolapse incised 
via a transverse annulotomy. The disc fragment is removed 
and the disc space cleared of any remaining nuclear material 
with rongeurs and multiple washouts of the disc space. The 
wound is closed. Patients are generally discharged the next 
morning.
Spinal stenosis
Spinal stenosis may be defined as any type of narrowing of the 
spinal canal, nerve root canal or intervertebral foramen. The 
resultant nerve root compression leads to nerve root isch -
aemia, presenting with back, buttock or leg pain provoked 
by exercise. Spinal stenosis may be congenital, as is the case 
in achondroplasia, or acquired, as is the case for degenerative 
types (commonly presenting between 50 and 70 years of age). 
The narrowing is caused by facet joint hypertrophy, disc bulg-
ing and ligamentum flavum thickening. 
Symptoms of spinal claudication can be distinguished 
from vascular claudication because they are frequently asso -
ciated with neurological symptoms, are often worse in exten-
sion, and pedal pulses are present on clinical examination. 
Symptoms progress in approximately 20–33% of patients who 
receive no treatment. The condition may be treated success -
fully by surgical decompression alone with preservation of the 
facet joints. 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   476 25/10/2017   08:29Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis 477
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
asymptomatic. The diagnosis is difficult to confirm with 
plain radiographs. Reverse gantry CT, MRI and single pho -
ton emission computed tomography (SPECT) are very useful 
investigations for this condition. Treatment involves rest, non- 
steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, activity modifica -
tion and a lumbosacral orthosis. For patients who remain 
symptomatic despite an adequate trial of non-operative care, 
surgery in the form of a direct repair of the pseudarthrosis by a 
Buck’s fusion may be indicated. 
Figure 33.3  Anterior lumbar interbody fusion. (a) The PEEK 
(poly-ethyl-ethyl-ketone) cage has been packed with bone graft prior 
to insertion; (b) and (c) show the anteroposterior and lateral postop-
erative radiographs, respectively. 
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 33.4  Lumbar total disc replacement. (a) Anteroposterior 
radiograph with 30° of cranial inclination. (b) Lateral radiograph with 
the implant appropriately positioned.
(b)
(a)
Summary box 33.6
Spondylolysis
●● Incidence in general population 6% by 14 years
●● Incidence in athletic population 15–47%
●● May be completely asymptomatic/incidental finding on 
radiograph
●● Difficult to image, but MRI proving more useful
●● Conservative treatment: activity modification, antilordotic 
brace 
●● Surgical treatment: direct repair preserving motion or spinal 
fusion if associated disc degeneration
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   477 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS478
TABLE 33.7 Wiltse classification of spondylolisthesis.
Type 1 Dysplastic Associated with congenital 
deficiency of the L5–S1 articulation
Type 2 Isthmic Associated with a lesion of the pars 
interarticulares 
Three subtypes:
2A: lytic defect of the pars
2B: elongated or attenuated pars
2C: acute pars fracture
Type 3 Degenerative 
spondylolisthesis
Segmental instability due to disc 
degeneration/facet arthrosis
Type 4 Traumatic Acute fracture in the region of the 
posterior elements, other than the 
pars interarticulares
Type 5 Pathological Generalised bone disease resulting 
in attenuation of the pars (e.g. 
metabolic, neoplastic)
Type 6 Postsurgical After decompression of the lumbar 
spine
pression. Relevant investigations include full blood count 
(FBC), urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, calcium, 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein 
(CRP), prostate-specific antigen (PSA), serum protein elec -
trophoresis, thyroid function tests (where a thyroid mass has 
been palpated) and nutritional indices. Plain radiographs may 
show an absent pedicle (‘winking owl’ sign), vertebral corti -
cal erosion and/or vertebral collapse. MRI of the whole spine 
will detect most metastases. Most metastases are osteoblastic 
and will show up on bone scintigraphy; however, osteolytic 
lesions such as multiple myeloma and renal cell carcinoma 
may not show up on an isotope bone scan. Metastases from 
the prostate may be sclerotic. Biopsies may be obtained via a 
percutaneous CT-guided method or open biopsy.
Treatment options include orthotics, steroids (dexa -
methasone), radiotherapy, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, 
surgery or a combination of any of the above. Radiotherapy 
promotes reossification of the vertebral body and reduces 
tumour load. It can be very effective for reducing ‘bone pain’. 
Lymphoma, breast, lung and prostate metastases are highly 
radiosensitive. Gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma, metastatic 
melanoma, thyroid and renal carcinoma are radioresistant. 
Small cell carcinoma of the lung, Ewing’s sarcoma, thyroid 
carcinoma, breast carcinoma and neuroblastoma are usually 
sensitive to chemotherapy and should have chemotherapeu -
tic agents as the first-line management. Adenocarcinoma of 
the lung is resistant to chemotherapy. Prostate metastases may 
respond well to antiandrogenic hormone medication. 
Extensive reconstructive tumour surgery should be 
reserved for those patients whose life expectancy exceeds 3–6 
months. For patients with malignant spinal cord compression, 
the combination of decompressive surgery with stabilisation 
and postoperative radiotherapy has been shown to be superior 
in outcome when compared with radiotherapy alone. In one 
randomised trial, surgery and radiotherapy permitted most 
patients to remain ambulatory for the remainder of their lives, 
whereas patients treated with radiotherapy alone spent a large 
portion of their remaining time as paraplegics.
TABLE 33.8 The Meyerding classification for the degree 
of slip of spondylolisthesis.
Grade I 1–25%
Grade II 26–50%
Grade III 51–75%
Grade IV 76–100%
TABLE 33.9 Commonest malignancies that metastasise 
to the spine and their frequency.
●● Breast  21%
●● Lung  14%
●● Prostate  7.5%
●● Renal  5%
●● Gastrointestinal 5%
●● Thyroid  2.5%
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolisthesis is a forward slippage of the vertebral body 
engendered by a break in the continuity or elongation of the 
pars interarticularis and presents in 4% of the adult popu-
lation. Spondylolisthesis can be classified into six types by 
causation (Table 33.7), or by the degree of slip (Table 33.8). 
For skeletally immature patients (<18 years old) who have 
progressive slips in the spine, and in individuals with intracta-
ble low back or radicular pain, or neurological symptoms, sur-
gery may be indicated. For low-grade slips (Meyerding Grade 
I and II) fusion- in-situ is the procedure of choice. If there is 
objective evidence of neural compression (e.g. weakness of 
extensor hallucis longus), a spinal decompression should be 
performed at the same time. For high-grade slips (Meyerding 
Grade III or IV) (Figure 33.5), opinion is divided on whether 
to reduce the slip first and then fuse, or simply to fuse in situ. 
TUMOURS OF THE SPINE
Metastatic tumours
These are the most common tumours affecting the spine, 
accounting for 98% of all spine lesions. The commonest 
malignancies that metastasise to the spine are shown in Table 
33.9. Red flags picked up on history or examination will alert 
the clinician to this possible diagnosis. 
Over 80% of patients with spinal metastases present with 
progressive pain, and only 20% present with spinal cord com-
Summary box 33.7 
Metastatic tumours of the spine 
●● Commonest presentation is progressive spinal pain
●● Whole spine MRI will detect most metastases
●● Surgery is indicated for instability, pain, progressive deformity 
or neurological deficit
James Ewing , 1866–1943, Professor of Pathology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, NY, USA, described this type of sarcoma in 1921. 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   478 25/10/2017   08:29Tumours of the spine 479
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Figure 33.5  High-grade spondylolisthesis. Lateral standing radiograph (a) demonstrates Meyerding 
Grade IV slip associated with high pelvic incidence. Anter oposterior (AP) radiograph (b) demonstrates 
the inverted Napoleon hat sign. T2-weighted mid-sagittal magnetic resonance imaging scan  
(c) shows the ‘domed sacrum’. The patient underwent a modified Gaines procedure under one 
anaesthetic (d), with anterior vertebral resection of L5 along with the L4/5 and L5/S1 intervertebral discs, 
 followed by resection of the posterior elements, articular process and L5 pedicles. AP (e) and lateral 
radiographs (f) demonstrate final reduction of L4 onto the sacrum with pedicle fixation fr om L4 to S2.  
(g) Full-length lateral standing radiograph at 12 months post operatively. 
(a) (b) (c)
(e)(d) (f)
(g)
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   479 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS480
Primary tumours of the spine
Primary bone tumours of the spine account for only 2% 
of all spinal tumours. They arise de novo  in the bone, car -
tilage, neural or ligamentous structures of the spine. They 
may be benign, intermediate or malignant. Benign primary 
spine tumours include osteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma (Fig-
ure 33.6), chondroma, chondroblastoma, chondromyxoid 
fibroma, giant cell tumours, haemangioma, lymphangioma 
and lipoma. Intermediate primary spine tumours include 
aggressive osteoblastoma, haemangiopericytoma, haeman-
gioendothelioma and chordoma. Malignant primary spinal 
tumours include osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, Ewing’s 
sarcoma, neuroectodermal tumours, malignant lymphoma, 
myeloma, angiosarcoma, fibrosarcoma and liposarcoma. The 
reader is referred to Chapter 37 for more specific aspects of 
orthopaedic oncology. 
In patients less than 18 years of age, 68% of all tumours are 
benign. For those patients who present over 18 years of age, 
more than 80% of tumours are malignant. Benign tumours 
tend to occur in the posterior elements; malignant tumours 
tend to involve the vertebral body. 
Intradural tumours
These are rare. They may be intramedullary (within the sub -
stance of the cord) or extramedullary (outside the cord). Most 
are extramedullary and benign; the commonest are meningio-
mas and neurofibromas. 
Meningiomas are usually benign and arise from the 
meninges. They are generally slow growing and often warrant 
radiological surveillance. If the lesion is large and impinges 
on the spinal cord or nerve roots, steroids and early surgery 
may be indicated. 
Figure 33.6 Osteoblastoma arising from the posterior elements of 
C5. This 21-year-old man pr esented with severe unremitting neck 
pain. Isotope bone scan (a) demonstrated increased uptake in C5. An 
axial CT scan (b) further delineated the expansive lesion. The tumour 
was successfully removed with the aid of an intraoperative gamma 
probe to confirm complete excision; (c) and (d) show the postoper-
ative anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, respectively, following 
reconstruction with a tricortical bone graft, lateral mass screws and 
rods.
(a) (b)
(d)
(c)
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   480 25/10/2017   08:29Inflammatory spondyloarthropathy 481
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Neurofibromas are benign tumours that arise from the 
nerve sheath. There are three major types of neurofibroma: 
cutaneous, spinal and plexiform. In 90% of cases they pres -
ent as solitary lesions, with the remainder presenting in 
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), an autosomal 
dominant genetically inherited disease. NF1 occurs in 1 in 
3000 births and has been referred to as peripheral neurofibro-
matosis or von Recklinghausen disease. Diagnosis of NF1 is 
confirmed when an individual has two or more of the follow-
ing: at least six café-au-lait macules >5 mm diameter before 
puberty, or six café-au-lait macules >15  mm after puberty, 
two or more neurofibromas of any type or one plexiform 
neurofibroma, multiple freckles in the axillary or inguinal 
regions, a distinctive bone abnormality involving the eye 
socket or arm/leg bones, optic glioma in the brain, two or 
more Lisch nodules in the eye, and a parent, sibling or child 
with NF1. Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a genetically 
determined disorder which affects 1 in 40  000 individuals 
worldwide. A diagnosis of NF2 is made when an individual 
has the following findings: schwannomas on both 8th cranial 
(vestibular) nerves or a parent, sibling or child with NF2 plus 
one vestibular schwannoma in a person less than 30 years 
of age, or any two of the following: meningioma, glioma, 
schwannoma, juvenile cataracts.
INFECTIONS OF THE SPINE
Pyogenic infections
Pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis is primarily a lesion of the 
disc and its osseous margins. The most common method 
by which an organism spreads to the spine is via the 
haematogenous route. The disc is nearly always involved 
in pyogenic vertebral infection. In contrast, granulomatous 
infection, such as tuberculosis, typically does not involve the 
disc space.
Risk factors for pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis include 
advancing age, intravenous drug abuse, diabetes, renal failure, 
recent infections and trauma. Staphylococcus aureus accounts 
for 30–55% of the infections. Gram-negative organisms such 
as Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas species and Proteus species 
are associated with recent genitourinary infections and intra-
venous drug abuse. Anaerobic infections are uncommon, but 
may be seen in diabetic patients and after penetrating trauma.
Operative intervention should be considered for:
 ● open biopsy (when a closed biopsy has failed);
 ● failure of medical management (persistent pain, elevated 
ESR, CRP);
 ● drainage of abscesses;
 ● decompression of spinal cord compression;
 ● correction of progressive spinal deformity;
 ● stabilisation of progressive spinal instability.
Epidural abscess
This condition is often a surgical emergency. The majority 
of cases occur within the thoracic spine. Without treatment, 
neurological deficit including paralysis may develop.
Tuberculosis
This is discussed in Chapters 6 and 38. 
INFLAMMATORY 
SPONDYLOARTHROPATHY
Rheumatoid arthritis
Between 33% and 50% of patients develop atlantoaxial 
subluxation (AAS) within 5  years of the diagnosis of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Some 2–10% of patients with AAS 
develop myelo pathy over the next 10 years. Once diagnosed 
with myelo pathy, 50% of patients die within 1 year. Approx-
imately 20% of patients develop symptomatic subaxial 
disease. Neurological symptoms may occur as a result of direct 
compression by bone or soft tissue or from neural ischaemia. 
Care needs to be taken with these patients whenever they 
require surgery. The degree of subluxation may need to be 
checked by performing flexion and extension radiographs, 
and the theatre staff (especially the anaesthetist) need to be 
warned to take special care especially with intubation. The 
indications for surgery to stabilise the cervical spine are given 
in Table 33.10. 
Freidrich Daniel von Recklinghausen , 1833–1910, Professor of Pathology, Strasbourg, France, described generalised neurofibromatosis in 1882.
Hans Christian Joachim Gram  , 1853–1938, Professor of Pharmacology (1891–1900) and of Medicine (1900–1923), Copenhagen, Denmark, described this  
method of staining bacteria in 1884. 
Theodor Escherich , 1857–1911, Professor of Paediatrics, Vienna, Austria, discovered the Bacterium Coli Commune in 1886. 
TABLE 33.10 Recommendations for spinal surgery in 
rheumatoid arthritis.
●● AAS with a PADI of 14 mm or less
●● AAS with at least 5 mm of basilar invagination
●● Subaxial subluxation with a sagittal canal diameter of 14 mm 
or less
AAS, atlantoaxial subluxation; PADI, posterior atlantodental interval.
Ankylosing spondylitis
Should a patient with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) present 
following trauma, a high index of suspicion for occult frac -
tures should be present. It is common for patients with AS 
to develop epidural haematomas with subtle neurological 
deficit.
Patients with a significant fixed flexion deformity at the 
cervicothoracic junction (‘chin-on-chest’ deformity), limited 
forward gaze, eating and swallowing difficulties may be treated 
with a closing wedge osteotomy at the cervicothoracic junc -
tion (Figure 33.7). Extension osteotomies can also be per -
formed in the thoracic and lumbar spine.
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   481 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS482
SPINAL DEFORMITY
Spinal deformity may be categorised into a coronal plane 
deformity (scoliosis) or a sagittal plane deformity (kypho -
sis and lordosis). Further classification may be made on the 
basis of aetiology into congenital, neuromuscular, idiopathic 
or syndromic. Appropriate radiographs for the assessment of 
scoliosis include a full posteroanterior and lateral standing 
spine. When surgery is contemplated, supine lateral bending 
radiographs are obtained to assess the flexibility of the cur -
ve(s). Curve magnitude is measured in degrees and is known 
as the Cobb angle. The criterion for diagnosis of scoliosis is a 
Cobb angle of 10° or more. The causes of scoliosis are given 
in Table 33.11.
include female gender, remaining skeletal growth, curve loca-
tion and curve magnitude. Not all curves stabilise when skele-
tal maturity is reached. In long-term studies, 68% experienced 
curve progression; the most marked progression of 1° per year 
was observed in patients with thoracic curves between 50 
and 75°.
Idiopathic curves of less than 25° are monitored with clin-
ical and radiographic examination. In growing children (pre-
menarchal) with curves between 20° and 29°, a brace may 
be indicated. Bracing is used to prevent curve progression 
and generally does not lead to permanent curve correction. 
Curves beyond 45° are not amenable to brace treatment.
Surgery in the form of corrective instrumentation and 
spinal fusion is indicated for curve progression beyond 40°, 
truncal imbalance and unacceptable cosmesis. During sur -
gery, continuous spinal cord monitoring is used in the form 
of somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP), motor-evoked 
potentials (MEP) and free-run and stimulated electromyo-
graphic (EMG) activity to minimise the risk of neurological 
damage. The risk of neurological injury is 0.4% (1 in 250).
Neuromuscular scoliosis
This may be due to neuropathic disorders, such as cerebral 
palsy, spinocerebellar degeneration, syringomyelia, tetraplegia 
(Figure 33.9), spinal muscular atrophy and poliomyelitis, or 
myopathic disorders, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
and myotonic dystrophy. There is good evidence that stabili-
sation of the spine in children with Duchenne muscular dys -
trophy who are able to walk (before respiratory compromise 
is too severe to preclude a general anaesthetic) may increase 
their lifespan by several years. 
Congenital scoliosis
This is caused by vertebral anomalies that produce a frontal 
plane growth asymmetry. The anomalies are present at birth, 
but the curvature may take years to be clinically evident. 
Close observation of spinal growth is required until skeletal 
maturity is reached. Brace treatment is ineffective for the pri-
mary structural curves, which are often short and rigid, but it 
may have a role in the control of compensatory curves. For 
progressive curves, surgical options include growing rod con-
structs such as magnetically controlled growing rod (MCGR) 
procedures, hemivertebra excision, correction and fusion or 
posterior instrumented correction and fusion.  
C1 C1
C2
C2
C3
C3
C4
C4
C5
C5
C6
C6
C7
C7
T1
T2
T3
T4
T1
T2
T3
T4
Figure 33.7 C7 closing wedge osteotomy for correction of cervi -
cothoracic kyphosis in patients with ankylosing spondylitis. Planned 
resection lateral view (left) and lateral view after closure of the oste -
otomy (right).
Idiopathic scoliosis
Idiopathic scoliosis accounts for 70% of presentations. It can 
be classified into early onset (before 8 years of age) (Figure 
33.8) and late onset (after 8 years of age; typical adolescent 
idiopathic scoliosis). The distinction is important, as the 
number of alveoli in the lung does not increase after the age 
of 8 years. Patients with severe curves in the early-onset group 
may develop cor pulmonale and right ventricular failure 
resulting in premature death. Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis 
is associated with a normal or near-normal life expectancy.
The prevalence of curves with a Cobb angle >10° is 
between 0.5% and 3%. The prevalence of curves >30º is 
between 1.5 and 3 per 1000. Risk factors for progression 
TABLE 33.11 Aetiology of scoliosis.
●● Idiopathic 
●● Neuromuscular
●● Congenital
●● Syndrome-related
John R. Cobb , American surgeon, wrote a paper in 1948 on how to measure the angle on an x-ray in scoliosis.
Guillaume Benjamin Amand Duchenne , 1806–1875, neurologist, worked successively in Boulogne and Paris, France, but who never held a hospital appointment.
Summary box 33.8 
Spinal deformity
●● Early onset idiopathic scoliosis (<8 years old) has potential to 
impair lung function 
●● Neuromuscular scoliosis: timely surgery may prolong life
●● Congenital scoliosis: rigid curves do not respond to brace 
treatment
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   482 25/10/2017   08:29Developmental abnormalities 483
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Scheuermann’s kyphosis
Typically, in this condition, there is wedging of the 7th to 
10th thoracic vertebrae. The patient presents with both api -
cal pain and low back pain (due to attempts by lumbar mus -
culature to compensate for the thoracic hyperkyphosis). The 
incidence has been estimated at 1–8% of the population, and 
it is more common in males. Physiotherapy may be useful. 
Bracing for skeletally immature patients with kyphosis up to 
65° may be effective in arresting progression. Indications for 
surgery include pain (apical or low back pain produced by 
compensatory hyperlordosis), progressive deformity greater 
than 70°, unacceptable cosmesis and neurological and/or car-
diopulmonary compromise. If surgery is contemplated, it may 
require anterior release followed by posterior correction and 
fusion. Increasingly, posterior chevron osteotomies carried 
out at the time of posterior instrumentation may prevent the 
need for the initial anterior release. 
DEVELOPMENTAL 
ABNORMALITIES
Developmental abnormalities of the spine and spinal cord can 
be divided into primary bony disorders (e.g. congenital scoli -
osis, as discussed above) and primary neurological disorders 
(e.g. spina bifida, Arnold–Chiari malformation and spinal 
dysraphism).
Spina bifida
Spina bifida is caused by a failure of fusion of the vertebral 
arches and possibly the underlying neural tube. Spina bifida 
cystica has an incidence of 1 in 300 live births and is asso -
ciated with hydrocephalus. It is now decreasing as a conse -
quence of folic acid supplementation, antenatal ultrasound 
and the measurement of α-fetoprotein (AFP) levels. There 
are two basic types:
Figure 33.8 Early-onset idiopathic scoliosis. The anteroposterior standing radio-
graph (a) demonstrates a Cobb angle of 98° and dextrocar dia. This 34-month-
old boy underwent a convex hemiepiphysiodesis over the apical four discs (b), 
followed by posterior Luque trolley instrumentation without fusion to correct the 
spinal deformity and allow continued growth (c, d).
(a)
(b)
(c) (d)
Holger Weriel Scheuermann , 1877–1960, radiologist, the Municipal Hospital, Sundby, Copenhagen, Denmark, described juvenile kyphosis in 1920. 
Julius Arnold , 1835–1915, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, the University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, described this condition in 1894. 
Hans Chiari , 1851–1916, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Strasbourg, Germany (Stragbourg was returned to France in 1918 after the end of the First World 
War), gave his account of this condition in 1891. 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   483 25/10/2017   08:29CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS484
 ● Meningocoele: the meninges herniate through the bony 
defect and are covered by skin.
 ● Myelomeningocoele: the roof of the defect is formed 
by exposed neural tissue, with 75% of cases developing 
hydrocephalus.
A meningocoele with good-quality skin over the defect 
may be treated conservatively. A meningocoele with a more 
prominent sac can be excised at 3–6 months. The manage -
ment of myelomeningocoele is more controversial. Enthu -
siasm for closing all defects has been replaced by a more 
selective approach with the recognition that it was inappro -
priate to operate on children with severe hydrocephalus, a 
large open defect and no distal neurological function. The 
majority of these children die in their first year if closure is not 
attempted. With antibiotics, early surgical closure and shunts 
to prevent hydrocephalus, half the children who survive the 
first 24 hours will reach school age, but long-term problems 
remain, including skin problems, neuromuscular scoliosis, 
bone and joint deformity and the complications associated 
with a neuropathic bladder.
Arnold–Chiari malformation
Arnold–Chiari malformation occurs when the medulla oblon-
gata and the cerebellar tonsils extend through the foramen 
magnum into the cervical spinal canal, causing pressure on 
the lower medulla. Hydrocephalus and impaired neurological 
function are common, and there is a strong association with 
spina bifida and syringomyelia. Symptoms may include head-
ache, vomiting, visual disturbances, mental impairment, cer -
ebellar ataxia, sensory disturbances or paralysis. Management 
consists of decompressing the foramen magnum and, usually, 
the posterior arch of the atlas to restore normal cerebrospinal 
fluid flow.
Spinal dysraphism
This is a group of disorders arising from abnormal embryolog-
ical formation of tissues; all are associated with a progressive 
neurological deficit as the result of spinal cord tethering and 
traction or cord compression. There is a strong association 
with spina bifida.
In diastematomyelia, there is an abnormal bony or car -
tilaginous spur projecting across the middle of the verte -
bral canal, dividing the dural tube and spinal cord in two. 
Between 50% and 70% of patients are seen to have a skin 
naevus, dimple or hairy patch when the spine is examined. 
Surgical release of the tethering has variable results.
Syringomyelia
Patients may present with sensory disturbance, weakness of 
the hands, loss of pain and temperature sensation, asymmet -
rical abdominal reflexes or progressive kyphoscoliosis. It is 
associated with Arnold–Chiari malformation and spinal cord 
tumours. Where syringomyelia is associated with an Arnold–
Chiari malformation and scoliosis, a posterior cranial fossa 
Figure 33.9 Neuromuscular scoliosis. This 13-year-old girl sustained 
a cervical spinal cord injury (C5 ASIA B) following a dive into a swim -
ming pool. The T2 sagittal MRI scan (a) demonstrated signal change 
maximal at the level of C5. The patient developed significant scoliosis. 
The AP sitting radiograph (b) demonstrates a right thoracic curve with 
Cobb angle of 104° and a left lumbar curve with a Cobb angle of 82°. 
Following pedicle screw instrumentation, correction and fusion from 
T2 to L5, the right thoracic curve corrected to 40° and the left lumbar 
curve corrected to 38°, as noted on the AP (c), with restoration of 
sagittal balance (d).
(a) (b) (c) (d)
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   484 25/10/2017   08:30Global issues in spine surgery 485
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
decompression should be carried out first to resolve the syrin-
gomyelia. The scoliosis may then be corrected at a later date. 
METABOLIC BONE DISEASES 
AFFECTING THE SPINE
Osteoporosis
Patients with osteoporosis may present with pain following 
minimal trauma, loss of height and exaggerated thoracic 
kyphosis. Medications used to prevent and treat osteoporosis 
include calcium, vitamin D, bisphosphonates (alendronate, 
risedronate, once-yearly intravenous zoledronic acid), denos-
umab, strontium ranelate, selective oestrogen receptor mod -
ulators (SERMS) such as raloxifene, hormone replacement 
therapy and teriparatide.
Patients with painful thoracic fractures may be treated 
with short-term bed rest, analgesics and a spinal orthosis. 
If the back is still painful 6 weeks after the injury, patients 
may be considered for vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty. Verte-
broplasty involves the injection of polymethylmethacrylate 
bone cement (PMMA) under pressure into the vertebral 
body with fluoroscopic guidance. The goals of the procedure 
are to stabilise the spine and decrease the pain associated 
with compression fractures. Kyphoplasty, on the other hand, 
involves inserting bilateral bone tamps with balloons into the 
vertebral body. These are inflated under fluoroscopic control 
with the bone tamp re-expanding the body, and elevating the 
end plates to reduce the fracture deformity. The balloons are 
then deflated and removed, and PMMA is placed in the cav -
ity created by the balloons. The goals of kyphoplasty are spi-
nal stabilisation, pain relief and restoration of vertebral 
body height. Significant complications have been reported, 
including nerve root injury and spinal cord injury resulting 
from cement extravasation, along with cement embolism, 
infection and hypotension.
GLOBAL ISSUES IN SPINE 
SURGERY
It is important that the information presented in this chapter, 
which is widely used throughout the world for teaching and 
training, outlines the very best evidence-based treatment that 
is available for surgical conditions. The text has covered the 
essentials of spine surgery and has very rightly demonstrated 
current techniques which involve up-to-date equipment. It is, 
however, an inescapable fact that the majority of the world’s 
population does not have access to state-of-the-art spinal sur-
gery. There are two main reasons for this: first, the cost of 
spinal surgery and, second, the lack of trained surgeons.  
Cost implications of modern spinal 
surgery
There have been dramatic advances in spinal surgery due 
to modern imaging, modern instruments and implants, and 
advanced spinal cord monitoring equipment. The wide -
spread availability of MRI in high-income countries such as 
the USA, UK and most of Europe has meant that diagnostic 
accuracy is available to the whole population in these coun -
tries. This is not, however, the case for most of the world, 
where there is no free or state-sponsored MRI service, and a 
private scan costing US$500 is unaffordable to most. If a fam-
ily cannot afford a scan, then they also cannot afford the cost 
of an operation, the spinal implants, spinal cord monitoring 
and the use of expensive disposable instruments such as high-
speed burrs. 
The lack of trained spinal surgeons
In the last 20 years high income countries have seen the rapid 
development of spinal surgery, and the rapid development of 
spinal surgery as a complete career. It is now normal in such 
countries for spine surgeons to practise only in the field of 
spinal surgery and no longer to undertake general orthopaedic 
or neurosurgical operations. This has inevitably led to refine-
ment of skills and increasing subspecialisation. In low-income 
countries, where there may be a single orthopaedic surgeon 
for 1  million people, doing ‘just spinal surgery’ is not an 
option, and a much more general approach is needed. In the 
map shown in Figure 33.10, each country in the world is rep-
resented with an area proportional to the number of people in 
the population per active surgeon. This represents surgeons 
of all types, but it shows that, in many parts of Africa, there 
are more than half a million people per surgeon. The map 
showing the population covered by each spine surgeon would 
be even more striking.
Can good spine care be given 
without modern imaging and 
equipment?
The key to good surgery in all disciplines is a surgeon who 
is dedicated to the care of his or her patient, who takes a 
good history and examination, then offers the best treatment 
that is available under the circumstances. In a high-income 
country this will often involve MRI scanning, dissection 
under microscope control and expensive titanium implants. 
In a resource-poor, low-income country it may involve just 
as much time and skill, but often a much more conservative 
approach. When surgery is needed the surgeon may have to 
do the best that he or she can with the equipment available. 
The case in Figure 33.11 illustrates this point well. Note the 
lateral cervical spine radiograph with a fracture/dislocation at 
C2/C3 sustained by a patient living in a low-income country. 
The pedicles of C2 are fractured, allowing C2 to subluxate 
forwards on C3 and compress the spinal cord. The patient was 
admitted several days after a car crash, holding his head with 
his hands for stability. In a high-income country where there 
was imaging and fluoroscopic-guided pedicle screw fixation 
available, the fracture could easily have been fixed. In the 
low-income country, there was no cervical spine instrumenta-
tion available and the surgeon used a low-risk, low-technology 
technique of wiring the arch of C1 to the spine of C2 with a 
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   485 25/10/2017   08:30CHAPTER 33  The spine
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS486
Figure 33.10 Global distribution of surgeons, anaesthesiologists and obstetricians. Each country in the world is represented with an area pro-
portional to the number of people in the population per active surgeon. With permission from Holmer H et al., The Lancet Global Health, 2015; 
3, pp.S9–S11.
Figure 33.11 (a) Lateral cervical spine radiograph with a fracture/dislocation at C2/C3 sustained by a patient living in a low-income country. 
(b) The surgeon used a low-risk, low-technology technique, wiring the arch of C1 to the spine of C2 with a piece of stainless steel wire, then 
laying on corticocancellous bone graft. 
(a) (b)
Population per provider
<18,059
18,059 – 56,261
56,261 – 139,732
139,732 – 306,301
306,301 – 664,333
>664,333
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   486 25/10/2017   08:30Further reading 487
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Holmer H, Lantz A, Kunjuman T et al. Global distribution of surgeons, 
anaesthesiologists, and obstetricians. Lancet Global Hlth  2015; 
3: S9–11.
Janssen ME, Zigler JE, Spivak JE et al . ProDisc-C total disc replace -
ment versus anterior cervical discectomy and fusion for single-level 
symptomatic cervical disc disease. Seven-year follow-up of the pro -
spective randomized U.S. Food and Drug Administration investiga-
tional device exemption study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2015; 97(21): 
1738–47.
Meara JG, Leather AJ, Hagander L et al. Global Surgery 2030: evidence 
and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic develop -
ment. Lancet 2015; 386: 569–624.
Patchell RA, Tibb PA, Regine WF et al. Direct decompressive surgical 
resection in the treatment of spinal cord compression caused by met-
astatic cancer: A randomised trial. Lancet 2005; 366: 643–8.   
Tokala DP, Lam KS, Freeman BJ et al. C7 decancellisation closing wedge 
osteotomy for the correction of fixed cervico-thoracic kyphosis. Eur 
Spine J 2007; 16(9): 1471–8.  
Waddell G, McCulloch JA, Kummel ED et al. Volvo Award in clinical 
science: non organic physical signs in low-back pain. Spine 1979; 5: 
117–25.
Wiltse LL, Newman PH, Macnab I. Classification of spondylosis and 
spondylolisthesis. Clin Orthop 1976; 117: 23–9. 
piece of stainless steel wire, then laying on corticocancellous 
bone graft. The reduction was stable, the graft incorporated 
and the patient was thankful. It is not appropriate to say that 
this was inadequate treatment compared to the best that the 
world has to offer, because the best that the world has to offer 
was not available. 
FURTHER READING
Debnath UK, Freeman BJ, Gregory P et al. Clinical outcome and return 
to sport after the surgical treatment of spondylolysis in young ath -
letes. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2003; 85(2): 244–9. 
Fairbank J, Frost H, Wilson-McDonald J et al. Randomised controlled 
trial to compare surgical stabilisation of the lumbar spine with an in-
tensive rehabilitation programme for patients with chronic low back 
pain: The MRC spine stabilisation trial. BMJ 2005; 330: 1233–8.
Fritzell P , Hägg O, Wessperg P et al. Volvo Award in clinical science: 
lumbar fusion versus non-surgical treatment for chronic low back 
pain. A multi-centre randomised controlled trial from the Swedish 
lumbar spine study group. Spine 2001; 26: 2521–34. 
Gardner A, Gardner E, Morley T. Cauda equina syndrome: a review of 
the current clinical and medico-legal position. Eur Spine J 2011; 
20(5): 690–7.
05_33-B&L27_Pt5_Ch33.indd   487 25/10/2017   08:30Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • Anatomy and physiology relevant to upper limb 
pathology
To be able to explain:
 • The diagnosis and treatment of common upper limb 
conditions
Upper limb
34
SHOULDER GIRDLE
Anatomy and function
The shoulder girdle (scapula and clavicle) is controlled and 
supported by muscles crossing between the spine, thorax, 
scapula and humerus. The sternoclavicular joint is the only 
synovial joint between the upper limb and the axial skele-
ton. The glenohumeral joint is most closely controlled by the 
deltoid and rotator cuff muscles (subscapularis, supraspina -
tus, infraspinatus and teres minor). The scapula is integral to 
shoulder motion, both gliding and rotating on the posterior 
surface of the thorax (Figure 34.1). 
Congenital abnormalities
Sprengel’s shoulder
The commonest congenital abnormality is due to abnormal 
scapular descent from its embryonic midcervical position. 
The typical presentation is a high, small, rotated scapula 
which remains connected to the cervical spine by a bony bar, 
fibrous band or an omovertebral body (Figure 34.2). Other 
90o
50o
30–60o
130o
50o
Figure 34.1 Relative motion of the elements of the shoulder girdle.
 Figure 34.2 Sprengel’s shoulder (right) of a 4-year-old girl.
Otto Gerhard Karl Sprengel , 1852–1915, surgeon, Grossherzogliches Krankenhaus (the Grand Ducal Hospital), Brunswick, Germany, described congenital high 
scapula in 1891.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   488 25/10/2017   08:31Shoulder girdle 489
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
congenital deformities are rib abnormalities, and cervical or 
thoracic abnormalities including scoliosis and Klippel–Feil 
syndrome (congenital fusion of cervical vertebrae). 
Acquired abnormalities
History
Patients usually associate the onset of their symptoms with an 
unusual event (trauma or excessive activity) even though the 
causation may not be as clear as the patient thinks. Even so, 
the onset (sudden or gradual) and duration are important, as 
is the age of the patient, and their occupation. Pain present -
ing in the shoulder (or anywhere in the upper limb) can arise 
from the nerves of the neck, so the history should include 
questions about neck problems. 
Examination
If the patient can localise the source of the pain to an exact 
point around the shoulder, then the problem is unlikely to be 
referred from the neck. Tests for inflammation and impinge -
ment involve trying to reproduce the pain by loading the limb 
in the position that creates the problem (Hawkin’s test for 
impingement, Figure 34.3). Tests for tears in structures such 
as the rotator cuff look specifically for weakness, while appre-
hension tests check for instability (such as may predispose to 
recurrent shoulder dislocation).
Investigations
Radiographs are of limited value because most lesions in 
the shoulder involve damage to the soft tissues. However, a 
reduced subacromial space may be clearly visible in full thick-
ness rotator cuff tears (Figure 34.4a). The appearance of a 
typical subacromial spur can be seen on the radiograph in Fig-
ure 34.4b and morphological variants are shown in Figure 
34.5. The appearance of a spur is usually due to calcification 
Figure 34.3 Hawkin’s impingement test. Impingement pain is repro-
duced when the shoulder is internally rotated with 90° of forward flex-
ion, thereby locating the greater tuberosity underneath the acromion.
within the coracoacromial ligament and it may be a second -
ary consequence of degenerative cuff disease rather than a 
primary event. 
Both ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
allow the integrity and health of the rotator cuff to be checked, 
and MR arthrography also gives information on the integrity 
of the labrum of the glenohumeral joint (Figure 34.6).
Local anaesthetic injections may help to localise the 
source of inflammation and pain.
Maurice Klippel , 1858–1942, neurologist, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France.
André Feil , 1889–?, neurologist, Paris, France. Klippel and Feil described this condition in a joint paper in 1912.
Figure 34.4 (a) Radio-
graph showing sclerosis 
on the undersurface of 
the acr omion and the 
greater tuberosity, with 
reduced subacromial 
space. (b) Radiograph 
showing an acromial 
spur and arthritis of the 
acromioclavicular joint.
Acromio-clavicular arthritis
Spur
(a) (b)
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   489 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS490
Cuff tear
Figure 34.6 Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing a retracted 
cuff tear.
this segment (because of the pain), passively lifting the arm 
for the patient enables them to continue with pain-free move-
ment once the area of impingement is past (Figure 34.7).
TREATMENT
Injection of steroid into the inflamed area may break the 
cycle of inflammation and impingement (Figure 34.8), but 
arthroscopic removal of the subacromial spur, anteroinferior 
acromion and the CA ligament (if it is impinging) should 
give good relief of symptoms (Figure 34.9). 
180o
170o
120o
60o
0o
Figure 34.7  Arcs of shoulder gir dle motion with subacromial 
impingement pain between 60° and 120° of abduction, and acr omio-
clavicular joint pain between 170° and 180°.
Flat Curved Hooked
Figure 34.5 The three commonest acromial morphologies.
Rotator cuff tendonitis
The rotator cuff moves in a confined space between the 
humeral head, the acromion and the coracoacromial ligament 
(CAL). Even a trivial injury can start a progression of inflam-
mation, swelling and pain, which in turn causes subacromial 
pain, termed impingement, felt to be attributable to abrasion 
of the cuff and bursa on the undersurface of the acromion. 
The impingement then causes further swelling and pain and a 
vicious circle is set up. The likelihood of tendonitis develop -
ing is increased in patients with a spur beneath the acromion, 
which is seen increasingly commonly with age (Figure 34.5) 
and may be an effect rather than a cause of painful subacro -
mial degeneration, as described above. The result is a painful 
arc of movement for the patient, which corresponds to the 
position where the inflamed segment of the supraspinatus ten-
don jams under the anterior acromial spur. The examiner may 
find that, although the patient cannot lift their arm through 
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   490 25/10/2017   08:31Shoulder girdle 491
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Rotator cuff tears
The rotator cuff has a poor blood supply in the segment that 
glides between the humeral head and acromion and is subject 
to degenerative changes, which weaken it with age. The cuff 
thins and eventually develops defects that are termed tears, 
whether or not there has been any trauma involved in their 
appearance. This means that tears are more common in the 
elderly, and at any age they do not heal spontaneously. Tears 
usually begin at the anterolateral edge of the supraspinatus, 
and progress posteriorly to involve the infraspinatus and 
teres minor tendons. This creates a bare area over the greater 
tuberosity, as the torn cuff retracts medially (Figure 34.10). 
HISTORY
In the younger patient with a healthier cuff the onset often 
requires relatively major trauma, e.g. avoiding a fall by hang -
ing onto the rung of a ladder, but in the elderly the onset may 
Summary box 34.2
Treatment of subacromial impingement
●● Non-operative treatment includes injections and rotator cuff 
rehabilitation 
●● Surgery indicated if symptoms persist beyond 3 to 6 months
●● Surgery decompresses the rotator cuff
Critical
zone
Normal
Full-thickness tear Chronic tear Retracted chronic tear
Partial-thickness tears
Figure 34.10 Various stages of r otator cuff tear. Initial partial-thickness tears have the potential to progress to 
full-thickness and retracted tears.
Figure 34.8 Technique of administering an injection into the sub -
acromial bursa.
Figure 34.9  (a) Arthroscopic view of an acr omial spur. (b) 
Arthroscopic view after the acromial spur has been removed and the 
cuff decompressed.
(b)(a)
Summary box 34.1
Rotator cuff tendonitis
●● Tendonitis produces weakness secondary to pain (often a 
painful arc)
●● A tendon tear produces weakness which is only secondarily 
painful
●● Injection of local anaesthetic and retesting can be diagnostic
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   491 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS492
follow a painful period of tendonitis or the condition may 
apparently occur spontaneously. 
EXAMINATION
The patient may have a mixed picture of tendonitis and a tear, 
but if the pain is removed by injection of local anaesthetic the 
weakness will persist. Symptomatic tears are associated with 
pain, weakness, limited active abduction, cuff muscle wast -
ing and hunching of the shoulder when attempting abduction 
(Figure 34.11).
Figure 34.11 A 75-year-old man with a >5   cm retracted cuf f tear 
attempting to abduct his shoulder, which is limited, by lack of bal-
anced motor power, below 60°.
INVESTIGATION
Tears are classified as small (less than 1  cm), intermediate 
(2–4 cm) and large (more than 5 cm). 
TREATMENT
Treatment depends on the patient’s age, lifestyle and severity 
of symptoms. Arthroscopic or open repair with subacromial 
Figure 34.12 Reverse geometry total shoulder replacement. 
decompression can be considered for all tears, but is likely to 
give a better outcome in the young (see characteristics above) 
than in the old. It may not be possible to suture large tears 
owing to their size, or the attempt at repair may be fruitless 
because of fatty atrophy of the rotator cuff and loss of muscle 
contractility, in which case complex surgery e.g. tendon trans-
fers, patch grafts or reverse joint replacement (Figure 34.12) 
will need to be considered.
Summary box 34.3
Rotator cuff tears
●● Occur more commonly in older age groups
●● 4–20% of 40–50 year olds have asymptomatic rotator cuff 
tears
●● Up to 50% of 70 year olds have an asymptomatic tear
●● Subacromial decompression is carried out to facilitate pain 
relief at cuff repair
●● Acute tears may present with little pain but profound 
weakness
●● Earlier repair after traumatic onset gives better results
Frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis, 
contracted shoulder)
This is an idiopathic painful and stiff condition most com -
monly affecting females in their 50s. It is also associated with 
diabetes, heart or thyroid disease.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
Frozen shoulder is characterised by the onset of severe pain 
and may follow minor trauma. The differential diagnosis 
includes infection, fractures and rotator cuff tears. Initially 
there is severe pain but this improves with time. However, 
there is global loss of active and passive movement, limited 
by pain. The pathognomonic sign is loss of external rotation 
active. Radiographs are normal and distinguish it from the 
other  condition that can globally and painfully affect shoul -
der movement: osteoarthritis.
TREATMENT
The clinical course can run over 1–2 years, often consider -
ably longer in diabetic individuals, and is divided into painful, 
stiffening and thawing phases. If untreated, frozen shoulder 
will resolve, and the majority of patients are left with no 
functional problems. In the first phase of the condition, 
treatment is pain relief. Corticosteroids can also be injected 
locally. Despite the pain, the patient should be encouraged to 
perform as much active and passive movement as they can. 
Non-operative treatment can include distension injection of 
the glenohumeral joint with local anaesthetic and steroid. 
Operative options include manipulation under anaesthesia or 
arthroscopic release of the tight capsule, which usually pro -
duce pain relief and are indicated for prolonged stiffness.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   492 25/10/2017   08:31Shoulder girdle 493
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Summary box 34.4
Frozen shoulder (adhesive capsulitis)
●● Most commonly occurs in females in their 50s
●● Spontaneous onset
●● Produces severe pain followed by reduced shoulder motion
●● Spontaneous resolution can occur over 1–2 years
●● Differential diagnoses: calcific tendonitis and rotator cuff tear
●● Injections, distension with saline, manipulation and surgical 
release may all help
Calcific tendinitis
Calcium deposition within the supraspinatus tendon is 
believed to be part of a degenerative process, or the conse -
quence of a partial degenerative tear of the tendon.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
There is severe, rapid onset shoulder pain with painful, 
restricted motion. However, in contrast to adhesive capsulitis, 
external rotation is possible. Subacromial calcific deposits can 
be seen on plain radiographs (Figure 34.13). 
Figure 34.13 Radiograph demonstrating calcific tendonitis.
TREATMENT
Subacromial corticosteroid injections may help and can 
be accompanied by needling, aspiration or flushing of the 
deposits (barbotage). The condition is often self-limiting, 
with resorption of the calcium deposits. Surgery for resistant 
cases includes arthroscopic or open subacromial decompres-
sion and excision of the calcific deposits if they are prominent.
Arthritis of the shoulder
Rheumatoid arthritis
The glenohumeral joint is commonly involved in rheumatoid 
arthritis (Figure 34.14). As is typical of this condition, there 
is osteoporosis, destruction of the articular cartilage and syno-
vial proliferation with pannus formation. The rotator cuff is 
weakened and frequently tears. Arthroscopic synovectomy 
may slow the progress of the joint destruction and lead to a 
reduction in pain and improvement in range of movement, 
though it is needed much less frequently since the introduction 
of biological therapies for rheumatoid disease. Intra-articular 
steroid injections may also be helpful. Shoulder replacement is 
complicated by poor bone stock and damage to the stabilising 
structures around the shoulder, especially the rotator cuff. The 
patient should only expect a reduction in pain. Any increase 
in range of movement is a bonus.
Figure 34.14 Rheumatoid arthritis of the shoulder.
Summary box 34.5
Shoulder problems in rheumatoid arthritis
●● Arthroscopic synovectomy may be effective
●● Rotator cuff tears are common
●● Glenohumeral joint replacement improves pain but motion 
depends on rotator cuff involvement
Osteoarthritis of the shoulder
Glenohumeral joint osteoarthritis is either primary (Figure 
34.15), secondary to trauma (Figure 34.16) or end-stage 
rotator cuff disease i.e. cuff arthropathy (Figure 34.17).
TREATMENT
If medical treatment has failed, the surgical options are 
arthroscopic debridement or joint arthroplasty. Debride -
ment is not predictable, but both total shoulder replacement 
(Figure 34.18) and hemiarthroplasty (Figure 34.19) have 
good results in appropriate patients. A standard total shoul -
der arthroplasty can be performed if the rotator cuff is intact. 
However, in most rheumatoid patients and all patients with 
cuff tear arthropathy, the cuff is deficient and either a hemi -
arthroplasty or a reverse polarity total shoulder arthroplasty 
(see Figure 34.12) should be used. Shoulder arthroplasty is 
an effective pain-relieving procedure, but less predictable in 
restoring motion, especially above shoulder level.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   493 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS494
Figure 34.15 Osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral joint.
Figure 34.16 Post-traumatic arthritis with malunion of the proximal 
humerus, collapse of the humeral head, subchondral sclerosis and 
osteophytes.
Figure 34.17 A massive cuff tear that has led to superior migration 
of the humeral head and secondary osteoarthritis of the glenohumeral 
joint.
Figure 34.18  Total shoulder replacement performed for osteo -
arthritis. An intact rotator cuff is essential.
Figure 34.19 Shoulder hemiarthroplasty is performed for arthritis if 
there is a deficient rotator cuff.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   494 25/10/2017   08:31Shoulder girdle 495
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Arthrodesis of the joint is an alternative in younger 
patients with a history of sepsis or neurological problems (Fig-
ure 34.20). It is also used after brachial plexus injury, when 
nerve repairs restore hand and elbow function but the shoul-
der remains flail because of loss of the C5 supply. Good scapu-
lothoracic control, tested by the ability to shrug the shoulder 
powerfully, is a prerequisite to successful arthrodesis. Patients 
retain a moderate range of movement at the shoulder girdle, 
as a result of scapulothoracic motion, which normally makes 
up one-third of apparent shoulder elevation, the remaining 
two-thirds being glenohumeral movement, which is lost in 
arthrodesis. 
Figure 34.20 Arthrodesis of the shoulder.
Summary box 34.6
Arthritis of the shoulder
●● Severe cases are treated with hemiarthroplasty or total 
shoulder arthroplasty
●● Total shoulder replacements should not be performed if the 
rotator cuff is deficient
●● Pain relief is good following arthroplasty, though improvement 
in range of motion is less predictable
●● Glenohumeral arthrodesis is an option in the young or those 
with a history of sepsis
●● Post arthrodesis, motion is fair but is entirely scapulothoracic
Acromioclavicular joint arthritis
Acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) arthritis is common and is 
often asymptomatic, noted as an incidental finding on radio-
graphs (see Figure 34.4b). Symptoms typically arise in males 
aged 20–50 years. Inferior osteophytes can impinge on the 
underlying rotator cuff.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
There may be a history of trauma to the ACJ. Pain is activity 
related. There is prominence of the lateral end of the clavicle. 
The joint line is tender. Flexing and adducting the arm to 
place the hand behind the opposite shoulder reproduces pain. 
If symptoms are related to inferior osteophytes, impingement 
symptoms and signs are also present.
TREATMENT
An intra-articular corticosteroid injection will usually help, 
and even if the effect is short lived it localises the problem 
accurately. Surgery involves arthroscopic or open excision of 
the lateral 0.5–1 cm of the clavicle (Figure 34.21). This gives 
good pain relief. In patients with symptoms that are predom -
inantly those of impingement, arthroscopic removal of the 
inferior osteophytes with subacromial decompression should 
be performed.
Figure 34.21 Arthroscopic end-on view of the clavicle after excision 
of its distal end.
Summary box 34.7
Acromioclavicular joint problems
●● AC joint arthritis is common and may be asymptomatic
●● It may become symptomatic secondary to trauma or repetitive 
overload
●● Inferior clavicular osteophytes can impinge on the cuff
●● Intra-articular steroid and local anaesthetic injection may 
relieve symptoms
●● Excision of the lateral end of the clavicle gives good results
Long head of biceps tendon rupture
Rupture of the long head of biceps usually occurs in the elderly 
and is due to abrasion of the tendon in the bicipital groove, 
especially at the superior end, beneath the anterior acromion. 
It is associated with rotator cuff tears. Most patients present 
with few symptoms, although they often seek advice because 
of the bulge they notice in their arm.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
Patients feel a sense of ‘something giving way’ in front of 
the shoulder, sometimes with relief of pain if there was any 
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   495 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS496
present beforehand due to biceps tendinitis. The upper arm 
is bruised and elbow flexion produces a swelling in the front 
and middle of the arm (Figure 34.22). The lump will be per-
manent and is initially tender. Power is slightly diminished in 
the early stages, when there may also be cramping pains on 
use of the arm. 
Figure 34.22 Bruising and change in the upper arm shape due to 
rupture of the long head of biceps. 
TREATMENT
Reassurance that pain and bruising will resolve is sufficient. 
Power improves over several months and surgery (biceps 
tenodesis) is not needed for function, though it may help the 
cosmetic appearance. 
Dislocation of the shoulder and 
instability of the glenohumeral joint
Three broad groups of shoulder instability exist.
Classification of glenohumeral instability
 ● Traumatic: unidirectional; involuntary; surgery is usually 
successful.
 ● Atraumatic: multidirectional, painful; involuntary; 
responds to surgery.
 ● Habitual: voluntary, with ligament laxity , painless; sur -
gery usually contraindicated.
Recurrent traumatic instability
HISTORY
Traumatic shoulder dislocation is the commonest of all dislo-
cations, usually first presenting in patients under 25. Usually 
the shoulder dislocates anteroinferiorly. Initially there is a 
notable traumatic event. Subsequent dislocations require less 
force. The shoulder may subluxate or actually dislocate (com-
plete separation of the joint surfaces). 
Figure 34.23 Apprehension test for anterior instability.
EXAMINATION
On examination the shoulder has a full range of motion, but 
with forced abduction and external rotation the patient expe-
riences apprehension (a sense of impending doom!) (Figure 
34.23).
INVESTIGATIONS
On computed tomography (CT) or MR arthrography (Figure 
34.24), detachment of the anteroinferior labrum (Bankart’s 
lesion) (Figures 34.25 and 34.26) and damage to the 
humeral head (Hill–Sach’s lesion) can often be seen. 
TREATMENT
The relative indications for surgery are repeated dislocations, 
or symptoms of instability that persist after reduction of the 
first dislocation, that are interfering with the patient’s quality 
of life. Anterior instability can be treated with arthroscopic 
or open repair of the Bankart defect with tightening of the 
capsule, which prevents further dislocations in up to 90–95% 
of patients. Bony defects of the glenoid, and occasionally 
large Hill–Sachs lesions, may have to be grafted. For the less 
common recurrent posterior instability, repair of the  damaged 
labrum and tightening of the posterior capsule is needed.
Arthur Sydney Blundell Bankart , 1879–1951, orthopaedic surgeon, The Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   496 25/10/2017   08:31Shoulder girdle 497
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Bankart 
lesion
Posterior 
labral injury
AB CD E
Figure 34.25 Schematic representation of Bankart’s lesion, which forms a spectrum of pathology from minor labral detachment (B) to large 
detachments with glenoid rim fractures (bony Bankart; E).
Figure 34.24  (a) Magnetic resonance (MR) arthr ogram showing 
anterior Bankart lesion. (b) MR arthrogram showing posterior labral 
injury.
Summary box 34.8
Recurrent traumatic shoulder instability
●● An appreciable force leads to the first dislocation or 
subluxation
●● Subsequent dislocations/subluxations require less force 
●● The commonest direction of dislocation is anteroinferior
●● There is a positive apprehension sign
●● Surgical treatment repairs the labral lesion and tightens the 
capsule
(a)
(b)
Figure 34.26 An end-on view of the glenoid labrum, demonstrating 
anteroinferior labral detachment (r ed) with the rotator cuff muscles 
(brown), long head of biceps tendon and labrum (grey).
Posterior dislocation of the shoulder
This is a rare event but is easy to miss. The clue is often in the 
history, as the patient will have either had an electric shock, 
had an epileptic fit, or have been subject to severe restraint 
when their arm has been forced up their back (a half-Nelson) 
– all mechanisms producing forced internal rotation of the 
glenohumeral joint. 
The patient will be in severe pain and can be difficult to 
examine e.g. if they are psychotic and if this is why they are 
being restrained. For the same reason, the radiographer may 
only be able to get an anteroposterior (AP) view of the shoulder 
and, on this view, the shoulder may look normal to the unwary 
(Figure 34.27). It is the high ‘index of suspicion’ from the his-
tory which gives the best chance of making the diagnosis.
TREATMENT 
This dislocation may be difficult to reduce if the posterior mar-
gin of the glenoid is embedded in the humeral head (a ‘locked’ 
posterior dislocation), so that open reduction is needed.
Atraumatic instability
HISTORY
There is usually no history of an initial injury. Instability may 
be multidirectional and the shoulder is usually associated with 
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   497 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS498
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 34.27  Posterior dislocation of the shoulder. 
(a) Anter oposterior view; (b) origin of the light bulb 
sign; (c) axial projection demonstrating how much 
easier it is to visualise the injury on this view; (d) axial 
projection highlighting this joint and further demon-
strating the impacted fracture in the humeral head, or 
Hill–Sachs lesion.
subluxation rather than dislocation. The patient is often able 
to reduce the shoulder without assistance. 
EXAMINATION
Generalised ligament laxity is common. Apprehension tests 
are positive, but often in more than one direction. Anterior 
and posterior drawing of the humeral head allows laxity to be 
tested (Figure 34.28). Overactivity of muscle groups such as 
pectoralis major should be sought, as this gives an avenue of 
treatment through rehabilitation.
TREATMENT
Specialist physiotherapy should be tried first in these patients, 
aiming to improve both the proprioception and firing patterns 
of the muscles around the shoulder (for instance biofeedback 
to control an overactive pectoralis major, or strengthening of 
underactive muscle groups). If this fails then surgery may be 
considered, by way of capsular tightening. 
Habitual dislocation
Habitual dislocators are patients who can sublux the shoul -
der at will, usually either anteroinferiorly or posteriorly. The 
manoeuvre is painless. Patients have generalised joint laxity 
and may subluxate the shoulder as a ‘party trick’.
Patients should be advised to stop subluxating the shoul -
der, which may then allow the capsule to tighten naturally 
with age. They may benefit from assessment and advice from 
a specialist physiotherapist. Surgery is associated with a high 
failure rate and should be avoided. 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 36.28Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 34.28 Generalised laxity can be appreciated by drawing the 
humeral head in anterior and posterior directions and feeling it slide up 
to, and possible even over, the glenoid rim. A sulcus will be produced 
under the acromion if the humerus is drawn inferiorly (sulcus sign).
DISORDERS OF THE ELBOW
Anatomy and function
The elbow joint allows flexion and extension as well as mak -
ing up the proximal part of the radioulnar joint, which per -
mits pronation and supination of the forearm. The brachial 
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   498 25/10/2017   08:31Disorders of the elbow 499
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
artery passes immediately in front of the joint, while the ulnar 
nerve passes lateral to the medial epicondyle, immediately 
behind it. 
Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis) 
and golfer’s elbow (medial 
epicondylitis)
These are discussed in Chapters 31 and 32.
Arthritis of the elbow
Rheumatoid arthritis
Surgery may be required, especially in end-stage disease 
 (Figure 34.29). Arthroscopic or open radial head excision 
and synovectomy is effective for painful, restricted pronation 
and supination. Elbow arthroplasty is effective in the earliest 
stages for pain relief and functional restoration. 
Figure 34.29 Typical end-stage unstable and destroyed rheumatoid 
elbow. 
Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis of the elbow is usually primary (Figure 34.30) 
or secondary to trauma. 
HISTORY
Typical patients are middle-aged males in manual occupations. 
Symptoms are pain, locking, crepitus and painful motion with 
loss of extension. Ulnar nerve entrapment symptoms may be 
present. 
EXAMINATION
There is usually loss of extension and restriction of flexion. 
Pronation and supination tend to be spared in comparison 
with rheumatoid arthritis.
TREATMENT
Surgery should be considered only if medical treatment fails. 
Arthrodesis may be offered for those performing heavy manual 
work (Figure 34.31), but is associated with significant residual 
functional loss, as a joint replacement will not survive long 
under heavy loading. Surgical debridement alleviates pain 
Figure 34.30 (a, b) Radiographs showing osteoarthritis of the elbow 
joint. 
(a)
(b)
and increases range of motion in earlier stages. Interposition 
arthroplasty (for example Achilles tendon allograft) may be 
considered in younger patients though it can be  associated 
Figure 34.31 (a, b) Ankylosed elbow after tuberculosis. Arthrodesis 
is a surgical procedure to achieve the same end result, by excising the 
articular surfaces and compression plating across the joint.
(b)(a)
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   499 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS500
with significant bone loss with time, possibly restricting 
future treatments). Prosthetic joint arthroplasty provides 
more predictable symptomatic relief (Figure 34.32) but high 
activity levels are associated with early loosening.
(b)(a)
Figure 34.32 (a, b) Linked total elbow  
replacement.
Loose bodies in the elbow
The common causes are osteoarthritis, osteochondritis dis-
secans in the young (Figure 34.33 ) and synovial chondro-
matosis (Figure 34.34). Patients describe sudden pain and 
locking, and the need to manipulate the elbow for relief. 
Plain radiographs will usually confirm the diagnosis (Figure 
34.35). Arthroscopic clearance of the joint produces good 
results (Figure 34.36). 
Olecranon bursitis
This is a relatively common disorder in which the elbow 
becomes red, warm, swollen and painful. Initially, septic 
arthritis may be suspected. However, on examination signs 
and symptoms are confined to the back of the elbow (Figure 
34.37) and movement within an arc of 30–130° is possible. 
Most cases settle with anti-inflammatories. If the patient is 
pyrexial antibiotics should be given. Formal drainage of the 
bursa is indicated if purulent material is present.
Summary box 34.9
Arthritis of the elbow
●● Excision of the radial head improves pain and pronation–
supination in rheumatoid arthritis
●● Total elbow replacement gives good results in rheumatoid and 
low demand patients
●● Arthrodesis may be the only surgical option in a high demand 
manual labourer
Figure 34.33 Osteochondritis dessicans of the capitellum (Panner’s 
disease).
Figure 34.34 Synovial chondromatosis.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   500 25/10/2017   08:31Disorders of the elbow 501
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Chronic bursitis may be associated with calcific nodules of 
the bursal lining (Figure 34.38). These can be excised if they 
prove troublesome.
Figure 34.36  Loose bodies removed arthroscopically from the 
patient in Figure 34.35.
Figure 34.37 Olecranon bursitis.
Ulnar nerve compression
Compression of the ulnar nerve occurs in the cubital tunnel 
(behind the medial epicondyle), at the junction of the arcade 
of Struthers, and also at the medial intermuscular septum, as 
the nerve passes into the posterior compartment of the distal 
humerus. It can also occur as the nerve passes between the 
heads of the flexor carpi ulnaris (Figure 34.39). 
Figure 34.38 Large chronic olecranon bursa with dense calcific deposit.
Figure 34.39 (a) Anatomy of the cubital tunnel site for ulnar nerve 
compression, with (b) a view of arthroscopic ulnar nerve decompres-
sion (inset). FCU, flexor carpi ulnaris; MCL, medial collateral ligament.
Figure 34.35  Radiographs showing loose bodies in the elbow 
(arrow).
Sir John Struthers , 1823–1899, Professor of Anatomy, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.
Ulnar nerve
MCL
FCU muscle belly
Fibrous arch of FCU
(a)
(b)
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   501 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS502
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
Patients describe tingling/numbness in the little and ring fin-
gers. A positive Tinel’s sign is usually present at the compres-
sion site, with wasting and weakness of the intrinsic muscles of 
the hand (Figure 34.40). Froment’s sign will be positive, due 
to weakness of the adductor pollicis (Figure 34.41). Nerve 
conduction studies have an unpredictable diagnostic value in 
the early stages. Radiographs may confirm medial osteophytes 
if compression is secondary to arthritis. 
Figure 34.40 Intrinsic muscle wasting on the left due to ulnar neu -
ropathy.
TREATMENT
Splints preventing elbow flexion at night may be useful. If 
symptoms persist, surgery can be performed, including  simple 
nerve decompression (most cases), partial medial epicon-
dylectomy and/or anterior transposition of the nerve. Trans -
position is necessary in cases of valgus deformity or if the 
nerve is unstable after decompression. 
Figure 34.41 Froment’s sign tests the adductor pollicis. The patient 
is asked to hold a piece of paper in a side pinch between the thumb 
and the index finger. The examiner attempts to pull the paper out. 
Owing to weakness of the adductor pollicus, the patient will com -
pensate by flexing the flexor pollicis longus, which is supplied by the 
anterior interosseous nerve.
Summary box 34.10
Other common elbow problems
●● Loose bodies cause locking and can be removed 
arthroscopically
●● If the ulnar nerve is compressed, weakness and wasting will 
be seen in the hands
●● Simple decompression is usually successful
TUMOURS OF THE UPPER LIMB
Tumours are discussed in Chapter 37.
HAND
The index finger works against the thumb for fine pinch grip; 
the thumb can press against the side of the flexed index finger 
for a key grip; the tips of the thumb, index and middle fingers 
provide a tripod pinch; all fingers curl for hook grip while the 
little and ring fingers provide the most power when making 
a fist. A stable wrist is required to allow good hand function.
Clinical history and physical 
examination
History
The occupation, sport and recreational activities (especially 
music) and hand dominance are all important items of infor -
mation needed when treating a hand problem.
Examination
The examination of the hand should assess perfusion, sen -
sation, movement, power and coordination. A check should 
also be made for rotational malalignment of the digits (Figure 
34.42). There are also a number of special tests (which 
are beyond the scope of this chapter) relevant to different 
conditions. 
Figure 34.42 Rotational deformity of the little finger.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   502 25/10/2017   08:31Hand 503
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Thumb ulnar collateral ligament injury
Chronic thumb overuse leads to stretching of the ulnar col -
lateral ligament and instability (gamekeeper’s thumb). The 
ligament can also rupture acutely if the thumb is forcibly 
abducted (skier’s thumb). If valgus stress causes significant 
opening of the joint on the ulnar side then the ligament 
needs to be repaired surgically, as the adductor aponeurosis 
interposes between the torn end of the ligament and its inser-
tion (Figure 34.43), preventing healing and causing chronic 
instability.
Triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC)
The triangular fibrocartilage is a complex consisting of the 
ulnocarpal ligaments, extensor carpi ulnaris tendon sheath 
and a meniscus-like structure between the distal ulna and 
the carpus. It is continuous with the dorsal and volar wrist 
capsules and stabilises the distal radioulnar joint. It can 
undergo traumatic or degenerative tears, presenting with 
ulna-sided wrist pain and distal radioulnar instability. An 
MR arthrogram or wrist arthroscopy aids diagnosis (Figure 
34.44). Peripheral tears of the TFCC can be repaired (open 
or arthroscopically), while central degenerative tears can be 
arthroscopically debrided. 
Summary box 34.11
General principles of treatment
Avoid swelling and stiffness by:
●● Elevation – reduce swelling
●● Splintage – avoid contractures
●● Movement – pump away swelling and encourage suppleness
Ulnar 
collateral 
ligament
Figure 34.43 Magnetic resonance imaging showing ruptur e of the 
ulnar collateral ligament of the thumb (skier’s thumb).
Infections
Paronychia
Nail bed infection is the commonest hand infection (Figure 
34.45). After initial inflammation, pus accumulates beside 
the nail. It is best treated with incision, drainage and appro-
priate antibiotic therapy. This is sometimes, but not always, 
facilitated by partial nail removal to allow full drainage of the 
collection. 
Felon
A felon is an abscess between the specialised fibrous septae 
in the fingertip pulp. It causes intense pain and may lead 
Figure 34.44 Magnetic resonance arthr ogram showing peripheral 
detachment of the triangular fibrocartilage complex.
Investigations
Radiographs can be used to assess for arthritis or tumours. 
Electrophysiological studies may be required to assess nerve 
function. MRI is useful for diagnosing avascular necrosis, lig -
ament injuries or soft tissue tumours.
Hand swelling and stiffness 
Swelling followed by stiffness is the arch enemy of hand 
reha bilitation. The hand will swell after injury, surgery or 
infection. In response, the wrist flexes and then there is 
compensatory metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ) extension 
and interphalangeal joint (IPJ) flexion. If action is not 
taken this position will become permanent, as collateral 
ligaments shrink and tissues fibrose. Hand elevation to 
reduce swelling, splintage in the position of safety to prevent 
collateral shortening (Edinburgh position: wrist extension, 
MCPJ flexion, IPJ extension) and early mobilisation prevent 
permanent stiffness.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   503 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS504
Figure 34.45 Acute paronychia.
to terminal phalangeal osteomyelitis. Incision and drainage 
through the midline of the pulp of the finger in the location 
of maximal swelling, followed by intravenous antibiotics, are 
recommended. 
Flexor tendon sheath infection
Flexor tendon sheath infections present with Kanavel’s cardi-
nal signs: the affected finger is held in flexion; there is uniform 
swelling over the tendon and digit; it is tender to touch; and 
the patient experiences pain on passive extension of the fin-
ger. Treatment is by tendon sheath irrigation using catheters 
inserted through small wounds at the proximal and distal ends 
of the affected sheath or by an open approach if the viability 
of the digit is threatened. This is followed by what is often 
an extended course of intravenous antibiotics. If infection is 
untreated tendon adhesions and necrosis occur. Infection can 
spread proximally, damaging the whole hand.
Summary box 34.12
Treatment of hand infections
●● Elevate, splint and give intravenous antibiotics
●● Surgical drainage should include tendon sheath irrigation
●● Early mobilisation
Mycobacterial infections
Tuberculosis may involve the tenosynovium, joints or bone. 
The most dramatic form is a compound palmar ganglion, with 
synovial swelling proximal and distal to the transverse car -
pal ligament, occasionally causing symptoms of carpal tunnel 
syndrome. The diagnosis is made by taking a biopsy. Synovec-
tomy should be performed and the patient treated with the 
appropriate antibiotics.
Deep fascial space infections
These infections occur in the palm but may be limited to a 
web space. The whole hand becomes swollen and tender as 
pus collects on either side of the septum. Treatment is inci -
sion and drainage with thorough washout of the wound. It is 
important that all deep spaces are opened: incision on both 
dorsal and volar sides of the hand may be needed. If in doubt 
an ultrasound scan or MRI can delineate the extent of the 
collections within the deep palmar spaces.
Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis presents with classic symptoms: morn -
ing stiffness, symmetrical arthritis, hand deformities and 
rheumatoid nodules. Diagnostic criteria include seropositive 
rheumatoid factor and radiographic changes (Table 34.1). 
The inflamed rheumatoid synovium (pannus) destroys lig -
aments, tendons and joints, producing pain, deformity and 
loss of function. Typical rheumatoid deformities in the hand 
include boutonnière (Figure 34.46), swan neck (Figure 
34.47) and radial drift of the wrist (due to supination of the 
TABLE 34.1 Radiographic differences between  
rheumatoid and osteoarthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis Osteoarthritis
Periarticular osteoporosis/
subchondral erosions
Subchondral sclerosis and cysts
Periarticular soft-tissue swelling Less pronounced swelling
Joint space narrowing Joint space narrowing
Marginal erosions Marginal osteophytes
Joint deformity/malalignment Less pronounced deformities
Ankylosis Less common ankylosis
Rupture
Figure 34.46 Boutonnière deformity.
Figure 34.47 Swan neck deformity.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   504 25/10/2017   08:31Hand 505
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
carpus), with compensatory ulnar deviation of the metacarpo-
phalangeal joints (Figure 34.48). Pannus can cause extensor 
tendon ruptures, classically starting with the little finger and 
progressing stepwise in a radial direction (Vaughan Jackson 
syndrome). With progressive deformity and instability of the 
wrist and hand, activities such as key pinch and the opening 
of jars become impossible to perform. The treatment should 
be dictated by the patient’s levels of pain and disability, not 
purely on the basis of deformity.
young patient, a constrained ulnar head arthroplasty is 
preferred. 
4 Arthrodesis of the wrist, thumb and some of the smaller 
joints: gives good pain relief and creates a stable axis 
against which other parts can function. 
5 Metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint replace-
ments: provide pain relief and functional improvement. 
Total wrist arthroplasty will also provide good pain relief 
and some motion (Figure 34.49).
6 Tendon reconstructions: some ruptured tendons can cause 
significant morbidity (Figure 34.50) and are often treated 
either by a tendon transfer or a local joint fusion 
Figure 34.48  Rheumatoid hand showing ulnar drift at the meta -
carpo phalangeal joints.
Summary box 34.13
Manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis in the hand
●● Swan neck, Boutonnière finger deformities
●● Extensor tendon ruptures (Vaughan–Jackson syndrome)
●● Flexor tendon synovitis or rupture
●● Metacarpophalangeal joints: flexion, ulnar deviation, 
subluxation, dislocation
●● Wrist: radial deviation, carpal supination, prominent ulnar 
head (caput ulnae), extensor tenosynovitis
MANAGEMENT
The primary indications for surgery are: (1) pain relief; (2) 
functional improvement; (3) to prevent disease progression; 
(4) cosmesis. Patients may require many surgical procedures 
over time and a helpful axiom is to start proximally and work 
distally, alternating between motion-sacrificing and -sparing 
procedures. The various procedures which can be considered 
are:
1 Synovectomy: improves pain, increases function and pre -
vents tendon rupture.
2 Trigger finger releases and nerve decompression surgery 
(carpal tunnel syndrome).
3 Distal ulna excision: reduces pain, prevents extensor 
tendon rupture or protects repaired extensor tendons. 
Distal ulna excision leads to instability and so, in the 
Figure 34.49 Total wrist replacement.
Figure 34.50 Rupture of the extensor tendons to the little and ring 
fingers.
Boutonnière  is French for ‘button-hole’.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   505 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS506
Osteoarthritis
WRIST
The radiocarpal joint can develop primary or secondary 
osteoarthritis (after intra-articular trauma and infection). If 
conservative measures have failed then operative manage -
ment includes limited or total wrist arthrodesis and total wrist 
replacement.
HAND
Females are more commonly affected than males. The 
commonly affected joints are the distal interphalangeal 
(Heberden’s nodes), proximal interphalangeal (Bouchard’s 
nodes) and the thumb carpometacarpal joints (Figure 34.51). 
Symptoms rarely correlate with the appearance, either clini -
cally or radiographically. Treatment includes splinting, phys-
iotherapy and steroid injections. Surgical options include 
arthrodesis for distal (DIP) and proximal interphalangeal 
(PIP) joints (Figure 34.52), joint replacement (PIP and 
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints) and excision arthro -
plasty (excision of the trapezium for thumb carpometacar -
pal joint arthritis). Joint arthrodesis eliminates pain at the 
expense of motion, but function is often well preserved.
Other forms of arthritis in the hand
Psoriasis particularly affects the interphalangeal joints, but 
is asymmetrical in nature and causes fusiform swelling of the 
digits along with nail changes. Gout causes pain, joint red -
Figure 34.51 Hand deformities secondary to osteoarthritis.
(a) (b)
Figure 34.52 Radiographs of the distal interphalangeal and prox -
imal interphalangeal joints treated with arthr odesis (a) and joint 
replacement (b).
ness, occasionally tophi, and can be difficult to differentiate 
from septic arthritis. Serum urate is not always raised in acute 
attacks but finding negatively birefringent sodium urate crys -
tals on microscopy of aspirated joint fluid is diagnostic. 
Dupuytren’s contracture
Dupuytren’s contracture is most often characterised as an 
autosomal dominant condition, common in northern Europe, 
predominantly in men in the 5th–7th decades of life. Four 
out of seven cases occur in those with a family history but 
there are also many sporadic cases. It is associated with smok-
ing, trauma, epilepsy, AIDS, hypothyroidism and alcoholic 
cirrhosis. It also appears very frequently as a clinical case in 
postgraduate exams! The characteristic features are palmar 
nodules, skin puckering, cords of the palm and digits and flex-
ion contractures of the digits (Figure 34.53). It is commonest 
on the ulnar side of the hand. Garrod’s knuckle pads (thick -
ened skin on the dorsum of the PIP joint) are another fea -
ture visible on examination and seen in more severe forms of 
the disease (Figure 34.54). The condition can also produce 
cords in the penis, causing it to become curved (Peyronie’s 
disease) and may also produce plantar thickening (Ledder -
hosen disease). Intervention is indicated when the patient 
cannot put the affected hand flat on the table owing to fixed 
deformity, or when any flexion contracture develops in the 
PIP joint. Milder cases may be treated by needle fasciotomy or 
William Heberden (Snr.) , 1710–1801, physician, who practised first in Cambridge and from 1748 in London, UK, described these nodes in 1802.
Charles Jacques Bouchard , 1837–1915, physician, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France.
Baron Guillaume Dupuytren , 1777–1835, surgeon, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France, described this condition in 1831.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   506 25/10/2017   08:31Hand 507
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
collagenase injections, while more severe cases are managed 
surgically. Great care should be taken during surgery to avoid 
damage to the digital nerves, which may be trapped in the 
fibrous tissue. At the end of surgery, it may not be possible 
to obtain primary closure of the skin, so one should consider 
performing Z-plasties to lengthen the skin, full thickness skin 
grafting taken from the anteromedial proximal forearm (hair-
less) or occasionally leaving an open wound to heal by sec -
ondary intention.
In late stage disease a fixed contracture of the MCP and 
PIP joints may develop. In these cases, excision of the fibrous 
bands may produce no improvement in the condition, and 
if the contracted finger is preventing useful function of the 
hand then amputation may have to be considered.
Figure 34.53 Dupuytren’s contracture.
Figure 34.54 Garrod’s knuckle pads.
Summary box 34.14
Dupuytren’s contracture
●● Autosomal dominant inheritance but many sporadic cases
●● Fibroblastic hyperplasia with resultant skin nodules, cords and 
deformities
●● Intervention is indicated if hand cannot be placed flat
●● Severe fixed flexion deformities may mean that amputation is 
the only surgical option
Tendon disorders
Trigger digit
Triggering occurs in the fingers or in the thumb as a result of 
a size mismatch between the flexor tendon and the sheath 
(usually at the A1 pulley) in which it glides. 
The patient complains of painful locking or snapping of 
the finger, usually when attempting to straighten a bent fin -
ger. Occasionally, it may present as a finger that is too painful 
to bend, associated with pain and tenderness at the A1 pulley. 
There is often a palpable nodule in the tendon. Management 
is a steroid injection into the sheath, and if this fails then sur-
gical tendon sheath (A1 pulley) release should be performed 
under local anaesthesia, taking care not to cut too much of 
the pulley and create bowstringing of the flexor tendon. Trig-
ger digits, especially the thumb, can occur in infants and usu-
ally resolve spontaneously. 
De Quervain’s disease
De Quervain’s disease is caused by tenosynovitis of the abduc-
tor pollicis longus (APL) and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) 
in the first dorsal wrist extensor compartment (1st EC). It 
is predominantly seen in middle-aged females and is associ -
ated with pregnancy (new mother’ s wrist) and inflammatory 
arthritis. The clinical features are radial wrist pain, tender -
ness, swelling (Figure 34.55) and a positive Finkelstein’s test 
Figure 34.55 De Quervain’s disease.
Sir Archibald Edward Garrod , 1857–1936, Regius Professor of Medicine, the University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, described this condition in 1893.
Francois de la Peyronie , 1678–1747, surgeon to King Louis XIV of France and founder of the Royal Academy of Surgery, Paris, France.
Georg Ledderhose , 1855–1925, German surgeon, described this disease in 1894.
Fritz de Quervain , 1868–1940, Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland, described this form of tenosynovitis in 1895.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   507 25/10/2017   08:31CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS508
(pain over the 1st EC associated with ulnar deviation of the 
wrist when the thumb is clasped in the palm). The manage-
ment options are non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, splin-
tage, steroid injections and surgical release of the extensor 
retinaculum of the first dorsal compartment. If surgery is con-
sidered, careful attention should be paid to fully releasing the 
APL and EPB, which frequently consist of bundles of separate 
tendon slips that lie in separate sheaths. 
Compressive neuropathies
Median nerve (carpal tunnel syndrome)
The majority of cases of carpal tunnel syndrome are idio -
pathic. It is however, associated with diabetes, thyroid dis-
orders, alcoholism, amyloidosis, inflammatory arthritis, 
pregnancy and obesity. 
HISTORY
The patient presents with tingling and infrequently numb -
ness of the volar aspects of the radial three and a half digits. 
Patients also complain of being woken at night by pain and 
tingling, and that hanging their hand out of the bed provides 
relief. They may also complain of clumsiness when picking 
up small objects or when carrying heavy ones. Symptoms and 
signs are often bilateral.
EXAMINATION
Wasting of the thenar eminence is visible (Figure 34.56) in 
chronic severe cases, and there is sometimes weakness of the 
abductor pollicis brevis. The tests for carpal tunnel compres-
sion are described in Chapter 31 but the most reliable are: (1) 
Tinel’s – percussion over the carpal tunnel and (2) Phalen’s 
test – reproduction of paraesthesia with full wrist flexion. 
More recently, Durkin’s compression test, in which digital 
pressure over the carpal tunnel reproduces the symptoms, has 
been shown to be highly sensitive and specific. Electrophys -
iological studies may confirm the diagnosis, with evidence 
of slowing of nerve conduction through the carpal tunnel. 
Non-operative treatment includes night splintage of the wrist 
in extension and steroid injections. If surgery is required the 
median nerve is surgically decompressed by incising the roof 
of the tunnel (transverse carpal ligament), as either an open 
or an endoscopic percutaneous procedure.
Jean Casimir Felix Guyon , 1831–1920, Professor of Genito-urinary Surgery, Paris, France.
Robert Keinböck , 1871–1953, Professor of Radiology, Vienna, Austria, described this condition in 1910.
Figure 34.56 Thenar muscle wasting in carpal tunnel syndrome.
Summary box 34.15
Carpal tunnel syndrome
●● Night pain is common and relieved by shaking the hand
●● Thenar wasting is an advanced sign
●● Tinel’s, Phalen’s and Durkin’s tests are useful
●● Treatment includes splints and surgical decompression
Ulnar nerve (Guyon’s tunnel syndrome)
Ulnar nerve compression in Guyon’s canal can lead to tin -
gling and numbness in the ring and little fingers with hypoth-
enar wasting. There is preservation of dorsal sensation over 
the little and ring fingers, because although these areas are 
innervated by the ulnar nerve the dorsal branches do not 
pass through Guyon’s canal. Compression is usually due to a 
ganglion, ulnar artery aneurysm or a fracture of the hook of 
hamate. 
Avascular necrosis of carpal bones
Idiopathic avascular necrosis of the lunate (Kienb öck’s dis-
ease, Figure 34.57) or scaphoid (Preiser’s disease) can occur. 
The clinical presentation is of wrist pain and the diagnosis 
Figure 34.57 Avascular necrosis of the lunate (Keinbock’s).
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   508 25/10/2017   08:31Hand 509
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
can be confirmed with radiographs and MRI. The natural his-
tory of the condition is that it leads to collapse of the avascu-
lar carpal bones and subsequent arthritis of the carpus, which 
may be best treated with a partial or complete fusion of the 
wrist. This will at least give a strong and painless wrist. The 
limitation in movement caused by arthrodesis procedures is 
not as great as might be expected.
Ganglion cysts
Ganglion cysts are the commonest cause of a swelling in the 
hand and they are found most often on the dorsal (Figure 
34.58) and volar (Figure 34.59) surfaces of the wrist, over 
the dorsum of the DIP joint (digital mucous cyst) or within 
the flexor tendon sheath at the base of the finger (seed gan -
glion). Dorsal and volar wrist ganglions can cause discom -
fort. The swellings are smooth, fluctuant and transilluminate 
brightly. Mucous cysts can frequently discharge and cause nail 
changes (Figure 34.60). Seed ganglions can be painful when 
gripping. Aspiration or surgical excision can be considered. 
Patients should be informed regarding possible recurrence. 
Congenital malformations
There are many congenital malformations of the upper limb 
and these are discussed in Chapter 39. A classification sum-
marising the main congenital defects and based on aetiology 
appears as Table 34.2
Figure 34.58  
(a) Clinical and (b) surgical 
appearance of a dorsal wrist 
ganglion.
Figure 34.59 Volar wrist ganglion. Figure 34.60 Myxoid cyst with changes in the nail.
(b)(a)
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   509 25/10/2017   08:32CHAPTER 34  Upper limb
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS510
TABLE 34.2 Congenital malformations (hand and wrist)
A Defects in formation due to arrested development 1 Transverse agenesis
2 Longitudinal agenesis
(a) radial ray aplasia; (b) median ray aplasia; (c) ulnar ray aplasia
3 Thumb aplasia/hypoplasia
B Defects in differentiation/separation 1 Syndactyly
2 Camptodactyly
3 Clinodactyly
4 Kirner’s deformity
5 Radioulnar synostosis
C Duplications 1 Supernumerary phalanges
2 Supernumerary digits (polydactyly) 
D Excess development/hyperplasia Macrodactyly
E Insufficient development/hypoplasia Thumb hypoplasia
F Constricting (amniotic) bands Simple amniotic band syndrome
G Generalised skeletal anomalies Marfan, Turner and Down syndromes
FURTHER READING
Carr AJ, Cooper CD, Campbell AK et al . Clinical effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of open and arthroscopic rotator cuff repair [the 
UK Rotator Cuff Surgery (UKUFF) randomised trial]. Health Tech -
nol Assess 2015; 19(80): 1–218.
Constant CR, Murley AH. A clinical method of functional assessment 
of the shoulder. Clin Orthop 1987; 214: 160–4.
Dawson J, Rogers K, Fitzpatrick R, Carr A. The Oxford shoulder score 
revisited. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg 2009; 129(1): 119–23.
Gill DR, Morrey BF . The Coonrad-Morrey total elbow arthroplasty 
in patients who have rheumatoid arthritis. A ten to fifteen-year 
follow-up study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1998; 80: 1327–35.
Mizuno N, Denard PJ, Raiss P et al. Long-term results of the Latarjet 
procedure for anterior instability of the shoulder. J Shoulder Elbow 
Surg 2014; 23(11); 1691–9.
Neer CS. Anterior acromioplasty for the chronic impingement syndrome 
in the shoulder: a preliminary report. J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 1972; 
54-A: 41–50.
O’Driscoll SW , Bell DF , Morrey BF . Posterolateral rotatory instability of 
the elbow. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1991; 73: 440–6.
Poppen NK, Walker PS. Normal and abnormal motion of the shoulder. 
J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 1976; 58-A: 195–201.
Rowe CR, Patel D, Southmayd WW . The Bankart procedure: long-term 
end-result study. J Bone Joint Surg [Am] 1978; 60-A: 1–16.
Singh JA,  Sperling JW , Schleck S et al. Periprosthetic infections after 
total shoulder arthroplasty: A 33-year perspective. J Shoulder Elbow 
Surg. 2012; 21(11): 1534–41.
05_34-B&L27_Pt5_Ch34.indd   510 25/10/2017   08:32Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy and biomechanics of the hip and knee and 
their clinical implications
 • The clinical presentation, aetiology and management of 
common hip and knee pathologies
 • The principles of joint replacement including important 
complications
 • The advances in surgical practice in this field
Chapter
Hip and knee
35
THE HIP JOINT
Applied anatomy
The hip is a ball and socket joint formed by the head of the 
femur and the cup-shaped acetabulum (Latin: little vinegar 
cup) (Figure 35.1). The joint allows a considerable range of 
movement in different planes, and is still inherently stable 
because of its bony anatomy and the static and dynamic sta -
bilisers. The static stabilisers are composed of the ligaments 
(iliofemoral and pubofemoral ligaments anteriorly and the 
ischiofemoral ligament posteriorly), the joint capsule and the 
labrum. The muscles running across the joint (short external 
rotator muscles posteriorly, the iliopsoas anteriorly and the 
hip abductors laterally) constitute the dynamic stabilisers. 
The acetabular labrum is a fibrocartilagenous structure that 
is triangular in cross-section and attaches to the rim of the 
acetabulum except at its base, where it is replaced by the 
transverse ligament. It helps in deepening the socket, thereby 
enhancing stability. It also acts as a fluid seal and thereby 
helps to improve joint lubrication.The femoral head derives 
its blood supply mainly from the retinacular branches of the 
medial circumflex femoral artery and there is a small contri -
bution from the artery of the ligamentum teres.
Summary box 35.1
Anatomy
●● The hip joint is a ball and socket joint, stabilised by static and 
dynamic stabilisers
●● Static stabilisers include the capsule, ligaments and labrum
●● Dynamic stabilisers consist of the muscles acting across the 
joint
●● Blood supply to the femoral head is mainly derived from the 
medial circumflex femoral artery
Iliofemoral
ligament
Interotrochanteric
line
Ligamentum
teres
Capsule
Acetabulum Capsule
Figure 35.1 Anatomy of the hip joint.
Biomechanics of the hip joint
Kinetic analysis reveals that forces as high as three times body 
weight can be exerted across the hip joint during activities of 
daily living, and eight times body weight during physically 
demanding activities. This is primarily the result of contraction 
of muscles crossing the joint. The abductors, because of their 
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   511 25/10/2017   08:33CHAPTER 35  Hip and knee
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS512
insertion at the greater trochanter, help in supporting the pelvis 
when the patient stands on one leg and thereby form the basis of 
a Trendelenburg test (Figure 35.2).
Summary box 35.2
Forces going through the hip joint
●● Lifting leg from bed – one and a half times body weight
●● Standing on one leg – three times body weight
●● Running and jumping – ten times body weight
Friedrich Trendelenburg , 1844–1924, Professor of Surgery successively at Rostock (1875–1882), Bonn (1882–1895) and Leipzig (1895–1911), Germany. The 
Trendelenburg position was first described in 1885.
A caisson  is a watertight chamber used to protect construction workers during the building of underwater structures by means of pressurised air introduction.
Philippe Charles Ernest Gaucher , 1854–1918, physician, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France, described familial splenic anaemia in 1882.
Conditions affecting the hip joint
Common hip pathologies in the paediatric age group and 
secondary to trauma are covered in Chapters 39, 27 and 28. 
This chapter focuses on the acquired pathological conditions 
in the adult.
Avascular necrosis
Avascular necrosis (A VN), or osteonecrosis of the femoral 
head, occurs because of an interruption in the blood supply 
to the femoral head that causes bone death. This leads to 
collapse of the femoral head, and subsequent secondary osteo-
arthritis. A VN can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary to 
other pathology (Table 35.1).
Abductor
muscles
holding
pelvis up
W
weight of
subject
Anatomy of body
3W W
x 3x
4W
Load
on
joint
Biomechanical schematic
representation of loads
pivoted on a beam.
The hip joint is the fulcrum
Figure 35.2 Load on the hip joint when a subject weighing W stands 
on one leg. Hopping increases the load from 4 to 10W.
TABLE 35.1 Aetiology of avascular necrosis of the femoral 
head.
Sickle cell disease
Haemoglobinopathies
Caisson disease (‘the bends’ in divers)
Hyperlipidaemia
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Gaucher’s disease
Chronic liver disease
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Radiotherapy
Chemotherapy
Human immunodeficiency virus
Hypercoagulable states (protein C and protein S deficiency)
Steroids
Alcohol excess
Idiopathic (see Perthes’ disease, Chapter 39)
CLINICAL FEATURES
A VN usually affects men aged from 35 to 45 and is bilateral in 
over 50% of patients. The patient is frequently asymptomatic 
in the early stages. As the disease progresses the patient may 
complain of an ache in the groin and walk with a limp; clini-
cal examination may reveal limitation of movement.
INVESTIGATIONS
A weight-bearing anteroposterior (AP) radiograph of the pel-
vis along with a lateral radiograph will show the classical fea-
tures of A VN including increased sclerosis in the early stages, 
and the crescent sign indicating subchondral bone resorption. 
In the late stages there may be flattening indicating a segmen-
tal head collapse (Figure 35.3). However, radiographs may 
be normal in the early stages of the disease and, therefore, the 
most sensitive and specific way of investigating these patients 
is with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI allows accu-
rate assessment of the extent of involvement and can also 
identify associated bone marrow changes. This helps in early 
diagnosis and prediction of prognosis (Figure 35.4). In 1985, 
Ficat classified the disease into five stages. In 1995, Steinberg 
modified this classification into seven stages based upon both 
radiograph and MRI appearance (Table 35.2). Stages I–IV are 
further divided into A, B or C depending on the extent of 
involvement of the femoral head.
TREATMENT
Conservative treatment usually leads to poor results and is 
therefore not recommended. The choice of surgical treatment 
depends on whether the head has collapsed or not. In the 
pre-collapse group the principle is to preserve and preferably 
encourage revascularisation of the femoral head, whereas in 
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   512 25/10/2017   08:33The hip joint 513
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
the collapse group the aim is to bring the undamaged parts of 
the femoral head into the load-bearing area.
The surgical treatment for the pre-collapse stage includes 
core decompression, which is aimed at relieving intravascu -
lar congestion in the femoral head, and thereby pain. This 
can be achieved with or without bone grafting; a vascularised 
bone graft can also be used to stimulate bone formation. Once 
the femoral head has collapsed, either a femoral osteotomy 
(which aims to transfer the weight-bearing area of the femoral 
head and thereby protect the collapsed segment) or a joint 
replacement (if degenerative changes have set in) is the pre -
ferred option (see later).
Figure 35.3 (a, b) Radiological appearance of avascular necrosis of 
the femoral head.
(a)
(b)
Figure 35.4 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the hip joint show-
ing avascular necr osis and the extent of involvement of the femoral 
head (arrrow).
TABLE 35.2 Steinberg’s classification of avascular 
necrosis of the femoral head based on the type of 
radiological change on radiography and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI).
Stage Description
0 Normal or non-diagnostic radiograph, bone scan or MRI
I Normal radiograph, abnormal MRI or bone scan
II Sclerosis and cysts
III Subchondral collapse, crescent sign
IV Flattening of the head, normal acetabulum
V Acetabular involvement
VI Obliteration of joint space
Summary box 35.3
Avascular necrosis of the femoral head
●● Patients can be asymptomatic in the early stages and 
therefore a high index of suspicion is necessary for initial 
diagnosis
●● MRI scans are needed for early diagnosis
●● Treatment is based on whether the patient presents before or 
after the femoral head has collapsed
●● In the pre-collapse stage, treatement focuses on 
revascularisation
●● In the collapsed stage, the aim is to replace the damaged joint 
surface
●● Prognosis is dependent upon the extent of femoral head 
involvement
Osteoarthritis (OA)
OA is referred to as primary when no predisposing cause 
can be found and secondary (including traumatic) when it 
develops after an insult to the hip joint. A multitude of fac -
tors including genetic, biochemical and mechanical influ -
ences have been implicated in the development of primary 
OA. The exact mechanism for the development of primary 
OA remains unknown and it is therefore termed idiopathic. 
Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) has been proposed as 
an aetiological factor responsible for the development of OA. 
Secondary OA develops following trauma, A VN, dysplasia, 
slipped capital femoral epiphysis, inflammatory arthropathy 
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   513 25/10/2017   08:33CHAPTER 35  Hip and knee
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS514
or other known predisposing cause. The causes of OA of the 
hip are given in Table 35.3.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Osteoarthritis of the hip affects 10–25% of those over the age 
of 65 years. The most consistent symptoms are groin pain and 
limitation of movement. The pain may also radiate down to 
the knee joint, and in some cases the only presenting feature 
may be a painful knee. In the early stages of the disease, pain 
is activity related but as the disease progresses the patient also 
complains of pain at rest. The patient frequently complains 
of night pain and may also find it difficult to get into a com -
fortable position while sleeping. Functionally, most have diffi-
culty in putting on their shoes and socks, and getting into and 
out of a bath or a car. As the pain increases the joint gradually 
loses its movement because of muscle spasm, capsular con -
tracture and osteophyte formation.
Clinical examination may reveal gluteal muscle wasting. 
There may also be a limp, with a positive Trendelenburg’s test. 
Leg length discrepancy, usually shortening, and limitation of 
movement, particularly internal rotation, are consistent fea-
tures. Many patients present with a fixed flexion deformity that 
is best elicited by a modified Thomas’ test (see Chapter 31).
INVESTIGATIONS
The characteristic features on radiograph are (1) a reduction 
of joint space, (2) sclerosis in the subchondral bone, (3) sub-
chondral cysts and (4) osteophyte formation (Figure 35.5). 
Eventually, a collapsed femoral head may also be evident.
TREATMENT
There is no specific pharmacological therapy for OA; 
however, conservative treatment with non-steroidal anti-  
inflammatories, regular exercise, physiotherapy and modifica-
tion of lifestyle with loss of weight does help. Patients should 
also be encouraged to use walking aids (usually a walking stick 
in the opposite hand to offload the affected joint).
The indications for surgery are relentless pain, limitation 
of lifestyle and activities of daily living, and failure of conser-
vative treatment. The surgical options include an arthrodesis 
Georg Clemens Perthes , 1869–1927, Professor of Surgery, Tubingen, Germany, described osteochondritis of the femoral capital epiphysis in 1910.
TABLE 35.3 Aetiology of osteoarthritis.
Primary
Cause unknown, termed idiopathic
Associations: for example, genetics, gender, obesity
Secondary
Trauma
Avascular necrosis
Inflammatory arthropathy (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis)
Perthes’ disease
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Septic arthritis
Femoroacetabular impingement implicated as a possible cause
(fusion), an osteotomy (re-alignment) or a joint replacement 
(Figure 3.6). More and more joint replacements are now 
being performed. The indications are based on limitation 
of lifestyle and individual needs, thereby making it a truly 
life-improving operation.
Summary box 35.4
Osteoarthritis of the hip
●● Osteoarthritis is a non-inflammatory and low-grade 
inflammatory condition leading to progressive damage to the 
articular cartilage and other joint structures
●● The most consistent clinical features are groin pain and 
limitation of movement
●● Characteristic radiological findings include reduction of 
joint space, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral cysts and 
osteophyte formation
●● Conservative treatment includes walking aids, non-steroidal 
analgesics, physiotherapy and weight loss
●● Surgical options include osteotomy, arthrodesis or a joint 
replacement
(a)
Figure 35.5  Anteroposterior (a) and enlarged anter oposterior  
(b) radiographs of the hip joint showing osteoarthritis.
(b)
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   514 25/10/2017   08:33The hip joint 515
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Inflammatory arthritis
The hip joint can also be affected by inflammatory arthritides, 
however these are not as common as OA. This group includes 
rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, gout and chon -
drocalcinosis, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and systemic 
lupus erythematosus.
Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI)
Femoroacetabular impingement has recently been recognised 
as a cause of hip pain in the young adult and may lead to 
secondary hip OA. The non-spherical portion of the femo -
ral head is assumed to exert abnormal shear and compressive 
forces on the corresponding portion of the acetabular carti-
lage during deep hip flexion with internal rotation. Patients 
typically present with groin pain, and MRI-arthrograms typi-
cally reveal acetabular rim lesions and aberrant femoral head 
morphology.
T wo distinct types of FAI have been described – cam and 
pincer – although many patients have a mixed picture with 
both morphologies occuring simultaneously. Pincer impinge-
ment is a result of anterior overcoverage or retroversion of 
the acetabulum, while cam impingement is secondary to 
abnormal morphology of the femoral head and neck junction. 
Treatment options for FAI depend on the patient’s symptoms 
and vary from conservative treatment to hip arthroscopic 
procedures that aim to address labral and bone pathology, or 
osteotomy.
Surgical procedures
Arthroscopy of the hip
The hip joint presents challenges to arthroscopy in terms of 
access and instrumentation of the deeply recessed femoral 
head in the acetabulum and the surrounding thick fibrocap -
sular and muscular envelope. Technical advances, including 
an improved ability to manage the capsule and gain expo -
sure, have led to an expanding list of applications, including 
the treatment of symptomatic labral tears, femoroacetabular 
impingement and the removal of loose bodies, e.g. synovial 
chondromatosis. Arthroscopy allows a clear view of the fem -
oral and acetabular articular surfaces, the labrum, the liga -
mentum teres and the head–neck junction, along with the 
surrounding synovium and its folds and the peritrochanteric 
space. Advantages include minimally invasive access to all 
these structures coupled with rapid recovery, in comparison 
with open surgery.
Arthrodesis of the hip
Arthrodesis or fusion of the hip is an uncommon operation. 
It is generally reserved for young patients with severe osteo -
arthritis who have heavy manual jobs and in whom joint 
replacements would fail early. The aim is to achieve a painless 
joint by fusing it in a functional position, which is about 30° 
of flexion, 15° of external rotation and 5° of abduction. This 
can be achieved by an intra-articular dynamic hip screw or by 
an extra-articular plate with screws.
Several problems can occur following an arthrodesis, 
including altered gait and excessive loading of the ipsilat -
eral knee, the contralateral hip and the spine. Degenerative 
change in these joints in the long term is the rule rather than 
the exception.
Osteotomies around the hip
The goal of an osteotomy around the hip is to redistribute 
forces evenly across the joint, thereby eliminating exces -
sive point loading. This can be achieved by performing an 
osteotomy on the femoral or the acetabular side, depending 
upon the desired goal, e.g. an excessive valgus neck–shaft 
angle and an uncovered femoral head on the lateral aspect 
can be corrected by carrying out a varus femoral osteotomy. 
Similarly, a redirection osteotomy on the acetabular side can 
also be performed to improve coverage of the femoral head. 
The common indications for an osteotomy around the hip 
include:
 ● developmental dysplasia of the hip;
 ● Perthes’ disease;
 ● OA in a young patient;
 ● slipped capital femoral epiphysis;
 ● A VN.
Ideally, an osteotomy should be considered in a young 
patient who maintains a good range of movement of the 
hip and whose radiographs show a reasonable amount of 
joint space. Thorough preoperative planning is essential to 
assess whether the desired position can be achieved. Three-  
dimensional computed tomography (CT) scans are helpful for 
appropriate preoperative planning.
Total hip replacement
Over 80  000 primary total hip replacements are performed 
annually in the UK. The results of surgery are encourag -
ing. W ith evidence-based technique and selection of pros -
thesis, up to 95% of patients will have a well-functioning 
hip replacement at 10 years after surgery . In the best series, 
85% will still be functioning at 20 years, although some are 
Figure 35.6 Radiograph showing an uncemented total hip replace -
ment in situ.
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   515 25/10/2017   08:33CHAPTER 35  Hip and knee
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS516
still in place because the patient may have increasing comor-
bidities, preventing revision. Following surgery, pain is 
reduced, mobility increases and sleep, as well as social 
and sexual function, is improved. Nevertheless, with the 
ever-increasing number of patients with joint replacements, 
the number of patients whose replacement has failed and 
come to the point of revision, or even re-revision, is rising.
PRINCIPLES AND DESIGN OF HIP REPLACEMENTS
Any joint replacement should be biocompatible and made 
of inert materials. It should be well fixed to the host tissue 
and the design should incorporate features that allow a good 
range of movement and stability. The bearing surfaces should 
produce minimal friction to prevent early loosening, and the 
material released from the bearing surface should be non-
toxic. It should remove the minimum amount of the patient’s 
bone so that revision is possible, and it should create a bio -
mechanically stable joint. Finally, any implanted joint should 
ideally outlive the patient and be cost effective.
rate, such as ceramic on ceramic. With metal on metal bearing 
surfaces, although the wear rate is lower, the wear particles 
are smaller (nano rather than micro) and there is increasing 
evidence that these implants are less forgiving than conven -
tional metal on polyethylene THRs, appearing to require more 
precise implant positioning. Ceramic femoral heads bearing on 
polyethylene cups have far lower friction, but ceramic femoral 
heads on ceramic acetabular cups have the lowest friction of 
all. However they are expensive to manufacture and produce 
small-sized wear particles. A summary of the advantages and 
disadvantages of each bearing surface is provided in Table 35.4.
FIXATION OF IMPLANTS
Artificial joints must be securely fixed to the bone on each 
side of the joint so that the implant does not work loose. This 
can be achieved with the help of cement or biological inter -
digitation between the prosthesis and bone (Table 35.5).
Traditionally, hip replacements were fixed into a bed of 
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) cement (Figure 35.7a). 
The cement acts as a grout (spacer) and not as a glue between 
Summary box 35.5
Features of an ideal joint replacement
●● Biocompatible
●● Well fixed to the host tissue, stable and allowing a good range 
of movement
●● Bearing surfaces should be designed to minimise friction
●● Material released from the bearings should be non-toxic
●● Remove the minimum amount of bone
●● Produce mechanical stability
●● Should ideally outlive the patient
MATERIALS FOR THE FEMORAL COMPONENT
Most of the implants available currently are made of cobalt–
chrome alloy, but stainless steel and titanium are also used. 
Metal implants are able to withstand high loads, are relatively 
inert and can be manufactured easily. However, they do pose 
problems in terms of ion release if they are used as bearing 
surfaces. Also, corrosion can be a cause for concern if two 
dissimilar metals are used.
BEARING SURFACES
The total hip replacement (THR) designed by Charnley used 
a bearing surface of metal on high-density polyethylene. This 
is described as a hard-on-soft bearing surface and has a low 
coefficient of friction. High-density polyethylene has good 
shock-absorbing properties but does wear slowly over the years, 
producing small particles that can stimulate an inflammatory 
response in the joint, which then leads to aseptic loosening of 
the implants. The activated macrophages resorb bone and may 
also stimulate osteoclasts to do the same. There has therefore 
been a move towards using bearing surfaces with a lower wear 
Sir John Charnley,  1911–1982, Professor, Wrightington Hospital, UK, pioneer in hip replacment design, particularly the concept of low friction arthroplasty.
TABLE 35.4 Bearing surfaces for hip replacements.
Type of 
bearing
Advantages Disadvantages
Metal on 
polyethylene
Proven efficacy; easy 
to manufacture; cheap
Comparatively high 
friction; high wear rates; 
wear particles excite an 
inflammatory response 
that leads to osteolysis
Ceramic on 
polyethylene
Lower wear rate Expensive; ceramic 
fracture can be a 
problem
Metal on 
metal
Lower wear rate Published examples of 
failure requiring early 
revision; implant recalls; 
metal ion release is a 
problem; expensive
Ceramic on 
ceramic
Lowest wear rate Very expensive; ceramic 
can fracture; squeaking
TABLE 35.5 Fixation of implants.
Method of 
fixation
Advantages Disadvantages
Cemented Implant does not need 
to fit cavity exactly; 
well-proven results
Cement polymerisation 
is exothermic with 
possibility of thermal 
injury; fragments may 
cause third-body wear 
and stimulate aseptic 
loosening; difficult to 
remove at revision
Uncemented No cement needed; 
fixation more 
secure; dynamic and 
biological fixation
Risk of fracture; fit must 
be perfect; osseous 
integration may not be 
established; expensive
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   516 25/10/2017   08:33The hip joint 517
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
the implant and the bone. In the majority of cases it gives an 
excellent outcome as shown by the data in the national joint 
registries. However, it can cause potential problems: cement 
pressurisation can result in release of cement and marrow 
contents into the patient’s blood stream. This can cause a 
drop in blood pressure.
On the other hand, this problem can be obviated by using 
an uncemented prosthesis where biological fixation can be 
achieved by providing a rough surface on the prosthesis for 
bone to grow into the prosthesis or by coating the surface 
of the prosthesis with hydroxyapatite, an osteoconductive 
agent, to encourage bone to bond to the prosthesis (Figure 
35.7b). These uncemented devices have also shown good 
long-term outcomes, although they can be associated with 
higher implant costs, increased risk of intraoperative fracture 
and difficulty in removing them if revision surgery is needed.
Surgical approaches to the hip, 
postoperative course and complications
The operation can be performed via a posterior approach, a tro-
chanteric osteotomy, an anterolateral or Hardinge approach 
or an anterior approach (Table 35.6). Each approach has its 
own advantages and disadvantages. Minimally invasive sur -
gery has been described that shortens the size of the incision 
and attempts to lessen soft tissue damage. Specialised instru-
ments have been developed to facilitate this as access can be 
restricted. Although the concept is attractive, no long-term 
benefits have been conclusively shown in hip surgery over the 
conventional technique. Eventually, whichever approach is 
used, it is essential to be able to implant a prosthesis that has 
the correct offset, is at the correct centre of rotation with the 
correct component orientation, that restores leg length and 
carries minimal risk of complications.
The postoperative course generally involves a 3–5 day 
stay in hospital, where the physiotherapist encourages the 
patient to mobilise safely and independently, avoiding any 
movements which might lead to a dislocation (Figure 35.8). 
Before discharge, the occupational therapist assesses the 
patient’s home circumstances and arranges for any modifica -
tions that may be required to assist the patient e.g. a raised 
toilet seat. Follow-up visits are arranged at 6  weeks and at 
1 year post surgery. Although hip replacement is a generally 
a successful and safe procedure, it does have associated com -
plications. A comprehensive list of complications is given 
in Table 35.7. Deep vein thrombosis is relatively common if 
no precautions are taken to reduce this risk, for which the 
use of regional anaesthesia and early postoperative mobili -
sation are invaluable. In additon, either mechanical devices 
Figure 35.7 Radiographs of a cemented (a) and non-cemented (b) 
femoral component.
(a)
(b)
TABLE 35.6 Surgical approaches to the hip.
Surgical approach Anatomical interval and muscle
Posterior Along the fibres of the gluteus maximus, 
and dividing the short external rotators
Trochanteric A trochanteric osteotomy is required
Anterolateral/
Hardinge
Parts of the gluteus medius and minimus 
are reflected off the greater trochanter
Anterior The interval is developed between the 
sartorius and rectus femoris and the tensor 
fascia lata
Figure 35.8 Dislocation of the hip.
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   517 25/10/2017   08:33CHAPTER 35  Hip and knee
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS518
(thromboembolic deterrent (TED) stockings, foot pumps or 
intermittent pneumatic calf compression devices) and medi-
cation (low molecular weight heparin, warfarin or oral antico-
agulants) are commonly prescribed for a period of 4–6 weeks 
after surgery to reduce the risk of DVT (this will depend on 
local and national guidelines).
Revision total hip replacement
Revision of a total hip replacement is required if the patient 
is symptomatic secondary to failure of the implant by loos -
ening (Figure 35.9), recurrent dislocations or a peripros-
thetic fracture. Loosening of the implant can occur because 
of an infection or as a result of aseptic osteolysis caused by an 
inflammatory response secondary to particle wear.
In the initial stages of loosening the patient complains 
of pain, which is experienced mainly on weight bearing. A 
history of infection in the immediate postoperative perio d 
may suggest infection as a cause of premature implant loos -
ening. The infection can be low-grade, with Staphylococcus 
epidermidis multiplying slowly within a glycocalyx coating, 
and therefore normal measures of infection such as a raised 
C-reactive protien (CRP) may be equivocal (see Chapter 38).
If the loosening is secondary to infection, a two-staged 
revision is usually preferred. The first stage consists of implant 
removal, thorough debridement and implantation of an anti-
biotic loaded cement spacer. Multiple deep specimens are 
sent for bacteriology to determine the organism and its sensi-
tivity. The patient is subsequently prescribed an appropriate 
antibiotic regime (see Chapter 38). At the second stage of the 
procedure, the cement spacer is removed and a new prosthesis 
implanted. In the case of aseptic loosening, revision is per -
formed as a single-stage procedure. If there has been a signif -
icant amount of bone loss, bone grafting or trabecular metal 
augments may be required. The results following a revision 
hip replacement are not as good as those following a primary 
THR and the rate of complications, especially dislocation, is 
also higher.
THE KNEE
Applied anatomy
The knee joint is a synovial hinge joint. It consists of two 
condyloid tibiofemoral joints and a sellar (or saddle shaped) 
patellofemoral joint. The shape makes the joint inherently 
unstable, but stability is achieved by a combination of static 
(ligaments) and dynamic (muscles) stabilisers acting across 
the joint.
Interposed between the tibial and femoral condyles are 
the medial and lateral menisci. These fibrocartilaginous 
structures aid shock absorption, increase the area over which 
load is dissipated and have a role in anteroposterior stability 
(Figure 35.10). Medial meniscal tears are three times more 
TABLE 35.7 Complications of total hip replacement.
Intraoperative complications
Nerve injury – sciatic, femoral and obturator
Vascular injury – femoral vein and artery
Femoral fracture
Fragments of cement left in joint
Postoperative complications
Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
Leg length inequality
Dislocation
Infection
Aseptic loosening
Heterotopic ossification
Figure 35.9 Acetabular loosening (arrow).
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Lateral condyle
Tendon of popliteus
Lateral meniscus
Fibular collateral
ligament
Fibula
Fibula
Lateral meniscus
Lateral condyle
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Femur
Femur
Medial condyle
Tibia
Tibia
Medial meniscus
Posterior cruciate
ligament
Medial condyle
Ligament of Wrisberg
Posterior cruciate
ligament
Medial meniscus
Tibial collateral
ligament
Figure 35.10 Anatomy of the knee joint.
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   518 25/10/2017   08:33The knee 519
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
common than those in the more mobile lateral meniscus. The 
outer third of the meniscus is vascular and so tears can be 
repaired with the prospect of healing.
The medial and lateral collateral ligaments are the pri -
mary restraints to valgus and varus stress, respectively. The 
medial collateral ligament is a broad, flat ligament composed 
of a superficial and a deep layer. The deep layer is attached 
to the medial meniscus. The lateral collateral ligament is a 
simple cord-like structure.
The cruciate ligaments are vital for anteroposterior stabil-
ity. Each cruciate ligament comprises two bundles. The ante-
rior cruciate ligament (ACL) is composed of an anteromedial 
bundle that is tight in flexion and a posterolateral bundle that 
is tight in extension. The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) 
has an anterolateral bundle (tight in flexion) and a postero -
medial portion (tight in extension). The ACL and PCL pre -
vent anterior and posterior translation of the tibia on the 
femur respectively.
The knee has bursae surrounding it that can become 
inflamed and infected.
larger medial femoral condyle rolls back less than the smaller 
lateral femoral condyle.
The biomechanical role of the patella is to function as a 
pulley for the quadriceps. It increases the power of the quad -
riceps by increasing the lever arm. It has the thickest articular 
cartilage in the body and is designed to withstand loads as 
high as 20 times body weight when jumping.
Summary box 35.6
Anatomy of the knee joint
●● Complex synovial hinge joint
●● The shape of the joint surfaces make it inherently unstable
●● The static stabilisers are the joint capsule, menisci, cruciate 
and collateral ligaments
●● The dynamic stabilisers are the quadriceps and hamstrings 
muscles
Biomechanics
Axes of the lower limb
The anatomical axes of the femur and tibia are defined by 
their medullary canal. The mechanical axis of the lower limb 
runs from the centre of the femoral head, through the inter -
condylar notch of the knee to the centre of the ankle joint. 
The angle between the anatomical and mechanical axes of 
the femur is usually between 5 and 7° (often called the valgus 
cut angle in arthroplasty) (Figure 35.11). An artificial knee 
joint must have the joint surface parallel with the ground, 
and with the load transmitted equally between the condyles. 
This is achieved by cutting the femur perpendicular to the 
mechanical axis, by measuring the valgus cut angle off the 
anatomical axis. The tibia is cut perpendicular to its anatom-
ical and mechanical axes.
Kinematics and kinetics
Knee motion is predominately in the sagittal plane. A limited 
degree of rotation also occurs and increases as knee flexion 
increases. The normal range of motion is between 5° of hyper-
extension and 135° of flexion. MRI of cadaveric knees has 
revealed that, during knee flexion, a combination of rolling 
and sliding of the femur on the tibia occurs but there is also 
internal rotation of the tibia with flexion. This is because the 
Anatomical
axis femur
Anatomical
axis tibia
Femoral 
anatomical–
mechanical angle
Mechanical
axis femur
Mechanical
axis tibia
Figure 35.11 Axes of the lower limb. Anatomical and mechanical 
axes are coincident. Adapted fr om Miller, M. Review of Orthopae-
dics, 4th edn. 2004, Elsevier, Philadelphia. By kind permission of the 
 publishers.
Summary box 35.7
Biomechanics of the knee joint
●● The anatomical–mechanical angle of the femur is the angle 
between the anatomical and mechanical axes of the femur
●● Knee motion is mainly in the sagittal plane with some rotation
●● The patella acts as a pulley, increasing the lever arm of the 
quadriceps
●● Loads of up to 20 times body weight are transmitted across 
the patella when jumping
Conditions affecting the knee joint
Osteoarthritis
OA commonly affects the knee joint. Females are affected 
more often than their male counterparts and more than 3% of 
women aged over 75 years are affected. Osteoarthritis can be 
either primary (idiopathic) or secondary. Secondary osteoar-
thritis may occur following a previous intra-articular fracture, 
meniscectomy, osteonecrosis or in a neuropathic joint.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Pain is the main symptom, made worse with use. With 
patellofemoral involvement, pain is worse on stairs. As the dis-
ease progresses, exercise tolerance diminishes, pain becomes 
constant, often disturbing sleep, and patients become increas-
ingly reliant on walking aids. In severe cases, patients may 
even become housebound.
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   519 25/10/2017   08:33CHAPTER 35  Hip and knee
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS520
Clinical examination reveals an antalgic gait where the 
patient limps, spending a short time on the painful limb, and 
moves their centre of gravity to minimise the weight that 
they are taking through this limb. In osteoarthritic patients 
the deformity is usually varus, with bone loss on the medial 
side, while in rheumatoid patients valgus deformity is com-
monplace. An effusion is frequently present and movement is 
restricted, particularly extension. Crepitus can be both palpa-
ble and audible.
INVESTIGATIONS
The radiographic features are joint space narrowing, sub -
chondral sclerosis, osteophytes and subchondral cysts (Figure 
35.12). MRI can be used to judge both articular cartilage 
involvement and the integrity of the ACL, with a view to 
guiding future surgical intervention.
Soft tissue knee problems
Knee problems, in the case of injury, can present acutely or 
some time after the event (see Chapter 32). Problems can be 
associated with degenerative changes, in which case a more 
chronic presentation can be encountered. Specific structures 
commonly involved are the ligaments, tendons and menisci. 
Ligamentous injuries may involve the cruciate and collateral 
ligaments and can be combined with injury to stabilising 
structures, e.g. the posterolateral corner. Tendon problems 
include injuries to the quadriceps tendon and the patellar 
tendon. The pattern of meniscal injury or degeneration is 
variable, affecting either the medial or lateral meniscus (or 
both). There are several patterns of injury within a meniscal 
structure, some relating to blood supply and healing poten-
tial. Furthermore, soft tissue problems can be associated with 
chondral or osteochondral lesions.
ANTERIOR CRUCIATE LIGAMENT
The ACL is the most commonly injured ligament in the knee 
and injury most frequently results from pivoting injuries in 
high-energy contact sport. It may be associated with an audi-
ble ‘pop’, immediate swelling, and the need to be ‘carried-off’ 
the field.
The injury risk is higher among females, thought to be due 
to smaller ligaments, smaller femoral notches and different 
landing biomechanics.
Some controversy exists concerning the incidence of sec-
ondary osteoarthritis in ACL-deficient versus reconstructed 
knees. However, chronic ACL deficiency is clearly linked 
with an increased incidence of complex meniscal tears and 
chondral injury.
INVESTIGATION
MRI of the knee is useful for the identification of ligamentous 
and meniscal injuries, and any associated chondral lesions. 
An ultrasound scan is more commonly used to identify the 
more superficial tendon injuries.
TREATMENT
Isolated ligament injuries are generally initially managed 
non-operatively in a knee brace. Surgical repair, augmenta -
tion and reconstruction are considered in multiligament inju-
ries, and in cases of chronic instability after non-operative 
management of isolated ligament injuries. Meniscal injuries 
that are associated with mechanical symptoms, e.g. catching, 
locking and giving way, generally respond well to arthroscopic 
treatment. This can include either a repair or debridement 
depending on the location, morphology and chronicity of the 
tear. Chondral lesions do not breach the subchondral bone 
and make no spontaneous attempt to heal. These lesions, 
if appropriate, are commonly managed with microfracture 
to stimulate bone marrow cells to form fibrocartilage repair 
tissue.
Some patients with ACL injuries may decide that they 
have adequate stability in the knee once they have been 
through a full rehabilitation programme. If, however, they 
continue to experience instability, particularly with twist -
ing activities, they should be considered for surgical recon -
Summary box 35.8
Knee osteoarthritis
●● More common in females
●● Can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary (e.g. post traumatic)
●● The main symptom is pain made worse by use
●● Examination reveals swelling, and reduced range of motion 
with or without deformity
●● The key radiographic features are joint space narrowing, 
subchondral sclerosis and cysts, and osteophytes
●● Treatment is non-operative initially. Knee replacement is 
reserved for end-stage disease
TREATMENT
Non-operative metho ds are the first line of treatment. 
Patients should be encouraged to lose weight, undertake reg -
ular exercise to prevent joint stiffness and use anti-inflamma-
tory medication. Walking aids, e.g. a stick, may be beneficial. 
Intra-articular steroid injections can provide long-term pain 
relief, although may actually cause more rapid degeneration 
of the joint cartilage.
Surgical options include osteotomy, arthrodesis or knee 
replacement. These are all discussed below.
Figure 35.12 (a, b) Osteoarthritis of the knee.
(a) (b)
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   520 25/10/2017   08:33The knee 521
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
struction. Surgical reconstruction of the ACL should only be 
undertaken in those patients who have a full range of knee 
motion and good hamstring and quadriceps function preoper-
atively, as otherwise results are poor.
Surgical procedures
Arthroscopy of the knee
Knee arthroscopy is used in the diagnosis and treatment of 
injuries, e.g. ligamentous and meniscal injuries and articular 
cartilage defects. There are a number of other indications for 
knee arthroscopy summarised in Table 35.8.
a young patient and disruption of the extensor mechanism. 
The ideal position of fusion is 7° of valgus and 15° of flexion. 
Arthrodesis is performed using either a custom-made intra -
medullary nail or an extramedullary technique such as an 
external fixator.
Knee joint replacement
There are three compartments within the knee: medial and 
lateral tibiofemoral, and patellofemoral. Osteoarthritis may 
affect these individually or collectively. The medial compart-
ment is most commonly affected, producing a varus deformity. 
For single-compartment disease a unicompartmental replace-
ment may be used, while in tricompartmental disease a total 
knee replacement (TKR) is indicated (Figure 35.13).
Knee replacement can be regarded as a resurfacing proce -
dure in which the femoral articular surface is replaced with 
metal and the tibial articular surface is replaced by a tough 
polyethylene insert.
The main indication for knee replacement is pain, espe-
cially when combined with deformity and instability. Knee 
replacement should be reserved until a patient’s quality of life 
is significantly impaired.
Natural knee motion is complex. It involves translation 
and rotation about each of the x, y and z axes (six degrees of 
freedom). It has proven very difficult to reproduce this natural 
TABLE 35.8 Indications for knee arthroscopy.
Torn meniscus resection or repair
Anterior/posterior cruciate ligament reconstruction
Loose body removal
Cartilage regeneration techniques including microfracture
Septic arthritis washout
Inflammatory arthritis – synovectomy
Diagnosis of unexplained knee pain
Tibial plateau fractures – allows intraoperative assessment and 
reduction of the articular surface
Cruciate reconstruction
An isolated ACL injury is most commonly treated with an 
arthroscopic intra-articular reconstruction. The graft can be 
bone–patella, tendon–bone or four-strand hamstring auto -
graft. Postoperative rehabilitation programmes are crucial to 
a favourable outcome. Complications following ACL surgery 
are usually a result of incorrect tunnel placement (placing the 
femoral tunnel too far anteriorly limits knee flexion) and early 
surgery. The graft re-rupture rate is approximately 1% per year.
Osteotomy
Osteoarthritis can lead to varus or valgus deformity of the 
knee. This results in excessive stresses on the affected com -
partment, leading to premature degenerative change in that 
compartment. Osteotomy aims to divide the bone, correct the 
deformity and alter the load-bearing mechanics of the joint.
The most commonly performed operation is a high tibial 
osteotomy (HTO) for a varus knee. Realignment is achieved 
with either an opening-wedge medial HTO or a closing-wedge 
lateral HTO. In valgus knees with relatively mild deformity 
(less than 12°) a varus-producing HTO on the medial side 
can be performed. A deformity of 12° or more requires distal 
femoral varus osteotomy.
The ideal patient for osteotomy is a young and active, 
well-motivated individual with disease limited to one com -
partment.
Knee arthrodesis
The most common indication for knee arthrodesis is a failed 
total knee replacement. Other indications include uncontrol-
lable sepsis, a neuropathic joint, post-traumatic arthritis in 
 Figure 35.13 (a, b) Total knee replacement.
(a)
(b)
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   521 25/10/2017   08:33CHAPTER 35  Hip and knee
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS522
motion in TKRs. In comparison to THR, patients with TKR 
find it hard to forget they have a knee replacement. Conse -
quently, patient satisfaction is lower with TKR.
There are three types of TKR currently used: uncon -
strained, constrained–non-hinged and constrained–hinged. 
Almost all primary TKR are unconstrained while the con-
strained types are used in revision TKR when there may be 
significant bone loss and ligament deficiency.
The more constrained the implant the greater the force 
transmitted to the implant–cement–bone interfaces, there -
fore increasing the risk of loosening.
The main aim of TKR is to create a mechanical axis 
(weight-bearing line) that passes through the centre of the 
femoral head, knee and ankle. The joint line should then be 
perpendicular to the mechanical axis. It should also be par -
allel with the ground. If implants of the correct size are used 
and exactly the right amount of bone is cut away from both 
the tibia and the femur, the new joint surface will be placed 
exactly where the patient’s original surface had been before 
disease supervened.The collateral ligaments will then provide 
stability without constraint and ensure that the patella will 
track correctly on the femur.
Postoperatively, patients require physiotherapy to regain 
quadriceps strength and to achieve full extension. In addi -
tion they need at least 90° knee flexion to enable them to sit 
comfortably. The average length of hospital stay is between 
3 and 5 days. Complications following TKR can be broadly 
classified into intraoperative and postoperative (Table 35.9).
Unicompartmental knee replacement (UKR)
The natural history of osteoarthritis reveals that, in up to 92% 
of cases, the disease begins in the medial compartment alone. 
This was the basis for the development of the UKR, which 
is available in either fixed or mobile bearing forms (Figure 
35.14). Although generally the longevity of the implants is 
not as good as with TKRs, a number of series report 10-year 
survival figures over 90% for medial UKRs.
Summary box 35.9
Aims of total knee replacement
●● Mechanical axis through centre of knee
●● Joint line perpendicular to mechanical axis
●● Balance collateral ligaments
●● Ensure patellofemoral joint tracks normally
TABLE 35.9 Complications of total knee replacement.
Intraoperative
Poor placement of implants leading to instability or stiffness, 
or pain
Nerve or vessel injury including tourniquet damage
Fracture
Patellar tendon avulsion
Malalignment
Fat embolism
Postoperative
Infection
Deep vein thrombosis/pulmonary embolism
Pain/stiffness
Instability
Osteolysis
Component loosening
Dislocation
Prerequisites to undertaking medial UKR include intact 
ligaments (especially the ACL), disease limited to one com-
partment and varus/flexion deformities of not more than 15°. 
As it is a less invasive procedure than a TKR, it is associated 
with a more rapid recovery, shorter hospital stay and preserva-
tion of knee kinematics. It is a bone preserving procedure, and 
therefore revision is generally to a TKR rather than to more 
constrained implants.
Lateral UKR is performed for lateral compartment disease; 
this is far less common than medial UKR, partly owing to a 
reported dislocation rate of 10%.
Figure 35.14 (a, b) Unicompartmental knee replacement.
(b)
(a)
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   522 25/10/2017   08:33Further reading 523
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Patellofemoral replacement is also performed but again 
the longevity of the implants is not as good, and the num -
bers are low in view of the scarcity of patients with isolated 
patellofemoral disease.
Revision knee replacement
Implant loosening secondary to either infection or polyeth-
ylene-induced osteolysis is the main reason for revising TKR. 
Other indications include periprosthetic fracture, malalign -
ment, instability, stiffness and patellar maltracking. Regard-
less of the indication, as with any type of revision procedure it 
is important to exclude infection because this often warrants 
a two-stage rather than a single-stage procedure. Although it 
is more technically challenging, the aims of revision TKR are 
no different from those of primary TKR. That is to provide a 
well-aligned, stable and pain-free knee (Figure 35.15).
FURTHER READING
Bulstrode C, Wilson MacDonald J, Eastwood D et al. Oxford textbook of 
trauma and orthopaedics, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2017.
Miller MD, Thompson SR. Miller’s review of orthopaedics, 7th edn. Phil-
adelphia: Elsevier, 2016.
Solomon L, Warwick, DJ, Nayagam S. Apley & Solomon’s concise system 
of orthopaedics and trauma, 4th edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2014.
Figure 35.15  Radiographs of a malaligned knee (a) and a well-
aligned revised knee (b, c).
(a) (b)
(c)
05_35-B&L27_Pt5_Ch35.indd   523 25/10/2017   08:33Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The basic anatomy and biomechanics of the foot and 
ankle
 • The common problems affecting the foot and ankle in 
each age group
 • The principles behind the treatment of each condition, 
be it conservative or surgical
 • The significance of progressive neurological diseases
Foot and ankle
36 
ANATOMY
There are 26 (25 with variant) main bones in the foot (seven 
tarsal bones, five metatarsals and 14 phalanges; 13 in the 
biphalangeal fifth toe varient) plus the two sesamoids of the 
hallux and a variable number of other sesamoid and accessory 
bones.
Movements at the ankle joint are mainly dorsiflexion and 
plantarflexion, but are more complex than this. The joint is 
actually a truncated section of a cone, meaning the motion is 
not simply a hinge and, in addition, movement of the ankle 
leads to rotation of the fibula at the syndesmosis. This means 
that the foot externally rotates with dorsiflexion and inter ­
nally rotates with plantarflexion.
Stability is conferred upon the ankle by the congruence of 
the mortice and the integrity of principally the medial, lateral 
and the inferior tibiofibular ligaments.
The subtalar joint is divided into anterior, middle and 
posterior facets and, along with the talonavicular and calca­
neocuboid joints, makes up the triple joint complex. These 
joints are responsible for inversion and eversion of the hind 
and midfoot. The joints are codependent such that limi­
tation of one affects movement at the others. Fusion of the 
triple complex slightly affects movement at the ankle and  
vice versa.
The second tarsometatarsal joint is recessed relative to the 
first and third and acts as a ‘keystone’. Disruption of this joint 
(Lisfranc’s injury) leads to loss of the transverse arch and an 
acquired flat foot.
The lower leg is divided into four compartments:
 ● the superficial posterior – gastrocnemius, soleus and 
plantaris;
 ● the deep posterior – tibialis posterior, flexor digitorum lon­
gus and flexor hallucis longus;
 ● the lateral – peroneus brevis and peroneus longus;
 ● the anterior – tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, 
extensor digitorum longus and peroneus tertius.
There is only one muscle on the dorsum of the foot, the 
extensor digitorum brevis. The muscles on the plantar aspect 
of the foot are divided into four layers, the first being the most 
superficial, and the course of the neurovascular structures is a 
favourite exam topic. The plantar fascia is a very important 
structure that takes its origin from the heel and inserts into 
the bases of the proximal phalanges of the toes. At toe­off, the 
fascia tightens and accentuates the medial plantar arch and 
helps provide a rigid lever arm, the so­called ‘windlass mech­
anism’. This is essential in the preservation of the integrity of 
the arch of the foot and function of the toes.
The blood supply of the foot is from the anterior tibial, 
the posterior tibial and the peroneal arteries. The following 
nerves supply sensation to the foot: posterior tibial, saphe ­
nous, sural, superficial and deep peroneal (Figure 36.1).
Jacques Lisfranc , 1790–1847, Professor of Surgery and Operative Medicine, Paris, France.
Summary box 36.1
Anatomy of the foot
●● There are 26 major bones in the foot
●● There are four layers of muscles in the sole of the foot
●● The blood supply of the foot is from the anterior and posterior 
tibial arteries plus the peroneal artery
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   524 25/10/2017   08:34Pathology in the adult 525
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
BIOMECHANICS
The walking cycle is divided into the stance (60%) and swing 
(40%) phases. The stance phase is divided into three inter ­
vals: (1) heel strike to foot flat; (2) foot flat until the body 
passes over the ankle; and (3) ankle joint plantarflexion to 
toe­off. During walking up to 12% of the gait cycle is spent 
with both feet in the stance phase but with running there is 
a period when neither foot is in contact with the ground, the 
‘float’ phase. During running the cycle time is shortened but 
the forces generated are very much increased. PATHOLOGY IN THE ADUL T
The forefoot
Hallux valgus
Hallux valgus is deviation of the big toe away from the mid ­
line, i.e. towards the lesser toes, and is usually associated with 
a bunion, a swelling made up of both bone and bursa on the 
medial aspect of the first metatarsal head (Figure 36.2). It is 
a common condition that affects women more than men, and 
which is often bilateral. It is believed that the tendency to 
hallux valgus is inherited and that fully enclosed shoes accel­
erate the development of the condition. 
With increasing deformity the first ray becomes defunc­
tional and elevated, and overload of the second metatarso ­
phalangeal (MTP) joint often results in pain, swelling and 
eventually plantar plate disruption and dislocation. This can 
present with a prominent callosity beneath the second MTP 
joint and eventually hammering of the second toe.
Non­operative treatment of hallux valgus includes a wider 
toe box and pressure relief. Surgical intervention is commonly 
offered, but has a 10% rate of dissatisfaction. 
For mild deformities a distal osteotomy (e.g. chevron) 
is usually adequate. For moderate deformities the surgeon is 
more likely to use a shaft e.g. Scarf (Figure 36.3) or Ludloff, 
Summary box 36.2
Biomechanics
●● The gait cycle is divided into swing and stance phases
●● Running generates increased forces, shortens the gait cycle 
and has a float phase when neither foot touches the ground
Examination
The examination of the foot is described in Chapter 31. The 
patient should be watched walking, and both the foot and 
the footwear of the patient need examining when looking for 
abnormal load and wear.
PAEDIATRIC CONDITIONS
These are discussed in Chapter 39.
Deep peroneal nerve
or medial plantar nerve
(from tibial nerve)
Medial plantar nerve
(branch of tibial nerve)
Lateral plantar
branch of medial
plantar nerve (branch
of tibial nerve)
Sural nerve
Saphenous nerve
Super/f_icial
peroneal nerve
Medial calcaneal nerve
(tibial nerve)
Lateral plantar nerve
Figure 36.1  Cutaneous nerve supply of the foot (courtesy of 
Bartleby.com).
Figure 36.2 (a, b) Hallux valgus and bunion.
(a)
(b)
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   525 25/10/2017   08:34CHAPTER 36   Foot and ankle
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS526
Summary box 36.3
Hallux valgus
●● Bunions affect women more often than men
●● Patients with hallux valgus have inherited a tendency to 
develop the condition
●● Not all patients need surgery
●● The choice of operation is determined by the severity of the 
deformity and presence or absence of any arthritis
or a basal (proximal chevron or crescentic) osteotomy. Severe 
deformities can be corrected by shaft and basal osteotomies 
but sometimes a fusion of the first tarsometatarsal joint (mod­
ified Lapidus) or a first MTP joint fusion can be effective. 
Minimally invasive techniques are developing and are wide ­
spread, especially in Europe, but there are few peer ­reviewed 
series of outcomes from the UK. 
Basal osteotomies and fusions have a higher risk of 
abnomal elevation or depression of the rays, resulting in over­
load of the rest of the forefoot. However, they do allow a mas­
sive correction. They are best stabilised using plates.
Operations such as a Keller’s excision arthroplasty, where 
the proximal third of the proximal phalanx is excised, serve 
to defunction the toe and sesamoids and are reserved for 
low­demand high­risk patients where there is a high risk that 
healing of an osteotomy might fail.
The complications of bunion surgery are infection, cuta ­
neous nerve damage, recurrence or overcorrection of defor ­
mity, stiffness and overload of the second MTP joint (transfer 
lesion), and 10% of patients have reservations about their 
outcome. Occasionally patients develop early arthritis follow­
ing surgery and require revision to fusion.
Hallux rigidus
Hallux rigidus is a painful condition of the hallux MTP joint 
characterised by loss of motion especially in dorsiflexion and 
osteophyte formation on the dorsum and sides of the joint 
(Figure 36.4). 
Figure 36.3 Pre- (a) and postoperative (b) radiographs of a Scarf 
osteotomy.
Figure 36.4 Clinical (a) and radiographic (b) appearance of hallux 
rigidus.
(a)
(b)
 (b)
(a)
William Lordan Keller , 1874–1959, Head of the Department of Surgery, the Walter Reed Hospital, Washington, DC, USA, described this operation in 1904. 
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   526 25/10/2017   08:34Pathology in the adult 527
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
In adults there is often a history of trauma or repetitive 
microtrauma (sport) but, occasionally, there is a strong family 
history of the condition. Gout and rheumatological condi ­
tions may present in this way . Patients complain of stiffness 
and pain on weight bearing. 
The most effective non ­operative treatment is provision 
of a stiff­soled shoe with a deep toe box or a rocker­soled shoe, 
which are now available on the high street. 
The mainstays of surgical management are injection/
manipulation, cheilectomy (a radical debridement and exci­
sion of the part of the joint blocking movement), fusion, and 
interpostion arthroplasty (Keller’s ­type procedure or silicon 
interposition). Prosthetic arthroplasty, with hemi ­, total, 
interposition or spacer arthroplasty, is available but many 
prostheses have been withdrawn for high failure rates and few 
series extend beyond 9 years.
Fusion is for the severely affected and is an effective means 
of abolishing pain, but affects the biomechanics and some 
patients are left with intractable pain beneath the sesamoids. 
A fusion will still usually allow sports participation.
Isolated lesser toe MTP extension/subluxation may result 
from a ruptured plantar plate, and repair techniques have 
evolved recently.
Freiberg’s disease 
Freiberg’s disease (Figure 36.5) is an ischaemic necrosis of the 
epiphysis, resulting in pain and swelling of the joint. It will 
often settle with rest. Re ­shaping osteotomies are described, 
or excision of the proximal phalangeal head for severe adult 
cases with joint destruction. Excision of the whole metatarsal 
head should never be performed. 
Morton’s neuroma and metatarsalgia
Metatarsalgia usually occurs secondary to joint problems, 
overload or irritation of a nerve. Morton’s neuroma is a pain­
ful condition which in most cases arises from compression 
of the common digital nerve between the third and fourth 
metatarsal heads and is usually secondary to other forefoot 
pathology. 
The diagnosis is confirmed by ultrasound or magnetic res­
onance imaging (MRI). Non ­operative treatments include 
advice about footwear, an orthosis (premetatarsal dome) to 
splay the metatarsal heads or an injection of steroids. 
Surgery involves resection (the affected toes will be per ­
manently partly hemi ­numb if the nerve is removed) but 
this is not without risk of patient dissatisfaction, pain and 
recurrence.
Summary box 36.4
Hallux rigidus
●● Hallux rigidus can affect adolescents as well as adults
●● Stiff-soled shoes with a deep toe box are the most 
comfortable type of shoe
●● Cheilectomy and fusion are the mainstays of surgical 
treatment Summary box 36.5
Morton’s neuroma
●● Morton’s neuroma most commonly affects the second or third 
web space
●● Surgical excision of a neuroma is often successful but has a 
risk of pain syndrome and recurrence; guided injections form 
the mainstay of treatment for most
Sesamoid problems
Acute injuries (turf toe) can be managed non ­operatively 
or surgically depending on the grade of the injury and the 
occupation of the patient. Grade 4 acute fracture may require 
surgery.
Chronic conditions are indistinguishable and range from 
stress fracture to avascular necrosis and sesamoiditis but are 
probably all the same phenomenon. Management includes 
offloading with orthotics and injections of steroids and, rarely, 
shaving/excison. Excision surgery carries a high risk. 
Lesser toe deformities
Hammer, mallet, and claw toes are frequent and are usually 
non­indicative but may be secondary to other deformities 
in the foot or to underlying neurological disease. Non ­ 
operative treatment involves appropriate padding and 
footwear modification. For symptomatic flexible deformities 
soft­tissue surgery such as flexor/extensor tenotomies +/– 
capsulotomy is usually adequate, but for fixed deformities 
bony procedures are required such as interposition arthro ­
plasty, fusion or excision arthroplasty. 
Albert Henry Freiberg , Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, gave his account of this condition in 1926.
Thomas George Morton , 1835–1903, surgeon, the Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA, described this condition in 1876.
Figure 36.5 Freiberg’s disease.
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   527 25/10/2017   08:34CHAPTER 36   Foot and ankle
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS528
Stress fracture
May be post sport or incipient. Usually presents in the fore­
foot and may mimic Morton’s or metatarsalgia. A unexplained 
aetiology might require biochemical or biomechanical 
evaluation. Forefoot fractures can usually be managed non ­ 
operatively.
Stress fractures may occur in any bone. Those of the 
navicular, talus and tibial sesamoid often present with vague 
symptomatology but early diagnosis with MRI and manage ­
ment are essential, with early fixation if required.
The midfoot
The midfoot comprises the cuneiforms and the cuboid and 
related joints.
Midfoot arthritis
The aetiology is usually not known but the risk factors include 
microtrauma, rheumatological causes, flat foot, Lisfranc or 
similar injuries (which may have been missed), Charcot and 
cavus foot. Patients are best managed non ­operatively with 
orthotics, shoes, analgesia and modifications of their lifestyle. 
Pain, often with palpable dorsal osteophytes, is the com ­
monest finding. 
Injections and orthotics are the mainstay of treatment, 
with surgery high risk and having moderate outcomes. Fusion 
of the lateral two tarsometatarsal (TMT) joints has a univer ­
sally poor outcome. Arthroplasty, similarly, has little evidence 
to support its use and has poor outcomes in the hands of most.
Charcot
An acute hot, red swollen foot (which may or may not be 
painful) may be indicative of Charcot (often secondary to 
diabetes which may as yet be undiagnosed) or other neuropa­
thy. Immediate offloading in plaster and urgent management 
are indicated, and National Institute of Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) guidelines are available in the UK.
Tendinopathy
Rarely, dorsal pain may be due to tibialis anterior tendinosis 
at its insertion; management is usually non­operative.
Ganglions
Midfoot ganglions are common and may cause neuralgia over 
dorsal bosses. Injection/aspiration should be attempted. Sur ­
gery may be required but recurrence is high and secondary 
neuralgia not infrequent.
The hindfoot and ankle
Ankle arthritis
The definitive operative treatment for arthritis of the ankle 
will usually be in the form of total ankle replacement (TAR) 
or more commonly arthro desis (fusion); the latter is often 
carried out via an open approach but arthroscopic tech ­
niques have better outcomes, more rapid recovery and fewer 
complications. Such techniques are mandatory in the pres­
ence of poor soft­tissue envelope or in the presence of a clot­
ting diathesis. A UK National trial is currently underway to 
evaluate the relative outcomes of TAR versus arthrodesis (the 
TARVA trial), which are as yet undefined.
The advantage of fusion is it has a known track record, 
good outcomes (over 90% do well) and minimal morbidity, 
especially with modern arthroscopic techniques, but not all 
do well with fusion. Function following isolated fusion is vir ­
tually normal for most patients and this is probably due to 
increased mobility at other joints. However, this may precipi­
tate arthralgia elsewhere. 
Total ankle replacements (T ARs) are usually three ­ 
component devices (except in the USA) that allow preser ­
vation of joint mobility but at the expense of larger incisions 
and possible eventual failure. Revision rates of <1% to 7% per 
annum are reported. T wo of the most widely used TARs have 
been withdrawn in recent years, one due to massive osteolysis.
Hindfoot (excluding ankle) arthritis
The triple complex refers to the subtalar (talocalcaneal), cal­
caneocuboid and talonavicular joints. These joints are often 
affected by arthritis. Treatment options are limited and, if 
simple measures have failed, a fusion should be performed. 
Smokers and diabetics have a massively increased non­union 
rate for all foot fusion procedures and should be warned of 
this when they give consent. Late presentation of coalitions 
usually requires fusion.
Ankle combined with other hindfoot arthritis
If surgical input is required, one option is to treat one set of 
joints and then see how the patient fares. For example, offer 
the patient an ankle fusion or replacement and then assess 
the outcome. Secondary surgery to the other joints can then 
be performed if required. The alternative is to treat all joints 
at once. 
Modern techniques now use third ­generation hindfoot 
fusion nails which fuse both ankle and subtalar joints and are 
inserted with an open or arthroscopic fusion technique.
A pantalar fusion is quite disabling but may be necessary 
in rheumatological patients with deformities/stress fractures, 
patients with a failed arthroplasty with subtalar joint involve­
ment, pantalar arthritis or avascular necrosis (A VN) with col­
lapse of the talus. 
Summary box 36.6
Midfoot and hindfoot
●● Joint disorders are degenerative or inflammatory
●● The mainstay of surgical treatment remains fusion although 
ankle replacements are becoming more successful
●● Rheumatoid arthritis must be medically controlled as well as 
possible before surgery
●● Knee deformities should be corrected before tackling foot 
problems
Jean Martin Charcot , 1825–1893, physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   528 25/10/2017   08:34Pathology in the adult 529
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Rheumatological presentations in the foot 
The early presentations of rheumatological disease may 
include synovitis of the lesser MTP joints and widespread 
small joint disease, often in association with enthesopathy 
such as plantar fasciitis or Achilles tendonosis. However, the 
classic deformity is of hallux valgus with or without hallux 
rigidus deformity and subluxation or even dislocation of the 
lesser MTP joints in the forefoot, and arthritis and deformity 
in the mid/hindfoot.
The patient may present with a bunion and prominent 
lesser metatarsal heads which can often be felt to be dislo ­
cated on clinical examination, and are painful to palpa­
tion. Joint­sparing surgery is preferred, with preservation of 
the metatarsal (MT) heads if possible, often shortening and 
relocating the MTP joints. Destruction of the joints can be 
treated with proximal phalangeal partial excisions. Fusion of 
the first MTP is the usual requirement. Late recurrence can be 
managed with excision arthroplasty.
Excision of the metatarsal heads produces an almost 
instantaneous and gratifying relief of pain. If a plantar 
approach is used an ellipse of skin can be excised to move 
the metatarsal padding back over the end of the metatarsal. 
While most surgeons avoid scars on the plantar aspect of the 
foot wherever possible, this is one procedure where the results 
are good. However, such surgery leaves no room for revision 
in later years.
The requirement for rheumatoid forefoot correction has 
fallen dramatically in the last 10 years with the advent of 
disease­modifying drugs.
MIDFOOT
Rheumatological disease may also affect the midfoot and 
here the outcome is usually just pain and stiffness. Options 
are limi ted to injections and fusion surgery if non ­operative 
measures have failed.
HINDFOOT AND ANKLE
Rheumatological disease also affects the hindfoot and ankle. 
Many patients require surgical hindfoot fusions and the 
options for the ankle are discussed in the arthritis section.
The rheumatological diseases also affect soft tissues. 
Patients are more prone to developing enthesopathy, tendi ­
nitis and tendonosis, and even tendon rupture. The Achilles 
tendon should never be injected with steroid for fear of rup ­
ture and, similarly, the tibialis anterior and tibialis posterior 
tendons are risky for injection.
Tendon disorders
Tenosynovitis occurs as a result of injury , overuse or is 
secondary to inflammatory joint conditions. Rest, anti ­ 
inflammatory medication and physiotherapy are often helpful 
but, in inflammatory conditions, tenosynovectomy may be 
required.
The tendons most commonly affected by degeneration 
are the Achilles (Figure 36.6), tibialis posterior and peroneii 
(brevis more than longus).
Ruptured Achilles tendon
The Achilles tendon rupture is relatively frequent in the 40 ­ 
to 50­year­old age group who are undertaking vigorous sport 
after a long period away from such activities. Management 
of acute rupture is more frequently non ­operative nowadays, 
provided ultrasound has shown closure of the gap in plantar ­
flexion, and many protocols are described for non ­operative 
management. Surgical fixation is an alternative.
Many patients do not suffer the acute rupture classically 
described in all textbooks and many seem to have a series of 
micro tears that gradually lead to total rupture. Studies have 
shown that elderly patients with Achilles rupture regained 
70–90% of the normal power with no treatment whatsoever 
when reviewed at 1 year; for many patients, this is enough to 
allow them to return to normal function.
Non­operative options for a missed rupture include a 
sprung ankle–foot orthotic (AFO) ankle brace, while oper ­
ative options involve reconstructive surgery with or without 
flexor hallucis longus (FHL) tendon augmentation.
Achilles tendinosis
Non­insertional and insertional tendinosis are frequent, often 
related to overuse and are usually managed non ­operatively. 
Shockwave therapy is a recent addition to the armoury. Ste ­
roid injections may rupture the Achilles and are discouraged, 
but high volume saline, dry ­needling and sclerosant injec ­
tions have all been described. Surgery for non ­insertional 
tendinosis has moderate success. Minimally invasive excision 
of the prominent posterolateral corner of the calcaneum or 
reshaping osteotomy forms the mainstay of modern surgical 
techniques for insertional problems but both conditions have 
a high failure rate with surgery.
Peroneal tendon problems
The peroneal tendons may develop tendinosis, may subluxate 
or may become involved in an inflammatory process with or 
without bony overgrowth at the inferior retinaculum (Figure 
36.7). An associated varus heel will amplify the problem and 
will need addressing with an appropriate reconstruction/oste­
otomy or fusion.
Figure 36.6 Insertional Achilles tendinitis (arrow).
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   529 25/10/2017   08:34CHAPTER 36   Foot and ankle
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS530
Peroneal tendon subluxation can occur spontaneously or 
after injury. It may be associated with the groove at the back 
of the fibula being too shallow to contain the peroneal ten ­
dons, but may just be secondary to a superior retinaculum tear. 
The patient may be able to demonstrate a tendon subluxation 
over the fibula. Surgical repair is usually required and involves 
deepening of the groove.
Tendinosis/itis can be managed non­operatively, although 
injections have occasionally caused rupture. Surgical debride­
ment or repair of splits/tears/ruptures is well described but has 
only moderate success.
Acquired flat foot
There is a wide range of normal appearance of adult feet. 
Pathological causes of a flat foot include:
 ● tibialis posterior tendon dysfunction;
 ● tarsometatarsal arthritis/injury (Figure 36.8);
 ● Charcot neuroarthropathy, e.g. diabetes (see later); 
 ● inflammatory/degenerative arthritis of the subtalar/tal ­
onavicular/naviculocuneiform joints;
 ● spring ligament rupture;
 ● tarsal coalition.
The tibialis posterior tendon tends to fail in overweight 
individuals and those who have flat feet. Often, after unac­
customed exercise, the tendon swells and is painful. The 
diagnosis is rarely made early. The condition occurs mainly in 
women and the key test is that the patient cannot stand on 
tiptoe on that leg alone. Many individuals will require surgi ­
cal treatment in the form of a medial displacement calcaneal 
osteotomy, flexor digitorum longus or FHL tendon transfer 
and spring ligament repair. Failure to treat this condition can 
lead to spectacular deformity (Figure 36.9). 
An acute traumatic flat foot may develop in young ath ­
letes and military recruits after traumatic injury; here the 
injury is an isolated spring ligament tear and early surgery is 
needed to effect a repair.
Ankle instability
Most people who sustain an ankle sprain will recover, partic­
ularly if they receive prompt physiotherapy . However, some 
individuals develop significant instability. On examination an 
unstable ankle due to ligament disruption will show a marked 
‘anterior drawer’ sign.
If physiotherapy is unsuccessful at resolving the problem, 
a reconstruction may be needed with ligament augmentation. 
Anatomical techniques such as the Brostrum procedure are 
favoured and may be augmented with synthetic augments for 
early mobilisation.
Figure 36.7 Split and degenerate peroneus brevis.
Figure 36.8 Tarsometatarsal arthritis.
Summary box 36.7
Acquired flat foot
●● Tibialis posterior tendon dysfunction and tarsometatarsal 
osteoarthritis are common causes of an acquired flat foot
●● Orthoses, rest and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) can help with symptomatic relief
●● Surgery is a major undertaking but often highly successful at 
achieving symptomatic relief
Figure 36.9 A tibialis posterior tendon-deficient foot.
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   530 25/10/2017   08:34Pathology in the adult 531
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Osteochondral lesion of the talus
Patients with persistent pain in the ankle following an injury 
should be suspected of having an osteochondral lesion, with 
MRI or computed tomography (CT) usually required for 
diagnosis.
Repair of cartilage is not yet possible and large meta ­ 
analyses of experimental techniques such as grafting, cell 
culture, implants and stem cells have not yet shown any sta ­
tistical benefit. Debridement and microabrasion/microfrac ­
ture form the mainstay of treatment. Large fragments seen 
early might benefit from early fixation. Juveniles seem to have 
a high spontaneous recovery rate and surgery should not be 
necessary.
Synovitis
Many patients have ongoing pain following ankle injury that 
is simply due to synovitis within the ankle joint, prominence 
of the syndesmotic ligament into the joint, impaction injury 
or undiagnosed fracture or osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) 
lesion. MRI is mandatory for these cases. Synovitis may be 
treated non ­operatively, with an injection of steroid. Per ­
sistent symptoms may require arthroscopic debridement.
Neurological foot conditions
Pes cavus
The development of unilateral pes cavus is likely to be arising 
from an upper motor neurone lesion so an appropriate neuro­
logical examination should be performed.
Pes cavus is usually bilateral and most cases will be asso­
ciated with an underlying neurological condition, the most 
common being Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease. These patients 
may present with characteristic progressive small muscle 
wasting, thin calf musculature, hand symptoms, aches and 
pains, and cavo­varus feet. Examination may show early loss 
of vibration sense. Precise diagnosis is confirmed with nerve 
conduction studies and genetic testing.
The key deforming force is always relative preservation 
of the tibialis posterior (tib post) tendon. Surgical correc­
tion of the deformity is often required. The principle goal of 
treatment is to obtain a foot which can be placed flat on the 
ground, and with the power of the muscles around the ankle 
in balance. It will be necessary to transfer or release the tib 
post tendon. The most commonly performed procedure is 
to transfer the tib post to the dorsolateral side of the foot, 
followed by lateralising of the heel with an osteotomy and 
dorsiflexion osteotomy of the first ray with or without a Jones 
procedure to the great toe.
Tumours
The most common benign tumours of the foot are ganglia, 
giant cell tumour and angioleiomyomas (Figure 36.10); 
these tumours may need surgical excision.
Pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS) is a locally 
aggressive condition found in the ankle and is diagnosed by 
MRI or at histology. Surveillance for recurrence is mandatory.
The most common ‘tumour’ seen in the foot is the plantar 
fibroma or ‘ledderhosens disease’, which presents as a painful 
often growing lump in the sole along the plantar fascia. The 
condition is linked to Dupytren’s and Peyronie’s disease. Sur­
gery should be avoided. Ultrasound or MRI will confirm the 
multifocal nature of the disease and exclude other pathology.
Any large or growing lump in the foot needs formal 
work­up along tumour guidelines, especially in the presence 
of night pain.
Pierre Marie , 1853–1940, neurologist, Hospice de Bicêtre, Paris, France, later becoming Professor of Pathological Anatomy in the Faculty of Medicine, and finally, 
in 1918, Professor of Neurology.
Howard Henry Tooth , 1856–1925, physician, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, and the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen Square, London, UK, described 
peroneal muscular atrophy in 1886 independently of Charcot and Marie.
Summary box 36.8
Pes cavus
●● Pes cavus needs neurological investigation
●● About 80% of cases of pes cavus are associated with a 
neurological disease
●● The commonest cause is Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease
●● Unilateral pes cavus – think diastematomyelia/ tumour
Figure 36.10 Angioleiomyoma of the hallux.
Infection
Septic arthritis in the foot or ankle is rare except in diabetic 
patients and constitutes a surgical emergency; when it occurs 
it usually follows a surgical procedure but it can also arise 
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   531 25/10/2017   08:34CHAPTER 36   Foot and ankle
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS532
as a result of haematogenous spread. Treatment is imme ­
diate surgical drainage and administration of appropriate 
high­dosage antibiotics once cultures are obtained. The 
most common causative organism is Staphylococcus aureus 
with methicillin­resistant S. aureus (MRSA) becoming more 
common. Even with prompt treatment chondrolysis often 
occurs and subsequent degenerative changes develop rapidly.
In immunocompromised patients opportunistic infections 
can arise and, in diabetics, failure to treat with debridement 
can lead to amputation. It is important to realise that radio ­
graphs in the early stages of infection are usually normal and 
that diagnosis is made on clinical suspicion and with bloo d 
tests and more sophisticated imaging such as MRI or bone 
scanning.
Tuberculosis can affect the foot and is associated with major 
bony damage; it responds surprisingly well to debridement and 
appropriate antituberculous therapy (Figure 36.11).
Figure 36.11 Tuberculosis of the foot (arrow).
Figure 36.12 Charcot foot: radiographs taken at the time of a trivial 
injury (a) and 6 weeks later (b).
(b)
(a)
Diabetes
Diabetic patients have foot problems secondary to neuro­
pathy and microvascular changes. They are at increased risk 
of infection and ulceration, and trauma (sometimes trivial) 
can lead to collapse of the foot, also known as Charcot neuro­
arthropathy (Figure 36.12). 
Ulceration and amputation
Ulceration can lead to major morbidity and amputation (Fig-
ure 36.13). Ulcers need to be treated urgently, and when 
ulcer healing has occurred the aim should be to keep the foot 
ulcer free. NICE guidelines detail optimal management path­
ways with urgent admission, radiological and clinical assess ­
ment, followed by debridement, antibiotics if required and 
formal offloading. Ulceration is a surgical emergency. 
Most amputations are preceeded by ulceration.
Charcot
Charcot is a condition in which patients develop a 
neuropathic destruction of the joints. It is often described as 
Figure 36.13 Diabetic foot ulcer.
painless but actually the majority of patients have some pain. 
In the Western world diabetes is the biggest cause but in the 
rest of the world leprosy is also important. However, any other 
neurological condition can cause this disease.
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   532 25/10/2017   08:34Further reading 533
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Summary box 36.9
Diabetes
●● Diabetics are prone to infection because of:
Peripheral neuropathy
Peripheral vascular disease
Impaired resistance to infection
●● A Charcot foot is often misdiagnosed but is a surgical 
emergency and requires urgent admission and management
●● An ulcer in a diabetic foot is a surgical emergency and 
requires urgent admission and management
Entrapment neuropathies
Any nerve supplying the foot can become entrapped and 
result in pain, and treatment often requires surgical decom­
pression. Tarsal tunnel syndrome is much rarer than carpal 
tunnel syndrome.
Heel pain
The commonest cause of heel pain is plantar fasciitis. Pain 
is located inferomedially within the heel and is worst first 
thing in the morning and after periods of rest. The majority 
of cases settle within 18 months and surgery is rarely required 
or successful. Ultrasound ­guided injection forms the main ­
stay of treatment for the non­resolving cases. The differential 
diagnosis list includes calcaneal stress fracture, tarsal tunnel, 
seronegative arthropathy and lederhosens disease.
FURTHER READING
Bulstrode C, Wilson MacDonald J, Eastwood D et al. Oxford textbook of 
trauma and orthopaedics , 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2017.
Miller MD, Thompson SR. Miller’s review of orthopaedics, 7th edn. Phila­
delphia: Elsevier, 2016.
Solomon L, Warwick DJ, Nayagam S. Apley & Solomon’s concise system 
of orthopaedics and trauma, 4th edn. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2014.
Charcot often presents with a hot, swollen, red extremity. 
It is often misdiagnosed as cellulitis, gout, fracture or deep 
vein thrombosis (DVT), and many present late because of the 
difficulty in diagnosis. 
If there is no history of skin damage, infection is unlikely, 
but MRI and even biopsy can help differentiate between 
infection and Charcot. From initiation through to bone con­
solidation may take up to 18 months. The principle of treat­
ment throughout is to maintain a foot­shaped foot to prevent 
late pressure ulcers. The acute Charcot foot requires appropri­
ate splintage in a Charcot retaining orthotic walker (CROW) 
or a total contact cast (TCC), but many surgeons offer an 
aggressive early surgical approach if bony prominence ulcer ­
ation is thought to be inevitable. Surgical options include 
early stabilisation to prevent deformity, or late reconstruction 
or removal of bony prominences to prevent ulceration. Fail­
ure results in ulceration and amputation.
05_36-B&L27_Pt5_Ch36.indd   533 25/10/2017   08:34Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • List the symptoms and signs associated with a 
musculoskeletal tumour
 • Understand why a patient with a suspected 
musculoskeletal tumour should be referred 
to a specialist centre for staging, biopsy and 
multidisciplinary management
 • Understand why staging should be completed before 
biopsy
 • Explain why a diagnosis is required before treatment
 • Understand the principles of biopsy
 • Describe the principles of surgical treatment of 
musculoskeletal tumours
 • List the aims of surgical treatment for metastatic bone 
disease
 • Understand how to manage patients with an impending 
or completed pathological fracture
 • Evaluate the risk of pathological fracture
Musculoskeletal tumours
37
INTRODUCTION
Musculoskeletal tumours include primary and secondary 
benign and malignant tumours of bone and soft tissue. The 
most common malignant bone tumours are secondary meta­
static carcinomas (Figure 37.1). Advances in oncological 
treatment mean that the number of patients living with meta­
static bone disease is increasing. The most common carcino ­
mas that metastasise to bone originate in the breast, prostate, 
lung, kidney and thyroid (Figure 37.2). 
Haematopoietic tumours may also arise in bone: multiple 
myeloma (Figure 37.3) is a malignant neoplasm arising from 
plasma cells in the bone marrow, leading to multiple lesions 
in the skeleton. When solitary, this type of tumour is called a 
plasmacytoma.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 39.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Thyroid
Lung
Breast
Kidney
Myeloma
Prostate
Figure 37.1 (a) Pathological fracture of the pr oximal femur through meta -
static breast carcinoma. (b) Radiographs of the whole femur show a further, 
more distal metastatic deposit.
Figure 37.2 Malignant tumours that commonly metas-
tasise to bone.
(a) (b)
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   534 25/10/2017   08:35Bone tumours 535
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Malignant primary bone tumours (sarcomas) are very rare, 
but notably can occur in children and young adults. The most 
common of these are osteosarcoma (Figure 37.4), chondro­
sarcoma (Figures 37.5, 37.6 and 37.7) and Ewing’s sarcoma 
(Figure 37.8). 
Soft tissue tumours are common. However, only one in a 
hundred is malignant (Figure 37.9). 
BONE TUMOURS
Tumours found in bone are classified according to the tissue of 
origin. These include:
 ● metastatic carcinomas – may show histological features of 
their tissue of origin;
 ● haematopoietic tumours – e.g. myeloma;
 ● osteogenic tumours – e.g. osteosarcoma;
 ● chondrogenic tumours – e.g. chondrosarcoma;
 ● others – e.g. Ewing’s sarcoma.
Osteosarcoma has two age incidence ­peaks, one in ado ­
lescence and the other later in life. Osteosarcomas in older 
patients usually arise in association with Paget’s disease or 
after radiotherapy treatment. Ewing’s sarcoma occurs in ado­
lescence, whilst the incidence of chondrosarcoma increases 
from middle age onwards.
Some conditions are associated with an increased likeli­
hood of developing malignant tumours in bone and/or carti ­
lage (Table 37.1).
Figure 37.3 (a) Multiple myeloma affecting the left humerus with a 
pathological fracture. (b) Multiple myeloma with multiple deposits in 
the skull.
Figure 37.4 (a, b)  Sclerotic osteosarcoma of the distal femur in a 
child.
(a)
 (a)
(b)
(b)
James Ewing , 1866–1943, Professor of Pathology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, NY, USA, described this type of sarcoma in 1921.
Sir James Paget , 1814–1899, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described osteitis deformans in 1877.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   535 25/10/2017   08:35CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS536
(a) (b) (c)
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 37.6 (a) Chondrosarcoma of the foot. (b) Computed tomography scan reconstruction showing multiple calcifications. (c) T2-weighted 
magnetic resonance imaging scan shows high signal in chondrosarcoma. (d) Excised chondrosarcoma of the foot.
Figure 37.5 (a) Chondrosarcoma of the proximal humerus with multiple calcifications. (b) Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing exten-
sive involvement. (c) Excised chondrosarcoma of the proximal humerus.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   536 25/10/2017   08:35Bone tumours 537
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Oscar V Batson , 1894–1979, American otolaryngologist.
TABLE 37.1 Conditions associated with an increased risk 
of malignant disease in bone and cartilage.
High risk Moderate risk Low risk
Maffucci syndrome
(enchondromatosis 
and angiomas of 
soft tissue)
Hereditary multiple 
exostoses
Chronic 
osteomyelitis 
Ollier disease 
(enchondromatosis)
Polyostotic Paget’s 
disease
Osteonecrosis 
Familial 
retinoblastoma 
syndrome
Radiation osteitis Fibrous dysplasia, 
osteogenesis 
imperfecta, 
osteoblastoma and 
chondroblastoma 
Figure 37.7  Pathological fractur e through a primary chondrosar -
coma of the proximal humerus.
Figure 37.8 Ewing’s sarcoma of 
the proximal fibula. The tumour 
is metadiaphyseal in location with 
a periosteal reaction and subtle 
onion-skinning.
(a)
(b)
Figure 37.9 (a) Large, fungating soft-tissue sarcoma of the buttock. 
(b) Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing a lar ge fungating 
sarcoma of the buttock.
Summary box 37.1 
Most common tumours metastasising to bone (93%)
●● Breast
●● Prostate
●● Lung
●● Renal
●● Thyroid
Metastatic bone disease
Most tumours which metastasise to bone are carcinomas. 
Not infrequently the primary tumour is never found despite 
further investigation: these patients are described as having 
‘carcinoma of unknown primary’. 
Carcinomas usually spread to bone by the haematogenous 
route: the spine is the third most common site for metastases, 
after the lung and liver. Although most patients with meta ­
static cancer will have bone metastases in the spine before 
they die, only 10% are symptomatic. 
Tumour cells metastasise to the spine via Batson’s venous 
plexus. These retroperitoneal veins have no valves and allow 
retrograde embolic spread to the spine and proximal long 
bones (Figure 37.10).
Bone metastases can be lytic, sclerotic or mixed. Lytic 
metastases are usually highly vascular or locally aggressive 
such that there is no healing response from the bone. Metas­
tases from prostate cancer may appear sclerotic.
Metastases are rare in children, but bone metastases can 
occur from neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and clear cell 
carcinoma of the kidney.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   537 25/10/2017   08:35CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS538
Osteogenic tumours
These tumours characteristically produce osteoid or bony 
matrix which may be seen on imaging studies or on histolog­
ical examination. 
Osteoid osteoma (Figures 37.11 and 37.12) is a benign 
bone­forming lesion which is small but very painful. Usually, 
pain occurs at night and is typically relieved by non ­steroidal 
anti­inflammatory medication. Osteoid osteomas usually occur 
in children and adolescents. They arise in any bone, particularly 
Haematopoietic tumours
There are no benign neoplasms of the haematopoietic system. 
Malignant haematopoietic tumours, that commonly present 
in orthopaedic clinic, are either solitary plasmacytoma/  
multiple myeloma (arising from plasma cells, see Figure 37.2) 
or lymphomas (arising from lymphoid cells).
Summary box 37.2 
Most common sites of bone metastases
●● Spine
●● Proximal femur
●● Proximal humerus
Summary box 37.3 
Malignant bone tumours
●● Plasmacytoma – solitary form of multiple myeloma
●● Osteosarcoma – often secondary to Paget’s disease and 
radiotherapy
●● Chondrosarcoma
●● Ewing’s sarcoma
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 39.10Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Proximal
humerus
Proximal
femur
Spine
Figure 37.10 Common sites of metastatic bone disease.
Figure 37.11 Radiograph showing an osteoid osteoma of the tibial 
diaphysis with reactive bone formation.
Figure 37.12 (a) Axial computed tomography (CT) scan showing an 
osteoid osteoma nidus in the distal tibia (arrow). (b) CT-guided radiof-
requency thermocoagulation of an osteoid osteoma of the distal tibia. 
The scan shows the electrode in situ (arrow).
(a)
(b)
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   538 25/10/2017   08:35Bone tumours 539
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
the proximal femur, and cause a dense cortical reaction in the 
centre of which is a nidus (Figure 37.12). Osteoid osteomas 
can cause irritation and effusions if they occur close to a joint. 
Osteoblastoma is the larger (>2  cm), more aggressive 
counterpart of osteoid osteoma that more typically occurs in 
the spine. 
Osteosarcoma (see Figure 37.4 ) is a malignant bone ­ 
forming tumour, most common in the distal femur , followed 
by the proximal tibia, proximal humerus and distal tibia. The 
radiological and histological classification of osteosarcomas 
includes sclerotic (Figure 37.4), chondroblastic, telangiec ­
tatic and other more unusual forms. Usually, osteosarcomas 
are intraosseous, but they can also arise from the surface of 
bones. Parosteal osteosarcoma (Figure 37.13) is a low ­grade 
osteosarcoma that arises from the surface of the bone, typi ­
cally of the distal femur or proximal tibia. Symptoms are often 
mild and longstanding.
Summary box 37.4 
Tumours producing bone
●● Osteoid osteoma – small, painful; produce dense cortical 
reaction
●● Osteoblastoma – larger and more aggressive than osteoid 
osteoma
●● Osteosarcoma – malignant; commonest in lower femur and 
upper tibia
Chondrogenic tumours
These tumours produce chondroid matrix and include a wide 
range of benign and malignant tumours. 
Osteochondroma (Figures 37.14 and 37.15) is a benign 
cartilage­capped bony projection, thought to originate from 
the physis. The bony projection always grows away from the 
joint towards the diaphyseal region of the bone. It has no 
structures attached to it. Osteochondromas can be peduncu­
lated (with a stalk) or sessile (without a stalk). The stalk or 
base is always continuous with the intramedullary cavity of 
the bone, and the continuity of the cortex of the bone into an 
osteochondroma is a characteristic radiological feature. They 
are usually solitary, but some patients have multiple osteo ­
chondromas (hereditary multiple exostoses, autosomal dom ­
inant inheritance) (Figure 37.16). Osteochondromas can 
cause local irritation and complications include mechanical 
Figure 37.13  Paraosteal osteosar coma of the distal femur in an 
unusually young patient. Ther e is no continuity between the tumour 
and the intramedullary cavity of the femur.
Figure 37.14  
Pedunculated 
osteochondromas of 
the proximal fibula 
with pseudoarthrosis. 
Osteochondromas 
always grow away from 
the physis and are 
in continuity with the 
intramedullary cavity of 
the bone they arise from.
Figure 37.15  Excised pedunculated osteochondroma showing 
cartilage cap.
Figure 37.16  Multiple osteochondr omas in her editary multiple 
exostoses.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   539 25/10/2017   08:35CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS540
symptoms, nerve impingement, vascular pseudoaneurysm, 
fracture and infarction. Increasing size or pain, particularly 
after skeletal maturity, is concerning and may indicate malig­
nant transformation. The incidence of malignant transforma­
tion is less than 1% in solitary osteochondromas and 1–3% in 
patients with multiple osteochondromas.
Enchondroma (Figure 37.17) is a benign cartilaginous 
neoplasm within the intramedullary cavity of bone. Approxi­
mately 50% are in the hands and feet: enchondromas are the 
most common bone tumours in the hand. Although they can 
present with pain, swelling or pathological fracture, many are 
entirely asymptomatic and are detected incidentally. Patchy 
calcification, expansion and scalloping can be visible on 
radiographs, but some are only diagnosed on magnetic reso­
nance imaging (MRI) scan.
Ollier disease is a developmental condition characterised 
by multiple enchondromas. In Maffucci syndrome, multiple 
enchondromas are associated with multiple angiomas. Malig­
nant transformation to chondrosarcoma can occur in approx­
imately 20% of patients with Ollier disease and is almost 
inevitable in patients with Maffucci syndrome.
Chondroblastoma (Figure 37.18) is a benign carti ­
lage­producing tumour that occurs in the epiphyses of bones 
Figure 37.17 (a, b) Calcification and pathological fracture in a benign 
enchondroma of the proximal phalanx of the ring finger (arrows).
Figure 37.18 (a) Lateral radiograph with barely visible chondroblas-
toma in the epiphysis of the proximal tibia. (b) Coronal T2-weighted 
magnetic resonance imaging scan showing chondroblastoma in the 
epiphysis of the  proximal tibia with surrounding oedema. (c) Sagittal 
computed tomography reconstruction  showing calcification within a 
chondroblastoma of the proximal tibial epiphysis.
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
(c)
Angelo Maffucci , 1845–1903, Professor of Surgery, Lyons, France, described enchondromatosis in 1899.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   540 25/10/2017   08:35Bone tumours 541
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
in children. It is most common around the knee. Pain is 
often severe, with associated inflammation and possibly joint 
effusion. Radiologically, there is an often barely visible lytic 
lesion in the centre of the epiphysis. The diagnosis is often 
missed, and isotope bone scan can help identify the lesion.
Chondrosarcoma (see Figures 37.5, 37.6 and 37.7 ) is a 
malignant tumour with cartilage differentiation. The biolog ­
ical behaviour ranges from very low ­grade lesions to highly 
aggressive dedifferentiated tumours. Patients usually present 
with pain and/or swelling and symptoms may be longstand ­
ing. Many chondrosarcomas arise in pre­existing lesions such 
as osteochondromas or enchondromas. Diagnosis of a chon ­
drosarcoma requires clinical, radiological and pathological 
correlation. Clear cell chondrosarcoma is a rare form of chon­
drosarcoma that occurs in the epiphysis (Figure 37.19).
Summary box 37.5 
Tumours producing cartilage
●● Osteochondroma – cartilage capped; grows away from physis
●● Enchondroma – inside bone; commonest in hands and feet
●● Chondroblastoma – in epiphyses of adolescents
●● Chondrosarcoma – of varying malignancy
Others
Simple (unicameral) bone cyst (Figure 37.20) is a 
membrane­lined cavity filled with serous fluid within a bone. 
It usually occurs in the proximal long bones of children. Asso­
ciated thinning of the cortex of the bone can lead to fracture. 
Such fractures usually heal with conservative treatment, but 
the cyst may only partially resolve. 
Aneurysmal bone cyst (Figure 37.21) is a benign cys ­
tic lesion of bone consisting of blood ­filled spaces separated 
by fibrous septa. The lesion is more aggressive than a simple 
bone cyst and often presents with pain and swelling. Plain 
radiographs commonly show aggressive features with eccen ­
tric expansion of the cortex and an open physis. Scans often 
show multiple fluid levels (Figure 37.21b). 
Giant cell tumour of bone  (Figure 37.22) is a locally 
aggressive tumour with large osteoclast­like giant cells. It usu­
ally occurs between the ages of 20 and 45, after the physes 
have closed. Giant cell tumour of bone typically affects the 
epiphysis of long bones and ero des bone under the articular 
cartilage, especially around the knee, proximal humerus and 
distal radius. Metastases are rare.
Eosinophilic granuloma is a rare neoplasm of Langerhans 
cells (Figure 37.23). It can be unifocal (eosinophilic granu ­
loma), multifocal (Hand–Schuller–Christian disease) or dis­
seminated (Letterer–Siwe disease). There is a predilection for 
the skull and the diaphyses of long bones. In the spine it can 
present with collapse, known as vertebra plana. Radiographs 
can appear aggressive and similar to Ewing’s sarcoma.
Fibrous dysplasia (Figure 37.24)  is a benign fibro ­ 
osseous lesion that can be mono ­ or polyostotic. It usually 
affects the long bones, ribs and skull. Patients can present 
with pain, swelling and/or fracture, but many lesions are 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 37.19 (a) Clear cell chondrosar coma of the medial femoral 
condyle. (b) Sagittal T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging scan 
showing clear cell chondr osarcoma in the medial femoral condyle. 
(c) Computed tomography scan reconstruction shows calcification 
within the lesion.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   541 25/10/2017   08:35CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS542
detected incidentally. Hip fractures can produce a ‘shepherd’s 
crook’ deformity of the proximal femur. Radiologically there 
is often expansion and a ground glass appearance, sometimes 
with cystic change.
Ewing’s sarcoma (see Figure 37.8) is a malignant round 
cell sarcoma of bone in which cells usually have a character ­
istic 11:22 translocation. It tends to arise in the diaphysis of a 
long bone or the pelvis. Patients usually present with a pain ­
ful mass and may have systemic symptoms including fever, 
anaemia and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). 
Radiologically the bone appears moth ­eaten and may show 
an ‘onion ­skin’ periosteal reaction. MRI may show a large 
extraosseous soft tissue mass as well as significant inflamma ­
tion with oedema.
Bone tumours usually occur in characteristic anatomical 
locations (Table 37.2), and epiphyseal tumours are likely to 
be benign (Table 37.3).
TABLE 37.2 Classification of bone tumours by site.
Tumour and site
Diaphyseal Metaphyseal Epiphyseal
Eosinophilic 
granuloma
Most Chondroblastoma
Osteoid osteoma Intra-articular
osteoid osteoma
Fibrous dysplasia Giant cell tumour 
(physis closed)
Adamantinoma Clear cell 
chondrosarcoma
Ewing’s sarcoma 
TABLE 37.3 Common diaphyseal bone tumours according 
to age.
Age and most common diaphyseal tumour
<10 years Eosinophilic granuloma
Teenage Ewing’s sarcoma
Adult Lymphoma
>60 years Metastasis/myeloma
Summary box 37.6 
Other bone tumours
●● Simple bone cyst – proximal long bones of children
●● Aneurysmal bone cyst – more aggressive, expanding
●● Giant cell tumour – found in epiphyses around the knee
●● Fibrous dysplasia – may be multiple; long bones, ribs and 
skull
●● Ewing’s – round cell sarcoma; patients may have fever and 
anaemia
(a)
Figure 37.20 Pathological fracture through a simple bone cyst with 
the pathognomonic fallen leaf sign. The fracture healed and the cyst 
consolidated without operative intervention.
Figure 37.21 (a)  Aneurysmal bone cyst with 
pathological fracture of the proximal tibia. (b) 
Magnetic resonance imaging scan shows multiple 
fluid levels.
Figure 37.22  Giant cell tumour of the 
distal radius.
(b)
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   542 25/10/2017   08:36Bone tumours 543
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Staging of primary bone tumours
In the Enneking system, benign tumours are staged as:
 ● latent (e.g. osteochondroma);
 ● active (e.g. osteoid osteoma);
 ● aggressive (e.g. giant cell tumour).
Latent lesions are usually asymptomatic and often discov­
ered incidentally. Active lesions, such as osteoid osteoma, 
present with mild symptoms and continue to grow. Aggressive 
lesions tend to grow rapidly and destroy bone.
The Enneking staging system for malignant tumours com­
bines the local extent of the tumour and the histological 
grade (Table 37.4). The compartment is the bone in which 
the tumour arises. A tumour is extracompartmental when it 
has breached the cortex of the bone. Most primary malignant 
bone tumours are Enneking stage 2B at diagnosis, meaning 
they have extended outside the bone of origin but metasta ­
ses are not detectable. The American Joint Committee on 
Cancer (AJCC) staging system is also widely used.
Figure 37.23 (a) Eosinophilic granuloma of the scapula. (b) Com-
puted tomography scan shows a ‘punched-out’ lesion. (c)  Spon -
taneous resolution.
Figure 37.24  Fibrous dysplasia af fecting the left proximal femur. 
There is expansion of the bone with a ground glass appearance.
(a) (b)
(c)
Summary box 37.7 
Warning signs – bone tumour
●● Non-mechanical bone pain
●● Especially around the knee in young adolescents
●● Concerning radiographs
TABLE 37.4 The Enneking staging system for bone 
tumours.
Enneking staging of bone tumours
Low grade Intracompartmental 1A
Extracompartmental 1B
High grade Intracompartmental 2A
Extracompartmental 2B
Any grade Metastases 3
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   543 25/10/2017   08:36CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS544
SOFT TISSUE TUMOURS
Soft tissue tumours have also historically been classified 
according to their morphological appearance and presumed 
cell of origin. The range of biological behaviours is wide and 
most morphological types have a benign and malignant coun­
terpart, for example lipoma (Figure 37.25) and liposarcoma. 
Other more frequent types include undifferentiated pleomor­
phic sarcoma and synovial sarcoma. Patients with suspected 
or confirmed soft tissue sarcomas should be assessed and man­
aged in a specialist centre.
The Trojani system, based on tumour differentiation, 
mitotic count and tumour necrosis, is the standard for grading 
malignant soft tissue tumours. The Enneking and AJCC sys ­
tems can also be used to stage malignant soft tissue tumours. 
EVALUATION AND 
INVESTIGATION OF THE 
PATIENT WITH A SUSPECTED 
BONE OR SOFT TISSUE TUMOUR
The diagnosis and treatment of patients with primary bone 
and/or soft tissue tumours requires a high index of suspicion, 
appropriate and prompt investigation, and early referral to 
a specialist multidisciplinary team for diagnosis, biopsy and 
appropriate treatment. When a musculoskeletal tumour is 
suspected, clinicians should:
 ● stop;
 ● think;
 ● investigate.
The assessment and investigation of any patient with a 
bone or soft tissue tumour can be divided into three phases. 
The first two phases can be performed at the referring hospi­
tal, but the third phase may be best done in a specialist centre 
(Table 37.5).
(a)
(b)
Summary box 37.8 
Warning signs – soft tissue tumour
●● Larger than 5 cm
●● Increasing in size
●● Painful
●● Deep to the fascia
●● Recurrence after previous excision
Figure 37.25 (a) Coronal T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging 
scan showing a benign lipoma deep to the quadriceps muscle (arrow). 
(b) Excised benign lipoma.
TABLE 37.5 The three phases of assessment of lesions.
Phase 1 
(within 24 hours)
Phase 2 
(within first week)
Phase 3 
(at specialist centre)
History and 
examination
Bone scan CT-scan lesion
Bloods Ultrasound scan 
abdomen
MRI-scan lesion
Radiograph whole 
bone
CT-scan chest Biopsy
Chest radiograph
CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
History and examination
It is important to take a thorough history, including a pain 
history. Non­mechanical and/or night pain, particularly in 
the young adolescent, are concerning symptoms and a primary 
bone tumour should be suspected. Relief with non ­steroidal 
anti­inflammatory drugs may suggest an osteoid osteoma.
Patients with a history of malignancy who present with 
back pain should be considered to have metastatic disease 
until proven otherwise. Plain radiographs of the spine and 
routine blood tests are the minimum that is required. An 
MRI of the spine is a more sensitive test for the detection of a 
malignant tumour and may demonstrate soft tissue extension 
into the spinal canal. Multiple myeloma (see Figure 37.3) is 
the most common primary malignancy of bone in adults and 
should be considered in all patients over 65 years of age with 
back pain. Back pain associated with an ESR >100 mm/hour 
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   544 25/10/2017   08:36Evaluation and investigation of the patient with a suspect ed bone or soft tissue tumour 545
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
indicates multiple myeloma until proven otherwise. Mono ­
clonal gammopathy or elevated urinary and serum Bence 
Jones proteins are diagnostic. 
Great care should be taken when managing a patient with 
an apparently ‘solitary’ bone metastasis. This could be a pri ­
mary bone tumour, and further investigation including biopsy 
is required. 
Soft tissue tumours are common and the vast majority are 
benign. However, a soft tissue mass meeting any of the fol­
lowing criteria may be malignant and the patient should be 
referred to a specialist centre:
 ● painful;
 ● increasing in size;
 ● more than 5 cm in diameter.
In addition, tumours which have recurred after previous 
excision and tumours located deep to the fascia are more 
likely to be malignant.
Investigation
The investigation of a patient with a suspected primary bone 
or soft tissue tumour should include the following.
 ● Local investigations:
 ● ultrasound scan (for soft tissue tumours only);
 ● plain radiographs of the whole affected bone or soft 
tissue lesion (see Figure 37.1);
 ● MRI of the whole affected bone or soft tissue mass;
 ● Computed tomography (CT) scan may be helpful in 
addition to or instead of MRI scan.
 ● Distant:
 ● blood tests; including full bloo d count, ESR, urea and 
electrolytes, bone profile and protein electrophoresis;
 ● plain radiographs or CT scan of the chest (more sen­
sitive);
 ● whole body isotope bone scan (for suspected primary 
or metastatic bone tumours);
 ● ultrasound or CT scan of abdomen (if renal metastasis 
is a possibility).
Plain radiographs are usually the most useful imaging 
investigations in determining the diagnosis of a primary bone 
tumour, but further appropriate scans are usually required for 
confirmation and staging. Imaging should always include the 
whole of the affected bone to look for satellite lesions and skip 
metastases. Satellite lesions occur within, whilst skip lesions 
occur beyond, the reactive zone of the tumour.
Both primary bone and soft tissue sarcomas metastasise to 
the lungs, and a CT scan of the chest is an essential part of 
staging.
Patients who present with a lytic bone lesion could have a 
primary renal carcinoma and an ultrasound or CT scan of the 
abdomen is advised. Biopsy of a renal metastasis can lead to 
significant blood loss.
Biopsy
A biopsy is performed only when staging investigations have 
been completed. Because removal of the biopsy track is an 
important principle in the treatment of sarcomas, biopsies 
should be performed either in, or after consultation with, the 
specialist centre where the definitive surgical procedure will 
be performed.
Image­guided biopsies (usually ultrasound­ or CT­guided) 
have a higher diagnostic accuracy because areas of radio­
logical concern can be targeted. If image ­guided biopsy is 
performed, close discussion between radiologist and surgeon 
is required to ensure an appropriate biopsy route is used 
(Figures 37.26 and 37.27). 
Summary box 37.9 
Staging
●● Plain radiography is most informative for bone tumours
●● Always image the whole bone in case of skip lesions
●● CT of the lung detects lung metastases
●● Lytic lesions require ultrasound of the abdomen to check for a 
renal primary
Figure 37.26 Poorly placed biopsies, making subsequent surgical 
excision of the track impossible.
Figure 37.27 En bloc excised tumour and biopsy track.
Henry Bence Jones , 1813–1873, physician, St George’s Hospital, London, UK.
en bloc  is French for ‘in a block’.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   545 25/10/2017   08:36CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS546
Simple bone cysts usually heal following pathological frac­
ture and an initial conservative approach following fracture is 
best. If the cyst persists following union of the fracture, and 
the risk of further fracture is deemed to be high, then a variety 
of treatments including injection with steroid or bone marrow 
and surgical curettage have been described.
Osteoid osteomas can resolve spontaneously. However , 
symptoms are often pronounced and most patients are treated 
by CT­guided thermocoagulation. Surgical removal (which 
usually requires burring down onto the surface of the nidus 
and removing it) is seldom required. 
Large or more rapidly growing benign bone tumours may 
require more extensive surgical excision and reconstruction. 
Giant cell tumours of bone are associated with a high local 
recurrence rate and are usually treated with radical curettage 
or, when very extensive, surgical resection of the affected 
bone. The RANK­ligand antibody denosumab has an evolv ­
ing role in treating these tumours. 
Malignant tumours
Malignant primary bone tumours require a multidisciplinary 
approach which may include chemotherapy and radio therapy 
as well as surgery. Osteosarcoma and Ewing’s sarcoma are 
treated with neoadjuvant (before surgery) chemotherapy and 
surgery. Chondrosarcomas are not sensitive to chemo therapy 
or radiotherapy and treatment is surgical excision where 
possible.
The aim of surgery for a primary malignant bone tumour is 
to remove it completely (usually with a layer of normal tissue 
around it and the biopsy track) and then to reconstruct the 
limb to maximise physical function. 
Following excision the surgical margins can be classified as 
shown in Table 37.6.
TABLE 37.6 Classification of surgical resection margins.
Surgical margins
Intralesional Resection through the tumour
Marginal Resection through the reactive zone of the tumour
Wide Resection outside the reactive zone of the tumour
Radical Resection of the whole anatomical compartment
In most cases, limb salvage with excision and reconstruc ­
tion is possible (Figure 37.29). Only a minority of patients 
(10–15%) require primary amputation, either because of 
neurovascular invasion or because the reconstructed limb 
may be less functional than an amputation (e.g. for some 
tumours in the foot and ankle). Limb salvage is associated 
with a slightly higher rate of local recurrence than ampu ­
tation. However, no difference in overall survival has been 
demonstrated. The surgical options for malignant primary 
bone tumours include:
 ● amputation or van Ness rotationplasty;
 ● excision alone (for dispensable bones or areas where 
reconstruction is difficult, e.g. in parts of the pelvis);
 ● excision and replacement with graft or massive endopros­
thesis.
Summary box 37.10 
Biopsy
●● Only biopsy once staging is completed
●● Biopsy should be performed at the institution undertaking the 
main surgery
●● Imaging-guided biopsy is more reliable
●● The biopsy track must be excised at definitive surgery
●● Jamshidi needles for bone, Trucut needles for soft tissues
Figure 37.28 Bone biopsy instruments.
Biopsies for bone tumours are usually taken using a Jam ­
shidi or other hollow needle (Figure 37.28), while Trucut 
needles are preferred for soft tissue tumours.
Although most biopsies are performed with a needle, 
sometimes an open biopsy is required, which should be per ­
formed according to the following principles.
 ● A tourniquet can be used; but exsanguination by compres­
sion should be avoided as this may theoretically dissemi ­
nate the tumour locally or into the circulation.
 ● Use longitudinal incisions that are part of an extensile 
approach.
 ● Do not cross anatomical compartments or contaminate 
critical anatomical structures (e.g. nerves or blood vessels).
 ● Use a biopsy track that can be excised at the time of defin­
itive surgery.
 ● Ensure specimens are sent for microbiology as well as 
histopathology.
 ● Some specimens should be sent fresh to the laboratory for 
cytogenetic studies.
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
Primary bone tumours
Benign
Most latent and active benign bone tumours are treated by 
intralesional curettage. Packing of the cavity with a graft or 
bone substitutes is usually not required.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   546 25/10/2017   08:36Principles of treatment 547
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
The complications of massive endoprosthetic reconstruc ­
tion of a limb include infection and wear or loosening of the 
prosthesis.
Metastatic bone disease
Patients with confirmed metastatic bone disease may require 
resuscitation for electrolyte imbalance, anaemia, cardiorespi­
ratory problems or hypercalcaemia before surgical treatment 
can be considered. Hypercalcaemia can be treated effectively 
with fluid resuscitation and bisphosphonate infusion.
Surgical treatment in patients with metastatic bone dis ­
ease is usually palliative; although radical resection of solitary 
metastases in selected patients may confer some survival 
benefit, the evidence for this is not strong.
Surgery of the spine may be required for stabilisation and/
or decompression when tumour extension puts the spinal cord 
at risk. Surgery in the peripheral skeleton is mainly for treat ­
ment of (impending) pathological fracture. 
Renal metastases tend to be very vascular and massive 
blood loss can be encountered during surgery. Therefore, pre­
operative embolisation should be considered just before sur ­
gery to prevent blood loss (Figure 37.30).
Treatment of myeloma is mainly haematological. 
Non­surgical treatments including radiotherapy can lead to 
healing of bone lesions in some cases. Surgical treatment is 
only required for complications such as fracture and spinal 
cord compression. 
Summary box 37.11 
Treatment of benign bone tumours
●● Benign lesions can be simply curetted
●● CT-guided thermocoagulation is used for osteoid osteoma
●● Large benign tumours may require reconstruction
Summary box 37.12 
Treatment of malignant bone tumours
●● Osteosarcomas and Ewing’s sarcoma require neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy
●● Chondrosarcomas are insensitive to radiotherapy or 
chemotherapy
●● Most malignant tumours can be treated with limb salvage
●● There is no difference in survival between amputation and 
limb salvage
Figure 37.30 (a) Lytic metastasis of renal cell carcinoma. (b) Angiogram shows increased vascularity. (c) Following embolisation.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 37.29 Endoprosthetic replacement of the distal femur.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   547 25/10/2017   08:36CHAPTER 37  Musculoskeletal tumours
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS548
TABLE 37.7 The Mirels scoring system for risk of 
pathological fracture.
Score
1 2 3
Site Upper limb Lower limb Peritrochanteric
Pain Mild Moderate Functional
Size <1/3 1/3–2/3 >2/3
Lesion Blastic Mixed Lytic
Score ≥8, high risk of fracture – urgent prophylactic fixation should be 
considered; score <8, low risk of fracture – orthopaedic intervention may not 
be required.
Bone healing following a fracture through a metastasis is 
unpredictable and there can be local recurrence of the tumour 
after treatment. The approach is therefore different from the 
treatment of other fractures. The aim of surgery should be 
to improve pain and maintain mobility. Approaches which 
require prolonged protected weight bearing to allow healing 
are not appropriate in this group of patients with reduced life 
expectancy. Therefore, as a general rule, prosthetic replace ­
ment of bones is preferred, particularly for epiphyseal and 
metaphyseal lesions. Metastases in the diaphysis may be 
most appropriately treated with an intramedullary nail. In 
the shoulder, prosthetic replacements have a poor function 
and internal fixation may give better physical functioning. 
Soft tissue tumours
The treatment of soft tissue tumours should take account of 
tumour type and the response to other treatments including 
radiotherapy. Large low­grade or benign lipomatous tumours 
may be excised in a deliberately marginal or close but com ­
plete fashion. Soft tissue sarcomas should however be excised 
with a margin of normal tissue around them wherever pos ­
sible, and usually including the biopsy track (see Figure 
37.27). Skin involvement may require resection of the skin 
and reconstruction with a split skin graft or skin flap. 
Following surgical excision of high­grade soft tissue sarco­
mas, adjuvant radiotherapy should be considered. Preopera­
tive radiotherapy can also have good results, but there is a risk 
of wound healing problems following surgery. Chemotherapy 
has a limited role in the treatment of soft tissue sarcomas. 
FURTHER READING
British Orthopaedic Oncology Society and British Orthopaedic Associ­
ation. Metastatic bone disease. A guide to good practice. 2015 Revision.
Cool P , Grimer R. Pathological fractures of the extremities. Trauma 
2000; 2: 101–11.
Cool P , Grimer R, Rees R. Surveillance in patients with sarcoma of the 
extremities. Eur J Surg Oncol 2005; 31(9): 1020–4.
Dangoor A, Seddon B, Gerrand C et al. UK guidelines for the manage ­
ment of soft tissue sarcomas. Clin Sarcoma Res 2016; 6: 20.
Enneking WF , Spanier SS, Goodman MA. A system for the surgical stag­
ing of musculoskeletal sarcoma. Clin Orthop Relat Res 1980; 153: 
106–20. 
Gerrard C, Athanasou N, Brennan B et al. on behalf of the British Sar ­
coma Group. UK guidelines for the management of bone sarcomas. 
Clin Sarcoma Res 2016; 6: 7. 
Mankin HJ, Lange TA, Spanier SS. The hazards of biopsy in patients 
with malignant primary bone and soft tissue tumors. J Bone Joint Surg 
1982; 64-A: 1121–7.
Mirels H. Metastatic disease in long bones. Clin Orthop 1989: 249: 
256–64.
Wedin R, Bauer HC. Surgical treatment of skeletal metastatic lesions of 
the proximal femur: endoprosthesis or reconstruction nail? J Bone 
Joint Surg Br 2005; 87(12): 1653–7.
World Health Organization, International Agency for Research on Can­
cer. WHO classification of tumours of soft tissue and bone, 4th edition. 
Lyon: IARC Press, 2013.
Summary box 37.13 
Treatment of bone metastases
●● Surgery cannot lengthen life but may shorten it
●● The spine may need stabilising and nerves or the cord 
decompressing
●● Long bones will need stabilising if a pathological fracture is 
imminent
●● Patients who have a possibility of long-term survival may 
need a prosthesis
●● Radiotherapy relieves pain
0
1
0.8
Breast
Lung
Myeloma
Other
Prostate
Renal
Thyroid
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
5
Time (y)
Cum. survival
10
Figure 37.31 Cumulative survival curves of patients who present 
with bony metastasis.
The following factors should be considered when contem­
plating surgical treatment for patients with metastatic bone 
disease:
 ● likely survival (Figure 37.31 ) – consider the primary 
diagnosis and performance status;
 ● quality of life;
 ● fitness for anaesthesia and surgery;
 ● fracture risk;
 ● single or multiple bone lesions;
 ● response to adjuvant treatment such as radiotherapy and 
hormonal treatment;
 ● radiotherapy can be administered pre­ or postoperatively.
The risk of pathological fracture can be assessed using the 
Mirels score (Table 37.7).
However, for hip lesions, the best treatment is often a joint 
replacement.
Patients with solitary breast and renal metastases can have 
prolonged disease­free survival so excision and replacement 
rather than fixation should be the treatment of choice.
05_37-B&L27_Pt5_Ch37.indd   548 25/10/2017   08:36Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • Characteristic features in the history and examination of 
infection of bone and joint
 • Diagnostic principles in bone and joint infection
 • Treatment of infection of native bone and joint
 • Treatment of implant-associated orthopaedic infection
Chapter
Infection of the bones and joints
38
INTRODUCTION
Osteomyelitis is an old disease, identified in dinosaur bones, 
early hominids and skeletons from ancient civilisations. 
While infections of native bones and joints persist as a rele-
vant problem in the twenty-first century, implant-associated 
infection has progressively emerged as a new and major chal-
lenge to healthcare systems. 
Orthopaedic infection can present acutely with major sys-
temic upset, local inflammation and purulence, or insidiously, 
with gradual bone destruction leading to loss of function and 
slowly evolving local symptoms, in the presence or absence of 
systemic features.
Bone and joint infection causes a substantial burden 
of complex morbidity. Acute infections can be life or limb 
threatening, while undiagnosed or incompletely treated 
infection can persist for decades, causing pain and interfering 
with activities of daily living. In turn, this has the potential 
for complicated psychosocial impact on patients and their 
families. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The pattern of bone infection is changing. Worldwide, child-
hood acute haematogenous osteomyelitis and septic arthritis 
are common, with chronic disease following inadequate ini -
tial management. In resource-rich countries, bone infection 
is now mostly seen after injury or surgery (contiguous focus 
osteomyelitis) and is often implant-related (Figure 38.1). 
The high number of patients with comorbidities (diabetes, 
peripheral vascular disease, immunocompromise), more fre -
quent bone and joint surgery and longer population survival 
contribute to a group of patients with increased susceptibil-
ity to infection. In the UK, the number of prosthetic joint 
replacements (hip, knee) has doubled in 15 years. It is pro-
jected that, in the USA, there will be around 65  000 new 
infected joints in 2020. Although the incidence of infection 
after fracture has decreased, the increased use of internal fix -
ation has increased the prevalence of post-traumatic bone 
infection overall. This will produce a significant economic 
burden for healthcare providers in the future. 
Summary box 38.1 
Epidemiology of bone infection
●● Bone and joint infections from haematogenous spread remain 
common worldwide
●● The increased use of implants for joint replacement and 
fracture fixation is an important source of new infections 
●● Immunocompromised patients are another increasing source 
(e.g. diabetes, cancer treatment) 
Figure 38.1 An infected open fractur e of the tibia that has been  
stabilised with an external fixator. The central fracture fragment is dead. 
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   549 25/10/2017   08:37CHAPTER 38  Infection of the bones and joints
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS550
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF 
ORTHOPAEDIC INFECTION
Pathology
Acute osteomyelitis occurs when pathogenic organisms cause 
infection, leading to inflammation in the bone and surround-
ing tissues. The medullary bone may form abscesses and the 
infection may track through the cortex to form periosteal ele-
vation and soft-tissue extension. This process will devascula -
rise the bone, causing bone death – the characteristic feature 
of chronic osteomyelitis.
Bacteria can adhere to dead bone or implant surfaces, 
forming a complex community enveloped in a polysaccharide 
matrix, known as a biofilm. These bacteria alter their meta -
bolic state, making them more resistant both to the host 
immune system and to antibiotics. Toxins and lytic enzymes 
from bacteria cause early damage to articular cartilage. 
The infected bone reacts to the infection by separating 
dead fragments of bone (sequestration) and forming sinuses 
to drain pus and discharge small bone fragments. New bone is 
laid down around the infection from the periosteum (involu-
crum) (Figure 38.2).
In septic arthritis, infection may follow direct ingress of 
bacteria after injury or surgery, or may result from discharge of 
an adjacent acute osteomyelitis into the joint. Particularly in 
neonates or the elderly, bacteraemia may infect a previously 
normal joint. 
Microbiology
Virulent gram-positive organisms, particularly Staphylococcus 
aureus, are the most common cause of bone or joint infec-
tion in native tissue. However, once prosthetic material is 
implanted, a wide range of organisms can be involved. This 
includes organisms with low virulence that are usually con-
sidered skin commensals, such as coagulase-negative staphy -
lococci, alpha-haemolytic streptococci and propionibacteria 
(Table 38.1).
TABLE 38.1 Organisms most commonly involved in bone and joint infection.
Classification of infection Group(s) of organisms Examples of specific organisms and context in which 
infection occurs
Gram positive Staphylococci Staphylococcus aureus (commonest across all settings)
Coagulase-negative staphylococci (common in implant-associated 
infection)
Streptococci Alpha-haemolytic streptococci, including S. pneumoniae, S. milleri 
group and S. viridans (in implant-associated infection)
Beta-haemolytic streptococci (e.g. S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae)
Propionibacteria Increasingly recognised in implant-associated infection and septic 
arthritis of the shoulder
Gram negative Enterobacteriaceae Escherichia coli (especially at extremes of age)
Klebsiella species
Salmonella species (particularly associated with sickle cell disease)
Pseudomonas species Associated with diabetic foot infections, osteomyelitis underlying 
chronic wounds/ulcers, patients heavily exposed to hospital 
environment and/or prior antibiotics
Haemophilus species H. influenzae (consider in non-immunised children)
Neisseria species N. meningitidis 
N. gonorrhoeae (consider risk factors for sexually transmitted 
infection)
Others Anaerobes
Fungi (Cause infection in immunocompromised and/or heavily antibiotic-
exposed hosts)
Mycobacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Atypical mycobacteria (may be a component of disseminated 
infection in HIV-infected patients; also cause postsurgical infection in 
immunocompetent hosts)
Mixed Any combination of the above 
organisms
More common after trauma, recurrent surgery, with poor wound 
healing and sinuses, or resulting from contiguous spread from an 
infected source (e.g. skin, gastrointestinal tract)
‘Culture negative’ No growth from cultures, but diagnosis 
of infection made on clinical/
radiological/histopathological grounds
Most common in patients who have had recent antimicrobial 
exposure prior to surgical sampling
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   550 25/10/2017   08:37General principles of orthopaedic infection 551
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Summary box 38.2
Pathology of bone infection
●● Bacteria infecting bone form a resistant biofilm on dead bone 
and implant surfaces
●● Infected bone dies and forms a sequestrum
●● The periosteum around lays down new bone – an involucrum
Diagnosis 
Clinical
Diagnosis is predominantly clinical with confirmation using 
other tests, as outlined below. 
Biomarkers
Raised inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and white cell count 
(WCC)) are characteristic of acute infection, but they are 
insufficiently sensitive or specific to rule infection in or out. 
Imaging
Plain radiographs can demonstrate dead bone, periosteal reac-
tion, involucrum formation and loosening of implants. How -
ever, in the early stages of acute infection, plain radiographs  
may be normal and should not be used to exclude infection. 
Serial radiography is most useful in charting the onset of implant 
loosening, bone lysis or progression of chronic osteomyelitis. 
Ultrasonography is ideal for identifying soft-tissue collec -
tions and joint effusions and can be used to guide bone biopsy 
and aspiration.
Computed tomography (CT) scans are helpful in assessing 
bone union of infected fractures. Small sequestra and cortical 
erosions are best seen with CT and these scans can be used to 
plan surgery for excision of dead bone (Figure 38.3a).
Isotope bone scans are of very limited value as they are 
non-specific and give no information which may guide diagno-
sis or treatment. The combination of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
positron-emission tomography (18FDG-PET) with a CT scan 
allows localisation of active infection in chronic osteomyeli -
tis and may facilitate planning of surgery . However, 18FDG-
PET/CT is not specific for infection and so cannot reliably 
distinguish infective from aseptic loosening in implants.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning is the investi-
gation of choice. It is highly sensitive and specific, showing all 
components of the disease (Figure 38.3b). However, it can be 
adversely affected by metal implants and can overestimate the 
extent of infection when there is widespread reactive oedema. 
Culture and susceptibility 
Superficial samples from wounds or spontaneously draining 
pus are unreliable for culture, because the organisms colonis-
ing the surface may bear no relation to those causing the inva-
sive infection in the deeper tissues. Microbiological samples 
may be falsely negative if antibiotics are given first. Synovial 
tissue samples are particularly important in producing a higher 
diagnostic yield for infection with mycobacteria or fungi.
In complex infections, particularly those involving pros -
thetic material, multiple biopsy samples are needed to help 
determine whether organisms such as coagulase-negative 
staphylococci are likely to be the causative pathogens, or 
whether they are simply contaminants from the skin. This 
distinction cannot be made on a single sample, but the growth 
of an indistinguishable organism from three or more culture 
samples is 94% specific for infection. 
Figure 38.2 (a) Radiograph of chronic infec -
tion of the femur with a large central seques -
trum and well developed involucrum. (b) The 
sequestrum removed from the mid-femur at 
surgery. 
(a)
Figure 38.3 (a) Transverse computed tomography scan of femur with 
central sequestrum, sinus and cortical bone erosion. (b) Magnetic 
resonance imaging scan of the same femur with better resolution of 
medullary infection and soft-tissue involvement. 
(a)
(b)
(b)
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   551 25/10/2017   08:37CHAPTER 38  Infection of the bones and joints
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS552
It is also possible to culture organisms from removed 
implants which have been subjected to ultrasonic vibration 
to disrupt biofilm (sonication). 
Histopathology
The histological diagnosis of infection (rather than other 
sources of inflammation) depends on identifying organisms 
on a Gram stain, or the presence of a neutrophilic infiltrate. 
However, such an infiltrate may be patchy and so histologi -
cal studies are incompletely sensitive. Histology is valuable 
in confirming the presence of infection in culture-negative 
cases.
disease, nutrition and smoking cessation is essential. Many 
patients will benefit from psychological support or at least 
good counselling around the difficulties of eradicating infec-
tion and the components of treatment.
For patients requiring long courses of intravenous antibiot-
ics, outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy (OPAT) services 
can facilitate discharge from hospital. They must be delivered 
by a dedicated team with experience in supervising and sup -
porting all aspects of intravenous therapy in the community, 
including surveillance and care of a long-line, monitoring for 
side effects and toxicity, management of complications and 
accessing appropriate psychosocial support. 
Antibiotic therapy
Patients with septic shock, or with rapidly advancing local 
or systemic signs of infection, should receive prompt empir -
ical antibiotic therapy. When delay in antibiotics would be 
unsafe, blood cultures, local aspiration of pus or radiologically 
guided biopsy may give valuable culture material immediately 
prior to starting antibiotics.
In the majority of cases, it is safe to delay antibiotics 
until definitive operative microbiological samples have been 
taken; this is particularly important when prosthetic material 
is involved. For patients who have already been started on 
antibiotics, a clinical assessment should be made, and – if safe 
to do so – antibiotics should be stopped at least 2 weeks before 
biopsy or surgery. 
Local guidelines should be followed, but most hospitals 
recommend a ‘community acquired’ level of cover using an 
agent such as co-amoxiclav. Additional antibiotics to cover 
resistant gram-positive organisms (e.g. vancomycin for 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)) are con-
sidered if there has been significant prior hospital exposure or 
if the patient is known to be colonised with these organisms. 
Cover for resistant gram-negative organisms (e.g. meropenem 
for Pseudomonas) is considered in certain settings, including 
severe diabetic foot infection. 
Prolonged intravenous antibiotic courses (i.e. 4–6 weeks 
of treatment) are usually recommended for bone infection, 
although there is little evidence to support this.
Summary box 38.3 
Principles of diagnosis
●● ESR and CRP are neither sensitive nor specific in making a 
diagnosis of bone infection
●● Plain radiographs may be normal in the early phase
●● Ultrasound is valuable for identifying fluid/pus collections
●● MRI is usually the investigation of choice
●● Superficial swabs are of no value in identifying the organism 
causing deep infection
●● If the patient is on antibiotics, cultures may be falsely negative
●● Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained to optimise 
microbiological diagnosis
●● A neutrophil infiltrate on histology is strongly indicative of 
infection
Summary box 38.4 
Antibiotics for osteomyelitis
●● Septic shock needs treatment without delay, with antibiotics 
chosen empirically based on local guidelines
●● In clinically stable patients, antibiotics should be delayed until 
specimens have been taken
●● In elective surgery for osteomyelitis, antibiotics should be 
stopped at least 2 weeks in advance
●● Agents such as co-amoxiclav or ceftriaxone are appropriate 
for most community acquired infections
●● Vancomycin provides cover for MRSA
●● Meropenem may be needed for Pseudomonas species and 
other resistant gram-negative organisms
Management
Successful treatment relies on the careful multidisciplinary 
delivery of a package of care, summarised as follows:
 ● Preoperative:
 ● Patient assessment and clinical staging of disease.
 ● Full discussion of all treatment options with potential 
complications.
 ● Diagnostic tests for general health.
 ● Optimisation of patients and treatment of comorbid -
ities.
 ● Operative:
 ● Exposure for multiple, deep bone sampling.
 ● Excision of all non-viable tissue.
 ● Intravenous antibiotics after sampling.
 ● Bone stabilisation, if necessary.
 ● Dead space management.
 ● Soft-tissue cover which may include plastic surgery.
 ● Postoperative:
 ● Functional rehabilitation.
 ● Continued antimicrobial therapy guided by culture 
results, with regular clinical monitoring.
Patients with bone and joint infections should be treated 
in centres which have the facilities to manage all aspects of 
this care. With the exception of those who are acutely ill 
with sepsis, there is usually time to optimise comorbidities 
and improve general health prior to surgical treatment of the 
infection. Attention to diabetes control, peripheral vascular 
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   552 25/10/2017   08:37Native joint septic arthritis 553
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
NATIVE JOINT SEPTIC 
ARTHRITIS
Epidemiology
Bacterial infection of native joints occurs at an estimated 
incidence of 4–10 per 100 000 population per year in Western 
Europe, with higher rates in association with socioeconomic 
deprivation and in resource-poor countries. The condition 
most characteristically affects patients at extremes of age, and 
in the context of an underlying joint abnormality or immuno-
compromise (Table 38.2). 
Joint infection may arise as a result of haematogenous dis-
semination of bacteria from another focus (e.g. endocarditis), 
or may occur as a result of direct inoculation or local exten -
sion from an infected source (e.g. traumatic wound). 
TABLE 38.2 Risk factors for native joint septic arthritis.
●● Extremes of age
●● Underlying joint abnormality, especially rheumatoid arthritis
●● Immunocompromise (e.g. diabetes mellitus, human 
immunodeficiency virus infection, immunosuppressive therapy)
●● Joint instrumentation (e.g. steroid injection, arthroscopy)
●● Intravenous drug abuse
●● Indwelling central venous catheter
●● Bacteraemia (especially Staphylococcus aureus)
Clinical features
Most patients present with an acute or subacute history of a 
single hot, swollen, painful joint. In children, there is often 
a history of recent minor trauma. The joint is held immo -
bile in the ‘position of comfort’, and there is severe pain if 
any attempt is made to move the affected joint actively or 
passively. In children and adults, the knee joint is most fre -
quently affected; in neonates, the hip. Fever and other sys -
temic signs are usually present, but their absence does not rule 
out the diagnosis, especially in adults, where there may be no 
fever or only a low-grade one. 
Diagnosis
Aspiration and/or biopsy of intra-articular fluid or tissue will 
allow a Gram stain to be performed (although this is posi -
tive in only about one-third of infected cases), and then cul -
ture of a causative organism (positive in 80–90%). However, 
results are delayed by the time taken to grow and identify the 
organism in the laboratory. A high WCC in joint fluid (e.g. 
50–150 000 cells/mm 3), with a neutrophil predominance, is 
characteristic of infection. However, other inflammatory con-
ditions can also cause a raised cell count, and crystals may be 
seen in infected joints as well as gout or pseudo-gout. The 
limited sensitivity and specificity of direct microscopy and 
Gram stain, and the time taken to obtain a positive culture 
result, should not delay early treatment for the infection. The 
decision to perform a surgical washout and give antibiotics 
should therefore be based on the clinical picture. 
Summary box 38.5 
Presentation of septic arthritis
●● Children may be toxic and febrile but adults may only have a 
low-grade fever
●● The joint is swollen and held in a characteristic ‘position of 
comfort’
●● Any movement causes extreme pain
Management
Surgical management
Medical treatment alone is rarely indicated in joint sepsis. 
Prompt surgical drainage is a priority in order to avoid 
further damage to the joint. In general, open washout is 
preferred to arthroscopic washout, depending on the joint 
involved. Inadequate clearance may lead to chronic infection 
with destruction of the joint (Figure 38.4). Treatment 
Figure 38.4 (a) Septic arthritis of the hip in an intravenous drug user. 
This was untreated for several weeks, r esulting in destruction of the 
joint surface. (b) The same hip after 9 months without treatment. The 
proximal femur and acetabulum have been grossly eroded by infection. 
(a)
(b)
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   553 25/10/2017   08:37CHAPTER 38  Infection of the bones and joints
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS554
 dysfunction (‘start-up’ symptoms are particularly characteris -
tic), with or without a discharging sinus. Late presentations 
may represent a new haematogenous infection of a previously 
uninfected joint and can occur years after implantation. 
More often, they are due to a recurrence of a previously inad-
equately treated early or delayed infection.
Diagnosis
Infection should be suspected in any patient with a leaking 
wound over an implant, unresolved pain or new pain around 
a previously pain-free implant. Routine blood tests may be 
helpful in acute infection but are often falsely reassuring.
Plain radiographs may show features of loosening of a 
chronically infected prosthesis, and ultrasound may identify 
associated collections. Nuclear scans cannot distinguish asep-
tic loosening from infection. The gold standard for diagnosis 
is the culture of microorganisms from clean, deep samples (see 
above, under ‘Diagnosis’). These should be taken at the time 
of revision surgery or open debridement. 
Summary box 38.7
Implant-associated infection
●● Good centres should have an infection rate of <1% per joint 
per year
●● Internal fixation of open fractures remains a high infection risk
●● Late infection may present with low-grade symptoms 
(grumbling pain and start-up stiffness)
●● Radiographs may show lucency around the implant
●● Multiple specimens need to be taken at surgery for reliable 
diagnosis
IMPLANT-RELATED INFECTION
Epidemiology
The incidence of prosthetic joint infection in the UK is now 
<1% per joint per year, with hips at slightly higher risk than 
knees. These rates have fallen with improved operative prac-
tice and the recent introduction of surgical ‘care bundles’. 
Risk factors include obesity, skin disease, comorbidity, pro -
longed or complicated surgery, revision surgery, fracture and 
postoperative wound infection or haematoma.
Infection complicates around 3–5% of all fracture fixations. 
Open tibial fractures are a high-risk group with up to 15% 
becoming infected after fixation. Calcaneal fractures and ankle 
fracture fixation in the elderly also have high infection rates.
Clinical features
Implant-related infections may present early (within 2 weeks 
of injury or surgery), in a delayed manner (3–10 weeks from 
surgery) or late (after 10 weeks). 
Early infections  are acquired at surgery or injury and 
are usually caused by virulent organisms (e.g. Staphylococcus 
aureus). They present with a discharging wound, cellulitis, 
pain, inflammation and swelling. 
Delayed infections are more characteristically due to 
low-virulence organisms (e.g. coagulase-negative staphylo -
cocci or propionibacteria). 
Late infections are more likely to present with an indo -
lent clinical syndrome of joint discomfort or mechanical 
Management
A multidisciplinary approach is required, including ortho -
paedics, plastic surgery, infectious diseases/microbiology , 
pharmacy, nursing, occupational therapy and physiotherapy, 
centred on the patient’s understanding and wishes regarding 
their condition. Many of these patients have other medical 
comorbidities which should also be addressed and optimised. 
Implant-associated infections can be associated with a range 
of emotional, psychological and mental health issues, ranging 
from anger about surgical complications to depression arising 
from chronic symptoms, lack of function and prolonged hos -
pitalisation.
The choice of surgical strategy for prosthetic joints can be 
categorised as:
 ● salvage of an infected implant;
 ● removal of the infected implant with or without reimplan-
tation. 
Some groups have used the timing of presentation to 
determine this (i.e. salvage for early infection, versus removal 
and revision for late infection). Others regard any firmly fixed 
implant as potentially salvageable, irrespective of the timing 
(and there are now several case series suggesting that this is 
may then require joint excision, joint fusion or staged joint 
replacement. 
Medical management
Antibiotics are usually given for 4–6 weeks (of which at least 
the first 2 weeks are commonly given intravenously). There 
are sparse data to guide duration; in general, longer courses 
should be considered if the infection is slow to resolve, if more 
than one washout is required, if the patient is bacteraemic 
and/or if the infection is caused by Staphylococcus aureus. 
Choice of antibiotics can be summarised as above (see Sum-
mary box 38.4).
Summary box 38.6 
Native joint septic arthritis
●● Most common at extremes of age, in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis and in association with immunocompromise
●● Most commonly affects hips in neonates, and knees in adults 
and children
●● The commonest pathogen is Staphylococcus aureus
●● Joints should be aspirated for microbiology before starting 
antibiotics if safe to do so
●● Management is prompt surgical joint washout, followed by 
4–6 weeks of antibiotics
●● Joint fluid Gram stain and WCC are poorly predictive of 
infection
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   554 25/10/2017   08:37Implant-related infection 555
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
feasible). However, it is agreed that loose infected implants 
should always be removed (Figure 38.5). Furthermore, it is 
essential to achieve soft-tissue cover of bone and prosthetic 
material. This may be difficult around the knee, requiring 
local muscle flaps and the involvement of a plastic surgical 
team. 
Management options can be divided into the following 
broad approaches:
 ● Debridement, antibiotics and implant retention, ‘DAIR’: 
This can only be undertaken if the prosthesis is well-fixed. 
The surrounding infected soft tissue and bone must be 
fully excised and modular components exchanged. This 
cannot be achieved by arthroscopic surgery. Good soft-  
tissue cover is essential. Following debridement, the 
patient is treated with long-term antibiotics (frequently 
6  weeks of intravenous therapy followed by 6  months 
or more of oral antibiotics). Prolonged infection-free 
intervals will be achieved in 80% of patients but success 
with this strategy may be lower in infections caused by 
Staphylococcus aureus. 
 ● T wo-stage joint revision surgery: A thorough excision 
is undertaken and all cement and loose foreign material 
is removed. An antibiotic-impregnated spacer may be 
implanted (which may be articulating). This is a tempo-
rary measure and cannot withstand full weight bearing. 
The patient is treated with oral or intravenous antibiotics, 
most commonly for 6 weeks. A new prosthesis is implanted 
after the course of antibiotics has been completed. Re-  
revision surgery for infection has a higher failure rate than 
a first revision, and so early referral to a specialist centre 
should be considered.
 ● Single-stage joint revision surgery: the procedure is the 
same as above, but removal and reimplantation are under-
taken in the same operating session. Healthy soft tissues 
around the new implant are essential to prevent reinfec -
tion. Some centres consider single-stage revisions when 
less florid signs of infection are present (i.e. absence of 
collections or sinus tracts), or for frail patients for whom 
the risk of a second operation is higher. There are no ade-
quate trial data comparing outcomes with the two-stage 
approach. 
 ● Joint removal or fusion: For patients who have intolera -
ble symptoms (either pain or profuse discharge), but for 
whom the surgical strategies outlined above are techni-
cally not possible or are ruled out by comorbid conditions, 
removal of the prosthesis without reimplantation may 
palliate symptoms. An example is the Girdlestone hip 
arthroplasty. In prosthetic infections of the knee, ankle 
or wrist, it may be possible to create a joint fusion after 
prosthesis removal. This is complex surgery, which may 
involve major bone reconstruction. Amputation may be 
necessary for knee or ankle implants. 
 ● Suppressive therapy with antibiotics: In patients who are 
not medically fit for any operative intervention, or who 
choose to decline all surgical options, long-term treat-
ment with antibiotics may help to suppress the symptoms 
of infection. There are limited data, but anecdotally the 
success rate of this approach seems low.
Antimicrobial therapy for implant-
associated infection
Following surgical sampling, it is frequently routine practice to 
institute broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy (e.g. vancomycin 
and meropenem) and then to rationalise this in the subsequent 
(a)
 (b)
Figure 38.5 (a) Sinus draining from a scar over the lateral side of the hip. This patient had a total hip r eplacement 14 years before that had 
been complicated by a wound haematoma and infection. (b) Radiograph of both hips of the same patient. Both hips are loose but only the right 
side has definite infection (arrows). 
Gathorne Robert Girdlestone , 1881–1950, Nuffield Professor of Orthopaedics, University of Oxford, UK, described excision arthroplasty of the hip for septic arthritis.
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   555 25/10/2017   08:37CHAPTER 38  Infection of the bones and joints
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS556
48–72 hours according to culture results. In culture-negative 
cases, ongoing therapy to cover the most likely pathogens 
should be instituted.
The duration of therapy is determined according to the 
surgical approach, with 6 weeks for those in whom prosthetic 
material is completely removed, versus 6 months for patients 
undergoing a ‘DAIR’ strategy, and prolonged (occasionally 
life-long) treatment for patients in whom all other options are 
contraindicated or intolerable. In a small subset of patients, 
the best therapy is no intervention, when chronic low-grade 
symptoms are well controlled and preferable to the risks of 
either surgery or long-term antibiotic therapy.
The antibiotic regimen should be planned with the advice 
of a microbiologist, and supervised carefully to promote com-
pliance, and to detect and manage side effects. Monitoring of 
the joint is largely on clinical grounds; biomarkers including 
CRP are not predictive of treatment failure.
Serial radiographs are helpful to detect progressive bone loss, 
which may be an indicator of recurrent active infection and can 
predispose to periprosthetic fracture and implant loosening.
 ● Unhealed fracture with unstable fixation: Stability is 
essential for bone healing and eradiation of infection. 
If the implant is not stable, it should be removed and 
replaced by an external fixator . Radical excision of the 
infected fracture is needed and the resulting defect may 
present a major reconstructive challenge (Figure 38.6). 
Recently, antibiotic-coated implants have been used to 
stabilise infected fractures with some success.
ACUTE OSTEOMYELITIS
This presents like septic arthritis with a short history of pain, 
loss of function and systemic upset. In adults, the vertebral 
column is the commonest site; in children, long bones are 
most frequently affected and there may be swelling of the 
affected limb. In young children, a fever and refusal to bear 
weight may be the only clues.
Diagnosis
In the early phase (2–3 days) radiographs may be normal but 
MRI will show bone oedema and periosteal elevation. After 
5–7 days, plain radiographs may show subtle abnormality with 
osteopenia and periosteal new bone formation. The WCC 
and CRP are often abnormal in the early phase. Treatment 
should not be delayed pending investigations.
Management
Acute osteomyelitis can be treated with antibiotics alone 
when the diagnosis is made within 2–3 days of onset of symp-
toms, there is no dead bone on imaging and there is no adja -
cent septic arthritis. Culture results help to guide therapy, 
so blood cultures should be taken, and radiologically guided 
sampling should be considered. Prompt intravenous antibi-
otics, active against community-acquired pathogens, should 
then be started (see Summary box 38.4). 
The limb should be splinted and good analgesia given. 
Intravenous antibiotics may be converted to oral therapy, 
depending on clinical progress and the results of cultures, 
and therapy is continued for a total of at least 4  weeks. If 
the patient does not respond rapidly, the limb deteriorates or 
there is imaging evidence of progression of disease, surgery 
is indicated to prevent bone destruction and the onset of 
chronic osteomyelitis.
With prompt treatment, acute bone infection has a good 
prognosis with a 90% cure rate. Failure to treat adequately 
produces chronicity, with recurrent infection over many 
years. In children, the adjacent growth plates and joints may 
be affected with subsequent deformity and joint destruction.
CHRONIC OSTEOMYELITIS
This is a serious condition which may affect the patient for 
decades. Chronic bone infection is best treated by a dedicated 
multidisciplinary team, who have the skills to deal with all 
aspects of the condition, the associated comorbidities and the 
range of surgical reconstructive options.
Summary box 38.8 
Prosthetic joint Iinfection
●● Well-fixed prostheses may be debrided, treated with 
antibiotics and the implant retained (‘DAIR’ approach)
●● Loose prostheses must be removed
●● Replacement can be made at the initial surgery (one-stage) or 
after a delay to allow infection to be eradicated with a course 
of antibiotics (two-stage)
●● Multiple surgical samples are crucial for identifying a pathogen
●● Thorough excision of infected tissue is a key determinant of 
outcome
●● Long-term antibiotics may be used for patients who are not 
suitable for major revision surgery
INFECTION FOLLOWING 
FRACTURE FIXATION
Many of the principles outlined above can be applied to infec-
tions associated with metalwork used to fix fractures. 
There may be several clinical scenarios which must be 
addressed:
 ● Unhealed fracture with stable fixation: This is usually seen 
early after fixation and can be managed with deep sam -
pling, debridement of infected tissues and management 
of dead spaces (often with local antibiotic carriers). It 
is extremely important to provide good soft tissue cover 
over the fracture. In the tibia, this will most often require 
a plastic surgical reconstruction. After surgery, systemic 
antibiotics must be given to suppress infection until bone 
union, followed by removal of the implant.
 ● Healed fracture with infected implant: In these cases, the 
implant can be removed, but there should still be a careful 
debridement, deep sampling, dead space management and 
soft tissue cover.
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   556 25/10/2017   08:37Chronic osteomyelitis 557
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Diagnosis
Plain radiographs can delineate soft-tissue swelling, subperi -
osteal reaction, bone destruction and sequestra. CT scans 
are good for cortical bone imaging and for planning surgical 
excision. MRI is the imaging test of choice (see ‘General 
principles’ section). Blood tests are often normal in chronic 
osteomyelitis.
Management
The Cierny and Mader classification helps to define the fea-
tures of the infection in the bone (four stages) and to relate 
this to the general condition of the patient (three groups). 
Patients can be divided into three physiological ‘host types’ 
Summary box 38.9 
Acute osteomyelitis
●● Presents in children with toxaemia, fever and unwillingness to 
move the limb
●● May affect the vertebral column in adults, where back pain 
may be the only symptom
●● Radiographs may be normal for up to 1 week so are of limited 
value in early diagnosis
●● WCC and CRP are usually raised
●● Early diagnosis is treated with high dose intravenous 
antibiotics, started empirically and modified with culture 
results
●● Late diagnosis and/or failure of medical treatment requires 
surgical debridement
Figure 38.6 (a) Radiograph of a complex distal tibia fracture that was internally fixed but complicated by deep infection. (b) At operation, the 
plate was loose and grossly infected. (c) The plate was removed and all infected tissue was excised. Deep samples were sent for microbiology 
and histology. The defect at the lower end was filled with an absorbable antibiotic carrier. (d) The bone was stabilised with an Ilizarov circular 
external fixator and the skin primarily closed. 
(a)
 (b)
(c)
(d)
Goerge Cierny III , 1947–2013, osteomyelitis surgeon, San Diego, California, USA.
Jon T Mader , 1944–2002, Department of the Marine Biomedical Institute, Division of Infectious Diseases, the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, USA.
Cierny and Mader  described the classification in: G Cierny, JT Mader, JJ Pennick. A clinical staging for adult osteomyelitis. Contemp Orthop 1985; 10: 17–37. They 
appreciated the importance of treating the whole patient alongside the infected bone.
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   557 25/10/2017   08:38CHAPTER 38  Infection of the bones and joints
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS558
Stage 2 (superficial)
Only the cortical bone is involved and this requires excision. 
It often follows skin ulceration and there may be large skin 
defects which require complete excision and local or free mus-
cle flaps. If more than one-third of the cortical circumference 
is excised, splintage is essential, usually with external fixation 
to prevent fracture. Secondary bone grafting may be needed.
Stage 4 (diffuse)
This involves the entire circumference of the bone and sur -
rounding soft tissue. All infected non-unions are Stage 4. 
Resection must be segmental and stabilisation in an exter -
nal fixator will be required. Reconstruction will involve the 
introduction of new bone and healthy soft tissue. The Iliza -
rov method, which uses distraction osteogenesis to fill bone 
defects, is a powerful and successful technique. It can be com-
bined with free tissue transfer. This allows reconstruction to 
proceed in parallel with rehabilitation.
After surgery, patients should be given antibiotics. After 
total segmental excision of infection a short course may be 
indicated, but in most chronic infections, 6–12 weeks is often 
advised. If there is any doubt about the adequacy of clear -
ance of infection, a long antibiotic course will be needed and 
recurrence may be more likely. In infected fractures, antibiot-
ics should continue until fracture union.
There is now increasing interest in the use of local anti -
biotics with absorbable carriers. These can deliver high doses 
of antibiotics into the bone, without systemic effects. Some 
biocomposite materials (with hydroxyapatite) can form new 
bone in the defect, avoiding the need for secondary bone 
grafting.
Figure 38.7 (a) Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing a typical 
medullary osteomyelitis of the femur, in a patient with human immuno-
deficiency virus. (b) The infected bone has been removed by reaming 
and the central defect filled with absorbable calcium sulphate pellets 
with gentamicin. 
(a)
Figure 38.8 This large ulcer had been pr esent for 30 years with 
underlying Stage 3 chronic osteomyelitis. Biopsy of the skin edge 
revealed a squamous cell carcinoma; a rare complication of a long -
standing sinus (Marjolijn’s ulcer).
Gavril Abramovich Ilizarov , 1921–1992, pioneered this eponymous approach to bone reconstruction in Siberia in the 1960s for the management of osteo -
myelitis. 
Stage 3 (localised)
There is a limited area of dead cortical bone with medullary 
infection. Radical excision is required, and filling the defect 
and providing soft-tissue cover may be a challenge. Staged 
reconstruction may be necessary with cancellous bone graft -
ing (Figure 38.8).
(A, no active concurrent disease; B, compromised host; C, 
severe comorbidity preventing surgery). The interaction 
between the patient’s health status and the extent of the bone 
infection greatly affects the outcome after surgery. In chronic 
infection, it is helpful to address medical conditions which 
may impair wound healing (e.g. smoking, peripheral vascular 
disease, diabetes, steroid use) prior to surgery. This approach 
has been shown to improve cure rates.
Stage 1 (medullary)
Only cancellous bone is involved. Excision of the dead bone 
can be carried out by intramedullary reaming or by window-
ing the cortex. The resulting defect may be filled with anti -
biotic-loaded cement beads or absorbable pellets. Structural 
stability is rarely affected (Figure 38.7).
(b)
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   558 25/10/2017   08:38Musculoskeletal infection caused by my cobacteria 559
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Fever and systemic symptoms are relatively unusual in 
diabetic foot infections but, if present, should be acted on 
promptly, as they may herald rapidly advancing infection, 
bacteraemia or necrotising fasciitis. In unwell patients, blood 
cultures, imaging, careful clinical assessment with optimisa -
tion of organ function and prompt empirical antibiotics are 
essential. 
Blood tests are frequently unhelpful, as inflammatory 
markers may be normal or only mildly raised. Plain radio-
graphs may show evidence of osteomyelitis, but can be nor -
mal (particularly early in infection). MRI is the most sensitive 
imaging modality for diagnosis of bone involvement. Limited 
disease has a good prognosis, and in the absence of risk factors 
for resistant organisms (including prior treatment), empiri -
cal treatment can be justified. In extensive or complicated 
infections, antibiotic therapy should be guided by the results 
of culture of deep bone or tissue samples obtained surgically 
or radiologically. Superficial swabs or cultures from ulcers or 
sinus tracts are not reliable in determining the organisms 
responsible for underlying deep-seated infection. 
The aetiological agents of diabetic foot infection are the 
same as for bone infection in non-diabetic individuals, namely 
Staphylococcus aureus, beta-haemolytic streptococci and aero-
bic gram-negative bacilli. Pseudomonas is over-represented, 
and empirical therapy for severe infections should include 
cover for this organism. Anaerobes may also be present, and 
the addition of metronidazole (particularly for abscesses and/
or devitalised tissue) should be considered. 
Surgical debridement is required for collections, necrotic 
areas or more extensive osteomyelitis. Thought should be 
given to distinguishing superficial osteitis (stage 2 disease) 
resulting from loss of soft tissue cover (often in associa -
tion with vascular compromise) from more extensive bone 
involvement. In the former, biopsy and antibiotic therapy may 
be of limited importance and optimising glycaemic control, 
improving vascular supply and relieving pressure with appro -
priate footwear are much more important. This approach may 
avoid more extensive tissue loss or later amputation.
Vascular compromise should be considered a relative con-
traindication to a surgical approach. In patients with poor 
peripheral pulses, a full vascular assessment is mandatory. 
Proximal angioplasty or bypass surgery may improve distal 
vascularity to a level where infection surgery in the foot may 
be more successful.
Amputation is not an easy option in diabetic foot disease, 
and wound healing can be problematic. In general, excision 
should be adequate to remove all infected material, and 
excess bone may need to be resected to allow tension-free 
skin closure. If there is extensive peripheral neuropathy, a 
below-knee amputation in an area with better sensation may 
be appropriate.
Summary box 38.10
Chronic osteomyelitis
●● Chronic disease requires specialist surgery with excision, 
stabilisation and reconstruction
●● Host status should be optimised before surgery
●● Following surgery, antibiotic therapy is typically continued for 
at least 6 weeks
Summary box 38.11
Diabetic foot infection
●● The most important risk factor for osteomyelitis is the 
presence of a foot ulcer
●● Ulcer swabs are not reliable in determining the pathogens 
responsible for osteomyelitis
●● Bone biopsy for culture should be considered in extensive/
complex infection, but may not be necessary in mild disease
●● In severe disease, surgical debridement of collections and/
or necrotic tissue is required, followed by antibiotics tailored 
according to culture results
Figure 38.9 A severe diabetic foot infection, with marked infection, 
necrosis and soft-tissue loss. The patient was neur opathic but not 
ischaemic and it was possible to salvage a functional foot by ‘filleting’ 
the hallux and using the soft tissues to cover the defect. 
MUSCULOSKELETAL INFECTION 
CAUSED BY MYCOBACTERIA
Tuberculous arthritis/osteomyelitis had become uncommon 
in the UK, but remains prevalent in resource-poor coun -
tries. There is now a resurgence in higher-income countries 
as a consequence of immigration and immunocompromise 
(including human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]). The most 
common organism is Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Around half 
of all cases affect the spine, typically manifesting as paradiscal 
DIABETIC FOOT INFECTION
The global prevalence of diabetes has increased exponentially 
in recent years. Foot infections are a leading cause of hospital 
admissions in this group, with an annual incidence of foot 
complications of 1–2% per year, due to the combined influ-
ence of macro- and microvascular insufficiency, mechanical 
disruption, peripheral and autonomic neuropathy, immune 
defects and impaired tissue healing. Ulceration of the calca -
neum and bones of the forefoot, especially the great toe and 
first metatarsal head, is common, potentially leading to deep 
extension and osteomyelitis (Figure 38.9).
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   559 25/10/2017   08:38CHAPTER 38  Infection of the bones and joints
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS560
infection but also causing discitis and vertebral osteomyelitis. 
Native joint infection typically presents with monoarticular 
pain in a weight-bearing joint. 
Surgery may be crucial to facilitate synovial biopsy for 
diagnosis by culture and histopathology, as well as to decom -
press the spinal cord and debride infected tissue. 
For optimal management of tuberculosis, the patient must 
be referred to a specialist multidisciplinary team, for input 
that includes the following components.
 ● Baseline screening for HIV and other blood-borne viruses.
 ● Assessment for other sites of mycobacterial infection.
 ● Measurement of baseline renal and liver function, to be 
repeated at intervals throughout treatment. Drug-induced 
hepatitis is the commonest serious side effect that may 
require temporary withdrawal or alteration of therapy.
 ● Baseline and follow-up testing of hearing (if injectable 
agents to be used) and colour vision (if ethambutol to be 
used).
 ● Consideration of any potential drug interactions (rifampi-
cin is a potent inducer of the cytochrome P450 system; it 
can interact with many classes of drug including anticon -
vulsants, antiretroviral therapy, anticoagulants, antibiot-
ics and antifungals).
 ● Institution of appropriate infection control precautions 
and contact tracing.
 ● Appropriate education and support to optimise adherence 
to therapy.
 ● Prescription of an appropriate combination of drug 
therapy. 
 ● For fully sensitive Mycobacterium tuberculosis , the 
preferred regimen is oral rifampicin, isoniazid, pyra -
zinamide and ethambutol for 2  months, followed by 
rifampicin and isoniazid for a further 4 months. 
 ● Worldwide, there is an increase in the prevalence of 
drug-resistant tuberculosis, classified as multidrug resis-
tant (MDR) and extensively drug resistant (XDR). 
Infection with these organisms requires a treatment 
regimen that includes an injectable agent (typically 
amikacin, kanamycin or capreomycin) together with 
oral agents selected according to the susceptibility 
profile of the isolate (these may include cycloserine, 
ethionamide, p-aminosalicylic acid (PAS), fluoro-
quinolones and linezolid). Prolongation of therapy is 
required, and side effects and toxicity are common. 
Non-tuberculous mycobacteria are ubiquitous environ -
mental organisms. They are best recognised as agents of 
disease in patients with underlying immunocompromise 
(including HIV , diabetes and organ transplantation), or other 
risk factors for introduction of infection (such as penetrating 
trauma or the presence of a prosthesis). However, they may 
occasionally also cause infection in hosts without obvious risk 
factors. 
Treatment can be difficult. These organisms are resistant 
to the standard agents used for first-line antituberculous ther-
apy; surgery to debride and drain sites of infection can there -
fore be particularly important to reduce the bacterial burden. 
There is no single standardised drug regimen or duration, so 
choice of therapy depends on the in vitro susceptibility of the 
organism, and length of treatment depends on the location 
of disease, extent of surgical debridement, the identification 
and phenotypic characteristics of the organism, the patient’s 
underlying condition, presence of immunocompromise 
and response to therapy. As for treatment of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, expert medical oversight is crucial throughout 
treatment. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Dr Philip Bejon contributed to an earlier version of this chap-
ter, and we remain grateful for his previous input. 
FURTHER READING
Barrett L, Atkins B. The clinical presentation of prosthetic joint infec -
tion. J Antimicrob Chemother 2014; 69(Suppl 1): i25–7. 
Bejon P , Berendt A, Atkins BL et al. (2010) T wo-stage revision for pros-
thetic joint infection: predictors of outcome and the role of reim -
plantation microbiology. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010; 65: 569–75. 
Bose D, Kugan R, Stubbs D, McNally M. Management of infected non -
union of the long bones by a multidisciplinary team. Bone Joint J 
2015; 97-B: 814–17.
Byren I, Bejon P , Atkins BL et al. (2009) One hundred and twelve infect-
ed arthroplasties treated with ‘DAIR’ (debridement, antibiotics and 
implant retention): antibiotic duration and outcome. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2009; 63: 1264–71.
Ferguson JY, Riley N, Dudareva M et al. The use of a biodegradable anti-
biotic-loaded calcium sulphate carrier containing tobramycin for the 
treatment of chronic osteomyelitis. Bone Joint J 2014; 96-B: 829–36.
Mathews CJ, Weston VC, Jones A, Field M, Coakley G. Bacterial septic 
arthritis in adults. Lancet 2010; 375: 846–55.
Matthews PC, Berendt AR, McNally MA, Byren I. Diagnosis and man -
agement of prosthetic joint infection BMJ 2009; 338: 1378–83. 
McNally MA, Ferguson JY, Diefenbeck M et al. Single-stage treatment 
of chronic osteomyelitis with a new absorbable, gentamicin-loaded, 
calcium sulphate/hydroxyapatite biocomposite. A prospective series 
of 100 cases. Bone Joint J 2016; 98-B: 1289–96.
McNally MA, Nagarajah K. Osteomyelitis. Orthop Trauma 2010; 24(6): 
416–29.
Uçkay I, Gariani K, Dubois-Ferrière V , Suvà D, Lipsky BA. Diabetic foot 
infections: recent literature and cornerstones of management. Curr 
Opin Infect Dis 2016; 29(2): 145–52.
05_38-B&L27_Pt5_Ch38.indd   560 25/10/2017   08:38Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To be familiar with:
 • Normal and abnormal development of the 
musculoskeletal system
 • Normal variants versus pathological deformity
 • Diagnosis and treatment of developmental hip dysplasia
 • Presentation and management of other childhood hip 
conditions
 • Management of clubfoot
 • Problems associated with musculoskeletal infection in 
childhood
Chapter
Paediatric orthopaedics
39
INTRODUCTION
Immature skeletons heal rapidly and can remodel with growth 
but physeal injury or muscle imbalance may lead to progres -
sive deformity. The conservative treatment of common con -
ditions, such as developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) 
combines the child’s remodelling ability with an under -
standing of the Heuter–Volkmann principle and Wolff’s law 
(Table 39.1): improving the biomechanical environment may 
reverse abnormal growth. In contrast, in conditions such as 
Blount’s disease, a poorly functioning growth plate leads to 
asymmetrical growth and deformity. Advances in genetics 
and molecular science are improving our understanding of 
certain conditions and may lead to potential new avenues of 
treatment.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
The upper limb bud forms on the lateral wall of the embryo 
4  weeks after fertilisation, followed promptly by the lower 
limb bud. By 2 months’ gestation, differentiation of the limb 
elements is complete. Most congenital limb anomalies arise 
during this second month.
Three coordinated signalling centres control limb devel -
opment. The apical ectodermal ridge (AER) guides meso -
dermal differentiation (in the progress zone) in a proximal to 
distal direction and controls digit formation via the produc-
tion of several fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). The mesoder-
mal zone of polarising activity (ZPA) directs anteroposterior 
limb development via the sonic hedgehog protein which is 
itself sustained by the FGFs. The ectodermal driven wing-
less-type (Wnt) signalling centre develops dorsoventral axis 
configuration and limb alignment.
Certain limb anomalies are directly related to alterations 
in these centres. In experiments it is found that removal of 
the AER leads to a truncated limb, similar to a congenital 
amputation, and prevents interdigital necrosis. This results in 
syndactyly. An additional ZPA results in a mirror duplication 
of the distal limb, while the Wnt signalling system is critical 
for the transcription factor Lmx1b in the distal mesenchyme, 
such that absence of this gene affects the development of dor-
sal limb structures in the nail patella syndome.
An error during fetal limb development may disturb 
the formation of other organs. Thus some limb anomalies 
are associated with systemic disorders which may be life-  
threatening.
Richard von Volkmann , 1830–1889, Professor of Surgery, Halle, Germany.
Julius Wolff , 1836–1902, Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Berlin, Germany.
TABLE 39.1 Laws governing the remodelling of bone.
Heuter–Volkmann principle
●● Compressive forces inhibit growth
●● Tensile forces stimulate growth
Wolff’s Law
●● Bone deposition and resorption depend on the stresses applied
Summary box 39.1
Development of the musculoskeletal system
●● Occurs 4–8 weeks after fertilisation
●● AER controls proximal to distal differentiation and interdigital 
necrosis
●● ZPA directs posterior to anterior differentiation
●● Wnt influences dorsal to ventral differentiation
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   561 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS562
NORMAL VARIANTS
The many normal variants of growth and development can 
cause significant parental concern. The common problems 
are related to an intoeing gait, tripping and falling, bowlegs, 
knock-knees and flatfeet. In general, if they are symmetrical, 
symptom-free and supple and in an otherwise normal child, 
they require no intervention. There is often a family history 
of similar complaints. If the child fails to achieve their devel-
opmental milestones or there are functional problems, further 
investigation and help may be required.
Intoeing gait
Intoeing is defined as a negative foot progression angle. It can 
result from one or more lower limb torsional anomalies (Fig-
ure 39.1 and Table 39.2).
Persistent anteversion of the femoral neck presents clin -
ically with excessive internal rotation at the hip joint which 
is best measured with the patient prone (Figure 39.2a). All 
femurs are anteverted at birth but as the femur lengthens 
it also rotates, leading to spontaneous improvement in the 
degree of anteversion. If, by 10–12 years, a significant defor -
mity persists associated with functional difficulties, corrective 
osteotomy may be justified. In such cases, the child has usu -
ally lost the ability to externally rotate the extended hip. In 
other cases, compensatory external tibial torsion may have 
developed, in which case the foot progression angle will be 
normal but the child may have symptoms of the miserable 
malalignment syndrome, which include anterior knee pain 
and feelings of instability.
- 20o+ 20o
Figure 39.1 Foot progression angle: a positive angle is caused by an 
extoeing gait, a negative angle by an intoeing gait.
TABLE 39.2 Common sites and causes of intoeing gait in 
childhood.
Site Cause
Femur/hip Persistent femoral neck anteversion
Tibia Internal tibial torsion
Foot Metatarsus adductus
External
thigh–foot
angle
Internal
thigh–foot
angle
Normal Metatarsus adductus
Figure 39.2 Line diagrams illustrating assessment of the torsional 
profile: all assessments ar e done with the child prone. (a) Femoral 
neck anteversion measured as the range of internal hip rotation with 
the child prone, the hip extended and the knee flexed. Craig’s test 
measures the degree of internal rotation present when the greater 
trochanter is at its most prominent (also called the Trochanteric 
Prominence Test). (b)The thigh–foot angle (TFA) measures the angle 
between the relaxed hindfoot and the thigh (also measured with 
the child prone). (c) The bean-shaped foot of metatarsus adductus 
viewed from above: a curved lateral border with/without a medial 
crease. This deformity may be passively correctable. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   562 25/10/2017   08:39Normal variants 563
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Internal tibial torsion is assessed by the thigh–foot angle 
and is commonly associated with physiological tibia vara 
in infants (Figure 39.2b). Spontaneous correction can be 
expected by age 4, as the tibia also rotates as it grows.
Metatarsus adductus (Figure 39.2c) is usually flexible; 
spontaneous correction occurs in 90% of children by the 
age of 2–4 years. For the more rigid foot, stretching, with or 
without plaster casts or straight-last shoes, may help. Surgical 
release is rarely indicated.
Other abnormalities of gait
Extoeing is less common than intoeing but may result from 
relative femoral retroversion, external tibial torsion or flex -
ible flat feet. The young child may be late walking because of 
poor balance associated with the foot posture and the overall 
alignment. This condition improves with growth/time.
Toe-walking is a phase in normal gait development. If the gait 
does not mature to a heel–toe pattern by 3 years, physiother -
apy may help, and older children benefit from surgical length-
ening of a contracted gastrocsoleus complex, if it is present. If 
toe walking starts after walking age, a spinal or neuromuscular 
aetiology such as a tethered cord or a muscular dystrophy must 
be considered and in the unilateral case, an orthopaedic cause 
for a short leg, such as fibula hemimelia or a dislocated hip, 
needs to be considered and excluded.
Knock-knees and bowlegs
In the normal child, leg shape changes dramatically over time. 
All children start life with bowlegs, often accompanied by 
internal tibial torsion. By the age of 2–3 years they have devel-
oped knock-knees, which regress towards the normal adult 
tibiofemoral angle of 7° valgus by the age of 7 (Figure 39.3).
Traditionally, the intercondylar or intermalleolar dis-
tance is used to quantify the deformity, rather than measuring 
the angle. This is not very accurate. Further investigation is 
needed when the deformity is severe, asymmetrical or symp -
tomatic. The most common pathological causes are previous 
trauma, rickets or a skeletal dysplasia.
Flat foot
Before development of the medial longitudinal arch, all chil-
dren (<3 years) have flat feet, often with a fat pad obscuring 
the arch. Only 15% of adults have flat feet so the natural his-
tory is for improvement, influenced by both familial and racial 
factors.
The painless, flexible flat foot needs no treatment. Ortho-
ses do not alter the natural history but can alleviate symptoms 
if they are present. All flat feet have a flattened medial arch 
with a valgus heel but two major types must be distinguished 
(Table 39.3).
The symptomatic, rigid flat foot is usually the result of 
inflammation or a tarsal coalition and requires appropriate 
investigation followed by medical or surgical management 
(Figure 39.4).
123456
Age (years)
7891 01 1
/H1100210
0
5
10
20
30
15
25
/H1100220
/H1100215
/H110025
Valgus Varus
2 sd
2 sd
Knee angle
(tibiofemoral angle)
Figure 39.3 Graph to show the normal tendency of limb alignment to 
change from varus to valgus with growth; normal is slight valgus after 
the age of 7–8 years.
TABLE 39.3 Flat feet.
Types Characteristics
Flexible On tiptoe the arch is restored and the heel 
corrects into varus; subtalar joint movements are 
full and pain free
Rigid On tiptoe the arch fails to return and the heel 
remains in valgus; subtalar joint movements are 
restricted and often painful
Summary box 39.2
Normal variants
●● Children’s legs are often bowed until age 2 years and then 
knock-kneed until age 6 or 7 years
●● Neuromuscular pathology must be excluded in toe walkers, 
particularly when the onset is late
●● Intoeing or extoeing may be caused by excessive femoral or 
tibial torsion or foot deformity
●● Flexible, pain-free flat feet do not need treatment
Figure 39.4 Oblique radiograph of the foot that shows the most 
common form of tarsal coalition, a calcaneonavicular bar (arrow). 
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   563 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS564
Postural abnormalities
Many babies are subjected to moulding pressures in utero. At 
birth they exhibit ‘postural abnormalities’ such as torticollis, 
calcaneovalgus feet and plagiocephaly , which improve with 
time and/or stretching exercises.
CONGENITAL AND 
DEVELOPMENTAL 
ABNORMALITIES OF THE 
SKELETON
Although many skeletal abnormalities are identified antena-
tally or at birth, others only become apparent with growth. 
Skeletal disorders are often linked to soft-tissue abnormali-
ties which may be generalised or focal; the presence of a skin 
dimple or a vascular malformation should be a warning sign 
as should the ‘featureless’ limbs of a child with arthrogryposis 
multiplex congenita (AMC) (Table 39.4, Figure 39.5).
Many anomalies require little treatment and cause min -
imal functional disability whereas others, such as proximal 
femoral focal deficiency (PFFD) and radial club hand, pose 
considerable challenges to both the patient and their doctors. 
In these cases the functional and cosmetic needs of the child 
and family must be balanced against available resources and 
expertise (Figure 39.6). Despite advances in limb reconstruc-
tion techniques there is little high-quality evidence-based 
data from skeletally mature patients to support their wide-
spread use. Concurrently, considerable advances are occur -
ring with amputation prosthetics which may result in better 
patient-reported quality of life outcome scores, particularly in 
certain regions.
Generalised skeletal dysplasias
Achondroplasia
Achondroplasia is caused by a gain in function mutation in 
the FGFR3 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 3) gene, located 
on the short arm of chromosome (Chr) 4, which affects 
TABLE 39.4 Classification of congenital limb 
malformations.
Category Example
Failure of formation of parts
 Transverse Congenital amputation of the 
forearm/lower limb
 Longitudinal Fibular hemimelia
Failure of differentiation Radioulnar synostosis; vertebral 
body fusion
Duplication Extra digits
Overgrowth Gigantism; macrodactyly
Undergrowth
Congenital constriction band 
syndrome
Often affects hands/feet with poor 
formation of the digits distally
Generalised skeletal 
abnormalities
Skeletal dysplasia, e.g. 
achondroplasia
Figure 39.5  Clinical photograph of a child with arthrogryposis 
multiplex congenita and featureless upper limbs (no skin cr eases 
or muscle definition). He mobilises with the help of knee–ankle–foot 
orthoses. 
Figure 39.6  Radiograph 
of a child born with pr ox-
imal femoral focal defi -
ciency. A proximal femoral 
osteotomy improved her 
hip mechanics and stabilty 
(a screw has come loose 
from the plate). She opted 
to keep her foot and not to 
undergo leg lengthening. 
She functions well with an 
extension prosthesis.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   564 25/10/2017   08:39Congenital and developmental abnormalities of the sk eleton 565
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
enchondral bone formation. It is an autosomal dominant 
condition. Patients present with disproportionate short stat -
ure where the limbs are shorter than the trunk, together with 
classical clinical and radiographic features (Figure 39.7). 
Underdevelopment of the foramen magnum and spinal ste -
nosis can cause neurological difficulties. Correction of limb 
alignment may be necessary and limb lengthening techniques 
are used in some countries.
Hereditary multiple exostoses – diaphyseal 
aclasis
This is an autosomal dominant condition usually related to a 
loss of function mutation in either the EXT 1 (on Chr 8q) or 
EXT 2 gene (Chr 11p), although it is unclear how this defect 
leads to the disregulated growth which results in an exosto -
sis. Exostoses consisting of a cartilaginous cap on a bony stalk 
may be sessile or pedunculated. They grow as the child grows 
and may cause cosmetic or functional difficulties that justify 
excision. Differential growth between the paired bones of the 
forearm and lower leg can lead to joint deformity and dislo -
cation of the radial head, exacerbated by the disorded physeal 
growth secondary to altered mechanical forces. Such growth 
abnormalities are predictable and treatment is designed to 
prevent deformity from developing (Figure 39.8). Continued 
growth after skeletal maturity may represent malignant trans-
formation of a previously benign osteochondroma: a rare but 
recognised problem (see Chapter 37).
Enchondromatosis
This non-hereditary skeletal dysplasia is also called Olli -
er’s disease. Enchondromas arise from rests of chondrocytes 
located within the medullary canal of tubular bones: they con-
sist of mature hyaline cartilage (Figure 39.9). Larger lesions 
may show calcification on radiographs, and vertical streaks of 
lucency (representing cartilage columns) may run the length 
of the metaphysis. Pathological fractures are common. If there 
are also soft tissue haemangiomas and lymphangiomas, the 
condition is called Maffucci’s syndrome (see Chapter 37).
Figure 39.7  Achondroplasia. (a) Clinical photograph of a child 
with achondroplasia. (b) Standing leg length/alignment radiograph 
of a different child with achondroplasia showing short limbs, flared/  
widened metaphysis, an overlong fibula and slight bowing, The 
acetabulum is very horizontal and the pelvic wings seem square: all 
classical features of this condition.
Figure 39.8 Radiograph of the knee showing multiple broad-based 
osteochondromas.
Louis Xavier Edouard Léopold Ollier , 1830–1900, Professor of Surgery, Lyons, France, described enchondromatosis in 1899.
Angelo Maffucci , 1845–1903, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Pisa, Italy, described enchondromatosis in association with soft tissue haemangiomas in 1881.
(a)
(b)
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   565 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS566
Fibrous dysplasia
This common disorder is often a chance finding on radio -
graphs, particularly in its monostotic form. It is a localised 
defect in osteoblastic differentiation and maturation where 
normal bone is replaced by fibrous stroma. With polyostotic 
fibrous dysplasia, limb deformity and pathological fractures 
are common. In patients with precocious puberty and Coast of 
Maine café-au-lait spots, the diagnosis is McCune Albright’s 
syndrome (Figure 39.10).
METABOLIC BONE DISEASE
Rickets
In all types of rickets, the primary problem is inadequate 
mineralisation of growing bone (Table 39.5). In severe cases, 
skeletal deformities, with classic radiographic features, affect 
Figure 39.9 Anteroposterior radiograph of the index finger of a child 
showing a solitary enchondroma (arr ow): note the opacity in the soft 
tissues that represents the extent of the cartilaginous lesion. 
Figure 39.10 Standing leg length and alignment radiograph of a 
child with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. The diaphyseal lesions classi-
cally have a ‘ground glass’ appearance. The bones are often deformed 
and the limb may be short, as seen particularly on the right. The femur 
has fractured previously and one intramedullary nail remains in place. 
TABLE 39.5 Common causes of rickets.
Nutritional Reduced intake of vitamin D and calcium
Environmental Inadequate exposure to sunlight
Gastrointestinal 
disease
Crohn’s disease, gluten-sensitive 
enteropathy
Genetic X-linked hypophosphataemia
Renal disease End-stage renal failure, renal tubular 
anomalies; changes related to secondary 
hyperparathyroidism may be present
Summary box 39.3
Congenital and developmental abnormalities of the 
skeleton
●● Achondroplasia affects enchondral ossification and presents 
with disproportionate short stature
●● Exostoses may cause functional and/or cosmetic problems
●● Patients with Ollier’s disease (multiple enchondromatosis) 
often have lesions in the hands and feet
every physis (Figure 39.11). Medical treatment improves 
mineralisation. Correction of the deformity then occurs with 
growth. Once the medical condition has been stabilised, sur -
gery may be necessary for the management of any residual 
limb deformity. Guided growth techniques are often used in 
preference to osteotomies.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) (brittle 
bone disease)
OI represents a spectrum of conditions linked by a qualita -
tive and/or quantitative malfunction of collagen pro duction. 
Many specific genetic defects have been identified, most 
caused by mutations in the collagen genes. The bone may 
break easily but it heals promptly and well. All structures that 
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   566 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the hip 567
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
contain collagen may be affected. This accounts for the lig -
amentous laxity, blue sclerae and poor teeth found in some 
phenotypes.
Cyclical bisphosphonate treatment decreases bone resorp-
tion and bone turnover. This reduces bone pain and the frac-
ture rate, which in turn improves weight-bearing mobility 
and bone strength (Figure 39.12).
Following fracture, care must be taken to minimise dis -
use osteoporosis and to maintain bone alignment. Treatment 
options range from simple casting techniques to more special-
ised surgical procedures to correct/maintain limb alignment 
while allowing growth. Intramedullary techniques for reduc -
tion and stabilisation of fractures or osteotomies are preferred 
to plate fixation because of the associated problems with stress 
risers. Immobilisation must be minimised and rehabilitation 
commenced promptly.
ABNORMALITIES OF THE HIP
Developmental dysplasia of the 
hip (DDH)
DDH defines the spectrum of hip instability, ranging from the 
hip that is in joint but has a shallow (dysplastic) acetabulum 
and may be ‘pushed out’ (Barlow positive) to the dislocated 
hip that is irreducible (Ortolani negative). These tests are 
described below. The associated clinical picture varies with 
the pathology and the age at presentation: neonatal hips may 
be unstable, a toddler may limp, adolescents may experience 
exercise-induced pain and an adult may have pain secondary 
to degenerative arthritis.
Incidence
The incidence of neonatal instability is ~20 per 1000 live 
births whereas that of true dislocation is ~2 per 1000 live 
births; many hips stabilise spontaneously.
Aetiology of DDH
 ● Gender. DDH is 4–5 times more common in girls than in 
boys, possibly related to hormonal factors causing tempo -
rary joint laxity.
 ● Breech presentation. DDH is more common in breech 
babies, particularly with the extended breech position.
 ● Birth order. DDH is more common in firstborns and in 
the left hip because of the common fetal position (LOA – 
left occipitoanterior) in a tight primigravid uterus where 
movement is restricted.
 ● Oligohydramnios. Restricts fetal movement. The pre -
sence of other postural deformities (torticollis and meta-
tarsus adductus) raises the possibility of DDH.
 ● Family history. A positive family history significantly 
increases the risk of DDH. This may reflect faulty aceta -
bular development or excessive ligamentous laxity.
 ● Regional and racial variation . DDH is more common in 
certain regions and in certain races, probably because of a 
combination of genetic, environmental and cultural fac -
tors. Swaddling the legs together will exacerbate an unsta-
ble hip whereas carrying the baby astride the carer’s hip or 
back encourages a position of hip flexion and abduction 
that will help stability.
Figure 39.11 Radiographs in cases of rickets demonstrate widened 
physes with cupped, flared metaphyses.
Figure 39.12 Radiograph of a child with osteogenesis imperfecta 
who has been treated with cyclical bisphosphonates. Multiple growth 
lines are visible in addition to intramedullary devices in both the femur 
and tibia.
Summary box 39.4
Metabolic bone disease
●● Rickets, from nutritional or other causes, is characterised by a 
failure of bone mineralisation
●● X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets is transmitted in a 
dominant fashion, therefore affecting both boys and girls
●● In osteogenesis imperfecta:
●● There is defective type I collagen production
●● In severe forms frequent fractures lead to progressive 
deformity
●● Systemic treatment with bisphosphonates reduces the 
fracture rate
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   567 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS568
Hip dislocation is often found in association with gen -
eralised syndromes or neuromuscular conditions. These 
teratological hips are often resistant to the simpler surgical 
procedures and a holistic approach to the child’s overall con-
dition and prognosis must be taken when planning treatment.
Diagnosis
NEONATES
Clinical assessment and screening . In many countries, all 
neonates are screened for limitation of hip abduction and hip 
joint instability. In the UK, as part of the newborn and infant 
physical examination (NIPE) guidelines, the hips are exam-
ined again at 6 weeks. The knees and hips are flexed and the 
thigh held by the examiner with the thumb along the medial 
aspect and a finger behind the greater trochanter. The hips are 
abducted gently: if abduction is limited, the hip may be dislo-
cated. The examiner’s finger then lifts the greater trochanter 
upwards; a soft clunk – the Ortolani test – with improved hip 
abduction signifies hip reduction (Figure 39.13a). If the hip 
does abduct fully, then the leg is brought back up to neutral 
and then adducted while downward pressure is applied to the 
knee with the examiner’s thumb and palm: an unstable hip 
may dislocate or subluxate – the Barlow test (Figure 39.13b). 
With an irreducible hip there is no clunk of reduction but 
there will be limitation of abduction. Bilateral dislocation 
may be missed because abduction is symmetrical and abduc -
tion may be normal when there is low muscle tone and joint 
laxity. In a dislocated hip, the femoral head may be palpable 
in the buttock.
Ultrasound assessment. Ultrasonography defines the anat-
omy and the stability of the hip joint. It is used to monitor early 
treatment (Figure 39.14) or as a screening tool (universally or 
just for ‘at risk’ patients). Ideally, screening scans should be 
performed between 4 and 6 weeks of age and treatment, when 
necessary, by 6  weeks. The sonographic appearance of most 
hips improves (both in terms of hip stability and acetabular 
dysplasia) spontaneously as the child grows.
Radiography. Plain radiographs are used to evaluate 
DDH from 4–5 months of age, but are of limited value in 
Figure 39.13 Line diagram illustrating the (a) Ortolani and (b) Barlow tests for developmental dysplasia of the hip. For the Barlow test the 
femur must be at 90° to the bed.
Summary box 39.5
The neonatal clinical examination must ask and 
answer the following questions:
●● Is the hip dislocated?
●● If so is it reducible (Ortolani postive) or not (Ortolani 
negative)?
●● If the hip is not dislocated, is it dislocatable (or subluxable)?
●● If so, it is Barlow positive.
●● If the hip is not dislocated or dislocatable, is it clinically 
normal?
●● If so, do the risk factors in the history still demand further 
assessment with an ultrasound scan (USS) or plain 
radiograph?
Marius Ortolani , orthopaedic surgeon, Instituto Provinciale Per L’Infanzia di Ferrara, Italy, described this test in 1937.
Thomas Geoffrey Barlow , 1915–1975, orthopaedic surgeon, the Salford Royal Hospital, Salford, UK.
the newborn because no ossific nucleus is visible within the 
cartilaginous femoral head so its relationship to the acetabu -
lum is difficult to judge. The appearance of the femoral ossific 
nucleus is also often delayed in DDH (Figure 39.15).
INFANTS
Hip checks, looking for limitation of abduction in >90° of 
flexion and limb shortening, are part of routine developmen-
tal monitoring.
CHILD
Children present with a limp and sometimes with unilateral 
tiptoeing, because the affected leg is short. It is also externally 
rotated. Abduction in flexion is limited and there may be an 
extra thigh crease. The signs may be subtle and easily missed 
in an unsteady toddler. If both hips are affected there will be 
a waddling gait and a lumbar lordosis.
ADOLESCENT/ADUL T
Discomfort after exercise is common but the pain may be in 
the knee. Radiographs show dysplasia, subluxation or degen -
erative change.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   568 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the hip 569
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Management
When diagnosed early, conservative treatment is usually suc-
cessful, but after walking age surgery is required. The objective 
is to obtain a stable, congruous reduction of the femoral head 
into the acetabulum while avoiding damage to the capital 
epiphysis (avascular necrosis) or to the growth plate, which 
causes stiffness, coxa vara and shortening.
NEONATE
Owing to the hormonal effects in play during the perinatal 
period many hips are unstable initially. Most stabilise within 
the first few weeks of life and do not need treatment.
Hips that remain unstable at 6  weeks or that are dislo -
cated at rest, are treated with harnesses or splints that obtain 
and then maintain hip reduction in the position of abduction 
and flexion. Most harnesses (Figure 39.16) allow controlled 
movement while splints hold the hips more rigidly and so may 
carry a greater risk of avascular necrosis (A VN). If the hips fail 
to relocate or stabilise then non-operative treatment should 
be discontinued.
INFANT
Successful treatment using a harness is unusual after the age 
of 4–6 months. For the late-presenting hip or the hip that 
(a)
a
(b)
a
(c)
Figure 39.14 Ultrasound images of an infant hip. (a) Normal hip 
with a high α angle and a Morin index of 50% (defined as the percent-
age of the femoral head covered by the acetabulum, i.e. the portion 
lying below the horizontal r ed line). (b) Grossly dysplastic hip with 
a low α angle and a Morin index of <50%. This hip is likely to be 
unstable on dynamic ultrasound scanning, i.e. Barlow positive. 
(c) A dislocated hip joint (dislocated femoral head, red arrow; ‘empty’ 
acetabulum, white arrow).
a
b
Figure 39.15 Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph showing Hilgenrein-
er’s line (a) and Perkins’ line (b). The femoral head (ossific nucleus) of 
a normal hip lies in the inner lower quadrant. The right hip is normal, 
the left hip has developmental dysplasia of the hip.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Summary box 39.6
Diagnosis of developmental dysplasia of the hip
●● Is always based on the history and clinical examination and 
then confirmed by appropriate investigations
●● All neonates are screened clinically (Barlow and Ortolani 
tests), at birth and at 6 weeks
●● Ultrasound is used to monitor hip stability/anatomy and often 
as a screening test in ‘at-risk’ babies
●● Radiography is useful from 4 months onwards
●● Older children present with a limp and/or tiptoeing.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   569 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS570
may be required to reorientate or close down the acetabulum, 
and femoral shortening or derotation osteotomies are often 
required to improve stability. Earlier surgery via the medial 
approach can be considered but no additional surgery such as 
capsulorraphy or bony realignment can be performed through 
that incision.
OLDER CHILD
In the older child a similar approach is necessary but pel -
vic and femoral realignment will always be needed, and the 
results tend to be less rewarding. Surgery is often avoided in 
children over the age of 6–8 years (bilateral cases) and the age 
of 8–10 in unilateral cases (Figure 39.18).
ADOLESCENT AND YOUNG ADUL T
These hips are often subluxated rather than truly dislocated. 
On investigation, the hip may be reducible and the joint can 
be recreated with a combination of pelvic and femoral osteo-
tomies. For the irreducible hip, acetabular augmentation may 
reduce symptoms and delay the onset of degenerative change.
Summary box 39.7
Management of early developmental dysplasia of 
the hip
●● Many hips that are unstable in the first few days/weeks of life 
do not need treatment as they improve spontaneously
●● Up to age 4–6 months, a harness or splint is effective 
treatment
●● In older babies, closed reduction is often possible and 
preferable to an open reduction
●● For failed closed treatment, open surgical reduction is 
required
Shoulder strap
Flexion strap
Abduction strap
Leg strap
Chest strap
Figure 39.16 The anterior strap of the Pavlik harness contr ols hip 
flexion, whereas the posterior strap limits adduction and encourages 
abduction.
Figure 39.17 Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph showing acetabular 
dysplasia with subluxation (developmental dysplasia of the hip) of the 
left hip. This child presented at the age of 4 years.
Figure 39.18  Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph showing bilateral 
true dislocations in a 9-year -old child; the decision was made not to 
offer an operation. The pathology in these hips is different from that 
shown in Figure 39.17.
fails conservative treatment, an examination under anaes-
thetic may result in a closed reduction. The arthrogram shows 
whether a concentric reduction is present and, if not, it will 
indicate which structures are blocking reduction. A psoas/
adductor release can be performed as necessary. Following a 
closed reduction, the hip will need to be held reduced with a 
hip spica cast for several months.
If the hip is irreducible or can only be held reduced in an 
extreme position with a small safe zone then treatment must 
be abandoned and an open reduction considered via a medial 
or anterior approach.
YOUNG CHILD OR TODDLER
The older the child, the less likely it is that reduction by 
closed methods will succeed (Figure 39.17) The traditional 
approach is then to carry out open reduction via an anterior 
approach around the age of 9–12 months. A pelvic osteotomy 
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   570 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the hip 571
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
SECONDARY PROCEDURES AND COMPLICATIONS
Regular follow-up ensures that the hip development is mon -
itored. Acetabular remodelling may be assessed objectively 
by measuring the acetabular index or the centre–edge angle 
(Figure 39.19).
If the acetabulum does not improve, a variety of pelvic 
osteotomies can be considered. A VN with overgrowth of the 
greater trochanter can cause a Trendelenburg limp and distal 
transfer of the trochanter may help (Figure 39.20). Occa-
sionally, a leg length difference needs treatment. There is also 
an increased risk of osteoarthritis which may need arthro -
plasty later in life.
Legg–Calvé–Perthes’ (LCP) disease
Incidence and aetiology
This rare condition, characterised by the development of 
avascular necrosis (A VN) of the proximal femoral epiphy sis, 
affects boys predominantly between the ages of 4 and 7 years; 
10% develop bilateral disease. Although the aetiology is 
unclear, several factors have been implicated (Table 39.6). 
There are also other causes of A VN of the femoral head (Table 
39.7). Overall, the incidence appears to be declining.
Pathology
Once established the process follows a well-described course. 
The avascular change may affect all or part of the femoral 
epiphysis. The avascular bone may collapse. This is followed 
by revascularisation, resorption and fragmentation of the 
dead ossific nucleus within the cartilaginous femoral head, 
and finally by reossification and regeneration (‘healing’) of 
the bony epiphysis. In this respect, Perthes’ disease is a self- 
limiting condition but, during the collapse and fragmentation 
phases, femoral head deformity occurs as the cartilage ‘follows’ 
the shape of the newly reossified epiphysis. This change in 
Summary box 39.8
Management of late-presenting DDH
●● The older the child, the more likely it is that they will require 
surgery
●● Femoral osteotomy can stabilise the hip and reduce pressure 
on the femoral head
●● Pelvic osteotomy redirects or reshapes the acetabulum
●● The potential for acetabular remodelling decreases after the 
age of 3–4 years
●● Avascular necrosis is a risk with all DDH treatment
Legg, Calvé and Perthes  all described osteochondritis of the head of the femur independently in 1910.
Arthur Thornton Legg , 1874–1939, orthopaedic surgeon, The Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
Jacques Calvé , 1875–1927, orthopaedic surgeon, La Fondation Franco-Americaine, Berck Plage, Pas-de-Calais, France.
Georg Clemens Perthes , 1869–1927, Professor of Surgery, Tübingen, Germany.
AI
CE
Figure 39.19 Anteroposterior pelvic radiographs demonstrating the 
acetabular index (AI) and the centre–edge (CE) angle: (a) normal hips; 
(b) the left hip shows residual dysplasia. The AI is increased when 
compared with the normal right hip. The left CE angle would be smaller 
than the right too but it has not been measured on this radiograph.
(a)
(b)
TABLE 39.7 Causes of avascular necrosis of the femoral 
head.
●● Steroids
●● Infection/surgery/previous injury or fracture
●● Perthes’ disease
●● Sickle cell disease
●● Hypothyroidism
●● Skeletal dysplasia – classically multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
TABLE 39.6 Factors implicated in the pathogenesis of 
Perthes’ disease.
●● Low birth weight
●● Delayed bone age
●● Short stature with rostral sparing
●● Associated with congenital urogenital anomalies
●● Socioeconomic deprivation
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   571 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS572
shape is not reversible and has a permanent effect on the 
health of the hip joint.
Diagnosis
The history, clinical examination and anteroposterior and 
‘frog’ lateral radiographs of the pelvis make the diagnosis. An 
intermittently painful hip (or knee) with a limp and irrita -
bility or restriction of hip movements requires investigation. 
The radiographic features vary with the disease stage and may 
not correlate with the clinical condition (Figure 39.21).
A VN of the femoral head may be due to other causes and a 
differential diagnosis should be considered, particularly when 
changes are bilateral.
Management
The prognosis, and hence the management, is influenced by 
the extent of A VN and the degree of collapse. Traditionally, 
LCP disease has been classified with the Catterall classifica -
tion but currently the popular system in use is the Herring 
classification; however, this can only be applied when the 
head is in the fragmentation phase. In both systems, if the 
anterolateral portion is preserved, the prognosis is good.
Treatment aims to minimise femoral head deformity and 
thus the likelihood of secondary acetabular dysplasia. This is 
achieved by maintaining a good range of joint movement, 
with some restriction in activity level, and using analgesia and 
physiotherapy as required. The routine use of crutches and/or 
wheelchairs is discouraged because they promote a flexion/
adduction posture. Recent evidence suggests that brace man-
agement on its own does not alter the natural history of the 
condition.
The role of operative treatment is controversial. Surgery 
can be performed early to prevent deformity secondary to 
femoral head collapse or late to ‘salvage’ a poor mechanical 
situation when deformity is limiting movement (Table 39.8). 
Joint distraction (arthrodiastasis) may preserve joint move -
ment and maintain femoral head height but has not gained 
popularity.
Not all hips with deformity require ‘salvage’ surgery: young 
children, with more time to remodel, have a better prognosis 
as the acetabular changes (in response to the changed shape of 
the femoral head) result in an aspherical but congruent joint. 
Long-term follow-up may be required to deal with mechanical 
symptoms caused by loose osteochondral fragments, a Trende-
lenburg gait secondary to trochanteric overgrowth or a short-
leg gait. Degenerative change may occur in adult life.
Other conditions (all eponymous) also show radiographic 
changes of A VN (Table 39.9). Again, the radiographic 
changes ‘heal’ but the change in shape of the affected bone 
may lead to secondary joint stiffness and loss of function.
Figure 39.21 Anteroposterior pelvic radiographs of Perthes’ disease 
demonstrating whole head involvement: (a) right-sided disease; the 
process is in an early phase and the ar ea of dense necrotic bone is 
visible; (b) there has been collapse and fragmentation. The Catterall 
classification relates to how much of the epiphysis has been affected 
and the Herring classification relates to the height of the lateral pil -
lar (lateral portion of the epiphysis) in the fragmentation phase of the 
disease.
(a)
(b)
Figure 39.20 Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph of a 7-year-old girl 
who developed avascular necrosis secondary to a postoperative 
wound infection following a closed r eduction of her dislocated left 
hip. Note the destruction of the femoral head and the proximal femoral 
physis, so that the femoral neck is short and the greater trochanter 
relatively high (arrow).
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   572 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the hip 573
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
 physiological or pathological conditions a ‘stress fracture’ 
through the physis allows the epiphysis to displace as it would 
with an intracapsular femoral neck fracture, so the leg lies 
short and externally rotated. There is painful limitation of 
hip movement. Hilton’s law, which states that a joint is sup -
plied by the same nerves as the muscles that move the joint, 
explains why many children present with knee pain although 
the pathology is in the hip.
Incidence and aetiology
SUFE or SCFE is rare, with an incidence of ~5 per 100 000 
population. Boys are affected most commonly; the peak inci -
dence is related to the start of puberty, hence it is earlier in 
girls. As a result of growth stimulated by hormonal changes, 
the strength of the growth plate, its resistance to shear and 
its orientation are reduced. The hip is therefore ‘at risk’ and 
normal forces, exacerbated by obesity and repetitive minor 
trauma, precipitate a slip. Other conditions such as hypothy -
roidism, renal failure and previous radiotherapy treatment 
(local or to the pituitary region) also increase the risk.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is suggested by the history and examination and 
confirmed on plain radiograph (Figure 39.22). Displacement 
is often more obvious on a lateral view. Indeed, it can easily be 
missed by the unwary clinician if only the AP view is checked.
Classification
A SCFE can be classified according to three parameters: tim-
ing, severity and stability. The onset of symptoms divides 
Robert Kienbock , 1871–1953, Professor of Radiology, Vienna, Austria, described this condition in 1910.
Hans Jessen Panner , 1871–1930, radiologist, of Copenhagen, Denmark, described this condition in 1927.
Albert Henry Freiberg , 1869–1940, Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA, described this disease in 1926.
Alban Köhler , 1874–1947, radiologist, of Wiesbaden, Germany, described this disease in 1908.
John Hilton , 1805–1878, surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
TABLE 39.8 A guide to some of the surgical options available for the management of Perthes’ disease.
Timing Type of procedure Comments Aim
Early Femoral osteotomy Varus and derotation
Consider an opening wedge 
osteotomy to maintain length
To cover (‘contain’) the vulnerable 
femoral head
Innominate osteotomy
Shelf acetabuloplasty
Intermediate Arthrodiastasis Hinged distraction to allow movement, 
primarily flexion/extension
To reduce deforming pressures on the 
femoral head
Late Femoral osteotomy Valgus
With extension to undo a fixed flexion 
deformity or flexion to remove the 
anterior bump from impinging on the 
acetabulum
To improve joint congruity and hence 
function; to improve joint mechanics
Arthrotomy To remove osteochondral fragments
Head-neck osteoplasty After physeal closure To improve head shape by reducing 
femoroacetabular impingement and 
increasing head/neck offset.
Trochanteric epiphyseodesis or 
distal transfer
Epiphyseodesis probably not effective 
after age 7–8 years
To improve lever arm function
Contralateral limb Distal femoral epiphyseodesis To improve leg length discrepancy and 
reduce effects on hip joint mechanics
TABLE 39.9 Other conditions (commonly called 
osteochondroses) in which the radiographic appearance is 
of avascular necrosis.
Condition Affected bone
Kienbock’s disease Lunate
Panner’s disease Capitellum of the humerus
Freiberg’s disease Metatarsal head – usually the second
Köhler’s disease Navicular
Summary box 39.9
Legg–Calvé–Perthes’ disease
●● Most common in boys aged 4–7 years
●● AVN leads to femoral head collapse; the return of the blood 
supply heralds the resorption and reossification phases that 
allow the femoral head to ‘heal’
●● The prognosis is better in younger children (and in boys), who 
have more remodelling potential before skeletal maturity
●● Management aims to maintain femoral head sphericity
●● Treatment may be non-surgical (to maximise range of 
movement) or surgical (early for containment or late for 
‘salvage’)
Slip of the upper (capital) femoral 
epiphysis (SUFE/SCFE)
The physis connects the proximal femoral epiphysis (the 
femoral head) to the metaphysis (femoral neck). In certain 
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   573 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS574
slips into those that are acute, chronic, or acute on chronic. 
Slip severity is assessed on the lateral radiograph in terms of 
percentage uncovering of the metaphysis (Table 39.10) or by 
measuring the slip angle of Southwick (Figure 39.23). An 
unstable slip is defined by Loder as one where the patient can 
not bear weight on the limb.
Management
Following an acute episode the patient is often completely  
unable to bear weight and the slip is considered to be unstable. 
Displacement is often moderate or severe. This situation is 
essentially equivalent to a displaced intracapsular femoral neck 
fracture. This means that an acute unstable SUFE is an emer-
gency. The A VN risk is considerable but is reduced by prompt 
screw fixation that stabilises the ‘fracture’ (Figure 39.24). 
Figure 39.22  Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph demonstrating a 
mild slip of the upper (capital) femoral epiphysis on the right side. A 
line drawn along the upper margin of the femoral neck should transect 
the femoral head (left side) – if it does not do so (right side) a slip is 
present. There are many other radiographic features that help confirm 
the diagnosis but the changes are often subtle and may be seen first 
on the frog lateral view.
TABLE 39.10 Grading of the severity of slip of the upper 
(capital) femoral epiphysis.
Slip severity Metaphysis uncovered (%)
Mild <33
Moderate 33–66
Severe >66
Normal SCFE
a
a
b
b
12°
40°
c
c
Figure 39.23  The Southwick slip 
angle is measured on a lateral radio -
graph and denotes how far the epiph-
ysis has slipped off the metaphysis. 
The value on the normal side must 
be subtracted from the value on the 
abnormal side to get the true value. 
(SCFE, slip of the capital femoral 
epiphysis.)
Figure 39.24 Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph showing a left-sided 
acute severe unstable slip of the upper (capital) femoral epiphysis: (a) 
at presentation; (b) following partial repositioning and fixation with a 
cannulated screw. When this heals, because of the incomplete reduc-
tion it is likely that the metaphysis will impinge on the acetabulum (FAI, 
femoroacetabular impingement) during movement, causing pain and 
leading to degenerative change.
(a)
(b)
Randall Loder , Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   574 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the knee and lower leg 575
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
With the reduction in muscle spasm that accompanies a gen-
eral anaesthetic, a gentle repositioning of the femoral epiphy-
sis takes place as the externally rotated limb is lifted into the  
neutral position; no force must be used with this maneouvre. 
A capsulotomy also helps reduce the tamponade effect on the 
vessels to the epiphysis. To be effective such treatment must 
take place within 24 hours of injury. If delayed, the A VN rate 
increases.
With chronic slips the patient is usually able to bear 
weight, albeit with pain, and the slip is considered stable. 
Screw or pin fixation in situ relieves pain and often improves 
the range of movement but permanent reduction in abduc-
tion, flexion and internal rotation will be present (Figure 
39.25). The leg will also always be slightly short.
In the acute-on-chronic case, repositioning of the acute 
element of the slip may be feasible.
In the chronic severe slip it may be impossible to place a 
screw in a satisfactory position in the epiphysis, even by start-
ing anteriorly on the neck. In addition, once healed, there 
may be significant, persistent deformity leading to restriction 
of joint movement. In these cases a realignment osteotomy 
may be considered. As with all osteotomies, the closer the 
correction is to the site of deformity, the better the outcome. 
However, in this situation the centre of rotation of angulation 
(CORA) for the deformity is at the level of the physis; the 
risk of A VN or chondrolysis may be unacceptably high with 
an osteotomy at this level, and so an intertrochanteric osteot-
omy could be considered. The slipped epiphysis is associated 
with a ‘cam’ type of femoroacetabular impingement and this 
may require treatment with a head-neck osteoplasty to restore 
the offset between the head and neck.
Bilateral slips do occur and prophylactic pinning of the 
normal but ‘at-risk’ hip may be indicated.
ABNORMALITIES OF THE KNEE 
AND LOWER LEG
Many knee problems in children or adoloescents are self-  
limiting. Others require surgical consideration to reduce the 
risk of later degenerative change.
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
OCD most commonly affects the lateral aspect of the medial 
femoral condyle of the distal femur (but also the talus and the 
humerus). An osteochondral fragment becomes partially or 
completely separated from the joint surface. Magnetic reso -
nance imaging (MRI) is the best method for demonstrating 
the site, extent and stability of the lesion. In mild cases, the 
osteochondral fragment remains attached and heals, partic-
ularly if treated early with rest and activity modification. If 
it detaches, partially or completely, mechanical symptoms 
necessitate treatment either to encourage bone healing via 
fixation of the fragment or to remove a loose body. Younger 
children have a better prognosis.
Discoid meniscus
This invariably affects the lateral meniscus, which is abnor -
mally thick and covers most of the tibial plateau. The child 
presents with a painful clunk on knee extension. MRI is 
usually diagnostic. Surgery is indicated for relief of pain or 
mechanical symptoms.
Anterior knee pain
In adolescents the extensor mechanism of the knee is a com-
mon site of knee pain.
Osgood–Schlatter disease is a traction apophysitis of the 
patellar tendon insertion. Pain, tenderness and swelling at the 
tibial tubercle, exacerbated by exercise, are diagnostic and 
radiographs are unnecessary (except in unilateral cases, where 
it is important to exclude a diagnosis such as a malignancy). 
Treatment is relative rest and analgesia, and the condition 
resolves once the apophysis has fused.
Figure 39.25 Anteroposterior radiograph showing screw fixation in 
situ of a case of bilateral chronic slip of the upper (capital) femoral 
epiphysis. Note the position of the screw: the more severe the slip, 
the more proximal and more anterior the screw entry point has to be 
on the femoral neck.
Summary box 39.10
Slip of the upper (capital) femoral epiphysis
●● Occurs in prepubertal children, boys more commonly than 
girls
●● Often presents with knee pain, and the leg may be short and 
externally rotated
●● Classification systems relate to timing, severity and stability– 
all affect the prognosis
●● Most slips are pinned in situ with a single screw into the 
centre of the epiphysis
●● AVN is the most feared complication of both the condition and 
its treatment
Robert Bailey Osgood , 1873–1956, Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Carl Schlatter , 1864–1934, Professor of Surgery, Zurich, Switzerland. Osgood and Schlatter described osteochondritis of the tibial tubercle independently in 1903.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   575 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS576
Patellofemoral pain is common and often attributed to an 
adolescent growth spurt: symptoms are exacerbated either by 
activity or by rest with the knee in the flexed position. Alter-
ations to activity levels and sitting position, physiotherapy 
to stretch and strengthen both the hamstrings and the quad -
riceps muscles and time usually result in a return to normal 
within a few months.
Anterior knee pain may be associated with a degree of 
patellar maltracking and/or instability. Treatment starts with 
physiotherapy to develop the quadriceps muscles, particu -
larly the vastus medialis oblique (VMO) and to counteract 
any wasting secondary to the pain. There are a multitude of 
operations described to improve patellar tracking and these 
include options for realignment of the extensor mechanism 
both proximally and distally.
Fibular hemimelia
In fibular hemimelia there is a congenital failure of formation 
of the lateral ‘column’ of the lower leg ( Figure 39.26 and 
Table 39.11).
Management is tailored to the severity of the deficiency. 
Treatment options range from a shoe raise, through multiple 
episodes of limb equalisation surgery, to amputation for the 
worst cases. An early prediction of the leg length discrepancy 
at maturity allows a realistic treatment plan to be devised for 
the patient, which should include consideration of a contra -
lateral epiphysiodesis.
Blount’s disease
The aetiology of this disordered growth in the posteromedial 
proximal tibial physis is unknown. The infantile form is more 
common in Afro-Caribbeans but the adolescent-onset disease 
affects all ethnic origins. The child presents with progressive 
and often severe tibia vara with significant intoeing. The 
radiographic features are diagnostic (Figure 39.27).
Treatment is surgical: following correction of limb align-
ment via an osteotomy, an epiphyseodesis of the remaining 
physis may be necessary to prevent recurrence. In unilateral 
cases, the limb once straightened is short and concomitant 
tibial lengthening with an external fixator is often an attrac -
tive option.
Congenital pseudarthrosis of the 
tibia
This rare condition presents clinically with an anterolateral 
bow of the tibia with or without a fracture. Classic radio -
graphic changes are noted and 50% are associated with neu -
rofibromatosis. Once fractured the tibia is reluctant to heal. 
Long-term orthotic treatment may be necessary, with subse -
quent surgical procedures designed to obtain bony union and 
restore leg length (Figure 39.28).
TABLE 39.11 Classical radiographic features of fibular 
hemimelia.
Foot and ankle Absent lateral rays; tarsal coalition; 
ball and socket ankle joint
Lower leg Absent or deficient fibula; short 
bowed tibia
Knee Absent tibial spine (no cruciate 
ligament); deficient lateral femoral 
condyle
Femur Relative hypoplasia
Limb length and alignment Short; external rotation ± valgus
Figure 39.27  Standing leg length and alignment radiograph of 
a child with bilateral asymmetrical bow legs. Both proximal and 
medial tibial physes/epiphyses are abnormal: this is bilateral Blount’s  
disease.
Walter Putnam Blount , 1900–1992, Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI, USA, described this condition in 1937.
Figure 39.26  Anteroposterior (a) and lateral (b) radiographs of 
two lower limbs showing some of the features of a fibular hemimelia: 
absent 5th ray in the foot, absent fibula and deformed tibia. 
(a)
 (b)
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   576 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the foot and ankle 577
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
ABNORMALITIES OF THE FOOT 
AND ANKLE
Parents are often concerned that minor foot abnormalities 
will cause their child to be clumsy or slow. This is rarely the 
case, so reassurance is a cornerstone in the management of 
abnormalities of the foot and ankle in children.
Congenital talipes equinovarus 
(CTEV) (the ‘club foot’)
The club foot is deformed in three planes (Figure 39.29). In 
true CTEV the deformity is fixed. Intrauterine moulding can 
cause an identical pattern of deformity that is postural and 
therefore correctable.
Incidence and aetiology
The reported incidence varies from 1 to 6 per 1000 live births, 
depending on racial differences. It is more common in boys 
and bilateral in approximately 50% of cases. A family history 
is common but inheritance is multifactorial. The diagnosis 
of CTEV may be made during an antenatal ultrasound: the 
sensitivity is higher in bilateral cases, and these patients are 
statistically more likely to have a syndromic association. In 
some countries, the detection of such an abnormality leads 
to consideration of a termination of the pregnancy but the 
parents can be reassured that with treatment their child will 
walk, run and play with his/her peers.
Most cases are idiopathic but because the outcome varies 
with the aetiology it is important to consider the cause when 
planning treatment (Table 39.12). Many of the idiopathic 
cases will have some weakness of the evertor muscles.
Pathology
The talonavicular joint is subluxated, with the navicular dis-
placed medially with respect to a deformed talar head and 
neck. Ligaments, particularly the calcaneofibular ligament, 
and tendon sheaths, such as the posterior tibial tendon sheath, 
are shortened and thickened and contain contractile myofi -
broblasts. The gastrocsoleus and posterior tibial muscles are 
smaller than normal, with reduced myofibrils and increased 
connective tissue, possibly because of a local neuromuscular 
abnormality. The vascular supply via the dorsalis pedis may be 
diminished. It remains unclear which abnormalities are pri -
mary and which occur as the deformity develops.
Clinical assessment
It should be possible to distinguish the postural clubfoot 
from the structural (rigid) foot soon after birth. The postural 
clubfoot may benefit from physiotherapy stretches but, by 
Summary box 39.11
Abnormalities of the knee and lower leg
●● Osteochondritis dissecans – better prognosis in children than 
adults
●● Discoid meniscus – usually lateral, may require surgery
●● Anterior knee pain – treatment almost always conservative
●● Fibular hemimelia – associated with abnormalities from the 
foot proximally (foot worse than hip), the tibial bow has an 
anteromedial apex
●● Blount’s disease – clinically, a sharp proximal tibial angulation
●● Congenital pseudarthrosis of the tibia – the tibial bow has an 
anterolateral apex
●● Posteromedial apex tibial bow – largely physiological, the bow 
improves with time but the limb may be short
Figure 39.28  Anteroposterior 
radiograph of a child showing 
a congenital tibial pseudarthro -
sis. She was actually born with 
a bowed lower leg that subse -
quently fractured. She has a family 
history of neurofibromatosis.
Figure 39.29  Anteroposterior photograph of a foot showing the 
classic deformities associated with a clubfoot. The hindfoot is in equi-
nus and varus, there is midfoot cavus and the forefoot lies adducted 
and apparently supinated, although actually pronated relative to the 
hindfoot.
TABLE 39.12 Several different types of clubfoot are 
recognised.
Type Example
Postural
Idiopathic
Neuromuscular Spina bifida; arthrogryposis;
Syndromic Trisomy 15
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   577 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS578
definition, it must be completely normal by 3 months of age 
with 45° of forefoot abduction, full ankle dorsiflexion with 
the calcaneus well down in the heel pad, no significant medial 
crease and only shallow/multiple posterior creases.
In contrast, the structural idiopathic clubfoot has fixed 
deformity with elements of hindfoot equinus and varus, mid -
foot adductus and pronation of the first ray, giving the appear-
ance of forefoot cavus. The heel feels ‘empty’ as the calcaneus 
is held up by the shortened tendo Achilles. There is a deep 
medial and a single posterior crease.
All children with structural clubfoot deformity will have 
a small calf and foot and some tibial shortening but this may 
not be apparent until later in childhood. Children should 
be examined carefully for neurological signs of intraspinal 
pathology.
Both Pirani and Dimeglio have developed scoring sys-
tems, based on the appearance of the foot in its position of 
maximal correction, which predict treatment response and 
hence outcome.
release and has now become the treatment of choice for all 
such feet. Treatment commences within a few days of birth. 
A specific series of manoeuvres, followed by a series of well-
moulded above-knee plaster casts, results in gradual correc -
tion of the deformity (Figure 39.30). The head of the talus 
is the fulcrum around which the rest of the foot rotates. 
After the forefoot has been corrected, most feet (about 80%) 
require a percutaneous Achilles tenotomy (performed under 
local anaesthetic in the clinic setting) in order to dorsiflex the 
foot satisfactorily.
Once corrected the foot position is maintained by a foot 
abduction orthosis (FAO) that holds the feet in external rota-
tion and slight dorsiflexion. The FAO is worn full-time for 
3 months and at ‘night and nap-time’ for up to 4 years. Poor 
compliance with the FAO is associated with a higher relapse 
rate. Recurrent deformity can be treated with further plasters, 
but a tibialis anterior tendon transfer may be required around 
the age of 2.5–4 years for persisting dynamic supination.
Feet treated with the Ponseti method are less stiff, less 
likely to be painful and less subject to overcorrection than 
those treated surgically. The Ponseti method is significantly 
better than other reported conservative regimes. It also works 
reasonably well in non-idiopathic feet but both the failure 
and relapse rates are higher.
SURGICAL TREATMENT
When conservative treatment fails, surgical intervention is 
required, ideally before walking age.
Surgical release is generally performed ‘à la carte’, with 
sequential release of the pathologically tight structures via 
either a Turco incision or the Cincinnati incision (Table 39.13) 
to reduce the subluxated joints. Stabilisation may require the 
use of temporary Kirschner wires. Deformity correction should 
not be compromised by wound closure and the Cincinnati 
incision can be left to heal by secondary intention if necessary.Treatment
PONSETI METHOD
The method described by Ponseti corrects foot deformity in 
95% of idiopathic cases without the need for a formal surgical 
Summary box 39.12
Clubfoot
●● Multiplanar deformity: hindfoot equinus and varus, midfoot 
adductus and forefoot cavus
●● Incidence is 1–6 per 1000 live births, more common in boys 
and with a familial tendency
●● Most cases are idiopathic but neuromuscular causes include 
spina bifida and arthrogryposis
●● Scoring systems (Pirani/Dimeglio), are used to assess the 
severity
Corrected Uncorrected
Figure 39.30 A photograph of a series of casts documenting the 
stepwise correction of the foot deformity with the Ponseti method of 
serial manipulation and casting.
TABLE 39.13 The four stages of a peritalar release that 
may be required for the correction of a severe clubfoot 
deformity.
Site Structures requiring lengthening or release
Posterior Tendo Achilles
Ankle and subtalar joints
Calcaneofibular ligament
Posterior elements of the peroneal tendon sheaths
Medial Abductor hallucis
Tibialis posterior
Talonavicular joint
Toe flexors
Lateral Calcaneocuboid joint
Plantar Plantar ligaments
Plantar fascia
Protect Neurovascular bundle
Talocalcaneal interosseous ligament (if possible)
Martin Kirschner , 1879–1942, Professor of Surgery, Heidelberg, Germany, introduced the use of skeletal traction wires in 1909.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   578 25/10/2017   08:39Abnormalities of the foot and ankle 579
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Postoperative casting is followed by splinting and physio-
therapy as required. Good or excellent results are reported in 
60–80% of children treated surgically but stiffness and over- 
or undercorrection are common complications.
Surgery for residual or recurrent deformity is often diffi -
cult and requires a careful assessment of the forefoot, hindfoot 
and tibial torsion. Surgical procedures may involve further 
soft-tissue releases or tendon transfers but, in the presence of 
fixed deformity, bony correction is often necessary. The foot 
becomes progressively stiffer with each surgical intervention.
Curly toes that are flexed and medially deviated are com-
mon, often familial and rarely need treatment. Strapping is 
ineffective. Flexor tenotomy is used when there are symptoms 
or cosmetic concerns.
Other causes of foot pain in children include osteochon -
droses:
 ● Freiberg’s osteochondrosis  presents with forefoot pain 
and avascular change in the second metatarsal head. It 
may be asymptomatic and present as an incidental finding 
on a radiograph. Symptomatic bony spurs and osteochon-
dral fragments may need excision.
Ignacio Ponseti , 1914–2009, faculty member of the University of Iowa, USA. Born in Menorca, fled Spain during the Civil War because of the political situation, 
worked as a general practitioner in Mexico and then went to Iowa to train in orthopaedics. The technique that bears his name only became popular years after he 
retired – but it brought him back to work for another 20 years.
Other foot and ankle conditions
Most postural deformities such as metatarsus adductus and 
calcaneovalgus feet improve spontaneously.
Congenital vertical talus (CVT) is rare and often asso -
ciated with neuromuscular conditions such as arthrogryposis 
and spinal dysraphism. Clinically, there is a stiff ‘rocker-  
bottom’ foot with dorsal dislocation of the navicular on 
the talus (Figure 39.31). Correction is surgical although a 
‘reverse’ Ponseti method with a limited surgical approach to 
reduce the talonavicular joint and a percutaneous Achilles 
tenotomy is showing some good early results.
In tarsal coalition there is failure of segmentation of adja-
cent tarsal bones. School-age children present with hindfoot 
pain and recurrent ankle sprains. The stiff subtalar joint cannot 
accommodate uneven ground. The most common coalitions 
are talocalcaneal and calcaneonavicular (see Figure 39.4). 
Radiographs, computed tomography (CT) or MRI may be 
required to confirm the diagnosis. Treatment is initially conser-
vative but if the coalition requires surgical excision, this should 
be carried out before significant degenerative changes develop.
Summary box 39.13
Treatment of clubfoot
●● The Ponseti method of serial casting is successful in 95% of 
feet when defined as avoiding formal surgical release
●● The standard sequence of manipulations is:
C – correction of the apparent forefoot cavus by elevation 
of the first ray
A – gradual forefoot abduction to 60°, and simultaneous
V – correction of the hindfoot varus
E – correction of hindfoot equinus which usually follows a 
percutaneous Achilles tenotomy, which is an integral part 
of this treatment method
●● Tibialis anterior tendon transfer (TATT) can be used to correct 
dynamic supination in older children
If the Ponseti method fails:
●● Surgical release may be needed to address posterior, medial, 
plantar and lateral structures, and will result in a stiffer foot 
than one treated conservatively
Figure 39.31  Congenital vertical talus: (a) lateral photograph 
demonstrating a ‘rocker-bottom foot’; (b) lateral radiograph showing 
hindfoot equinus and suggesting dorsal subluxation of the non-  
ossified navicular and forefoot with respect to the head of the talus.
(a)
(b)
 Summary box 39.14
Other foot and ankle conditions
●● Congenital vertical talus – presents as ‘rocker-bottom’ foot
●● Tarsal coalition – presents as a stiff, painful flat foot
●● Curly toes are common – most do not need treatment
●● Osteochondroses – almost always self-limiting
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   579 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS580
ABNORMALITIES OF THE UPPER 
LIMB
Minor finger abnormalities are common (Table 39.14 ) but 
not all require surgical intervention. Comfort and function 
are more important than appearance.
Function is also the most important consideration when 
managing more extensive upper limb abnormalities. Treat-
ment is often delayed until hand dominance is established 
and it is clear what problems a specific deformity is causing a 
given child. Children are very adaptable and cope with dis-
abilities much more readily than their parents/doctors expect.
Radial club hand
This longitudinal failure of formation is commonly associated 
with other malformations, for example as part of the 
VACTERL syndrome (abnormal vertebrae, anus, cardiovascu-
lar system, trachea, oesophagus, renal system and limb buds). 
The clinical problem depends, most specifically, on whether 
the thumb is present and functional (Figure 39.32). Treat-
ment is a balance of conservative measures, including phys -
iotherapy and splinting, and judicious surgery to centralise 
and stabilise the hand and wrist on the single bone forearm. 
Thumb reconstruction may be technically challenging. In 
later childhood, forearm lengthening may be considered.
Radioulnar synostosis
Failure of proximal separation of the embryonic radius and 
ulna means that the forearm never develops the ability to 
pronate or supinate. The hand, on the end of the forearm, 
is therefore in a fixed position somewhere along the arc from 
full pronation–neutral–full supination and the child presents 
if this fixed position results in a functional problem. Oste -
otomy of the forearm bones can change the fixed position 
(for example, from pronation to neutral) but does not restore 
movement. Attempts at undoing the synostosis are not suc -
cessful. If surgery is comtemplated, the choice of the position 
post surgery will depend on hand dominance, cultural consid-
erations and functional demands.
Congenital radial head dislocation
The dislocation is usually posterolateral, compared with the 
classic traumatic anterior dislocation (Figure 39.33). Some 
restriction of elbow joint movement and forearm rotation is 
noted along with discomfort on activity. Radial head excision 
may be required after skeletal maturity.
TABLE 39.14 Common minor congenital anomalies 
affecting the hand.
Anomaly Definition Treatment
Extra/accessory 
digits
Excise/amputate when 
necessary
Syndactyly Failure of separation 
of digits
Separation with/
without skin grafting 
for functional or 
cosmetic reasons
Trigger thumb 
(digit)
Release of the A1 
pulley of the flexor 
tendon sheath
Clinodactyly 
(usually the fifth 
digit)
Abnormal angulation 
of the digit in the 
radioulnar plane
Surgical treatment of 
the delta phalanx if 
deformity progressive 
or interfering with 
hand function
Camptodactyly 
(usually the fifth 
digit)
Fixed flexion 
deformity of proximal 
interphalangeal joint
Splinting/
physiotherapy; surgery 
rarely indicated
Figure 39.32  Anteroposterior radiograph of a radial club hand 
demonstrating a short radius, a deformed ulna and an absent thumb.
Summary box 39.15
Upper limb abnormalities
●● Radial club hand is frequently associated with other 
congenital anomalies, for example the VACTERL or Holt–
Oram syndromes
●● Radioulnar synostosis presents with a fixed forearm position 
in childhood
●● Congenital radial head dislocation is usually posterolateral
James Warren Sever , 1878–1964, orthopaedic surgeon, The Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, described apophysitis of the os calcis in 1912.
 ● Köhler’s disease presents with dorsal forefoot pain and 
swelling in young children. The navicular becomes avas -
cular and there is alteration in the ossification process. 
The alarming radiological appearance resolves sponta -
neously and without sequelae.
 ● Sever’s disease (enthesopathy of the calcaneal apophysis) 
presents with heel pain related to activity. Tightness in the 
calf muscle complex may be a contributing factor. The ‘fea-
tures’ on a radiograph are, in fact, part of normal growth and 
development.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   580 25/10/2017   08:39Spinal deformities and back pain 581
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
SPINAL DEFORMITIES AND 
BACK PAIN
Congenital deformities
Congenital vertebral deformities are failures either of forma -
tion (a hemivertebra) or of segmentation (unilateral or bilat-
eral fusions or bars). The clinical result is usually a scoliosis 
(Figure 39.34). Treatment should be based on the potential 
for curve progression. When a kyphosis develops, progressive 
neurological deficit is common. Bracing is ineffective for con-
genital vertebral deformities.
Scoliosis
The term ‘scoliosis’ describes spinal deformity in three planes: 
lateral curvature is the most obvious deformity while the rota-
tional component is most apparent in forward flexion when 
the rib asymmetry creates a ‘rib hump’ (Figure 39.35). The 
cause may be idiopathic, neuromuscular, syndrome-related 
or congenital. Both the aetiology and the age of onset affect 
the natural history (Table 39.15). In general, the earlier the 
onset, the more likely the deformity is to be progressive. As so 
much lung development occurs in early childhood, the man -
agement of early-onset scoliosis must preserve growth: casting 
techniques or the use of ‘growing rods’ may be appropriate.
The adolescent idiopathic curve is the most common, 
affecting girls more than boys. Idiopathic scoliosis is generally 
not painful and, therefore, in the presence of significant pain 
Figure 39.33 Radial head dislocation: (a) lateral radiograph of a 
forearm showing a pr oximal radioulnar synostosis with a congenital 
posterolateral dislocation of the radial head. Note the underdeveloped 
radial head and neck and compare with (b), a lateral radiograph of a 
traumatic anterior dislocation of the radial head with a normal appear-
ance to the head and neck and a deformity in the proximal ulna.
(a)
(b)
Figure 39.34 Anteroposterior radiograph of the spine demonstrat -
ing multiple congenital vertebral anomalies including hemivertebrae.
Figure 39.35 Clinical photograph of the Adams forward bend test 
that demonstrates the pr esence of a rib hump and the level of the 
curve.
TABLE 39.15 Classification of idiopathic scoliosis.
Type Age at onset
Early onset <10 years
Adolescent 11–18 years
Adult Onset at maturity
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   581 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS582
tumour and infection must be excluded. The Cobb angle is a 
radiological measurement that defines severity and helps to 
guide treatment (Figure 39.36). Curves <20° do not need 
treatment, progressive curves of 25–40° may be braced, and 
those >40° are considered for surgery, which involves instru -
menting the spine and fusing it (see also Chapter 33).
Kyphosis
When a kyphosis exceeds the normal 20–50° the cause may 
be postural or structural. Structural kyphosis is commonly 
secondary to Scheuermann’s disease, presenting as a pro -
gressive adolescent kyphosis characterised radiologically by 
≥5° vertebral wedging at three adjacent levels and end-plate 
changes. The aetiology is unknown. Treatment ranges from 
physiotherapy and bracing to surgery, depending on severity, 
progression and symptoms.
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolysis defines a defect in the pars interarticularis 
of the vertebra. There are six types: congenital (dysplastic 
facet joints), isthmic (weak or elongated pars), degenerative, 
post-traumatic, pathological and post-surgical. Spondylolis-
thesis occurs when the upper vertebra slips forward on the 
lower; it is graded according to the percentage slip, mea -
sured by relating the slipped vertebra to the one below (Table 
39.16).
Mild slips are often asymptomatic and do not require 
treatment. Treatment (physiotherapy, bracing and surgery) 
depends on the degree of slip and symptoms; mechanical back 
pain may respond to conservative methods but neurological 
involvement usually requires surgical intervention.
Torticollis
In torticollis the head is tilted towards and rotated away from 
the tight sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Congenital torticollis is usually secondary to intrauterine 
moulding but may present with fixed sternocleidomastoid 
contracture or with a palpable ‘tumour’ within the muscle. 
There is a strong correlation with DDH. Most cases resolve 
with stretching but persistent cases develop facial asymmetry 
and require surgical release of the sternocleidomastoid at one 
or both ends.
Acquired torticollis is less common and may be caused 
by gastro-oesophageal reflux, posterior fossa tumour/other 
regional abnormality, inflammation/infection, ocular prob -
lems or atlantoaxial rotatory subluxation.
Figure 39.36 Anteroposterior radiograph of a spine with a scoliosis 
(right thoracic), with a Cobb angle of 40°.
Holger Werfel Scheuermann , 1877–1960, radiologist, The Municipal Hospital, Sundby, Copenhagen, Denmark, described juvenile kyphosis in 1920.
Summary box 39.16
Scoliosis
●● Multiplanar deformity includes an unsightly rotational 
component
●● Aetiology may be congenital (underlying bony malformation), 
neuromuscular, syndromic or idiopathic
●● A leg length discrepancy causes a postural scoliosis
●● Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis is the most common structural 
scoliosis
●● Back pain associated with scoliosis may be due to infection 
or tumour
●● Treatment depends on the severity and likelihood of curve 
progression – it varies from observation, through bracing, to 
surgery
TABLE 39.16 Classification of spondylolisthesis 
according to severity of the slip.
Grade Percentage slip
0 No slip
1 <25%
2 26–50%
3 51–75%
4 >75%
Spondyloptosis >100% – complete translation
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   582 25/10/2017   08:39Neuromuscul ar conditions 583
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Back pain
Children report back pain less frequently than adults, 
although >50% will have had an episode by late adolescence. 
Back pain in a child is a ‘red flag’ for serious spinal pathology 
but if mild, intermittent or occurring only on strenuous activ-
ity, it is usually self-limiting: many children do suffer posture 
related discomfort. Physiotherapy designed to improve core 
strength and stability leads to a reduction in symptoms, if 
exercises are performed regularly.
In children, even if the initial insult to the neuromuscular 
system is non-progressive, the effects of the insult change with 
growth. Damage at any level of the neuromuscular system 
leads to an alteration in tone and muscle imbalance associ -
ated with decreased control of movement. Abnormal muscle 
pull, particularly in combination with the effects of gravity, 
alters bone growth, leading to deformity and joint contrac-
ture. Muscles are relatively weak and, with body growth and a 
weight increase, they are no longer strong enough to control 
a heavier limb, particularly when deformity means they are 
working at a mechanical disadvantage.
A multidisciplinary approach to management is essential. 
Good physiotherapists and orthotists will reduce the need for 
surgical intervention and in the postoperative period they 
help ensure that the surgical benefits are maximised. In condi-
tions such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy there is substan -
tial evidence for the benefits of certain surgical procedures; 
however, in other conditions (cerebral palsy) there are fewer 
such long-term validated studies.
In general, it is important to maintain a full range of joint 
movement, muscle length and tendon excursion. This is easier 
to achieve in patients with a flaccid paralysis or low tone. The 
maintenance of muscle strength is also important. The use of 
splints, positioning techniques, seating and sleeping systems 
is common with the aim of preventing fixed contractures.
Surgery has a valuable role in the management of selected 
patients (Table 39.18).
The surgeon must understand that altering ankle posture 
may affect knee and hip posture/function and vice versa. The 
patient must have the intellectual ability and motivation to 
recover from the surgical procedure. Some of the factors men-
tioned previously (see Table 39.17) must be considered in any 
holistic approach to the patient.
All ‘red flag’ signs require urgent further investigation 
with a full blood count (FBC), erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), plain radiograph 
and MRI or other appropriate imaging. Other causes of back 
pain include intra-abdominal, renal and systemic pathology; 
all must be considered.
Summary box 39.17
‘Red flag’ symptoms and signs for spinal pathology
●● Systemic illness, fever or weight loss
●● Progressive neurological deficit
●● Unrelenting or night pain
●● Spinal deformity
NEUROMUSCULAR CONDITIONS
Joint stability and limb function rely on the complex integra-
tion of the musculoskeletal and neurological systems. Damage 
to either leads to one of several conditions linked only by the 
fact that they are incurable and often progressive, particularly 
during the period of skeletal growth. Management is directed 
at helping the child cope with their disability, minimising fur-
ther deterioration and maximising function. It is important 
to have an understanding of what the damage is and what the 
future holds (Table 39.17).
Spina bifida and polio are classic lower motor neurone 
lesions, whereas cerebral palsy and head injuries affect upper 
motor neurones and the higher centres. There are often other 
disabilities such as blindness, epilepsy and intellectual diffi -
culties to consider.
Summary box 39.18
Other spinal conditions
●● Excessive kyphosis may be caused by Scheuermann’s 
disease
●● Spondylolisthesis is forward slip of one vertebra on another; it 
may cause mechanical and, rarely, neurological symptoms
●● Torticollis may be congenital and usually responds to 
stretching of the fibrosed sternocleidomastoid muscle
●● Acquired torticollis may be due to one of several significant 
pathologies
●● Back pain with red flag symptoms and signs requires urgent 
investigation
TABLE 39.17 Factors to be considered in the assessment 
of a neuromuscular disability.
Is the insult to the neurological system progressive or 
nonprogressive?
Is it located centrally or peripherally?
Is it general or focal?
Is it associated with other abnormalities or not?
If the insult is not neurological, is is myopathic?
Guillaume Benjamin Amand Duchenne (Duchenne de Boulogne) , 1806–1875, neurologist, worked successively in Boulogne and Paris, France, but who never 
held a hospital appointment.
Summary box 39.19
Principles of treatment of neuromuscular conditions
●● A neurological defect, whether progressive or not, may cause 
progressive deformity as the skeleton grows
●● A multidisciplinary approach is essential
●● Primary therapy aims to maintain range of movement and 
prevent fixed contractures with an emphasis on managing 
tone and position
●● Surgery has a limited role in the management of 
neuromuscular conditions
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   583 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS584
Cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy is caused by a non-progressive insult to the 
developing brain in the perinatal period; in most cases only 
risk factors, such as prematurity , rather than specific causes, 
such as hypoxia (HIE, hypoxic ischaemic encephalopa-
thy), can be identified. The effects of cerebral palsy may 
only become apparent as the child grows and fails to reach 
expected developmental milestones. At this stage investiga-
tions may help with aetiology and may predict the pattern of 
the cerebral palsy: premature babies may show evidence of 
periventricular leucomalacia (PVL) on a brain MRI, which 
is associated with the development of spastic diplegia with 
relative preservation of intellectual function.
In general, the pattern of involvement can be classified 
according to the anatomical site involved and the effect on 
muscle tone (Table 39.19). The prognosis for walking can 
be predicted by identifying evidence of neurological devel -
opment, i.e. gaining motor skills with the loss of primitive 
reflexes. The age related Gross Motor Function Classifica -
tion System (GMFCS) has five categories which also relate 
to mobility and prognosis (GMFCS I – near normal versus 
GMFCS V – wheelchair based). Many children with GMFCS 
V cerebral palsy have multiple associated problems and 40% 
will die before they reach their mid-20s.
An important aspect of management is the control of high 
tone. Tone can be reduced with drugs such as diazepam and 
baclofen. Alternatively, neuromuscular blockers such as botu-
linum toxin can bring about a focal reduction in tone by pre-
venting acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction 
The effect is temporary, giving a ‘window’ during which the 
physiotherapists can stretch agonists and strengthen antag-
onists. It is important to differentiate between dynamic and 
fixed contractures; the latter will not respond to tone manage-
ment or splinting.
The classic cerebral palsy gait patterns demonstrate flexor 
spasticity. The child with spastic diplegia has problems at 
all levels of the lower limb. Single event multilevel surgery 
(SEMLS) is popular, and gait analysis (both observational 
and computerised) contributes to the selection of an appro-
TABLE 39.18 General types of surgical procedure that may be considered in the management of a patient with a 
neuromuscular condition.
Surgical procedure Aim of treatment
Lengthening of the muscle–tendon unit Restores joint range (but results in relative muscle weakness)
Tendon transfer Improves functional movement; rebalances muscle forces, after 
correction of fixed deformity
Release of joint contracture; correction of bony deformity Restores mechanical alignment, and allows muscles to work in a 
more efficient manner
Fuse/stabilise/relocate joints Improves posture/function; reduces pain
Neurological procedures:
●● selective dorsal rhizotomy (SDR)
●● intrathecal baclofen pumps (ITB)
Reduce spasticity (not primarily useful in dystonia)
Leg equalisation procedures Improve lower limb mechanics
TABLE 39.19 Classification of cerebral palsy with respect to muscle tone and site of involvement.
Characteristics
Tone
Spastic (‘high’) Commonest type of abnormality; due to damage to the pyramidal system
Velocity-dependent increased muscle tone and brisk reflexes
Dyskinetic
●● Dystonic
●● Choreoathetoid
Increased tone but reduced activity – stiff movements
Low tone but increased activity – uncoordinated jerky movements
●● Due to damage in the extrapyramidal system
Ataxia Generalised low tone, loss of muscle coordination
●● Due to damage in the cerebellum
Mixed No one tone/movement disorder predominates
●● Combination of spasticity and dystonia is common
Hypotonia Usually a phase (which may last years) before the features of spasticity develop
Site
Unilateral
●● Hemiplegia Arm more affected than leg
Bilateral
●● Diplegia
Legs more affected than arms
●● Total body involvement Often significant intellectual impairment and associated difficulties
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   584 25/10/2017   08:39Neuromuscul ar conditions 585
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
priate management plan for an individual patient. Computer-
ised analysis provides objective evidence of joint movement 
and mechanics in multiple planes (Figure 39.37). Appropri-
ate bone and soft-tissue procedures can then be planned. Bot-
ulinum toxin helps with postoperative pain and spasm.
In the child with total body involvement (TBI) and high 
muscle tone, hip subluxation and eventual dislocation are 
common but often relatively asymptomatic (Figure 39.38). 
Current thinking is that symmetry and pelvic position are 
important so the hips should be kept in joint by the simplest 
means possible, with early surgical intervention if necessary. 
Aggressive management of a spinal deformity will initially 
concentrate on seating position and subsequently emphasise 
spinal bracing or surgery.
Overall, it is important to remember what the child’s 
needs will be once they have reached adulthood. Indepen-
dent mobility and an effective means of communication are 
two of the most important requirements. Hence, it may not 
be appropriate to invest time and effort in gaining an upright 
posture if mobility will be achieved via an electric wheelchair 
and a hand-controlled car and life expectancy is limited.
70(a)
60
50
40
30Hip /f_lexion20
10
0
–10
0 20 40 60 80 100
25(c)
15
20
10
5
0
–5
Ankle dorsi/f_lexion +ve
Ankle plantar/f_lexion –ve
–10
–15
–20
–25
0 20 40 60 80 100
80(b)
70
60
50
40Knee /f_lexion30
20
10
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
70(a)
60
50
40
30Hip /f_lexion20
10
0
–10
0 20 40 60 80 100
25(c)
15
20
10
5
0
–5
Ankle dorsi/f_lexion +ve
Ankle plantar/f_lexion –ve
–10
–15
–20
–25
0 20 40 60 80 100
80(b)
70
60
50
40Knee /f_lexion30
20
10
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
70(a)
60
50
40
30Hip /f_lexion20
10
0
–10
0 20 40 60 80 100
25(c)
15
20
10
5
0
–5
Ankle dorsi/f_lexion +ve
Ankle plantar/f_lexion –ve
–10
–15
–20
–25
0 20 40 60 80 100
80(b)
70
60
50
40Knee /f_lexion30
20
10
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
Figure 39.37 Gait analysis graphs such as these demonstrate the 
normal range of joint movements (green band) at hip (a), knee (b) 
and ankle (c) during the stance and swing phases of the gait. The 
abnormal joint ranges are shown in red (right leg) and blue (left leg) 
and demonstrate the excessive hip flexion and lack of knee extension 
and abnormal ankle mechanics associated with the ‘crouch’ gait of a 
child with cerebral palsy.
Summary box 39.20
Cerebral palsy
●● Brain injury is non-progressive
●● Classified as unilateral or bilateral involvement: hemiplegia, 
diplegia or TBI
●● Tone may be high, low or variable but there is always a 
generalised, relative muscle weakness
●● In ambulant children, gait analysis may be used to plan 
surgery or botulinum toxin injections
●● In TBI, primary concerns are hip subluxation and spinal 
deformity
Figure 39.38 Anteroposterior pelvic radiograph of a child with spas-
tic cerebral palsy. The right hip is essentially dislocated: none of the 
head lies medial to the vertical Perkins line. The acetabulum is dys -
plastic and the leg lies in slight adduction. The left leg is in abduction. 
There is often this ‘windswept’ appearance with one leg stiff in abduc-
tion and the other stiff in adduction. The line demonstrates the pelvic 
obliquity; many children also have a scoliosis.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   585 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS586
Polio
Despite an effective polio vaccine, this disease still occurs. 
About 1–2% of patients develop neurological problems when 
the virus affects the anterior horn cells. Muscle weakness 
is proportionate to the number of motor units destroyed. 
Patients often develop trick movements to cope with their 
muscle weakness and minor joint contractures may actually 
improve function (for example, ankle equinus in the presence 
of weak quadriceps muscles). Careful assessment before sur -
gery is essential and both the surgeon and the patient must 
understand the goals of treatment.
Spina bifida
The extent of the disability varies with the level of the lesion: 
upper motor neurone involvement will produce spasticity 
while the more classic lower motor neurone lesion will merely 
produce a flaccid paralysis. Hydrocephalus may contribute to 
the complexity of the situation. Muscle imbalance leads to 
secondary joint deformity but the, often profound, accompa -
nying sensory disturbance may affect the choice of surgical 
and non-surgical options. Many children require a ventriculo-
peritoneal (VP) shunt to drain the hydrocephalus that devel-
ops following closure of the myelocoele. A tethered cord may 
develop, with growth adversely influencing the neurological 
picture.
Muscular dystrophy
Many types of muscular dystrophy exist that vary in terms of 
severity and distribution of involvement. Surgical interven -
tion aims to improve quality of life. This is best achieved by 
operating early to release joint contractures and facilitate the 
maintenance of walking abilities and good spinal posture.
Brachial plexopathy
The neonatal brachial plexus injury is still common, with a 
devastating effect on upper limb function, particularly if anti-
gravity motor activity has not recovered by 6 months. Physio-
therapy is the mainstay of early treatment to maintain muscle 
length and joint range of movement and thus reduce the risk 
of glenohumeral dislocation. Neural repair may be necessary 
in the infant. Later surgical interventions aim to release joint/
muscle contractures and improve function, perhaps with ten-
don transfers.
INFECTION
Worldwide, osteoarticular infection remains a frequent cause 
of significant morbidity.
Septic arthritis
Joint infection is usually secondary to haematogenous spread 
but direct inoculation can occur, for example during a neona-
tal venepuncture. Diagnosis can be difficult in the very young 
and in those presenting with overwhelming sepsis. Neonates, 
children with immunocompromise and those with sickle cell 
disease are at increased risk. At the other end of the spectrum 
the differentiation between joint sepsis and transient synovi -
tis of the hip can also be difficult.
Classically, the child presents with pain, fever and a reluc-
tance to use the joint; in the lower limb this implies a reluc -
tance to weight bear. On examination, local tenderness and 
painful restriction of movement are apparent and in superfi-
cial joints inflammation may be obvious, with a hot, swollen 
joint.
Investigations include FBC, ESR, CRP and blood cul -
tures. Plain radiographs help to exclude other diagnoses and 
may identify osteomyelitis. Ultrasound scans of deep seated 
joints, such as the hip, will identify joint effusions (Figure 
39.39). Increasingly, MRI is considered the investigation of 
choice but this resource is not available to all (in a timely 
manner) and, in young children, it requires a general anaes -
thetic if useful information is to be obtained. Good clinical 
skills, regular patient review and a high index of suspicion 
are still the most valuable tools. Four clinical predictors can 
differentiate between septic arthritis and transient synovitis 
(Table 39.20).
Pus in a joint is destructive: the proteases produced by leu-
kocytes destroy both the bacteria and the collagen matrix of 
the articular cartilage. A VN may occur secondary to pressure 
effects or ischaemic infarction. The treatment of a presumed 
septic arthritis therefore requires the prompt removal of pus 
from the joint and appropriate adequate antibiotic therapy. 
Pain relief and rest are also important, as are the general 
health and nutrition of the patient. The joint is aspirated and, 
if pus is confirmed, a formal washout is mandatory; standard 
teaching states that the joint must be opened, irrigated and 
free drainage encouraged via the capsulotomy. Recent liter -
ature supports repeated aspiration/irrigation via a large-bore 
cannula or a small arthroscope for all joints except the hip 
joint. Antibiotic usage is guided by the local hospital policy, 
the source of the infection, the Gram stain and, in due course, 
Figure 39.39 Ultrasound scan of a hip joint. A large effusion is dis -
tending the joint capsule. The dotted line r epresents the distance 
between the femoral neck and the joint capsule.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   586 25/10/2017   08:39Infection 587
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
the culture and sensitivity of the organism identified. Joint 
instability, particularly in the hip joint (Figure 39.40), may 
require the joint to be splinted in the reduced position while 
the inflammatory process settles.
The most frequently identified organism is Staphylococcus 
aureus. Streptococcal infection is also common and other 
organisms are more prevalent in certain age groups, e.g. the 
neonate, in certain conditions, e.g. sickle cell disease, or in cer-
tain countries. The Haemophilus influenzae type B (Hib) vaccine 
has essentially eliminated H. influenzae as a cause of infection, 
but in some countries Kingella kingae has taken its place.
Improvement is judged clinically and by monitoring the 
inflammatory markers. Reaccumulation of pus does occur and 
must be suspected and treated promptly if the child fails to 
improve.
progressive bony destruction. Pus can pass through cortical 
bone and when it does so it elevates the strong periosteum, 
which may render the cortical bone avascular. As in cases of 
trauma or tumour, the periosteal elevation is a potent stimu -
lus for new bone formation. In cases of untreated or chronic 
infection this new bone or involucrum may surround the 
dead bone, the sequestrum, leading to a ‘bone-within-a-bone’ 
appearance (Figure 39.41b).
The presentation and investigation of osteomyelitis 
can be similar to those for joint sepsis. The differentiation 
between the two may be difficult and a sympathetic joint 
effusion may occur with metaphyseal osteomyelitis. Thus, if 
there are no organisms seen on microscopy of a joint aspirate, 
the possibility of a coexisting osteomyelitis must be consid -
ered. The metaphysis of a long bone may be intracapsular and 
infection may spread easily into the joint once the periosteum 
is breached. In the neonate, proximal femoral osteomyelitis 
TABLE 39.20 Septic arthritis.
(a) The clinical predictors of Kocher et al. for the diagnosis of 
septic arthritis:
●● History of fever >38.5°C
●● Non-weight bearing
●● Erythrocyte sedimentation rate >40 mm/hour
●● White cell count >12 × 109/L
(b) The value of the clinical predictors of Kocher et al. in 
determining the likelihood of a joint being septic:
Number of positive 
predictors
Predicted probability of joint sepsis
0 2.0%
1 9.5%
2 35.0%
3 72.8%
4 93.0%
Figure 39.40 Septic arthritis of the right hip: (a) anteroposterior pel-
vic radiograph with subtle signs of right hip subluxation; (b) antero-
posterior pelvic radiograph 6 months later showing destruction of the 
femoral head secondary to late treatment of a septic joint.
Summary box 39.21
Septic arthritis
●● Diagnosis is difficult in neonates and the 
immunocompromised
●● Typical presentation is pain, fever and a reluctance to move 
the joint or weight bear
●● Investigations should include FBC, ESR, CRP , blood cultures 
and appropriate imaging studies, combined with astute 
clinical skills
●● Pus in a joint can destroy articular cartilage and cause 
avascular necrosis
●● Treatment is prompt removal of pus, appropriate antibiotic 
therapy, pain relief and splintage
Osteomyelitis
As with septic arthritis, bone infection is usually caused by hae-
matogenous spread. Infection often occurs in the metaphyses 
of long bones where the slow flow through the looped vessels 
combined with microtrauma is believed to encourage seeding 
of infection during a bacteraemia (Figure 39.41a). Inflam-
mation follows and, if purulent material forms, the pressure 
effects secondary to the formation of an abscess will lead to 
(a)
(b)
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   587 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS588
and septic arthritis are essentially the same condition (Figure 
39.41c).
General principles for the management of infection 
should be followed. Pus needs to be drained but otherwise the 
treatment is medical. Debate continues over the duration of 
treatment and indeed whether antibiotics should be parenteral 
or oral: management varies from region to region and relates 
to the local bacteriological prevalences. Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is common in some areas and 
not in others: the Staphylococcus aureus-associated Panton 
Valentine leucocidin gene significantly alters the morbidity 
associated with S. aureus infection.
It must be noted that the reduced intravenous and oral 
treatment times published recently are for uncomplicated 
cases of osteomyelitis and septic arthritis only, and only for 
those patients who are improving promptly both clinically 
and haematologically.
Artery
(with
bacteraemia)
Vein
Trauma
Thrombosed
sinusoidal
vessel
Bacterial
colonies
Dead and
dying bone
Bone abscess
Periosteum
Pus
Cortex
Medullary
cavity
Joint cavity
Periosteum
Bone abscess
Figure 39.41  (a–c) Diagrams illustrating the pathology underly -
ing the development of osteomyelitis. The longer the infection goes 
untreated the greater the destruction, with the possibility of seques-
trum formation and secondary joint infection.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Complications of bone and joint 
sepsis
Treated appropriately, most cases of bone and joint sepsis 
resolve with no sequelae. However, significant complications 
can occur, particularly in terms of chronic infection and in 
cases in which there has been damage to the joint and/or the 
physis and the epiphyseal growth centres. In the neonate, 
vascular channels pass through the physis, connecting the 
metaphysis with the epiphysis, and a poorer outcome may 
ensue (see Figure 39.40b). Orthopaedic follow-up should be 
continued until normal growth patterns are documented.
Meningococcal sepsis
The often debilitating, late orthopaedic sequelae of menin -
gococcal septicaemia are secondary to endotoxin-induced 
microvascular injury and ischaemic physeal damage (Figure 
39.42).
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is still common. The clinical presentation is 
often insidious, with malaise and weight loss combined with 
a boggy joint swelling, muscle wasting and joint contractures. 
Spinal deformity and neurological symptoms are particular 
problems.
Summary box 39.22
Occurence and treatment principles for bone and soft 
tissue infection
●● Occurs by haematogenous spread, enhanced by microtrauma
●● In untreated and/or chronic osteomyelitis, new involucrum 
envelops dead sequestrum
●● In addition to antibiotics, treatment consists of:
●● Rest/splintage of affected limb
●● Analgesia
●● A joint effusion may be sympathetic or caused by direct 
spread from the adjacent metaphysis
●● Treatment involves drainage of pus when present
●● Appropriate and often prolonged antibiotic therapy: parenteral 
and then oral
●● Treatment of the underlying condition, e.g. nutritional 
deficiency, sickle cell disease
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   588 25/10/2017   08:39Clinical dilemmas 589
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS
Chronic relapsing/recurrent multifocal 
osteomyelitis
The radiographic features suggest subacute or chronic osteo -
myelitis (or tumour) but laboratory and histopathological 
findings are usually non-specific and cultures negative. This is 
probably an inflammatory rather than an infective condition.
Discitis
Children who refuse to weight bear and complain of back 
pain may have discitis. The aetiology of this condition may be 
infective or inflammatory but if vertebral bodies are involved, 
infection is assumed.
Brodies’s abscess
Chronic infections may present with radiographic features of 
a sclerotic walled cyst.
The examination must include all joints and soft tissues 
and, in addition, a brief neurological examination, measure -
ment of leg length and an assessment of pain at rest or on 
weight bearing.
Many conditions, such as sepsis and juvenile arthritis, can 
present at any age but certain hip conditions are more likely 
in particular age groups (Table 39.22).
Plain radiographs should usually include both anteropos -
terior and ‘frog’ lateral views of the pelvis. Always bear in 
mind the possibility of a tumour; further imaging such as MRI 
may be required.
Figure 39.42 Anteroposterior leg length and alignment radiograph 
of a child who had meningococcal septicaemia as a child; he was left 
with multiple problems. He has a below-knee amputation of the right 
leg. Many of his lower limb physes are not growing well so he has 
deformity of his remaining right proximal tibia, a very short left tibia 
and an overgrown fibula. His right femur is also short.
Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie , 1783–1862, surgeon, St. George’s Hospital, London, UK, described ‘Brodie’s abscess’ in 1828.
TABLE 39.21 A guide to the clinical assessment of the 
limping child.
Symptom onset: sudden or gradual?
Symptom duration
Concurrent events: recent viral infection, trauma, new shoes, new 
sport?
General health: is the child well?
TABLE 39.22 Age at presentation of certain hip 
conditions.
Age (years) Diagnosis
1–3 Late presenting developmental dysplasia of the 
hip; sepsis
3–10 Transient synovitis; Perthes’ disease
11–15 Slipped upper femoral epiphysis
Non-accidental injury (NAI)
No child is exempt but some children are at particular risk, 
including those under 3 years of age and those with disabili -
ties in a family who are suffering socioeconomic deprivation. 
A careful clinical assessment is required (Figure 39.43 and 
Table 39.23). Characteristic patterns should warn the clini -
cian to consider the possibility of NAI (Table 39.24).
Child abuse occurs in different forms: emotional, physical, 
sexual and neglect. When suspected it should be discussed 
with the relevant child safeguarding team. All injuries should 
be documented carefully. It may be prudent to admit the child 
until further checks have been made.
CLINICAL DILEMMAS
The limping child
Children may limp because of pain, weakness, deformity or to 
gain attention; the causes vary from sepsis to a spinal tumour 
and from a leg length discrepancy to a shoe that rubs. Serious 
causes must be excluded and the ‘surgical sieve’ helps identify 
the most likely diagnoses. See Table 39.21.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   589 25/10/2017   08:39CHAPTER 39  Paediatric orthopaedics
PART 5 | ELECTIVE ORTHOPAEDICS590
FURTHER READING
Benson MKD, Fixsen JA, MacNicol MF (eds). Children’s orthopaedics and 
fractures, 3rd edn. London, Harcourt, 2010.
Dartnell J, Ramachandran M, Katchburian M. Haematogenous acute 
and subacute paediatric osteomyelitis: a systematic review of the lit-
erature. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2012; 94(5): 584–95. 
Kocher MS, Mandiga R, Zurakowski D, Barnewolt C, Kasser JR. Vali -
dation of a clinical prediction rule for the differentiation between 
septic arthritis and transient synovitis of the hip in children. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am 2004; 86-A(8):1629–35.
Sewell MD, Eastwood DM, Wimalasundera N. Managing common symp-
toms of cerebral palsy in children. BMJ 2014; 349: g5474. 
Weinstein, SL, Flynn JM (eds). Lovell and Winter’s pediatric orthopaedics, 
Vols 1 and 2, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and 
Wilkins, 2014.
Figure 39.43  Anteroposterior radiograph of a knee showing 
metaphyseal corner fractures that are often considered to be pathog-
nomonic of non-accidental injury. Non-accidental injury must also be 
considered in any fracture that presents late or without an adequate 
explanation.
TABLE 39.24 Fracture patterns with a high specificity for 
non-accidental injury.
Multiple fractures at different stages of healing/old fractures
Posterior rib fractures
Corner or bucket-handle metaphyseal fractures
Scapular fractures
Any fracture in a child below walking age
TABLE 39.23 Factors that raise concern in the clinical 
assessment of suspected non-accidental injury.
History
Delay in seeking medical advice
Variable story
Mechanism inconsistent with injury pattern
Examination
Unexpected bruising to the buttocks/back of legs
‘Finger-mark’ bruises
Bruises of various ages
Burns, deep scratches, etc.
05_39-B&L27_Pt5_Ch39.indd   590 25/10/2017   08:39PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
40 Skin and subcutaneous tissue ............................................................. 592
41 Burns .............................................................................................................. 617
42 Plastic and reconstructive surgery ..................................................... 633
Skin and 
subcutaneous tissue
6
06_40A-B&L27_Pt6.indd   591 25/10/2017   08:41Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The structure and functional properties of skin
 • The classification of vascular skin lesions
 • The cutaneous manifestations of generalised disease as 
related to surgery
 • The classification of benign skin tumours
 • The management of malignant skin tumours
Skin and subcutaneous tissue
40 
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY OF SKIN
Skin can be divided into two layers: the outer epidermis and 
the inner dermis. Deep to the dermis lies subcutaneous fat and 
remnants of the panniculus carnosus.
Epidermis
The epidermis is 5% of the skin and is composed of five lay-
ers of keratinised, stratified squamous epithelium; the strata: 
basalis (deep), spinosum, granulosum, lucidum and corneum 
(superficial).
Most epidermal cells are keratinocytes arranged in layers. 
The basal epidermis (stratum basalis) also contains melano -
cytes. Keratinocytes are classified according to their depth in 
the epidermis and their degree of differentiation. Keratino -
cytes grow and are replaced via mitoses in the cells of the 
stratum granulosum as they progress from deep to superficial, 
losing their nuclei and organelles as they ascend, before form-
ing the stratum corneum. The other keratinocyte layers in the 
skin (strata lucidum; granulosum and spinosum) are variably 
thick according to body site – for instance all three are thick 
in the glabrous skin of the palms and soles of the feet and 
almost absent in eyelid skin.
Melanocytes are dendritic cells of neural crest origin, usu-
ally located in the basal epidermis. Each melanocyte synthe -
sises melanin, a brown-black pigment, which is transferred via 
membrane processes to the keratinocytes in the strata gran -
ulosum and spinosum. Melanin provides protection against 
ultraviolet radiation. Ethnic differences in skin colour are 
determined by variations in the amount, combination and 
distribution of melanin within the keratinocytes, not by dif-
ferences in the number of melanocytes. 
Dermis
Dermis comprises 95% of skin and is structurally divided into 
a superficial papillary layer; composed of delicate collagen and 
elastin fibres in ground substance, into which a capillary and 
lymphatic network ramifies and a deeper reticular layer; com-
posed of course branching collagen, layered parallel to the 
skin surface (Figure 40.1).
The epidermis and dermis meet at the dermo-epidermal 
junction in a three-dimensional wave-like arrangement in 
which epidermal rete ridges project down, interdigitating 
with upward-pointing, dermal papillae containing vascular 
and lymphatic plexi.
The skin also contains specialised cells such as Langer -
han’s cells, whose role is to engulf antigens and present them 
to T cells. Merkel cells, Meissner’s and Pacinian corpuscles 
have roles in mechano-sensation.
Skin adnexa
Adnexal structures such as hair follicles, sebaceous and sweat 
glands span both the epidermal and dermal layers and contain 
some keratinocytes in their ducts. In injuries where epidermis 
is lost, re-epithelialisation occurs from these structures as well 
as from the wound margins.
Paul Langerhans , 1847–1888, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Freiberg, Germany.
Filippo Pacini , 1812–1883, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, Florence, Italy.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   592 25/10/2017   08:42Functional anatomy and physiology of skin 593
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Hair follicles
Hair follicles are tubular invaginations of the epidermis, from 
which grow hair shafts (dead keratinised tissue). Strips of 
smooth muscle (arrector pili) are inserted into the wall of the 
hair follicle and lead to hair elevation in times of stress and 
cold. 
Sebaceous glands
Sebaceous glands are hair follicle appendages situated 
between each hair follicle and the associated arrector pili 
muscle. When the arrector pili muscle contracts to elevate 
the hair, it compresses the gland and sebum is released (holo-
crine secretion). 
Sweat glands
Simple eccrine and apocrine sweat glands open into pores in 
hair follicles. Eccrine glands are distributed throughout the 
entire body surface, except the lips. They secrete sweat in 
response to emotion or during thermoregulation. Apocrine 
glands are found in the axillae and groins and become active 
at puberty. Their secretion, characteristically malodourous 
after bacterial degradation, is in response to emotion and hor-
mone secretion. 
Skin thickness
Skin thickness varies with age, location and sun damage, but 
in any given region it is thinner in children than adults. The 
dermis is between 15 and 40 times thicker than the epidermis, 
but starts to thin during the fourth decade. The epidermis is 
thickest on the palms, soles, back and buttocks and thinnest 
on eyelids (0.5–1 mm on the sole of the foot, 0.05–0.09 mm 
on the eyelid).
Blood supply of the skin
The body can be envisaged as three-dimensional segments of 
tissue called angiosomes, each with an arterial supply and a 
venous drainage. Blood equilibrates and flows between neigh-
bouring angiosomes via ‘choke’ vessels, which tend to be 
situated within muscles. Cutaneous arteries, direct branches 
of segmental arteries (concentrated at the dorsoventral axes 
and intermuscular septae), perforate the underlying muscles 
or run directly within fascial layers to the skin from the deep 
tissues (Figure 40.2).
The blood supply to the skin anastomoses in subfascial, 
fascial, subdermal, dermal and subepidermal plexi. The epi-
dermis contains no blood vessels so cells there derive nourish-
ment by diffusion.
The venous drainage of the skin is via both valved and 
unvalved veins. Unvalved veins allow oscillating flow in the 
subdermal plexus between cutaneous territories, equilibrating 
flow and pressure. The valved cutaneous veins drain via plexi 
to the deep veins.
Anomalies of skin metabolism
Blood flow to the skin can vary between 5 and 100 mL/100 
g/min in the temperature range 20–40°C. Thus, skin has the 
potential for a blood supply 20–100 times greater than its 
metabolic and thermoregulatory requirements. This apparent 
excess enables restitution of mechanical integrity after the 
myriad trivial injuries (scratching, stretching, compressing, 
thermal) to which skin is subjected; however, blood supply 
is inadequate to support full-thickness wound healing, which 
requires primary closure or granulation tissue.
Skin functions optimally at temperatures below body 
core temperature and can tolerate long periods of ischaemia 
(allowing it both to be grafted and/or expanded for use in 
reconstruction (see Chapter 42 on plastic surgery).
Sebaceous
gland
Hair
Sweat gland
Subcutaneous fat
Pilus
muscle
Hair follicle
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutis
Sweat pore
Figure 40.1 Three-dimensional diagram 
of the structural layers of the skin and its 
adnexal structures. (Repr oduced from 
Simonsen T, Aarbakke J, Kay I et al. Illus-
trated pharmacology for nurses . London: 
Hodder Arnold, 2006 with kind permis-
sion of the illustrator Roy Lysaa.)
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   593 25/10/2017   08:42CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE594
FUNCTION OF THE SKIN
Human skin and subcutaneous tissue have several important 
functions:
 ● Barrier to the environment enveloping the body and 
 protecting against trauma, radiation and pathogens.
 ● Regulates temperature and water homeostasis.
 ● Organ of excretion for urea, sodium chloride, potassium 
and water, as well as sulphur-containing metabolites from 
drugs (e.g. dimethyl sulphoxide) or food (garlic, cumin).
 ● The skin has significant endocrine and metabolic func -
tions and interactions. Skin cells contain receptors for 
and respond to: peptides, steroid sex hormones, thyroid 
hormones and neurotransmitters and they both produce 
(cholecalciferol) and metabolise (androgens) hormones 
and precursors to activate, potentiate and inactivate their 
functions.
 ● Sensory organ with multiple receptors for pain, pressure 
and movement.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE 
SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS 
TISSUES
Radiation damage
Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) and ionising radiation (IR) damage 
cellular deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) via the tumour suppres-
sor gene p53, inhibiting cellular repair and apoptotic mecha-
nisms. There is also evidence that efferent immune responses 
are impaired after skin exposure to UVR, facilitating neoplasia. 
Ultraviolet radiation
UVR is divisible into A, B and C according to wavelength. 
UVR is the principal cause of skin cancer in all skin types. 
Its effects are attenuated by melanin and there is an inverse 
relationship between melanin content and skin susceptibility 
to UV-induced neoplasia. Some protection is afforded by the 
stratum corneum, which reflects and refracts UVR, and by 
clothing, protective creams, cloud cover, particulate air pol -
lution and buildings. 
Ionising radiation
The effects of IR are dose, wavelength and time dependent. The 
skin with its rapid cellular turnover exhibits signs soon after  
exposure. High-frequency rays cause electron coupling at the 
molecular level, damaging proteins, polysaccharides and lipids.
Infrared radiation
Infrared radiation generates heat; cumulative exposure can 
cause thermal burns.
Congenital/genetic disorders
Neurofibromatosis
There are two distinct neurofibromatosis (NF) syndromes, 
where Schwann cells form tumours (Figure 40.3). Each is 
Epidermis
Muscle
Fascia and
epimysium
Fasciocutaneous
perforator
Musculocutaneous
perforator
Subcutaneous
fat
Named
artery and
vein
Angiosome AA ngiosome B
Major vein
Major artery
Choke vessels
between
angiosomes A
and B
within muscle
Figure 40.2  Schematic showing two neighbouring angio -
somes. Note the choke vessels within the muscle spanning the 
two cutaneous territories of angiosome A and B; two common 
examples of myocutaneous flaps that utilise this physiology 
include the rectus abdominus and the latissimus dorsi flaps.
Friedrich Theodor Schwann , 1810–1882, Professor of Anatomy successively at Louvain (1839–1848) and Liege, Belgium (1849–1880). Original researches be-
fore the age of 27 laid the foundation of physiology of nerve and muscle. The first to deal with problems related to living matter on a purely physical and chemical 
basis, and to recognise the cell as the unit of living matter. Discoverer of pepsin, and role of living organisms in fermentation.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   594 25/10/2017   08:42Pathophysiology of the skin and subcutaneous tissues 595
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
caused by different genes on different chromosomes. 70% are 
autosomal dominant and 30% arise from sporadic mutations. 
NF 1 (Von Recklinghausen’s disease) is the commoner vari-
ant, affecting approximately 1:4000 births. It arises from a 
gene mutation on chromosome (Ch.) 17. Skin manifestations 
appear in early life, with the development of more than five 
smooth surfaced café-au-lait spots, subcutaneous neurofibro-
mata, armpit or groin freckling and Lisch nodules.
Naevoid basal cell carcinoma (Gorlin’s) 
syndrome
This is an autosomal dominant inherited condition caused by 
an abnormal tumour suppressor gene on Ch. 9q 22-31 coding 
the ‘patched’ protein. 90% of patients develop multiple basal 
cell carcinomas (BCCs). Patients may exhibit specific pheno-
typical characteristics including: over-developed supraorbital 
ridges; broad nasal roots; hyperteliorism; bifid ribs; scoliosis; 
brachymetacarpalism; palmar pits and molar odontogenic 
cysts.
Xeroderma pigmentosum
This syndrome is caused by an abnormality on the ‘patched’ 
gene of Ch. 9q resulting in aberrant nucleotide repair during 
cellular DNA maintenance. It confers a >2000-fold increase 
in skin cancer risk and has autosomal recessive inheritance. 
Sufferers are intolerant of UVR, leading to premature skin 
ageing and development of multiple neoplasms. Most affected 
individuals die in early adulthood from metastatic disease 
(60% mortality by 20 years of age).
Gardner’s syndrome
This syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease variant of 
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) caused by an abnormal 
gene on Ch. 5. Gardner’s syndrome can cause the  development 
of cutaneous pathology such as multiple epidermoid cysts and 
lipomata. 
Ferguson-Smith syndrome
This is a rare, autosomal-dominantly inherited abnormality 
on Ch. 9q in which affected individuals develop multiple 
self-healing squamous cell carcinomas (SCC). 
Cutaneous manifestations of 
generalised disease
Many diseases have cutaneous manifestations that present in 
surgical practice. These include: necrobiosis lipoidica, gran-
uloma annulare in diabetes mellitus and pyoderma gangre -
nosum in inflammatory bowel disease. Their management 
should be sought in appropriate texts.
Hyperhydrosis
This involves excessive eccrine sweating of the palms, soles 
of the feet, axillae and groins, causing functional and social 
problems. It can be treated with antiperspirants or periodic 
local injections with botulinum toxin A. More resistant cases 
are treated by laparoscopic cervical sympathectomy.
Lipodystrophy
Lipodystrophy (lipoatrophy) is a localised or generalised loss 
of fatty tissue, which can be primary or secondary. It can be a 
complication of long-term administration of insulin, follow -
ing treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) with 
protease inhibitors or in transplant recipients.
It can be treated in selected cases by autologous fat  grafting, 
injections of poly-L-lactic acid and free tissue transfer. 
Inflammatory conditions
HIDRADENITIS SUPPURATIVA (HS)
Follicular occlusion followed by folliculitis and secondary 
infection with skin flora (usually Staphylococcus aureus and 
Propionibacterium acnes) culminates in chronic suppurative, 
painful, skin abscesses, sinus tracts and scarring. HS occurs in 
skin containing apocrine glands, commonly in the axillae and 
groins; but also the scalp, breast, chest and perineum (Figure 
40.4). It appears to have a genetic predisposition with vari -
able penetrance, and is strongly associated with obesity and 
smoking. It affects four women for every man.
Management Patients should stop smoking and lose excess 
weight. Symptoms can be reduced by the use of antiseptic 
soaps, tea tree oil and wearing non-compressive and aerated 
underwear. Medical treatments include topical and oral anti-
biotics and antiandrogen drugs. In selected cases, patients 
require radical excision of the affected skin and subcutaneous 
tissue. Reconstruction after excision avoids contracture and 
functional impairment. 
Figure 40.3 Neurofibromatosis (courtesty of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Friedrich Von Recklinghausen , 1833–1910, German Professor of Pathology, also described haemochromatosis.
Karl Lisch , 1907–1999, ophthalmologist, Wörgl, Austria.
Robert J Gorlin , 1923–2006, American dentist and Professor of Oral Pathology, published over 400 articles on craniofacial syndromes. 
John Ferguson-Smith , 1888–1978, Glaswegian dermatologist.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   595 25/10/2017   08:42CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE596
PYODERMA GANGRENOSUM (PG)
Characterised by cutaneous ulceration with purple under -
mined edges, PG is secondary to heightened  immunological 
reactivity, usually from another disease process, such as 
inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, non-  
Hodgkin’s lymphoma or Wegener’s granulomatosis (Figure 
40.5). Ulcers generally respond to steroids; surgery is rarely 
indicated and may exacerbate the condition. 
Infections
Skin and soft tissue infections can be localised or spread -
ing, necrotising or non-necrotising. Localised or spreading, 
non-necrotising infections usually respond to broad spec-
trum antibiotics. Localised necrotising infections need sur -
gical debridement as well as antibiotic therapy. Spreading, 
necrotising soft-tissue infection constitutes a life-threatening 
surgical emergency, requiring immediate resuscitation, intra -
venous antibiotic therapy and urgent surgical intervention 
with radical debridement.
Impetigo
Impetigo is a superficial infection of skin with staphylococci, 
streptococci or both (Figure 40.6). It is highly infectious, 
characterised by blisters that rupture and coalesce to form a 
honey-coloured crust and usually affects children. Treatment 
is directed at washing the affected areas and applying topical 
antistaphyloccocal treatments, and broad spectrum oral anti-
biotics if streptococcal infection is also implicated.
Figure 40.4 Hidradenitis suppurativa affecting the axilla (courtesy of 
St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
(a)
(b)
Figure 40.5 Pyoderma gangrenosum affecting the legs (a) and the 
breasts (b) (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, 
UK).
Figure 40.6 Impetigo. Note the honey-coloured crust (courtesy of St 
John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, curator of the Museum and demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
Erysipelas
Erysipelas is a sharply demarcated streptococcal infection of 
the superficial lymphatics, usually associated with broken skin 
on the face (Figure 40.7). The area affected is erythematous 
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   596 25/10/2017   08:42Pathophysiology of the skin and subcutaneous tissues 597
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
and oedematous. The patient may be febrile and have a leuco-
cytosis. Prompt administration of broad spectrum antibiotics 
after swabbing the area for culture and sensitivity is usually all 
that is necessary.
Cellulitis/lymphangitis
This is a bacterial infection of the skin and subcutaneous 
tissue that is more generalised than erysipelas. It is usually 
associated with broken skin or pre-existing ulceration. It is 
characterised by an expanding area of erythematous, oedem -
atous tissue that is painful, in association with fever, malaise 
and leucocytosis. Erythema tracking along lymphatics may be 
visible (lymphangitis) (Figure 40.8). The commonest caus-
ative organism is Streptococcus. Blood and skin cultures for 
sensitivity should be taken before prompt administration of 
broad spectrum, intravenous antibiotics and elevation of the 
affected extremity.
Necrotising fasciitis 
Meleney’s synergistic gangrene and Fournier’ s gangrene are 
variants of a similar disease process.
Necrotising fasciitis results from synergistic, polymicrobial 
infection; most commonly a streptococcal species (Group A 
β-haemolytic) in combination with Staphylococcus, Esch­
erichia coli, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Bacteroides or Clostridia. 
80% have a history of previous trauma/infection and over 
60% commence in the lower extremities. Predisposing condi-
tions include: diabetes mellitus; smoking; penetrating trauma; 
pressure sores; immunosuppression; intravenous drug abuse; 
perineal infection (perianal abscess, Bartholin’s cysts); and 
skin damage/infection (abrasions, bites, boils).
Classical clinical signs include: oedema stretching beyond 
visible skin erythema; a woody-hard texture to the subcuta -
neous tissues; an inability to distinguish fascial planes and 
muscle groups on palpation; disproportionate pain in relation 
to the affected area, with associated skin vesicles and soft-  
tissue crepitus (Figure 40.9). Lymphangitis tends to be absent. 
Early on, patients may be febrile and tachycardic, with a very 
rapid progression to septic shock. Radiographs, that should 
not have delayed urgent treatment, may demonstrate air in 
the tissues.
Management should commence with urgent fluid resusci -
tation, monitoring of haemodynamic status and administra -
tion of high-dose, intravenous broad spectrum, antibiotics. 
Figure 40.7 Erysipelas (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatol-
ogy, London, UK).
Figure 40.8  Cellulitis af fecting the left leg (courtesy of St John’s 
Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Frank Meleney , 1889–1963, American surgeon in the First World War, then became a Professor at Columbia Medical School in New York.
Jean Fournier , 1832–1914, French dermatologist, also described tertiary syphilis.
Summary box 40.1
Necrotising fasciitis
●● Surgical emergency
●● Polymicrobial synergistic infection
●● 80% history of previous trauma or infection
●● Rapid progression to septic shock
●● Urgent resuscitation, antibiotics and surgical debridement
●● Mortality 30–50%
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   597 25/10/2017   08:42CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE598
This is a surgical emergency and the diseased area should be 
debrided as soon as possible until viable, healthy, bleeding tis-
sue is reached. Early surgical review and further debridement 
is advisable, together with the use vacuum-assisted dressings. 
Early skin grafting in selected cases may minimise protein 
and fluid losses. Mortality of between 30% and 50% can be 
expected, even with prompt with operative intervention.
Purpura fulminans
This is a relatively rare condition in which intravascular 
thrombosis produces rapid skin necrosis and haemorrhagic 
infarction, which progresses rapidly to septic shock and dis -
seminated intravascular coagulation. Usually seen in chil -
dren, it can occur in adults and may be subdivided into three 
types based on aetiological mechanism: ‘acute infectious’; 
‘neonatal’ and ‘idiopathic’ purpura fulminans.
Acute infectious is the commonest form. It is associated 
with a mortality rate of 40–50%, usually from multiorgan fail-
ure and is secondary to either an acute bacterial ( Neisseria 
meningitidis) or viral infection (varicella). It is most common 
in children under 7 years, following an upper respiratory tract 
infection, or in asplenia. Endotoxins produce an imbalance in 
procoagulant and anticoagulant endothelial activity, produc-
ing protein C deficiency; this gives the clinical picture of 
an initial petechial rash developing into confluent ecchy-
moses and haemorrhagic bullae, which necrose to form well-  
demarcated lesions that form hard eschars. Extensive tissue 
loss is common, which often culminates in limb amputation 
(Figure 40.10).
Skin and soft tissue cysts
Milia
Milia are small, hard, keratin retention cysts seen both in 
babies and, after chronic sun exposure, in the elderly (Figure 
40.11). 
Figure 40.9 Necrotising fasciitis affecting the left orbit and facial 
skin (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Albert Ludwig Seigmund Neisser , 1855–1916, Director of the Dermatological Institute, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Figure 40.10 Acute infectious purpura fulminans caused by menin-
gococcal septicaemia. Note the sharply demarcated necr otic areas 
distal to the affected end or perforating arteries with surrounding nor-
mal skin (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.11 Milia (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology , 
London, UK).
Epidermal cysts
These cysts are lined with true, stratified-squamous epithe -
lium, derived from hair follicle infundibuli or traumatic inclu-
sion. Commonly known as sebaceous cysts, they can occur 
anywhere. They are fixed to the skin and usually have a cen -
tral punctum (Figure 40.12). 
Treatment depends on the clinical state of the cyst. When 
inflamed or infected, they should be incised and drained 
initially, and removed later once the inflammation and 
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   598 25/10/2017   08:42Skin tumours 599
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
induration has subsided. It is important to excise the cyst in 
its entirety as failure to do so usually results in recurrence.
Meibomian cysts are epidermal cysts found on the free 
edge of the eyelid. Tricholemmal (pilar/pilosebaceous) cysts 
are derived from the epidermis of the external root sheath 
of the hair follicle. 90% are found in the scalp and 70% are 
multiple; they are usually distinguished from epidermal cysts 
by pathologists, rather than clinically.
SKIN TUMOURS
Benign lesions
Basal cell papilloma (seborrhoeic keratosis, 
senile keratosis, verruca senilis)
These vary from macular to soft, excrescent, warty lesions, 
which are often pigmented and hyperkeratotic. They are 
formed from the basal layer of epidermal cells and contain 
melanocytes. 
Papillary wart (verruca vulgaris) 
This is a benign skin tumour arising from infection with the 
human papilloma virus (HPV), which is also responsible for 
plantar warts and condylomata acuminata.
Freckle (ephelis)
A freckle is an area of skin that contains a normal number of 
melanocytes, producing an abnormally large number of mel -
anin granules.
Lentigo
These are small, circumscribed pigmented macules, which 
stem from sun damage and some systemic syndromes. Solar 
lentigos are commoner in fairer skins. 
Moles/naevi
Melanocytes migrate from the neural crest to the basal epi-
dermis during embryogenesis. When melanocytes aggregate 
in the dermis or at the dermo-epidermal junction, they are 
called naevus cells.
Junctional naevus
A junctional naevus is a dermo-epidermal proliferation of 
naevus cells, visible as deeply pigmented macules or papules 
that occur commonly in childhood or adolescence, usually 
progressing to form compound or intradermal naevi with 
advancing age. Benign mucosal lesions tend to be junctional 
naevi (Figure 40.13).
Heinrich Meibom  (Meibomius), 1638–1700, Professor of Medicine, History and Poetry, Helmstadt, Germany, described these glands in 1666.
Sophie Spitz , 1910–1956, American dermatopathologist at Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, published the first case series of ‘juvenile melanoma’ in 1948. Died at 
the age of 46 from carcinoma of the colon.
Figure 40.12 Multiple scrotal epidermal cysts (courtesy of St John’s 
Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.13 Junctional naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Compound naevus
This is a maculopapular, pigmented lesion that becomes most 
prominent during adolescence (Figure 40.14). It represents 
a junctional proliferation of naevus cells, with nests and col -
umns in the dermis.
Intradermal naevus
Intradermal naevi are faintly pigmented papules in adults 
showing no junctional proliferation, but a cluster of dermal 
melanocytes (Figure 40.15).
Spitz naevus 
These are reddish brown (occasionally deeply pigmented) 
nodules, previously termed ‘juvenile melanoma’ (Figure 
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   599 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE600
40.16). They most commonly occur on the face and legs, 
growing rapidly initially then remaining static or regressing. 
The differential diagnosis is melanoma and excision biopsy is 
warranted if there is doubt as to the diagnosis.
Spindle cell naevus
Spindle cell naevi are dense black lesions, which contain 
spindle cells and atypical melanocytes at the dermo-epidermal 
junction. They are commonly seen on the thighs and affect 
women more frequently. They may have malignant potential.
Halo naevus
The halo of depigmentation around any benign naevus rep-
resents an antibody response to melanocytes. Depigmentation 
may also be a feature of a malignant melanoma. Halo naevi are 
associated with vitiligo (Figure 40.17).
Café-au-lait spots
These are coffee-coloured macules of variable size (from a few 
mm to 10 cm) (Figure 40.18). Multiple lesions are associated 
with NF 1 and McCune–Albright syndromes. They are more 
common in dark-skinned races.
Naevus spilus (speckled lentiginous naevus)
These are similar in appearance to a café-au-lait spots, but 
with hyperpigmented speckles throughout (Figure 40.19 ). 
They are benign lesions that are associated with various cuta-
neous diseases, but whose speckled appearance can be con -
fused with malignant change. The mainstay of management 
is observation and serial photography as malignant transfor -
mation is rare.
Donovan James McCune , 1902–1976, American paediatrician.
Fuller Albright , 1900–1969, physician, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
Figure 40.14 Compound naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.15 Intradermal naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.16  Spitz naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.17 Halo naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Derma-
tology, London, UK).
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   600 25/10/2017   08:43Skin tumours 601
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Blue naevus
This is a benign skin lesion that is four times more common in 
children, typically affecting the extremities and face (Figure 
40.21).
Naevi of Ota and Ito
A naevus of Ota is a dermal, melanocytic hamartoma visible 
as a blue or grey macule in the trigeminal V1 and V2 der -
matomes. It is four times more common in women and most 
frequently seen in Oriental and African races (Figure 40.22).
Mongolian spot
A Mongolian spot is a congenital blue grey macule found on 
the sacral skin (Figure 40.20). Pigmentation initially deep-
ens and then regresses completely by age 7 years.
Figure 40.18 Café-au-lait spots. Note the two topographical vari -
ants: in (a) the spot has a smooth ‘coast of California’ border, whereas 
the upper spot in (b) has an irregular ‘coast of Maine’ border. Multiple 
smooth-bordered lesions are commonly associated with syndromes 
(courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
(a)
(b)
Figure 40.19  Naevus spilus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
Minoru Ito , 1892–1986, Professor of Dermatology, Tohoko University, Sendai, Honshu, Japan.
Figure 40.20  Mongolian spot (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   601 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE602
A naevus of Ito is characterised by dermal melanocyto -
sis in the shoulder region and can occur simultaneously in 
patients with naevus of Ota (Figure 40.23).
Hair follicles
Trichoepithelioma
These are small skin-coloured nodules, found most often in 
the nasolabial folds. It is clinically and histologically similar 
to a basal cell carcinoma. 
Pilomatrixoma (calcifying epithelioma of 
Malherbe)
These are benign hair matrix cell tumours that often calcify. 
40% are found in the under-10 age group.
Tricholemmoma (naevus sebaceous of 
Jadassohn)
Tricholemmoma is a congenital hamartoma with the appear-
ance of a linear verrucous naevus. 10% form a BCC life-long 
(Figure 40.24).
Josef Jadassohn , 1863–1936, dermatologist, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Desire M Bourneville , 1840–1909, physician, Le Bicêtre, Paris, France.
Figure 40.21 Blue naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Derma-
tology, London, UK).
Figure 40.22  Naevus of Ota (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.23  Naevus of Ito (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.24  Naevus sebaceous of Jadassohn (courtesy of St 
John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Adenoma sebaceum (tuberous sclerosis, 
Bourneville disease)
These are typically red, facial papules (angiofibromas), usually 
on the nasolabial folds, cheek and chin. They usually appear 
in children before 10 years of age and increase in size and 
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   602 25/10/2017   08:43Skin tumours 603
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
number until adolescence. Cosmetic removal by argon or 
pulse dye lasers or scalpel is indicated (Figure 40.25).
Rhinophyma
Rhinophyma is the end-stage sequela of nasal acne rosacea 
(Figure 40.26). It is nasal sebaceous gland hypertrophy and 
hyperplasia and tends to affect elderly men (M:F12:1). Occult 
BCCs exist in 3%. Treatment by dermabrasion or laser resur-
facing produces good results.
Cylindroma (turban tumour) 
A variant of eccrine spiradenoma, which coalesce when mul-
tiple on the scalp, forming a ‘turban tumour’.
Premalignant lesions
Extramammary Paget’s disease 
(intraepidermal adenocarcinoma) 
This occurs in cutaneous sites rich in apocrine glands such as 
the axillae, genital and perianal regions. Approximately 25% 
are associated with an underlying in situ or invasive adeno -
carcinoma. Early skin changes are subtle and may present as 
an eczematous lesion or intertrigo. Surgical excision forms the 
basis of treatment, with up to 20% demonstrating invasive 
disease after pathology assessment (Figure 40.27).
Figure 40.25 Adenoma sebaceum (courtesy of St John’s Institute 
for Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.26  Rhinophyma (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
Sweat glands 
Cystadenoma (hydrocystadenomas, 
hidradenomas) 
These are 1–3 cm translucent blue cystic nodules.
Eccrine poroma (papillary syringoma) 
These are single raised or pedicled lesions found most often 
on the palm or sole.
Figure 40.27 Extramammary Paget’s disease involving the perineum 
(courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Giant congenital pigmented naevus (GCPN) 
or giant hairy naevus
This naevus causes a great deal of confusion as its definition 
and management is contentious. It is a hamartoma of nae -
vo-melanocytes that has a tendency to dermatomal distribu -
tion (Figure 40.28). It has a similar histology to compound 
naevi, but the naevus cells are distributed variably from the 
epidermis throughout all layers and into the subdermal fat 
and muscle. GCPNs are precursors of melanoma, but the mag-
nitude of this risk is unclear, largely due to the lack of well-  
conducted studies and variable classification of the naevus. 
A 3–5% lifetime risk of melanoma is quoted. 1 in 3 childhood 
malignant melanomas (MM) arise in patients with GCPN, 
but the risk decreases with age: 15% of MMs present at birth; 
62% present by puberty and 99% by 45 years of age.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   603 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE604
A multidisciplinary management approach is advocated, 
with initial investigations examining for neurocutaneous 
melanosis as there may be leptomeningeal involvement. 
Removal of GCPN should be considered for both aesthetic 
and oncological reasons.
Atypical (dysplastic) naevus
To be ‘atypical naevi’, lesions must have three of the following 
characteristics: variegated pigmentation; ill-defined borders; 
undulating irregular surfaces; or measure >5 mm. Histologi -
cally, they are irregular proliferations of melanocytes at the 
basal layer of epidermis. They can be sporadic or familial 
(familial atypical multiple mole-melanoma (F AMMM) syn-
drome). Possession of more than five confers a relative risk of 
melanoma six times greater than usual; within FAMM syn-
drome, they confer a life-long 10% risk of MM (Figure 40.29).
Malignant lesions
WHO data suggest both non-melanoma and melanoma skin 
cancers continue to increase in incidence, despite educa -
tional programmes and wide-ranging changes in uptake of 
sun  protective measures and improvements in sun-screens. 
Annually, global figures reveal 33% of all recorded malig -
nancy affects the skin, with 2–3 million new non-melanoma 
skin cancers and 132  000 new malignant melanomas diag -
nosed each year.
Basal cell carcinoma
This is usually a slow-growing, locally-invasive, malignant 
tumour of pluripotential epithelial cells arising from basal epi-
dermis and hair follicles; hence, it affects the pilo-sebaceous 
skin. 
Figure 40.28 Giant congenital pigmented naevus (courtesy of St 
John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.29 Dysplastic naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Summary box 40.2
Basal cell carcinoma
●● Slow growing
●● Risk factor – ultraviolet radiation
●● 90% nodular/nodular cystic
●● High- and low-risk basal cell carcinoma
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The strongest predisposing factor to BCC is UVR. It occurs 
in the elderly or the middle-aged after excessive sun expo -
sure, with 95% occurring between the ages of 40 and 80 years. 
The incidence of BCC rises with proximity to the equator, 
although 33% arise in parts of the body not usually sun-  
exposed. Other predisposing factors include exposure to 
arsenical compounds, coal tar, aromatic hydrocarbons, 
ionising radiation and genetic skin cancer syndromes. White-
skinned people are almost exclusively affected. BCC is more 
common in men than women. 
PATHOGENESIS
BCCs have no apparent precursor lesions and their develop -
ment is proportional to the initial dose of the carcinogen, but 
not duration of exposure. The most likely model of pathogen-
esis for BCCs involves mesodermal factors as intrinsic pro -
moters coupled with an initiation step. 
BCCs metastasise extremely rarely.
 MACROSCOPIC
BCC can be divided into localised (nodular; nodulocystic; 
cystic; pigmented and naevoid) and generalised (superficial: 
multifocal and superficial spreading; or infiltrative: morphoeic, 
ice pick and cicatrizing). Nodular and nodulocystic variants 
account for 90% of BCC.
MICROSCOPIC
T wenty-six histological subtypes have been described. The 
characteristic finding is of ovoid cells in nests with a single 
‘palisading’ layer. It is only the outer layer of cells that actively 
divide, explaining why tumour growth rates are slower than 
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   604 25/10/2017   08:43Skin tumours 605
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
their cell cycle speed would suggest, and why incompletely 
excised lesions are more aggressive. Morphoeic BCCs synthe-
size type 4 collagenase and so spread rapidly (Figure 40.30).
PROGNOSIS
There are ‘high-risk’ and ‘low-risk’ BCCs. High-risk BCCs 
are: large (>2 cm); located at sites where direct invasion gives 
access to the cranium (near the eye, nose and ear); recurrent 
tumours; tumours forming in the presence of immunosuppres-
sion; or that have micronodular or infiltrating histological 
subtypes.
MANAGEMENT
Treatment can be surgical or non-surgical. Tumour and sur -
rounding surgical margins should always be assessed and 
marked under loupe magnification; the latter varying between 
2 and15 mm, depending on the macroscopic variant. Where 
margins are ill-defined, or tissue at a premium (nose, eyes) 
then either a two-stage surgical approach with subsequent 
reconstruction after confirmation of clear margins, or Mohs’ 
micrographic surgery is advisable. The histological sample 
must be orientated and marked for pathological examination.
Mohs’ micrographic surgery is a method used by dermato-
logical surgeons (dermatologists who have undergone extra 
training in techniques of cutaneous surgery and histopathol-
ogy) to excise skin cancer under microscopic control.
In the elderly or infirm patients, radiotherapy produces 
similar recurrence rates to surgery; but with the risk of gen-
erating further malignancy after 1–2 decades. Biopsy-proven, 
superficial tumours can be treated with topical treatments 
(5-fluorouracil, imquimod).
Unless excision of a BCC is complete, there is a 67% 
recurrence rate if margins are grossly involved and a 33% 
recurrence rate within 2 years with microscopic involvement 
or when reported ‘close’.
Patients with uncomplicated, completely-excised lesions 
can be discharged. Follow-up is reserved for patients with 
tumours in high-risk areas; with globally, sun-damaged skin; 
with syndromes; and for those who decline further surgery 
after incomplete excisions.
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
SCC is a malignant tumour of keratinising cells of the epider-
mis or its appendages. It arises from the stratum basalis of the 
epidermis and expresses cytokeratins 1 and 10.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Four BCCs occur for every SCC, which is the second most 
common form of skin cancer. It is strongly-related to cumu-
lative sun exposure and damage, especially in white skinned 
individuals living nearer the equator. In the northern hemi -
sphere it affects the elderly, whereas it is not uncommon in 
sun-damaged, middle-aged, white people in the southern 
hemisphere. Everywhere, it is more common in men than 
women. SCC is also associated with chronic inflammation 
(chronic sinus tracts, pre-existing scars, osteomyelitis, burns, 
vaccination points) and immunosuppression. When a SCC 
appears in a scar it is known as a Marjolin’s ulcer.
Figure 40.30 (a) A nodulocystic basal carcinoma (BCC). Note the 
characteristic pearly surface with telangectasia. (b) An ulcerating 
BCC on the lower eyelid. (c) A recurrent morphoeic BCC. ((a) and 
(b) courtesy of Mr AR Greenbaum; (c) courtesy of St John’s Institute 
for Dermatology, London, UK.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Frederic E Mohs , 1910–2002, twentieth century American physician and general surgeon, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA, developed the Mohs 
micrographic surgical technique in 1938 for cutaneous malignant lesions.
Jean-Nicholas Marjolin , 1780–1850, surgeon, Paris, France, described the development of carcinomatous ulcers in scars in 1828.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   605 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE606
IR causes SCC, as do chemical carcinogens (arsenicals, 
tar) and infection with HPV 5 and 16. There is also evidence 
that current and previous tobacco use doubles the relative risk 
of SCC.
In the past, actinic (solar) keratoses (AK), i.e. cutane -
ous horns and keratoacanthomas, were considered to be 
 premalignant lesions leading to SCC. Current thinking is 
to classify these lesions on a continuum of lesions, some of 
which can improve, as with other squamous cell tumours such 
as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.
AKs are areas of permananent sun damage in which there 
is dyskeratosis and partial-thickness, cellular atypia, subepi -
dermal inflammation, but an intact basement membrane (Fig-
ure 40.31). They ‘wax and wane’ macroscopically between 
macular and papular, with and without, keratinous surfaces. 
Most improve after moisturisation and remain as erythema -
tous macules; however, up to 20% form SCC.
Current thought is that rather than being separate premalig-
nant entities, they are better considered as self-healing SCCs 
and as such, are often reported by pathologists as ‘keratoac -
anthoma-like SCCs’ (Figure 40.33). Keratoacanthomas are 
twice as common in men than women and usually found on 
the face or limbs of chronically, sun-damaged 50–70-year-old 
white-skinned individuals. They may be caused by HPV in a 
hair follicle during growth phase and are also associated with 
smoking and chemical carcinogen exposure. Excision is rec -
ommended, rather than observation, as the differential diag -
nosis includes anaplastic SCC and the excision scar is often 
better than that which remains after resolution.
Bowen’s disease is SCC in situ  and often develops as 
full-thickness dysplasia in hypertrophic AKs (Figure 40.34). 
SCC in situ usually presents as a slowly enlarging, erythema -
tous scaly plaque and may occur anywhere on the muco- 
cutaneous surface of the body . On the glans penis, it 
is called erythroplasia of Queyrat (Figure 40.35). Topical ther-
apy with 5-fluorouracil or imiquimod are effective treatments. 
Alternatives include surgical excision with a 4 mm margin, 
or Mohs’ micrographic surgery for larger or recurrent lesions.
Figure 40.31 Actinic keratosis (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.32 Cutaneous horn (courtesy of St John’ s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
When an AK has a keratinous surface with a height greater 
than its base diameter, it is termed a keratin horn. 10% will 
have an underlying SCC (Figure 40.32).
Keratoacanthomas are rapidly-growing, nodular tumours, 
exhibiting symmetry around a central, keratin-filled crater. 
Summary box 40.3
Squamous cell carcinoma
●● Associated with ultraviolet radiation, chronic inflammation and 
chemical carcinogens
●● High- and low-risk squamous cell carcinoma
●● Metastasis in 2% cases
Figure 40.33 Keratocanthoma (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
John T Bowen , 1857–1940, Professor of Dermatology at Harvard, USA.
August Queyrat , 1856–1933, dermatologist, Paris, France, described this condition in 1911.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   606 25/10/2017   08:43Skin tumours 607
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
MICROSCOPIC
Characteristic irregular masses of squamous epithelium are 
noted to proliferate and invade the dermis from the basal layer. 
The tumour stains positive for cytokeratins 1 and 10. SCC 
can be graded histologically according to Broder’s grading, 
which describes the proportion of dedifferentiated cells in the 
tumour. Table 40.1 presents tumour classification and staging. 
PROGNOSIS
There are several independent prognostic variables for SCC:
 ● Depth: the deeper the lesion, the worse the prognosis. 
For SCC <2 mm, metastasis is highly unlikely; whereas if 
>6 mm, 15% of SCC will have metastasised.
Figure 40.34 Bowen’s 
disease – squamous cell 
carcinoma in situ (courtesy 
of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.35 Erythroplasia of Queyrat – squamous cell carcinoma in 
situ on the glans penis; also called Paget’s disease of the penis (cour-
tesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
TABLE 40.1 TNM Classification and staging.
Size Nodes Mets Stages
TX 
Primary tumour cannot be 
assessed
NX 
Nodal involvement cannot be 
assessed
M0 
No metastatic disease
Stage 0 
Tis, N0, M0
T0 
No evidence of primary tumour
N0 
No regional nodes
M1 
Metastatic disease present
Stage I
T1, N0, M0
Tis 
In situ (confined to full thickness 
epidermal) disease 
N1 
Spread to 1 ipsilateral, nearby 
node that is <3 cm diameter
Stage II
T2, N0, M0
T1 
Primary <2 cm
N2a 
Spread to 1 ipsilateral nearby 
node that is 3–6 cm diameter 
Stage III
T3, N0, M0 or T1–T3, N1, M0
T2 
Primary >2 cm
N2b 
Spread to >1 ipsilateral, nearby 
nodes, but none >6 cm diameter
Stage IV
T1–T3, N2, M0 or any disease 
that is N3, or T4 or M1
T3 
Primary invasion of a facial bone
N2c 
Spread to contralateral node(s), 
but none are >6 cm diameter 
T4 
Invasion of muscle, base of skull 
or other bones
N3 
Spread to any node >6 cm 
diameter 
Albert Compton Broders , 1885–1964, American pathologist of Minnesota, USA and Chairman of the Department of Surgical Pathology, The Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota, MN, USA; for 1 year in 1935 Professor of Surgical Pathology and Director of Cancer Research, University of Virginia, VA, USA. Broders 
graded rectal cancer in the USA in a manner that Cuthbert Dukes classified them in the UK. A combination of Broders’ grading and Dukes’ classification gave a 
more accurate prognosis for rectal carcinoma than either method alone.
MACROSCOPIC 
The appearance of SCC may vary from smooth nodular, verru-
cous, papillomatous to ulcerating lesions. All ulcerate eventu-
ally, as they grow. The ulcers have a characteristic everted edge 
and are surrounded by inflamed, indurated skin. Differential 
diagnoses of SCC include: AK; BCC; pyoderma gangrenosum; 
warts; and lichen simplex chronicus (Figure 40.36).
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   607 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE608
 ● Surface size: lesions >2  cm have a worse prognosis than 
smaller ones.
 ● Histological grade: the higher the Broder’s grade, the 
worse the prognosis.
 ● Microscopic invasion of lympho-vascular spaces or nerve 
tissue carries a high risk of metastatic disease.
Therefore, as well as information on pathological pattern, 
cellular morphology and Broder’s grade, any histopathology 
report for SCC should include the depth of invasion, the pres-
ence of perineural or lymphovascular invasion and the deep 
and peripheral margin clearance.
 ● Site: SCCs on the lips and ears have higher local recur -
rence rates than lesions elsewhere, and tumours at the 
extremities fare worse than those on the trunk.
 ● Aetiology: SCCs that arise in burn scars, osteomyelitis 
skin sinuses, chronic ulcers and areas of skin that have 
been irradiated have a higher metastatic potential.
 ● Immunosuppression: SCCs will invade further in those 
with impaired immune response.
The overall rate of metastasis is 2% for SCC (usually to 
regional nodes) with a local recurrence rate of 20%.
Figure 40.36 (a) A squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) on the face. (b) A recurrent SCC arising in a previously skin-grafted area of the scalp. (c) 
SCC arising on the dorsum of the hand in a renal transplant recipient on immunosuppressive therapy. (d) SCC arising on the lip of a smoker who 
worked outside on a farm. ((a–c) courtesy of Mr AR Greenbaum; (d) courtesy of St John’s Institute for Dermatology, London, UK.)
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
MANAGEMENT
SCC is a heterogeneous tumour with a malignant potential 
that varies between subtypes. Management must address the 
tumour’s tendency for lymphatic metastasis and the possibil -
ity of in-transit metastasis.
Surgical excision is the only means of providing accurate 
information on histology and clearance. The margins for pri -
mary excision should be tailored to surface size in the first 
instance. This should ideally be assessed using surgical loupe 
magnification. A 4 mm clearance margin should be achieved 
if the SCC measures <2 cm across, and a 1-cm clearance mar-
gin if >2 cm. 95% of local recurrence and regional metastases 
occur within 5 years, thus follow-up beyond this period is not 
indicated. 
Cutaneous malignant melanoma 
Melanoma is a cancer of melanocytes and can, therefore, arise 
in skin, mucosa, retina and the leptomeninges.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Cutaneous melanoma is caused by exposure to UVR. Its rise 
in incidence reflects increased recreational activity in the sun 
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   608 25/10/2017   08:43Skin tumours 609
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
and emigration among white skinned races, not suited to sun 
exposure. Although it accounts for less than 5% of skin malig-
nancy (and 1.6% of all malignancy worldwide), it is respon -
sible for over 75% of skin malignancy-related deaths. 
It is the commonest cancer in young adults (20–39 years) 
and the most likely cause of cancer-related death.
Distribution between the sexes varies around the world 
and reflects occupational and recreational exposure to sun -
light. Likewise, geographical distribution reflects exposure of 
white-skinned individuals to sunlight: Taranaki in New Zea-
land, a country with a predominantly white-skinned, immi -
grant population, currently reports the highest (and rising) 
incidence per capita. 5% of all patients with MM will develop 
a second primary melanoma. 7% of MM presents as occult 
metastasis from an unknown primary.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Cumulative UV exposure favours the development of lentigo 
maligna melanoma (LMM) and later onset of disease, whereas 
‘flash fry’ exposure, typical of rapidly-acquired, holiday tans, 
favours the other morphological variants and early onset of 
disease.
A small proportion of MM is genetically-mediated and 
develops at an earlier age. People at most risk of developing 
MM include: those with genetic syndromes; a past history 
of MM or with first-degree relatives who have MM; those 
who have more than 30 sun-acquired naevi or a history of 
five significant sun-burns before the age of 16; fair-skinned/
red-haired people living close to the equator; anyone with 
excessive UVR exposure (environmental or salon-delivered); 
or anyone with immunosuppression (which increases MM 
incidence 20–30-fold). 
Summary box 40.4
Malignant melanoma
●● Rising incidence
●● Genetic and acquired risk factors
●● Superficial spreading form the most common
●● Breslow thickness most important prognostic indicator
●● Sentinel node biopsy useful for staging
MACROSCOPIC
Only 10–20% of MM form in pre-existing naevi, with the 
remainder arising de novo in previously normally pigmented 
skin. The most likely naevi to form MM are atypical naevi, 
atypical junctional lenitiginous naevi (usually facial) and 
giant pigmented congenital naevi. 
Macroscopic features in a pre-existing naevus that suggest 
malignant change are listed in Summary box 40.5.
There are four common macroscopic variants of MM and 
several other notable, but rarer forms:
Figure 40.37 Superficial spreading melanoma (courtesy of St John’s 
Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
Summary box 40.5 
Macroscopic features in naevi suggestive of malignant 
melanoma
●● Change in size
●● Shape
●● Colour
●● Thickness (elevation/nodularity or ulceration)
●● Satellite lesions (pigment spreading into surrounding area)
●● Tingling/itching /serosanguinous discharge (usually late signs)
Superficial spreading melanoma (SSM) This is the most 
common presentation (70%), usually arising in a pre-existent 
naevus after several years of slow change, followed by rapid 
growth in the preceding months before presentation (Figure 
40.37). Nodularity within SSM heralds the onset of the ver-
tical growth phase.
Nodular melanoma (NM) Nodular melanoma accounts for 
15% of all MM and tends to be more aggressive than SSM, 
with a shorter clinical onset. These lesions often arise de novo 
in skin and are more common in men than women, often pre-
senting in middle age and usually on the trunk, head or neck 
(Figure 40.38). They typically appear as blue/black papules, 
1–2 cm in diameter, and because they lack the horizontal 
growth phase, they tend to be sharply demarcated. Up to 5% 
are amelanotic.
Lentigo maligna melanoma LMM was previously also 
known as Hutchinson’s melanotic freckle. This variant 
Sir Jonathan Hutchinson , 1828–1913, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   609 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE610
sical feature of a subungual melanoma is Hutchinson’s sign: 
nail fold pigmentation that widens progressively to produce a 
triangular pigmented macule with associated nail dystrophy. 
The differential diagnosis is ‘benign racial melanonychia’, 
which produces a linear dark streak under a nail in a dark-
skinned individual. Malignancy is unlikely if the nail fold is 
uninvolved (Figure 40.40).
Miscellaneous 
 ● Amelanotic melanoma may present as a flesh-coloured, 
skin lesion; as a metastasis from an unknown skin primary; 
or, in the gastrointestinal tract, with obstruction or intus-
susception.
 ● Desmoplastic melanoma is mostly found on the head and 
neck region. It has a propensity for perineural infiltration 
and often recurs locally if not widely excised. It may be 
amelanotic clinically.
Figure 40.39  Lentigo maligna melanoma (courtesy of St John’s 
Institute for Dermatology, London, UK).
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 40.40 (a) Acral lentiginous melanoma on the sole of the foot (courtesy of Mr AR Gr eenbaum). (b) Subungual melanoma – probably a 
superficial spreading melanoma. Note the swelling proximal to the nail fold. (c) Benign racial melanonychia. ((b) and (c) courtesy of St John’s 
Institute for Dermatology, London, UK.)
Figure 40.38 Nodular melanoma (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
presents as a slow-growing, variegated brown macule on the 
face, neck or hands of the elderly (Figure 40.39). They are 
positively correlated with prolonged, intense sun exposure, 
affecting women more than men. They account for between 
5% and 10% of MM.
LMM are thought to have less metastatic potential than 
other variants as they take longer to enter a vertical growth 
phase. Nonetheless, when they have entered the vertical 
growth phase their metastatic potential is the same as any 
other melanoma.
Acral lentigious melanoma (ALM) ALM affects the soles of 
feet and palms of hands. It is rare in white-skinned individuals 
(2–8% of MM) but more common in the Afro-Caribbean, 
Hispanic and Asian population (35–60%). It usually presents 
as a flat, irregular macule in later life. 25% are amelanotic and 
may mimic a fungal infection or pyogenic granuloma.
MM under the finger nail are usually SSM rather than 
ALM. For finger or toe nail lesions it is vital to biopsy the nail 
matrix, rather than just the pigment on the nail plate. A clas-
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   610 25/10/2017   08:43Skin tumours 611
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
MICROSCOPIC
Malignant change occurs in the melanocytes in the basal 
epidermis, while in situ, atypical melanocytes are limited to 
the dermo-epidermal junction and show no evidence of der -
mal involvement. During the horizontal growth phase, cells 
spread along the dermo-epidermal junction and although 
they may breach the dermis, their migration is predominantly 
radial. During the vertical growth phase, the dermis maybe 
invaded. The greater the depth of invasion, the greater is the 
metastatic potential of the tumour.
MANAGEMENT
History and clinical examination should be directed at discov-
ering the primary lesion and identification of local, regional 
or distant spread.
An excision biopsy with 2–3 mm margin of skin and a cuff 
of subdermal fat is acceptable. Incision biopsy is occasionally 
indicated: for instance, in large lesions on the face where an 
excision biopsy of the whole lesion would be disfiguring.
In experienced hands, observation and review every 2 
months may avoid biopsies in equivocal cases, but serial clin-
ical and dermoscopic photography by a clinician with exper -
tise in dermoscopy is mandatory when observation is chosen, 
rather than excision biopsy, for definitive histopathological 
diagnosis.
Biopsy and pathological examination provide the first 
step towards staging melanoma. The Breslow thickness of a 
melanoma (measured to nearest 0.1 mm from granular layer 
to base of tumour) is the most important prognostic indica -
tor in the absence of lymph node metastases. The  American 
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system then 
takes lymph node and distant metastases into account  
(Table 40.2).
INVESTIGATIONS
Guidelines for staging are controversial. The authors suggest 
investigations should be directed towards detecting occult dis-
ease, so as to upstage patients and treat them accurately and 
appropriately, the only cure for MM currently being appro-
priate surgery. Thus, offering sentinel node biopsy to patients 
with T2a disease and greater is prudent and investigations for 
T3a disease and greater should be directed to individual clin-
ical presentation. 
LOCAL TREATMENT
The treatment for melanoma is surgery. Lentigo maligna 
(melanoma in situ) should be excised completely in most clin-
ical situations because of the risk of it entering the vertical 
growth phase to become LMM. A complete excision requires 
no further treatment.
For in situ melanoma a wide excision of 5 mm is sufficient; 
for melanoma <1 mm deep, a 1 cm margin is sufficient; and for 
deeper lesions, a 2 cm only margin is recommended, as there is 
no evidence that wider margins make a difference.
Alexander Breslow , 1928–1980, American pathologist. George Washington University, Washington DC, USA, first reported in 1970 that the prognosis depends 
upon the thickness of the tumour.
TABLE 40.2 AJCC 2009 melanoma staging.
Primary tumour Regional nodes Distant metastases
Tx Primary tumour cannot be assessed (has 
been curettage or severely regressed)
NX Patients in whom nodes cannot be 
assessed (e.g. previous excision)
T0 No evidence of primary tumour N0   No node involvement M0 No detected distant metastases
Tis melanoma in situ
T1   
≤1.0 mm
a: no ulceration or mitoses 
b: with ulceration, or >1 
mitosis/mm2
N1
1 node
a: micrometastasis
b: macrometastasis
M1a
Skin, subcutaneous, or distant lymph node 
metastases (normal serum LDH levels)
T2   
1.01–2.0 mm 
a: no ulceration 
b: with ulceration
N2
2–3 nodes
a: micrometastasis
b: macrometastasis
c: in transit mets/ 
satellite(s), without 
metastatic node(s)
M1b
Lung metastases  
(normal serum LDH levels)
T3   
2.01–3.0 mm
a: no ulceration 
b: with ulceration
N3 ≥4 nodes, or matted 
nodes, or in transit mets/ 
satellite(s), with metastatic 
node(s)
M1c
All other visceral metastases or any distant 
metastases with elevated serum LDH levels
T4   
>4 mm
a: no ulceration 
b: with ulceration
Clinical staging of melanoma
Stage 0:  Tis, N0, M0
Stage Ia:  T1a, N0, M0
Stage Ib:  T1b or T2a, N0, M0
Stage IIa:  T2b or T3a, N0, M0
Stage IIb:  T3b or T4a, N0, M0
Stage IIc:  T4b, N0, M0
Stage III:  any T, ≥ N1, M0
Stage IV:  any T, Any N1, M1
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   611 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE612
REGIONAL LYMPH NODES
The likelihood of metastatic spread to regional lymph nodes 
is proportional to the Breslow thickness of the melanoma. 
Management of regional lymph nodes has been a contentious 
topic for well over a century. Some advocated simultaneous 
elective lymph node clearance at the time of wide excision 
of the primary melanoma. Others favoured a therapeutic 
lymphadenectomy if regional metastases became clinically 
evident. Evidence from retrospective studies demonstrate 
that patients with thick melanomas had better survival after 
elective lymphadenectomy, while data from prospective 
randomized studies were less convincing, except in specific 
subgroups. Ideally, one would like to be able to select for treat-
ment those patients with the highest risk of metastatic spread. 
Sentinel node biopsy (SNB), an investigation based on the 
fact that lymphatic metastases proceed in an orderly fashion 
and can be predicted by mapping the lymphatic drainage from 
a primary tumor to the first or ‘sentinel’ node in the regional 
lymphatic basin, offered that potential; but extensive studies 
show no survival benefit, so SNB in melanoma is currently 
a staging investigation for patients with tumours of Breslow 
thickness >1 mm.
ADJUVANT THERAPY
Since the last edition of this book, great advances have 
occurred in treatment for unresectable and metastatic MM.
When mutation locks B-RAF protein signalling to ‘on’, 
it affects the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cel -
lular pathway, promoting initiation, malignant transforma-
tion, tumour progression and metastasis in the 50% of MM 
with B-RAF V600 mutations. Targeted therapy in stage IV 
melanoma using dabrafenib or vemurafenib, which block 
B-RAF action has shown promising results with metastatic 
melanoma. Trametinib has a different action on the MAPK 
pathway: stopping cell growth and promoting apoptosis. 
Combined use with dabrafenib to counter acquired tumour 
resistance via MAPK pathway reactivation, shows promising 
results in stage 4 disease. Also, selective immune checkpoint 
inhibitors ipilimumab or nivolimumab demonstrate benefit in 
metastatic or unresectable melanoma. 
PROGNOSIS
The Breslow thickness of the primary tumour offers the best 
correlation with survival in stage I disease. The higher the 
mitotic index, the poorer is the prognosis of the primary 
tumour. This has greater significance than the presence or 
absence of ulceration.
The presence of lymph node metastases is the single most 
important prognostic index in melanoma, outweighing both 
tumour and host factors. The number of affected nodes and 
the presence of extranodal extension are also significant out -
come predictors. Once regional nodes are clinically involved, 
70–85% of patients will have occult distant metastases. 
Merkel cell (dermal mechanoreceptor) 
tumour
This is an aggressive malignant tumour of Merkel cells and 
usually affects the elderly. It is four times more common in 
women than men (Figure 40.41). Treatment is with wide 
local excision aiming for a 25–30 mm margin, followed by 
radiotherapy.
Friedrich Sigmud Merkel , 1845–1919, Professor of Anatomy successively at Rostock, Koningsberg (now Kaliningrad in Russia) and Göttingen, Germany.
Haig H Kasabach , 1898–1943, radiologist, the Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
Katharine K Merritt , b.1886, American paediatrician, Department of Paediatrics, the Babies Hospital, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
New York, NY, USA. Kasabach and Merritt described the condition as a joint paper in 1940.
Figure 40.41 Merkel cell tumour (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
VASCULAR LESIONS
Congenital: haemangiomata and 
vascular malformations
These can be subclassified biologically into vascular tumours 
or vascular malformations based on their endothelial charac -
teristics, or radiologically into haemangiomata, vascular and 
lymphatic malformations based on their vascular dynamics. 
Haemangiomata
These are benign endothelial tumours that affect three girls 
for every boy. 30% have a herald patch at birth, which then 
grows rapidly in the first year of life and slowly involutes over 
several years, with 70% having resolved by 7 years of age. 
Large hamangiomata can trap platelets leading to thrombo -
cytopenia (Kasabach–Merritt syndrome).
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   612 25/10/2017   08:43Vascular lesions 613
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Vascular malformations
Vascular malformations affect boys and girls equally and 
are associated with numerous syndromes. They are invari -
ably present at birth, but may be missed if deep to the skin. 
Vascular malformations subsequently grow in proportion to 
the child’s growth (other than in response to sepsis or hor -
monal stimulation). Stasis can lead to a localised, consump -
tive coagulopathy in large venous malformations. Low-flow 
malformations may cause skeletal hypoplasia, while high-flow 
malformations can cause hypertrophy.
Common vascular birthmarks
Salmon patch
A salmon patch is a haemangioma that presents as a pink -
ish macule, usually at the nape of neck (Figure 40.42). It is 
caused by an area of persistent fetal dermal circulation, which 
usually disappears at 1 year. Capillary vascular malformations ‘port-wine’ 
stains
Capillary vascular malformations (‘port-wine stains’ (PWS)) 
are 20 times less common than capillary haemangiomata and 
result from defective maturation of cutaneous sympathetic 
innervation during embryogenesis, leading to localised intra-
dermal capillary vasodilatation (Figure 40.44). They appear 
at birth as flat, smooth, intensely purple-stained areas, most 
frequently on the head and neck, often within the maxillary 
and mandibular dermatomes of the trigeminal nerve.
Treatment with intense pulsed light and pulse dye laser are 
successful. PWS may be associated with various syndromes.
Figure 40.42 Salmon patch (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Der -
matology, London, UK).
Capillary haemangioma (strawberry naevus)
This is the commonest ‘birth mark’, occurring most com -
monly on the head and neck (Figure 40.43). 90% appear 
at birth, and, as a consequence of intravascular thrombosis, 
fibrosis and mast cell infiltration, 10% resolve each subse -
quent year, with 70% resolved by 7 years old. 
Whites skin is affected most commonly and girls are 
affected three times more than boys.
Figure 40.43 Capillary haemangioma (courtesy of St John’s Institute 
for Dermatology, London, UK).
Acquired 
Campbell de Morgan spots
These are arteriovenous fistulae at the dermal capillary level 
in sun-exposed skin of older patients (Figure 40.45). 
Figure 40.44 ‘Port-wine’ stain (courtesy of St John’ s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
Campbell Greig de Morgan , 1811–1876, surgeon, the Middlesex Hospital, London UK.
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   613 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE614
Spider naevi
These are angiomata that appear (and may disappear) sponta-
neously at puberty or in two-thirds of pregnant women, usu -
ally disappearing in the puerperium (Figure 40.46). Spider 
naevi are also associated with chronic liver disease. They can 
be treated with intense pulsed light or pulse dye laser.
nail bed. Typically, it is a small, purple nodule measuring a 
few millimetres in size, which is disproportionately painful 
in response to insignificant stimuli, including cold exposure 
(Figure 40.48). Subungual varieties may be invisible causes 
of paroxysmal digital pain.
Figure 40.45 Campbell de Morgan spot (courtesy of Mr AR Gr een-
baum).
Figure 40.46  Spider naevus (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
JP Sucquet , 1840–1870, anatomist, Paris, France.
Heinrich Hoyer , 1834–1907, Professor of Histology, Embryology and Anatomy, the Central Medical School, The Polish University, Warsaw, Poland.
Pyogenic granuloma
These share many histological characteristics of haemangio-
mas and are probably a subtype thereof (Figure 40.47). Most 
are small (0.5–1.5 cm), raised, pedunculated, soft red nodular 
lesions showing superficial ulceration and a tendency to bleed 
after trivial trauma. They should be excised with a minimal 
margin.
Glomus tumour
These arise from a subcutaneous arteriovenous shunt 
(Sucquet–Hoyer canals), especially in the corium of the 
Figure 40.47 Pyogenic granuloma (courtesy of St John’s Institute 
for Dermatology, London, UK).
Figure 40.48  Glomus tumour (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
 Dermatology, London, UK).
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   614 25/10/2017   08:43Wounds 615
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Angiosarcoma (‘malignant 
angioendothelioma’)
A rare, highly malignant tumour arising from the endothelial 
cells (Figure 40.49). The lymphangiosarcoma variant arises 
from lymphatic endothelium and can develop in lymphoe -
dematous tissue, particularly an extremity. Proliferation is 
rapid with early systemic spread.
WOUNDS
Congenital
Cutis aplasia congenita
This is a rare condition characterised by the congenital 
absence of epidermis, dermis and, in some cases, subcuta-
neous tissues, with underlying bony defects in 20%. Treat -
ment depends on the severity of the presentation, but usually 
involves plastic surgery.
Parry–Romberg disease
Parry–Romberg disease is an uncommon and poorly under -
stood progressive, hemifacial atrophy of skin, soft tissue and 
bone. Its incidence is unknown and its inheritance uncertain, 
but it affects women more commonly than men.
The disease commonly starts in a patient’s late 20s, but can 
present in childhood, when the resulting deformity is worse 
because it is magnified by differential growth elsewhere. The 
condition is self-limiting, usually by 5–10 years after onset. 
Once stable, plastic surgical techniques can be employed 
alone or in combination to reconstruct an aesthetic contour.
Spina bifida
Failure of closure of the caudal neuropore during the 4th week 
in utero results in incomplete development of some or all of 
the structural elements posterior to the spinal cord. This can 
occur anywhere, but is commonest in lumbar vertebrae and 
presents as gross variants: spina bifida occulta, in which there 
is a bony defect without neural protrusion and spina bifida 
cystica, in which there is herniation of the meninges (menin-
gocoele), spinal cord (myelocoele) or, most commonly, both 
(menigomyelocoele) and is therefore asymptomatic. Man -
agement ideally involves a multidisciplinary approach and is 
directed towards protecting the spinal cord, preventing cere -
brospinal fluid contamination and secondary hydrocephalus 
and meningitis.
Acquired
Pressure sores
These begin with tissue necrosis at a pressure point and 
develop into a cone-shaped volume of necrotic loss. As many 
as 10% of acute hospital in-patients will suffer some degree 
of pressure sore. The majority affect the elderly and patients 
with spinal injury or decreased sensibility; 80% of paraplegics 
will get a pressure sore and 8% die as a result.
The pathogenesis of pressure sores revolves around unre -
lieved pressure: an increase in local tissue pressure above 
that of perfusion pressure produces ischaemic necrosis that is 
directly proportional to the duration and degree of pressure 
and inversely proportional to the area over which it is applied. 
Muscle and fat are more susceptible to pressure than skin.
Moricz K Kaposi , 1837–1902, Austrian dermatologist, described xeroderma pigmentosum in 1874. He also described a rare cutaneous sarcoma in Ashkenazi Jews; 
now more often an AIDS-defining condition.
Caleb Hillier Parry , 1755–1822, physician, The General Hospital, Bath, UK.
Moritiz Heinrich Romberg , 1795–1873, German neurologist, Director of the University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
Figure 40.49 Angiosarcoma (courtesy of St John’s Institute for Der-
matology, London, UK).
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Kaposi’s sarcoma is a malignant, proliferative tumour of vascu-
lar endothelial cells, which was first described in elderly Jew-
ish men but is now most commonly associated with immune 
compromise after transplantation or HIV infection (Figure 
40.50). There appears to be a causal link with infection by 
human herpes virus 8. Kaposi’s sarcoma usually starts as a red 
brown, indurated, plaque-like, skin lesion that becomes nodu-
lar and then ulcerates. Treatment is with radiotherapy.
Figure 40.50 Kaposi’s sarcoma (courtesy of St John’s Institute for 
Dermatology, London, UK).
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   615 25/10/2017   08:43CHAPTER 40   Skin and subcutaneous tissue
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE616
In a patient who has no predisposing factors manage -
ment is aimed at debridement and repair of the defect, on 
the assumption that recurrence will not occur once normal 
function and sensibility returns. In the paraplegic patient 
recurrence is likely, so management should involve a multi-
disciplinary approach. Primary treatment involves relieving 
pressure (special mattress; nursing care; relief of muscle spasm 
and contractures); optimising nutrition; correcting anaemia; 
and preventing infection and dressings. Surgery involves 
thorough debridement to promote healing and plastic surgery 
to reconstruct the defect.
Ulcers
An ulcer is a discontinuity of an epithelial surface. It is char -
acterised by destruction of the surface epithelium and a gran-
ulating base. Ulcers can be classified as non-specific, specific 
and malignant (Figure 40.51).
Sinus
A sinus is a blind-ending tract connecting a cavity lined 
with granulation tissue (often an abscess cavity) to an epi -
thelial surface (Figure 40.52a ). Sinuses may be congenital 
or acquired. Congenital sinuses arise from the remnants of 
persistent embryonic ducts. Acquired sinuses can result from: 
a retained foreign body (ingrown hair or suture material); 
chronic infection (tuberculosis, osteomyelitis or actinomyco-
sis); chronic inflammation (Crohn’s disease); malignancy; or 
inadequate surgical drainage of the cavity.
Treatment of a sinus is directed at removing the underly-
ing cause. Biopsies should always be taken from the wall of 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 42.3a-eTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a) (b) (c)
(d)( e)
Figure 40.51 Some characteristic shapes of the edges of ulcers. 
(a) Non-specific ulcer: note the shelving edge. (b) Tuberculous ulcer: 
note the undermined edge. (c) Basal cell carcinoma (rodent ulcer): 
note the rolled edge, which may exhibit small blood vessels. (d) Epi-
thelioma: note the heaped-up, everted edge and irregular thickened 
base. (e) Syphilis: note the punched-out edge and thin base, which 
may be covered with a ‘wash-leather’ slough.
(a) (b)
Figure 40.52 A sinus (a) and a fistula (b); both usually arises from 
a preceding abscess. (a) This is a blind track, in this case a pilondial 
abscess. (b) This is a track connecting two epithelium-lined surfaces, 
in this case a colocutaneous fistula from colon to skin.
a sinus to exclude malignancy or specific infection. For spe -
cific management of the disease conditions, please refer to the 
appropriate chapter.
Fistula
A fistula is an abnormal communication between two 
epithelial-lined surfaces (Figure 40.52b). This communi-
cation or tract may be lined by granulation tissue, but may 
become epithelialised in chronic cases. Fistulas may be con-
genital (for example, tracheo-oesophageal and branchial 
fistulas) or acquired (for example, enterocutaneous compli -
cating Crohn’s disease or surgery, or arteriovenous). Manage-
ment of a fistula is directed at the underlying aetiology (see 
the appropriate chapters).
FURTHER READING
Balch CM, Gershenwald,JE, Soong SJ et al. Final version of the Ameri-
can Joint Committee on Cancer staging system for cutaneous mela-
noma. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27(36): 6199–206.
Calonje JE, Brenn T, Lazar A, McKee PH. Pathology of the skin, 4th edn. 
Elsevier, 2011.
Patterson J. Weedon’s skin pathology, 4th edn. Elsevier, 2015.
Soyer HP , Argenziano G, Hoffmann-Wellenhof R, Zalaudek I. Dermo­
scopy: the essentials, 2nd edn. Elsevier, 2011.
WEBSITE ADDRESSES
The American Joint Committee on Cancer: https://cancerstaging.org
Dermnet New Zealand – a reliable online educational resource run 
by a community of dermatologists and other health specialists:  
https://www.dermnetnz.org/
International Dermoscopy Society.  Free to join, this society is run by 
dermatologists to promote clinical research and education in der -
moscopy: https://dermoscopy-ids.org/
06_40B-B&L27_Pt6_Ch40.indd   616 25/10/2017   08:43Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To assess:
 • The area and depth of burns
To understand:
 • Methods for calculating the rate and quantity of fluids to 
be given
 • Techniques for treating burns and the patient
 • The pathophysiology of electrical and chemical burns
Chapter
Burns
41
INTRODUCTION
The incidence of burn injury varies greatly between cultures. 
In the United Kingdom (with its population of 65 million), 
each year around 175  000 people visit accident and emer -
gency (A&E) departments suffering from burns, of whom 
about 13 000 need to be admitted. About 1000 have severe 
burns requiring fluid resuscitation, and half of the victims are 
under 16 years of age.
The majority of burns in children are scalds caused by 
accidents with kettles, pans, hot drinks and bath water. 
Among adolescent patients, the burns are usually caused 
by young males experimenting with matches and flammable 
liquids. In adults, scalds are not uncommon, but are less 
frequent than flame burns. Most electrical and chemical 
injuries occur in adults. Cold and radiation are very rare 
causes of burns. Associated conditions in adults, such as 
mental disease (attempted suicide or assault), epilepsy and 
alcohol or drug abuse, are underlying factors in as many as 
80% of patients with burns admitted to hospital in some 
populations.
Legislation, health promotion and appliance design have 
reduced the incidence of burns, with regulations regard -
ing flame-retardant clothes and furniture, the promotion of 
smoke alarms, the design of cookers and gas fires, the almost 
universal use of cordless kettles and the education of parents 
to keep their hot water thermostat to 60°C all playing their 
part.
The last 50 years have seen great strides made to reduce 
both morbidity and mortality from burn injuries. The coming 
years will see a better understanding of the control of physio-
logy along with improvements in reconstruction and rehabil-
itation.
A large burn injury will have a significant effect on the 
patient’s family and friends and the patient’ s future. The 
importance of multidisciplinary care needs to be stressed for 
the adequate and effective care of the burn patient.
THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF 
BURN INJURY
Burns cause damage in a number of different ways, but by far 
the most common organ affected is the skin. However, burns 
can also damage the airway and lungs, with life-threatening 
consequences. Airway injuries occur when the face and neck 
are burned. Respiratory system injuries usually occur if a per -
son is trapped in a burning vehicle, house, car or aeroplane 
and is forced to inhale the hot and poisonous gases.
Summary box 41.1
Prevention of burns
A significant proportion of burns can be prevented by:
●● Implementing good health and safety regulations
●● Educating the public
●● Introducing of effective legislation
Summary box 41.2
Warning signs of burns to the respiratory system
●● Burns around the face and neck
●● A history of being trapped in a burning room
●● Change in voice
●● Stridor
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   617 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE618
INJURY TO THE AIRWAY AND 
LUNGS
Physical burn injury to the airway 
above the larynx
The hot gases can physically burn the nose, mouth, tongue, 
palate and larynx. Once burned, the linings of these structures 
will start to swell. After a few hours, they may start to inter -
fere with the larynx and may completely block the airway if 
action is not taken to secure an airway.
Inhalational injury
Inhalational injury is caused by the minute particles within 
thick smoke, which, because of their small size, are not fil -
tered by the upper airway, but are carried down to the lung 
parenchyma. They stick to the moist lining, causing an 
intense reaction in the alveoli. This chemical pneumonitis 
causes oedema within the alveolar sacs and decreasing gas -
eous exchange over the ensuing 24 hours (Figure 41.1), 
and often gives rise to a bacterial pneumonia. Its presence or 
absence has a very significant effect on the mortality of any 
burn patient.
Summary box 41.3
Dangers of smoke, hot gas or steam inhalation
●● Inhaled hot gases can cause supraglottic airway burns and 
laryngeal oedema
●● Inhaled steam can cause subglottic burns and loss of 
respiratory epithelium
●● Inhaled smoke particles can cause chemical alveolitis and 
respiratory failure
●● Inhaled poisons, such as carbon monoxide, can cause 
metabolic poisoning
●● Full-thickness burns to the chest can cause mechanical 
blockage to rib movement
Physical burn injury to the airway 
below the larynx
This is a rare injury as the heat exchange mechanisms in the 
supraglottic airway are usually able safely to absorb the heat 
from hot air. However, steam has a large latent heat of evap -
oration and can cause thermal damage to the lower airway. 
In such injuries, the respiratory epithelium rapidly swells and 
detaches from the bronchial tree. This creates casts, which 
can block the main upper airway.
Metabolic poisoning
There are many poisonous gases that can be given off in a 
fire, the most common being carbon monoxide, a product 
of incomplete combustion that is often pro duced by fires in 
enclosed spaces. This is the usual cause of a person being 
found with altered consciousness at the scene of a fire. Car -
bon monoxide binds to haemoglobin with an affinity 240 
times greater than that of oxygen and therefore blocks 
the transport of oxygen. Levels of carboxyhaemoglobin in 
the bloodstream can be measured. Concentrations above 
10% are dangerous and need treatment with pure oxygen 
for more than 24 hours. Death occurs with concentrations 
around 60%.
Another metabolic toxin produced in house fires is hydro-
gen cyanide, which causes a metabolic acidosis by interfering 
with mitochondrial respiration.
Figure 41.1 The swelling that occurs with inflammation due to burns.
Mechanical block on rib movement
Burned skin is very thick and stiff, and this can physically stop 
the ribs moving if there is a large full-thickness burn across 
the chest.
INFLAMMATION AND 
CIRCULATORY CHANGES
The dangers to the airway and respiration described above 
are readily apparent, but the cause of circulatory changes fol-
lowing a burn are more complex. The changes occur because 
burned skin activates a web of inflammatory cascades. The 
release of neuropeptides and the activation of complement 
are initiated by the stimulation of pain fibres and the alter -
ation of proteins by heat. The activation of Hageman factor 
John Hageman  was a 37-year-old railroad brakeman in whom this factor deficiency was discovered by Dr Oscar Ratnoff in 1955.
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   618 25/10/2017   08:44Other life-threat ening events with major burns 619
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
initiates a number of protease-driven cascades, altering the 
arachidonic acid, thrombin and kallikrein pathways.
At a cellular level, complement causes the degranulation 
of mast cells and coats the proteins altered by the burn. This 
attracts neutrophils, which also degranulate, with the release 
of large quantities of free radicals and proteases. These can, 
in turn, cause further damage to the tissue. Mast cells also 
release primary cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor alpha  
(TNF-α). These act as chemotactic agents to inflammatory 
cells and cause the subsequent release of many secondary 
cytokines. These inflammatory factors alter the permeabil -
ity of blood vessels such that intravascular fluid escapes. The 
increase in permeability is such that large protein molecules 
can also now escape with ease. The damaged collagen and 
these extravasated proteins increase the oncotic pressure 
within the burned tissue, further increasing the flow of water 
from the intravascular to the extravascular space (Figure 
41.2).
The overall effect of these changes is to produce a net flow 
of water, solutes and proteins from the intravascular to the 
extravascular space. This flow occurs over the first 36 hours 
after the injury, but does not include red blood cells. In a 
small burn, this reaction is small and localised but, as the burn 
size approaches 10–15% of total body surface area (TBSA), 
the loss of intravascular fluid can cause a level of circulatory 
shock. Furthermore, once the area increases to 25% of TBSA, 
the inflammatory reaction causes fluid loss in vessels remote 
from the burn injury. This is why such importance is attached 
to measuring the TBSA involved in any burn. It dictates the 
size of inflammatory reaction and therefore the amount of 
fluid needed to control shock.
(a)
(b)
Figure 41.2 A scald burn (a) and its laser doppler image (b) show-
ing burn depth. Red and pink areas are superficial burns, which 
should heal with conservative dressings.
Summary box 41.4
The shock reaction after burns
●● Burns produce an inflammatory reaction
●● This leads to vastly increased vascular permeability
●● Water, solutes and proteins move from the intra- to the 
extravascular space
●● The volume of fluid lost is directly proportional to the area of 
the burn
●● Above 15% of surface area, the loss of fluid produces shock
OTHER LIFE-THREATENING 
EVENTS WITH MAJOR BURNS
The immune system and 
infection
The inflammatory changes caused by the burn have an effect 
on the patient’s immune system. Cell-mediated immunity is 
significantly reduced in large burns, leaving them more sus -
ceptible to bacterial and fungal infections. There are many 
potential sources of infection, especially from the burn wound 
and from the lung if this is injured, but also from any central 
venous lines, tracheostomies or urinary catheters present.
Changes to the intestine
The inflammatory stimulus and shock can cause 
microvascular damage and ischaemia to the gut mucosa. 
This reduces gut motility and can prevent the absorption 
of food. Failure of enteral feeding in a patient with a 
large burn is a life-threatening complication. This process 
also increases the translocation of gut bacteria, which can 
become an important source of infection in large burns. Gut 
mucosal swelling, gastric stasis and peritoneal oedema can 
also cause abdominal compartment syndrome, which splints 
the diaphragm and increases the airway pressures needed for 
respiration.
Danger to peripheral circulation
In full-thickness burns, the collagen fibres are coagulated. 
The normal elasticity of the skin is lost. A circumferential 
full-thickness burn to a limb acts as a tourniquet as the limb 
swells. If untreated, this will progress to limb-threatening 
ischaemia.
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   619 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE620
IMMEDIATE CARE OF THE BURN 
PATIENT
Prehospital care
The principles of prehospital care are:
 ● Ensure rescuer safety. This is particularly important in 
house fires and in the case of electrical and chemical  injuries.
 ● Stop the burning process . Stop, drop and roll is a good 
method of extinguishing fire burning on a person.
 ● Check for other injuries . A standard ABC (airway, 
breathing, circulation) check followed by a rapid second -
ary survey will ensure that no other significant injuries 
are missed. Patients burned in explosions or even escap -
ing from fires may have head or spine injuries and other 
life-threatening problems.
 ● Cool the burn wound. This provides analgesia and slows 
the delayed microvascular damage that can occur after a 
burn injury. Cooling should occur for a minimum of 10 
minutes and is effective up to 1 hour after the burn injury. It 
is a particularly important first aid step in partial-thickness 
burns, especially scalds. In temperate climates, cooling 
should be at about 15°C, and hypothermia must be avoided.
 ● Give oxygen. Anyone involved in a fire in an enclosed 
space should receive oxygen, especially if there is an 
altered consciousness level.
 ● Elevate. Sitting a patient up with a burned airway may 
prove life-saving in the event of a delay in transfer to hos-
pital care. Elevation of burned limbs will reduce swelling 
and discomfort.
Hospital care
The principles of managing an acute burn injury are the same 
as in any acute trauma case:
 ● A, Airway control.
 ● B, Breathing and ventilation.
 ● C, Circulation.
 ● D, Disability – neurological status.
 ● E, Exposure with environmental control.
 ● F , Fluid resuscitation.
The possibility of injury additional to the burn must 
be sought both clinically and from the history , and treated 
appropriately. The major determinants of severity of any burn 
injury are the percentage of TBSA that is burned, the pres -
ence of an inhalation injury and the depth of the burn.
Not all burned patients will need to be admitted to a burns 
unit, but the main criteria are given in Table 41.1.
TABLE 41.1 The criteria for acute admission to a burns unit.
Suspected airway or inhalational injury
Any burn likely to require fluid resuscitation
Any burn likely to require surgery
Patients with burns of any significance to the hands, face, feet or 
perineum
Patients whose psychiatric or social background makes it 
inadvisable to send them home
Any suspicion of non-accidental injury
Any burn in a patient at the extremes of age
Any burn with associated potentially serious sequelae, including 
high-tension electrical burns and concentrated hydrofluoric acid 
burns
Airway
The burned airway creates problems for the patient by swell -
ing and, if not managed proactively, can completely occlude 
the upper airway. The treatment is to secure the airway with 
an endotracheal tube until the swelling has subsided, which 
is usually after about 48 hours. The symptoms of laryngeal 
oedema, such as change in voice, stridor, anxiety and respira-
tory difficulty, are very late symptoms. Intubation at this point 
is often difficult or impossible owing to swelling, so acute cri-
cothyroidotomy equipment must be at hand when intubating 
patients with a delayed diagnosis of airway burn. Because of 
this, early intubation of suspected airway burn is the treatment 
of choice in such patients. The time-frame from burn to airway 
occlusion is usually between 4 and 24 hours, so there is time to 
make a sensible decision with senior staff and allow an experi-
enced anaesthetist to intubate the patient.
Summary box 41.6
Major determinants of the outcome of a burn
●● Percentage surface area involved
●● Depth of burns
●● Presence of an inhalational injury
Summary box 41.7
Initial management of the burned airway
●● Early elective intubation is safest
●● Delay can make intubation very difficult because of swelling
●● Be ready to perform an emergency cricothyroidotomy, if 
intubation is delayed
The key in the management of airway burn is the history 
and early signs, rather than the symptoms. The history is of 
inhalation of hot gases such as in a house or car fire. Clues on 
examination include blisters on the hard palate, burned nasal 
mucosa and loss of all the hair in the nose (the anterior hairs 
are often burned), but perhaps the most valuable signs are the 
presence of deep burns around the mouth and in the neck.
Summary box 41.5
Other complications of burns
●● Infection from the burn site, lungs, gut, lines and catheters
●● Malabsorption from the gut
●● Circumferential burns may compromise circulation to a limb
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   620 25/10/2017   08:44Assessment of the burn wound 621
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Breathing
Inhalational injury
Time is also a factor; anyone trapped in a fire for more than a 
couple of minutes must be observed for signs of smoke inha -
lation. Other signs that raise suspicion are the presence of 
soot in the nose and the oropharynx and a chest radiograph 
showing patchy consolidation.
The clinical features are a progressive increase in respiratory 
effort and rate, rising pulse, anxiety and confusion and decreas-
ing oxygen saturation. These symptoms may not be apparent 
immediately and can take 24 hours to 5 days to develop.
Treatment starts as soon as this injury is suspected and the 
airway is secure. Physiotherapy, nebulisers and warm humid -
ified oxygen are all useful. The patient’s progress should be 
monitored using respiratory rate, together with blood gas 
measurements. If the situation deteriorates, continuous or 
intermittent positive pressure may be used with a mask or 
T-piece. In the severest cases, intubation and management in 
an intensive care unit will be needed.
The key, therefore, in the management of inhalational 
injury is to suspect it from the history, institute early manage-
ment and observe carefully for deterioration.
Thermal burn injury to the lower airway
These rare injuries can occur with steam injuries. Their man-
agement is supportive and the same as that for an inhalational 
injury.
Metabolic poisoning
Any history of a fire within an enclosed space and any his -
tory of altered consciousness are important clues to meta -
bolic  poisoning. Blood gases must be measured immediately 
if poisoning is a possibility. Carboxyhaemoglobin levels raised 
above 10% must be treated with high inspired oxygen for 24 
hours to speed its displacement from haemoglobin. Metabolic 
acidosis is a feature of this and other forms of poisoning.
Once again, the key to diagnosing these injuries is suspi -
cion from the history . Blood gas measurement will confirm 
the diagnosis. The treatment is oxygen.
Mechanical block to breathing
Any mechanical block to breathing from the eschar of a sig -
nificant full-thickness burn on the chest wall is obvious from 
the examination. There will also be carbon dioxide retention 
and high inspiratory pressures if the patient is ventilated. The 
treatment is to make some scoring cuts through the burned 
skin to allow the chest to expand (escharotomy). The nerves 
have been destroyed in the skin, and this procedure is not 
painful for the patient.
ASSESSMENT OF THE BURN 
WOUND
Assessing size
Burn size needs to be formally assessed in a controlled environ-
ment. This allows the area to be exposed and any soot or debris 
washed off. Care should be taken not to cause hypothermia 
during this stage. In the case of smaller burns or patches of burn, 
the best measurement is to cut a piece of clean paper the size of 
the patient’s whole hand (digits and palm), which represents 
1% TBSA, and match this to the area. Another accurate way 
of measuring the size of burns is to draw the burn on a Lund and 
Browder chart (Figure 41.3), which maps out the percentage 
TBSA of sections of our anatomy. It also takes into account 
different proportional body surface area in children according 
to age. The ‘rule of nines’, which states that each upper limb is 
9% TBSA, each lower limb 18%, the torso 18% each side and 
the head and neck 9%, can be used as a rough guide to TBSA 
outside the hospital environment.
Summary box 41.8
Recognition of the potentially burned airway
●● A history of being trapped in the presence of smoke or hot gases
●● Burns on the palate or nasal mucosa, or loss of all the hairs in 
the nose
●● Deep burns around the mouth and neck
Relative percentage of area affected by growth
Age in years
A Head
B Thigh
C Leg
0
9
2
2
1
8
3
2
5
6
4
3
10
 5
 4
 3
15
 4
 4
 3
Adult
  3
  4
  3
A
B B
C C
13
1
1
2
1½
1½
1 ¾ 1 ¾
2
1½
1½
A
B B
C C
13
1
2
1½
2½ 2½
1½
1 ¾ 1 ¾
2
1½
1½
Figure 41.3 The Lund and Browder chart.
Summary box 41.9
Assessing the area of a burn
●● The patient’s whole hand is 1% TBSA, and is a useful guide in 
small burns
●● The Lund and Browder chart is useful in larger burns
●● The ‘rule of nines’ is adequate for a first approximation only
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   621 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE622
Assessing depth from the history
The first indication of burn depth comes from the history 
(Table 41.2). The burning of human skin is temperature- and 
time-dependent. It takes 6 hours for skin maintained at 44°C 
to suffer irreversible changes, but a surface temperature of 70°C 
for 1 s is all that is needed to produce epidermal destruction. 
Taking an example of hot water at 65°C: exposure for 45 s will 
produce a full-thickness burn, for 15 s a deep partial-thickness 
burn and for 7 s a superficial partial-thickness burn.
Full-thickness burns
The whole of the dermis is destroyed in these burns (Figure 
41.7). Clinically, they have a hard, leathery feel. The appear- 
ance can vary from that similar to the patient’s normal skin 
to charred black, depending upon the intensity of the heat. 
There is no capillary return. Often, thrombosed vessels can 
be seen under the skin. These burns are completely anaesthe-
tised: a needle can be stuck deep into the dermis without any 
pain or bleeding.
FLUID RESUSCITATION
The principle of fluid resuscitation is that the intravascular  
volume must be maintained following a burn, in order to pro-
vide sufficient circulation to perfuse not only the essential 
visceral organs such as the brain, kidneys and gut, but also the 
peripheral tissues, especially the damaged skin.
TABLE 41.2 Causes of burns and their likely depth.
Cause of burn Probable depth of burn 
Scald Superficial, but with deep dermal 
patches in the absence of good first 
aid. Will be deep in a young infant
Fat burns Deep dermal
Flame burns Mixed deep dermal and full thickness
Alkali burns, including 
cement
Often deep dermal or full thickness
Acid burns Weak concentrations superficial; 
strong concentrations deep dermal
Electrical contact burn Full thickness
Summary box 41.10
Assessing the depth of a burn
●● The history is important – temperature, time and burning 
material
●● Superficial burns have capillary filling
●● Deep partial-thickness burns do not blanch, but have some 
sensation
●● Full-thickness burns feel leathery and have no sensation
Superficial partial-thickness burns
The damage in these burns goes no deeper than the papillary 
dermis. The clinical features are blistering and/or loss of the 
epidermis. The underlying dermis is pink and moist. The cap-
illary return is clearly visible when blanched. There is little 
or no fixed capillary staining. Pinprick sensation is normal. 
Superficial partial-thickness burns heal without residual scar-
ring in 2 weeks. The treatment is non-surgical (Figure 41.4).
Deep partial-thickness burn
These burns involve damage to the deeper parts of the retic-
ular dermis (Figure 41.5). Clinically, the epidermis is usually 
lost. The exposed dermis is not as moist as that in a super -
ficial burn. There is often abundant fixed capillary staining, 
especially if examined after 48 hours. The colour does not 
blanch with pressure under the examiner’s finger. Sensation 
is reduced, and the patient is unable to distinguish sharp from 
blunt pressure when examined with a needle. Deep dermal 
burns take 3 or more weeks to heal without surgery and usu-
ally lead to hypertrophic scarring (Figure 41.6).
Figure 41.4 (a) A superficial partial-thickness scald 24 hours after 
injury. The dermis is pink and blanches to pressure. (b) At 2 weeks, 
the wound is healed but lacks pigment. (c) At 3 months, the pigment 
is returning.
(a)
(b)
(c)
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   622 25/10/2017   08:44Fluid resuscitation 623
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Figure 41.5 (a) A deep dermal burn under going tangential shav -
ing. The dead dermis is removed layer by layer until healthy bleeding 
is seen. The burn is pale because it was dressed with silver sulph-
adiazine cream, but no blanching was visible under this layer. The 
patient was unable to differentiate between pressure from the sharp 
and blunt ends of a needle. (b) A thin, split-thickness graft harvested 
from the thigh. (c) The thin graft is placed in the dermal remnants. The 
rete pegs can be seen between the remnants of the dermis through 
the graft.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 41.6 Hypertrophic scarring following a deep dermal burn.
Summary box 41.11
Fluids for resuscitation
●● In children with burns over 10% TBSA and adults with burns 
over 15% TBSA, consider the need for intravenous fluid 
resuscitation
●● If oral fluids are to be used, salt must be added
●● Fluids needed can be calculated from a standard formula
●● The key is to monitor urine output
Figure 41.7  (a) A full-thickness burn on admission just prior to 
escharotomy. The wound is wrapped in cling film while in transit. The 
patient’s facial burn is shown in Figure 41.10. (b) Excision of the same 
full-thickness burn, down to healthy fat.
(a)
(b)
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   623 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE624
Intravenous resuscitation is appropriate for any child with 
a burn greater than 10% TBSA. The figure is 15% TBSA for 
adults. In some parts of the world, intravenous resuscitation 
is commenced only with burns that approach 30% TBSA. If 
oral resuscitation is to be commenced, it is important that 
the water given is not salt free. It is rarely possible to undergo 
significant diuresis in the first 24 hours in view of the stress 
hormones that are present. Hyponatraemia and water intox -
ication can be fatal. It is therefore appropriate to give oral 
rehydration with a solution such as Dioralyte®.
The resuscitation volume is relatively constant in pro -
portion to the area of the body burned and, therefore, there 
are formulae that calculate the approximate volume of fluid 
needed for the resuscitation of a patient of a given body 
weight with a given percentage of the body burned. These 
regimes follow the fluid loss, which is at its maximum in the 
first 8 hours and slows, such that, by 24–36 hours, the patient 
can be maintained on his or her normal daily requirements.
There are three types of fluid used. The most common 
is Ringer’s lactate or Hartmann’s solution; some centres use 
human albumin solution or fresh-frozen plasma; and some 
centres use hypertonic saline.
Perhaps the simplest and most widely used formula is the 
Parkland formula. This calculates the fluid to be replaced in 
the first 24 hours by the following formula: total percentage 
body surface area × weight (kg) × 4 = volume (mL). Half this 
volume is given in the first 8 hours and the second half is 
given in the subsequent 16 hours.
Crystalloid resuscitation
Ringer’s lactate is the most commonly used crystalloid. Crys-
talloids are said to be as effective as colloids for maintaining 
intravascular volume. They are also significantly less expen -
sive. Another reason for the use of crystalloids is that even 
large protein molecules leak out of capillaries following burn 
injury; however, non-burnt capillaries continue to sieve pro -
teins virtually normally.
In children maintenance fluid must also be given. This is 
normally dextrose–saline given as follows:
 ● 100 mL/kg for 24 hours for the first 10 kg;
 ● 50 mL/kg for the next 10 kg;
 ● 20 mL/kg for 24 hours for each kilogram over 20 kg body 
weight.
Hypertonic saline
Hypertonic saline has been effective in treating burns 
shock for many years. It produces hyperosmolarity and 
hypernatraemia. This reduces the shift of intracellular water 
to the extracellular space. Advantages include less tissue 
oedema and a resultant decrease in escharotomies and 
intubations.
Colloid resuscitation
Human albumin solution (HAS) is a commonly used colloid. 
Plasma proteins are responsible for the inward oncotic pressure 
that counteracts the outward capillary hydrostatic pressure. 
Without proteins, plasma volumes would not be maintained 
as there would be oedema. Proteins should be given after the 
first 12 hours of burn because, before this time, the massive 
fluid shifts cause proteins to leak out of the cells.
The most common colloid-based formula is the Muir and 
Barclay formula:
 ● 0.5 × percentage body surface area burnt × weight = one 
portion;
 ● periods of 4/4/4, 6/6 and 12 hours, respectively;
 ● one portion to be given in each period.
Monitoring of resuscitation
The key to monitoring of resuscitation is urine output. Urine 
output should be between 0.5 and 1.0 mL/kg body weight per 
hour. If the urine output is below this, the infusion rate should 
be increased by 50%. If the urine output is inadequate and the 
patient is showing signs of hypoperfusion (restlessness with 
tachycardia, cool peripheries and a high haematocrit), then a 
bolus of 10 mL/kg body weight should be given. It is import -
ant that patients are not over-resuscitated and urine output 
in excess of 2 mL/kg body weight per hour should signal a 
decrease in the rate of infusion.
Other measures of tissue perfusion such as acid–base 
balance are appropriate in larger, more complex burns, and 
a haematocrit measurement is a useful tool in confirming 
suspected under- or over-hydration. Those with cardiac dys -
function, acute or chronic, may well need more exact mea -
surement of filling pressure, preferably by transoesophageal 
ultrasound or with the more invasive central line.
TREATING THE BURN WOUND
Escharotomy
Circumferential full-thickness burns to the limbs require 
emergency surgery (Figure 41.8). The tourniquet effect of 
this injury is easily treated by incising the whole length of 
full-thickness burns. This should be done in the mid-axial 
line, avoiding major nerves (Table 41.3). One should remem-
ber that an escharotomy can cause a large amount of blood 
loss; therefore, adequate blood should be available for trans-
fusion if required.
Thereafter, the management of the burn wound remains 
the same, irrespective of the size of the injury. The burn needs 
to be cleaned, and the size and depth need to be assessed. Full- 
thickness burns and deep partial-thickness burns that will 
require operative treatment will need to be dressed with an 
antibacterial dressing to delay the onset of colonisation of 
the wound.
Alexis Frank Hartmann , 1898–1964, paediatrician, St Louis, MO, USA.
Thomas Laird Barclay , d.2007, formerly plastic surgeon, The Royal Infirmary, Bradford, UK.
Ian Fraser Kerr Muir , 1921–2008, formerly plastic surgeon, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK, referred to as ‘a gentle giant of plastic surgery’.
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   624 25/10/2017   08:44Treating the burn wound 625
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Full-thickness burns and obvious 
deep dermal wounds
The four most common dressings for full-thickness and con -
taminated wounds are listed in Table 41.4.
 ● Mafenide acetate cream . This is popular, especially in 
the United States, but is painful to apply. It is usually used 
as a 5% topical solution, but has been associated with met-
abolic acidosis.
 ● Silver sulphadiazine and cerium nitrate . This is also 
a very useful burn dressing, especially for full-thickness 
burns. It induces a sterile eschar on the burned skin and 
has been shown in certain instances, especially in elderly 
patients, to reduce some of the cell-mediated immunosup-
pression that occurs in burns. Cerium nitrate forms a ster-
ile eschar and is especially useful in treating burns when 
a conservative treatment option has been chosen. Cerium 
nitrate has also been shown to boost cell-mediated immu-
nity in these patients.
Superficial partial-thickness wounds 
and mixed-depth wounds
Around the world, a wide variety of substances are used to treat 
these wounds, from honey or boiled potato peel to synthetic 
biological dressings with live cultured fibroblasts within the 
matrix. This is testament to the fact that superficial partial-
thickness burns will heal almost irrespective of the dressing. 
Thus, the key lies with dressings that are easy to apply, non-
painful, reduce pain, simple to manage and locally available. 
The choice of dressings does, however, become crucial in the 
case of burns that border on being deep dermal (Figure 41.9). 
Here, the choice of dressing can make the difference between 
scar and no scar and/or operation and no operation. Some of 
the options for dressing choice are described below.
If the wound is heavily contaminated as a result of the 
accident, then it is prudent to clean the wound formally 
under a general anaesthetic. W ith more chronic contamina -
tion, silver sulphadiazine cream dressing for 2 or 3 days is very 
effective and can be changed to a dressing that is more effi -
cient at promoting healing after this period.
The simplest method of treating a superficial wound is by 
exposure. The initial exudate needs to be managed by fre -
quent changes of clean linen around the patient but, after 
a few days, a dry eschar forms, which then separates as the 
wound epithelialises. This is often used in hot climates and for 
small burns on the face. However, this method is painful and 
requires an intensive amount of nursing support. A variation 
on this theme is to cover the wound with a permeable wound 
dressing, such as Mefix® or Fixamol®. This allows the wounds 
to dry but, because it is a covering, it avoids the problems of the 
wound adhering to the sheets and clothes. A similar method 
of managing these types of burn is to place a Vaseline-impreg-
nated gauze (with or without an antiseptic, such as chlorhexi-
dine) over the wound. An alternative is a fenestrated silicone 
sheet (e.g. Mepitel ®). These can then be backed with swabs 
to absorb the exudate. The Vaseline gauze or silicone layer is 
used to prevent the swabs adhering to the wound and reduces 
the stiffness of the dry eschar, preventing it from cracking so 
easily. The swabs need to be changed after the first 48 hours as 
they are often soaked. After that, they can be left for longer.
More interactive dressings include hydrocolloids and bio-
logical dressings. Hydrocolloid dressings need to be changed 
TABLE 41.3 Key features of escharotomy placement.
Upper limb Mid-axial, anterior to the elbow medially to avoid 
the ulnar nerve
Hand Midline in the digits. Release muscle 
compartments if tight. Best done in theatre and 
with an experienced surgeon
Lower limb Mid-axial. Posterior to the ankle medially to avoid 
the saphenous vein
Chest Down the chest lateral to the nipples, across the 
chest below the clavicle and across the chest at 
the level of the xiphisternum
General rules Extend the wound beyond the deep burn
Diathermy any significant bleeding vessels
Apply haemostatic dressing and elevate the limb 
postoperatively
TABLE 41.4 Options for topical treatment of deep burns.
1% silver sulphadiazine cream 
0.5% silver nitrate solution 
Mafenide acetate cream
Serum nitrate, silver sulphadiazine and cerium nitrate
Figure 41.8 A full-thickness burn to the upper limb with a mid-axial 
escharotomy. The soot and debris have been washed off.
Dressings with nanocrystalline silver
 ● Silver sulphadiazine cream (1%) . This gives broad 
spectrum prophylaxis against bacterial colonisation and is 
particularly effective against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
also methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
 ● Silver nitrate solution (0.5%) . Again, this is highly 
effective as a prophylaxis against Pseudomonas colonisa-
tion, but it is not as active as silver sulphadiazine cream 
against some of the gram-negative aerobes. The other dis-
advantage of this solution is that it needs to be changed 
or the wounds resoaked every 2–4 hours. It also produces 
black staining of all the furniture surrounding the patient.
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   625 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE626
every 3–5 days. They are particularly useful in mixed-depth 
burns as the high protease levels under the occlusive dressings 
aid with the debridement of the deeper areas of burn. They 
also provide a moist environment, which is good for epitheli-
alisation. Duoderm® is a hydrocolloid dressing. There is good 
evidence for its value in burns.
Biological, synthetic (e.g. Biobrane ®) and natural (e.g. 
amniotic membranes) dressings also provide good healing 
environments and do not need to be changed. They are ideal 
for one-stop management of superficial burns, being easy to 
apply and comfortable. However, they will become detached 
if applied to deep dermal wounds as the eschar needs to sepa-
rate. They are therefore not as useful in mixed-depth wounds.
Early debridement and grafting is the key to effectively 
treating deep partial- and full-thickness burns in a majority 
of cases.
ADDITIONAL ASPECTS OF 
TREATING THE BURNED 
PATIENT
Analgesia
Acute
Analgesia is a vital part of burns management. Small burns, 
especially superficial burns, respond well to simple oral anal -
gesia, paracetamol and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs. Topical cooling is especially soothing. Large burns 
require intravenous opiates. Intramuscular injections should 
not be given in acute burns over 10% of TBSA, as absorption 
is unpredictable and dangerous.
Subacute
In patients with large burns, continuous analgesia is required, 
beginning with infusions and continuing with oral tablets, 
such as slow-release morphine. Powerful, short-acting analge-
sia should be administered before dressing changes. Adminis-
tration may require an anaesthetist, as in the case of general 
anaesthesia or midazolam and ketamine, or less intensive 
supervision, as in the case of morphine and nitrous oxide.
Energy balance and nutrition
One of the most important aspects in treating burns patients 
is nutrition. Any adult with a burn greater than 15% (10% in 
children) of TBSA has an increased nutritional requirement. 
All patients with burns of 20% of TBSA or greater should 
receive a nasogastric tube. (Feeding should start within 6 
hours of the injury to reduce gut mucosal damage.) A num-
ber of different formulae are available to calculate the energy 
requirements of patients.
Burn injuries are catabolic in the acute episode. Success -
ful management of the patient’s energy balance involves a 
Figure 41.9  (a) A scald to the chest from boiling water , mainly 
superficial but in some areas close to being deep dermal. This was 
treated with a hydrocolloid dressing. (b) There are two tiny areas of 
hypertrophy indicating how close the burn was to being deep dermal. 
The good first aid this patient received probably made a difference to 
the outcome.
(a)
(b)
Summary box 41.12
Principles of dressings for burns
●● Full-thickness and deep dermal burns need antibacterial 
dressings to delay colonisation prior to surgery
●● Superficial burns will heal and need simple dressings
●● An optimal healing environment can make a difference to 
outcome in borderline depth burns
Summary box 41.13
Nutrition in burns patients
●● Burns patients need extra feeding
●● A nasogastric tube should be used in all patients with burns 
over 15% of TBSA
●● Removing the burn and achieving healing stops the catabolic 
drive
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   626 25/10/2017   08:44Surgery for the acut e burn wound 627
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
number of strategies. The catabolic drive continues while the 
wound remains unhealed and, therefore, rapid excision of the 
burn and stable coverage of the wound are the most signif-
icant factors in reversing this. Obligatory energy utilisation 
must be reduced to a minimum by keeping the patient warm 
with good environmental control. The excess energy require-
ments must be provided for and the nutritional balance moni-
tored by measuring weight and nitrogen balance (Table 41.5).
TABLE 41.5 Commonly used feeding formulae.
Curreri formula Age 16–59 years: (25)W + (40)TBSA
Age 60+ years: (20)W + (65)TBSA
Sutherland 
formula
Children: 60 kcal/kg + 35 kcal%TBSA 
Adults: 20 kcal/kg + 70 kcal%TBSA
Protein needs Greatest nitrogen losses between days 5 and 10 
20% of kilocalories should be provided by 
proteins
Davies formula Children: 3 g/kg + 1 g%TBSA 
Adults: 1 g/kg + 3 g%TBSA
TBSA, total body surface area; W, weight.
Monitoring and control of infection
Patients with major burns are immunocompromised, having 
large portals of entry to pathogenic and opportunistic bacteria 
and fungi via the burn wound. They have compromised local 
defences in the lungs and gut due to oedema, and usually have 
monitoring lines and catheters, which themselves represent 
portals for infection.
Nursing care
Burns patients require particularly intensive nursing care. 
Nurses are the primary effectors of many decisions that 
directly affect healing. Bandaged hands and joints that are 
stiff and painful need careful coaxing. Personal hygiene, baths 
and showers all become time-consuming and painful, but are 
vital parts of the patient’s physiotherapy. Their success or fail-
ure has a powerful psychological impact on the patient and 
his or her family.
Physiotherapy
All burns cause swelling, especially burns to the hands. Eleva-
tion, splintage and exercise reduce swelling and improve the 
final outcome. The physiotherapy needs to be started on day 
1, so that the message can be reinforced on a daily basis.
Psychological
A major burn is an overwhelming event, outside the normal 
experience, which stretches the patient’s coping ability , 
suspends the patient’s sense of safety and causes post- 
traumatic reactions. These are normal and usually self-  
limiting, receding as the patient heals. The features of this 
intensity of experience are of intrusive reactions, arousal 
reactions and avoidance reactions.
SURGERY FOR THE ACUTE BURN 
WOUND
Any deep partial-thickness and full-thickness burns, except 
those that are less than about 4 cm 2, need surgery. Any burn 
of indeterminate depth should be reassessed after 48 hours. 
This is because burns that initially appear superficial may well 
deepen over that time. Delayed microvascular injury is espe-
cially common in scalds.
The essence of burns surgery is control. First and foremost, 
the anaesthetist needs good control of the patient. A wide-
bore cannula should be used and the patient’s blood pressure 
must be monitored adequately. If a large excision is consid -
ered, then an arterial line (to monitor blood pressure) and a 
central venous pressure monitor are needed. The anaesthetist 
also needs measurements and control of the acid–base 
Summary box 41.14
Infection control in burns patients
●● Burns patients are immunocompromised
●● They are susceptible to infection from many routes
●● Sterile precautions must be rigorous
●● Swabs should be taken regularly
●● A rise in white blood cell count, thrombocytosis and increased 
catabolism are warnings of infection
Control of infection begins with policies on hand-washing 
and other cross-contamination prevention measures. Bac -
teriological surveillance of the wound, catheter tips and spu -
tum helps to build a picture of the patient’s flora. If there are 
signs of infection, then further cultures need to be taken and 
antibiotics started. This is often initially on a best guess basis, 
hence the usefulness of prior surveillance; close liaison with 
a bacteriologist is essential. In patients with large burns that 
remain catabolic, the core temperature is usually reset by the 
hypothalamus above 37°C. Significant temperatures are those 
above 38.5°C, but often other signs of infection are more use-
ful to the clinician. These include significant rise or fall in the 
white cell count, thrombocytosis, increasing signs of catabo -
lism and decreasing clinical status of the patient.
Summary box 41.15
Surgical treatment of deep burns
●● Deep dermal burns need tangential shaving and split-skin
●● grafting
●● All but the smallest full-thickness burns need surgery
●● The anaesthetist needs to be ready for significant blood loss
●● Topical adrenaline reduces bleeding
●● All burnt tissue needs to be excised
●● Stable cover, permanent or temporary, should be applied at 
once to reduce burn load
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   627 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE628
balance, clotting time and haemoglobin levels. The core tem-
perature of the patient must not drop below 36°C, otherwise 
clotting irregularities will be compounded.
For most burn excisions, subcutaneous injection of a 
dilute solution of adrenaline 1:1 000 000 or 1:500 000 and 
tourniquet control are important for controlling blood loss.
In deep dermal burns, the top layer of dead dermis is 
shaved off until punctate bleeding is observed and the dermis 
can be seen to be free of any small thrombosed vessels (Figure 
41.5a). A topical solution of 1:500 000 adrenaline also helps 
to reduce bleeding, as does the application of the skin graft. 
The use of a tourniquet during burn excisions in the limbs 
helps to decrease blood loss and maintain control.
Full-thickness burns require full-thickness excision of the 
skin (Figure 41.7b). In certain circumstances, it is appro-
priate to go down to the fascia but, in most cases, the burn 
excision is down to viable fat. Wherever possible, a skin graft 
should be applied immediately. With very large burns, the use 
of synthetic dermis or homografts provides temporary stable 
coverage and will allow complete excision of the wound and 
thus reduce the burn load on the patient.
Postoperative management of these patients obviously 
requires careful evaluation of fluid balance and levels of hae -
moglobin. The outer dressings will quickly be soaked through 
with serum and will need to be changed on a regular basis to 
reduce the bacterial load within the dressing.
Physiotherapy and splints are important in maintaining 
range of movement and reducing joint contracture. Eleva -
tion of the appropriate limbs is important. The hand must be 
splinted in a position of function after grafting, although the 
graft needs to be applied in the position of maximal stretch. 
Knees are best splinted in extension, axillae in abduction. 
Supervised movement by the physiotherapists, usually under 
direct vision of any affected joints, should begin after about 
5 days.
Delayed reconstruction and scar 
management
Delayed reconstruction of burn injuries is common for large 
full-thickness burns. In the early healing period, acute con -
tractures around the eye need particular attention. Eyelids 
must be grafted at the first sign of difficulty in closing the eye-
lids, and this must be done before the patient has any symp -
toms of exposure keratitis (Figure 41.10). Other areas that 
require early intervention are any contracture causing signifi-
cant loss of range of movement of a joint. This is particularly 
important in the hand and axilla.
An established contracture can be treated in a number of 
ways. Burn alopecia is best treated with tissue expansion of 
the unburned hair-bearing skin. Tissue expansion is also a use-
ful technique for isolated burns and other areas with adjacent 
normal skin. Z-plasty is useful where there is a single band and 
a transposition flap is useful in wider bands of scarring (Figure 
41.11). In areas of circumferential or very broad areas of scar-
ring, the only real treatment is incision and replacement with 
tissue. By far the best tissue for replacement is from either 
a full-thickness graft or vascularised tissue as in a free flap. 
Occasionally, the situation requires the less ideal covering of 
split skin, possibly with an artificial dermis, such as Integra ® 
(Figure 41.12). These last two options require prolonged scar 
management after their use.
Hypertrophy of many scars will respond to pressure gar -
ments. These need to be worn for a period of 6–18 months. 
Where it is difficult to apply pressure with pressure garments, 
or with smaller areas of hypertrophy, silicone patches will 
speed scar maturation, as will intralesional injection of ste-
roid. Itching and dermatitis in burn scar areas are common. 
Pharmacological treatment of itch is an essential adjunct to 
therapy.
MINOR BURNS/OUTPATIENT 
BURNS
Local burn wound care
Blisters
Whether to remove blisters or leave them intact has been 
the subject of much debate. Proponents of blister removal 
quote laboratory studies that show that blister fluid depresses 
immune function, slowing down chemotaxis and intracellular 
killing and also acting as a medium for bacterial growth.
Conversely, other authors advocate leaving blisters intact 
as they form a sterile stratum spongiosum. Leaving a ruptured 
blister is not advised.
Initial cleaning of the burn wound
Washing the burn wound with chlorhexidine solution is ideal 
for this purpose.
The Guinea Pig Club. Sir Archibald McIndoe  (1900–1960), born in New Zealand, was appointed in 1938 as Consultant Plastic Surgeon to the Royal Air Force. 
He trained with his cousin, Sir Harold Gillies, another internationally reputed plastic surgeon. McIndoe became world famous for his pioneering work on Battle 
of Britain pilots who were badly burnt. His work on these airmen, who needed several operations, and using his innovative technical and psychological methods, 
was the start of a life-long service. The young fighter pilots were therefore referred to as ‘guinea pigs’ – thus was formed The Guinea Pig Club. McIndoe referred to 
his patients as ‘the boys’ who in turn called him ‘the boss’ or ‘the maestro’. To this day, some of the members of the Guinea Pig Club from all over the world still 
meet on an annual basis in Sussex. McIndoe founded the British Association of Plastic Surgeons (BAPS).
Summary box 41.16
Delayed reconstruction of burns
●● Eyelids must be treated before exposure keratitis arises
●● Transposition flaps and Z-plasties with or without tissue 
expansion are useful
●● Full-thickness grafts and free flaps may be needed for large or 
difficult areas
●● Hypertrophy is treated with pressure garments
●● Pharmacological treatment of itch is important
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   628 25/10/2017   08:44Minor burns/outpatient burns 629
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
Figure 41.10 (a) A mixed superficial and deep burn to the face after a petr ol explosion. The patient’s airway was protected prior to transfer. 
He has an orogastric tube and feeding has commenced. (b) The face dressed with a hydrocolloid dressing. The endotracheal tube is wired 
to the teeth. (c) Day 6, the swelling is still present. (d) Six weeks after injury. With the mouth wide open, the lower eyelids are pulled down, 
demonstrating the intrinsic and extrinsic shortening of the eyelids. (e) Three months after injury. The eyelids have been grafted but note the 
contracture of the lips. (f) Six months after injury. The patient has had grafts to the upper and lower lips.
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   629 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE630
Topical agents
For initial management of minor burns that are superficial 
or partial thickness, dressings with a non-adherent material, 
such as Vaseline-impregnated gauze or Mepitel are often suffi-
cient. These dressings are left in place for 5 days. These burns, 
by definition, should be healed after 7–10 days. Various topi -
cal creams and ointments have been used for the treatment of 
minor burns. All published comparative data show no advan-
tage of these agents over petroleum gauze.
Silver sulphadiazine (1%) or Flamazine® is the most com-
monly used topical agent. However, it should be avoided in 
pregnant women, nursing mothers and infants less than 2 
months of age because of the increased possibility of kernic -
terus in these patients.
Dressing the minor burn wound
The aims of dressing are to decrease wound pain and to pro-
tect and isolate the burn wound. The small superficial burn 
requires Vaseline gauze or another non-adherent dressing, 
such as Mepitel, as the first layer . Following this, gauze or 
Kerlix® is wrapped around with sufficient tightness to keep 
the dressing intact, but not to impede the circulation. This is 
further wrapped with bandage. It is important to realise that 
bulkiness of dressings in the minor burn wound depends upon 
the amount of wound discharge. A special case is burns of 
the hands where dressings should be minimised so as not to 
impede mobilisation and physiotherapy.
Synthetic burn wound dressings are popular as they:
 ● decrease pain associated with dressings;
 ● improve healing times;
 ● decrease outpatient appointments;
 ● lower overall costs.
Biobrane® is a bilaminar dressing made up of an inner layer 
of knitted nylon threads coated with porcine collagen and an 
outer layer of rubberised silicone impervious to gases, but not to 
fluids and bacteria. Wounds to be dressed with Biobrane should 
be carefully selected. Burn wounds should be fresh (less than 24 
hours), sensate, show capillary blanching and refill. Biobrane 
should be applied to the wound after removal of all blisters. It 
should be checked at 48 hours for adherence and any signs of 
infection. It should be removed if any sign of infection is found.
Duoderm® or hydrocolloid dressings are not bulky, help in 
healing and can be kept in place for 48–72 hours. They pro -
vide a moist environment, which helps in re-epithelialisation 
of the burn wound.
Healing of burn wounds
Burns that are being managed conservatively should be healed 
within 3 weeks. If there are no signs of re-epithelialisation in 
this time, the wound requires debridement and grafting.
Infection
Infection in the minor burn should be tackled very aggres -
sively as it is known to convert a superficial burn to a par -
tial-thickness burn and a partial- to a deep partial-thickness 
Figure 41.11  A transposition flap bringing normal skin across a 
scarred elbow.
Figure 41.12 (a) A healed full-thickness leg burn prior to resurfacing 
with Integra. (b) The burn scar has been excised and Integra applied 
prior to split-thickness skin grafting. (c) Six months after Integra 
resurfacing. The skin is smoother and more supple and the scar has 
faded.
(a)
(b)
(c)
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   630 25/10/2017   08:44Non-thermal burn injury 631
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
burn, respectively. It should be managed using a combination 
of topical and systemic agents. Debridement and skin grafting 
should also be considered.
Itching
Most burn patients have itchy wounds. Histamine and various 
endopeptides are said to be the causative factors of itching. 
Antihistamines, analgesics, moisturising creams, aloe vera 
and antibiotics have all been tried with varying degrees of 
success. Sometimes gabapentin has been used in patients with 
severe itch. Examples of therapeutic agents described include 
cyproheptadine, loratidine and topical doxepin cream.
Traumatic blisters
The healed burn wound is prone to getting traumatic blisters 
because the new epithelium is very fragile. Non-adherent 
dressings usually suffice; regular moisturisation is also useful 
in this condition.
NON-THERMAL BURN INJURY
Electrical injuries
Electrical injuries are usually divided into low- and high-  
voltage injuries, the threshold being 1000 v.
When a high-tension line is earthed, enormous energy is 
released as the current travels from the line to the earth. It 
can arc over the patient, causing a flash burn. The extremely 
rapid heating of the air causes an explosion that often propels 
the victim backwards. The key here is that the current trav-
elled from the line to the earth directly and not through the 
patient. The flash, however, can go on to ignite the patient’s 
clothes and so cause a normal flame burn.
In accidents with overhead lines, the patient often acts as 
the conduction rod to earth. In these injuries, there is enough 
current to cause damage to the subcutaneous tissues and mus-
cles. The entry and exit points are damaged but, importantly, 
the current can cause huge amounts of subcutaneous damage 
between these two points. These can be extremely serious 
injuries.
The damage to the underlying muscles in the affected 
limb can cause the rapid onset of compartment syndrome. 
The release of the myoglobins will cause myoglobinuria and 
subsequent renal dysfunction. Therefore, during the resuscita-
tion of these patients, efforts must be made to maintain a high 
urine output of up to 2 mL/kg body weight per hour. Severe 
acidosis is common in large electrical burns and may require 
boluses of bicarbonate. These patients are also at risk of myo-
cardial damage as a result  of direct muscle damage, rather 
than by interference with cardiac pacing. This gives rise to 
significant electrocardiogram changes, with raised cardiac 
enzymes. If there is significant damage, there is rapid onset 
of heart failure. In the case of a severe injury through a limb, 
primary amputation is sometimes the most effective manage-
ment (Figure 41.13).
Chemical injuries
There are over 70  000 different chemicals in regular use 
within industry. Occasionally, these cause burns. Ultimately, 
there are two aspects to a chemical injury. The first is the 
physical destruction of the skin and the second is any poison-
ing caused by systemic absorption.
The initial management of any chemical injury is copious 
lavage with water. There are only a handful of chemicals for 
which water is not helpful, for example phosphorus, which is 
a component of some military devices, and elemental sodium, 
which is occasionally present in laboratory explosions. These 
substances need to be physically removed with forceps; however, 
it is extremely rare that any medical practitioner will encoun-
ter these in his or her lifetime. The more common injuries are 
caused by either acids or alkalis. Alkalis are usually the more 
destructive and are especially dangerous if they have come into 
contact with the eyes. After copious lavage, the next step in the 
management of any chemical injury is to identify the chemical 
Summary box 41.17
Electrical burns
●● Low-voltage injuries cause small, localised, deep burns
●● They can cause cardiac arrest through pacing interruption 
without significant direct myocardial damage
●● High-voltage injuries damage by flash (external burn) and 
conduction (internal burn)
●● Myocardium may be directly damaged without pacing 
interruption
●● Limbs may need fasciotomies or amputation
●● Look for and treat acidosis and myoglobinuria
Low-tension injuries
Low-tension or domestic appliance injuries do not have enough 
energy to cause destruction to significant amounts of subcuta-
neous tissues when the current passes through the body. The 
resistance is too great. The entry and exit points, normally in the 
fingers, suffer small deep burns; these may cause underlying ten-
don and nerve damage, but there will be little damage between. 
The alternating current creates a tetany within the muscles, and 
thus patients often describe how they were unable to release the 
device until the power was turned off. The main danger with 
these injuries is from the alternating current interfering with 
normal cardiac pacing. This can cause cardiac arrest. The elec-
tricity itself does not usually cause significant underlying myo-
cardial damage, so resuscitation, if successful, should be lasting.
High-tension injuries
High-tension electrical injuries can be caused by one of three 
sources of damage: the flash, the flame and the current itself.
Summary box 41.18
Chemical burns
●● Damage is from corrosion and poisoning
●● Copious lavage with water helps in most cases
●● Then identify the chemical and assess the risks of absorption
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   631 25/10/2017   08:44CHAPTER 41  Burns
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE632
and its concentration and to elucidate whether there is any 
underlying threat to the patient’s life if absorbed systemically.
One acid that is a common cause of acid burns is hydro-
fluoric acid. Burns affecting the fingers and caused by dilute 
acid are relatively common. The initial management is with 
calcium gluconate gel topically; however, severe burns or 
burns to large areas of the hand can be subsequently treated 
with Bier’s blocks containing calcium gluconate 10% gel. If 
the patient has been burnt with a concentration greater than 
50%, the threat of hypocalcaemia and subsequent arrhyth-
mias then becomes high, and this is an indication for acute 
early excision. It is best not to split-skin graft these hydroflu -
oric acid wounds initially, but to do this at a delayed stage.
Ionising radiation injury
These injuries can be divided into groups depending on 
whether radiation exposure was to the whole body or local -
ised. The management of localised radiation damage is usually 
conservative until the true extent of the tissue injury is appar-
ent. Should this damage have caused an ulcer, then excision 
and coverage with vascularised tissue is required.
Whole-body radiation causes a large number of symptoms. 
The dose of radiation either is, or is not, lethal. A patient 
who has suffered whole-body irradiation and is suffering from 
acute desquamation of the skin has received a lethal dose of 
radiation, which can cause a particularly slow and unpleasant 
death. Non-lethal radiation has a number of systemic effects 
related to the gut mucosa and immune system dysfunction. 
Other than giving iodine tablets, the management of these 
injuries is supportive.
August Karl Gustav Bier  , 1861–1949, Professor of Surgery, Berlin, Germany.
Figure 41.13 (a) An exit wound of a high-tension injury, with a dead 
big toe and significant damage to the medial portion of the second 
toe. (b) Amputation and cover with the lateral portion of the second 
toe.
(a)
(b)
Summary box 41.19
Radiation burns
●● Local burns causing ulceration need excision and 
vascularised flap cover, usually with free flaps
●● Systemic overdose needs supportive treatment
Cold injuries
Cold injuries are principally divided into two types: acute 
cold injuries from industrial accidents and frostbite.
Exposure to liquid nitrogen and other such liquids will cause 
epidermal and dermal destruction. The tissue is more resistant 
to cold injury than to heat injury, and the inflammatory reac-
tion is not as marked. The assessment of depth of injury is more 
difficult, so it is rare to make the decision for surgery early.
Frostbite injuries affect the peripheries in cold climates. 
The initial treatment is with rapid rewarming in a bath at 
42°C. The cold injury produces delayed microvascular dam -
age similar to that of cardiac reperfusion injury. The level of 
damage is difficult to assess, and surgery usually does not play 
a role in its management, which is conservative, until there is 
absolute demarcation of the level of injury.
RECENT ADVANCES
Advanced technology, newer drugs and skin substitutes are the 
major advances in burn care. An intelligent use of these modal-
ities is essential to make an effective case for cost–benefit ratios. 
The introduction of new modalities needs to be carried 
out within critically reviewed and controlled clinical proto -
cols, working towards building appropriate clinical evidence. 
FURTHER READING
British Burns Association. Emergency management of burns, 8th edn. UK 
Course Pre-reading. British Burns Association, 2004.
Herndon D (ed.). Total burn care, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders 
and Elsevier, 2012.
Pape S, Judkins K, Settle J. Burns: the first five days, 2nd edn. Romford: 
Smith and Nephew, 2000.
06_41-B&L27_Pt6_Ch41.indd   632 25/10/2017   08:44Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The spectrum of plastic surgical techniques used to 
restore bodily form and function
 • The relevant anatomy and physiology of tissues used in 
reconstruction
 • The various skin grafts and how to use them 
appropriately
 • The principles and use of flaps
 • How to use plastic surgery to manage difficult and 
complex tissue loss
Chapter
Plastic and reconstructive surgery
42
HISTORICAL CONTEXT
Reconstructive plastic (from the ancient Greek plassein, to 
mould or shape – which is also the stem for our modern use of 
the materials termed ‘plastics’) surgery involves using various 
techniques to restore form and function to the body when tis-
sues have been damaged by injury, cancer or congenital loss. 
Its origins can be traced back to ancient Egypt, with wound 
care depicted in hieroglyphs on papyrus, to India in the sixth 
century BC, where Sushruta described using the forehead flap 
to reconstruct a nose, and to Al-Zahrawi, the tenth-century 
Islamic surgical scholar from Cordoba. Modern techniques 
were developed after the First World War, especially with Sir 
Harold Gillies’ work on reconstructing facial injuries (Figure 
42.1), which was enabled by new safe anaesthetic intubation 
(Sir Ivan Magill). Later in the twentieth century, renewed 
understanding of detailed soft tissue anatomy led to an explo-
sion in the use of new flaps, which with microsurgical meth -
ods, craniofacial surgery and tissue expansion resulted in an 
entirely new set of techniques becoming available to surgeons 
for reconstructing parts.
Today, the need for reconstructive plastic surgery, espe -
cially in resource-poor countries, has never been greater. 
Road, war and domestic injury inflict life-diminishing effects, 
which plastic surgery can reduce. The reconstructive sur -
geon’s ‘toolbox’ is now very diverse and will continue to grow 
in order to address problem wounds and tissue defects, which 
arise as modern medical care is more successful in treating 
cancer, preserving life into old age and salvaging victims of 
trauma.
Sushruta , regarded as the father of modern surgery, lived in the Indian city of Kashi (now called Banaras) in 600BC (while the exact period is unclear, most scholars 
maintain that he practised between 600 and 1000BC). A large part of his practice was plastic surgery in the form of rhinoplasty carried out on criminals who had 
their noses amputated as a punishment for their crimes. His medical pursuits were recorde d in ‘Sushsruta Samhita (compendum)’.
Sir Harold Delf Gillies , 1882–1960, born New Zealand, studied medicine at the University of Cambridge, pioneer of plastic surgical techniques during and after 
World War 1.
Sir Ivan Whiteside Magill , 1888–1986, anaesthetist, Westminister Hospital, London, UK.
Henry Tonks , 1862–1937, commenced a career in surgery, but abandoned it for art and became, from 1917 to 1930, Slade Professor at the Westminster School 
of Art, London, UK.
Figure 42.1 Sir Harold Gillies operating during the First W orld War 
– ‘the birth of plastic surgery’. Picture by Henry Tonks (by kind permis-
sion of the Royal College of Surgeons of England).
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   633 25/10/2017   08:46CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE634
ANATOMY RELATED TO 
RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERY
Skin
The surface of the skin is important as a biological layer for 
homeostasis. Restoring the skin surface is therefore critical, 
even if the underlying structures can await later reconstruc -
tion. Epidermis regenerates from deeper follicular elements, 
with the most superficial layer losing vascularity and acting 
as a barrier to fluid loss and providing important protection 
against invasion by microorganisms. (Epidermal keratino-
cytes can be artificially cultured in vitro and are used in some 
wound management systems.)
The depth of the dermis and the amounts of elastin and 
skin adnexal elements, such as sweat glands and hair follicles, 
vary depending on the functional requirements of the area 
concerned. This means that some areas are much more vul-
nerable to injury than others, e.g. the fine flexible elastic skin 
of the eyelid rapidly suffers a full-thickness burn after a flash 
burn, whereas thick back skin suffers only a partial loss after 
the same flash burn.
Skin vascularity is derived from fine perforating vessels 
that run through underlying muscles or through fascial septal 
layers, and then horizontally in a subcutaneous plane from 
which capillaries branch (Figure 42.2). Nerves run axially 
out from major trunks and are less well defined than most 
perforating blood vessels.
When local, random-pattern skin flaps are raised, they are 
lifted at the subcutaneous level and are nourished by the sub-
dermal plexus of blood vessels. However, this plexus can only 
survive a limited distance from the more substantial arterial 
branches running in the fascial, septal or muscle-perforating 
planes. Understanding the detailed anatomy of different parts 
of the skin and tissues to be moved is a key element of suc -
cessful plastic surgery.
Without skin, wounds heal by secondary intention with 
fibrosis and contracture (Figure 42.3), and underlying structures 
are vulnerable to necrosis, chronic infection and dysfunction.
Graft anatomy
Split-thickness skin grafts
Split-thickness skin grafts are harvested by taking all of the 
epidermis together with some dermis, leaving the remaining 
dermis behind to heal the donor site. The thicker the dermis 
that is taken (seen by more brisk punctate bleeding at the 
donor site; Figure 42.4), the more durable will be the graft 
once healed (although it might take longer and require 
more care), but also the more difficult will be donor site 
healing.
Internal
artery
Muscle
Perforator
artery
Direct
cutaneous
artery
SkinFascia
Subcutaneous
tissue
Subfascial
Prefascial
Subcutaneous
Subdermal
Mid-dermal
(primarily venous plexus)
Subpapillary
PLEXUSES
Perforating vessels
Musculocutaneous
artery
Fasciocutaneous
artery
Papillary
loops
Subpapillary
plexus
Mid-dermal
(primary venous
plexus)
Hair
Epidermis
Papillary
dermis
Reticular
dermis
Subcutaneous
tissue
Thin
split-skin graft
Deeper
split-skin graft
Thick
split-skin graft
Full thickness
(Wolfe) skin graft
Local /f_laps
Subcutaneous
vessels
Deep
subdermal
plexus
(a) (b)
Figure 42.2 Diagram of skin anatomy with vascular plexus.
in vitro  is Latin for ‘in the glass’.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   634 25/10/2017   08:46Classification 635
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Full-thickness skin grafts
Full-thickness grafts are harvested to incorporate the whole 
dermis, with the underlying fat trimmed away – unless ele -
ments of fat (or even cartilage as well) are deliberately left 
attached to form a composite graft. Full-thickness and 
composite grafts require the most careful handling and 
postoperative nursing to help ensure that they ‘take’ in their 
transplanted site.
How does a skin graft survive?
Split-thickness skin grafts survive initially by imbibition of 
plasma from the wound bed; after 48 hours, fine anastomotic 
connections are made, which lead to inosculation of blood. 
Capillary ingrowth then completes the healing process with 
fibroblast maturation. Because only tissues that produce gran-
ulation will support a graft, it is usually contraindicated to use 
grafts to cover exposed tendons, cartilage or cortical bone.
Skin grafts inevitably contract, with the extent of con -
tracture determined by the amount of dermis taken with the 
graft and the level of postoperative splintage and physiother-
apy applied to the grafted site.
CLASSIFICATION
The reconstructive toolbox
Plastic surgery offers a variety of techniques to address clinical 
problems. Sometimes, a problem is managed using a ‘ladder’ 
approach, with the simplest methods being used first and only 
moving to more complex methods when absolutely necessary. 
However, this is frequently not the ideal approach for best 
outcomes. If resources permit, it is often more cost-effective 
and better functionally for the patient to begin with a more 
complex treatment, with other easier management options 
held in reserve as ‘lifeboats’. Plastic surgeons now prefer to 
think of the range of options available as a toolbox from 
which they can take the most appropriate method to solve a 
problem, taking into account available skill, resources and the 
consequences of failure.
The scope of plastic surgery
The tools of reconstruction are used for a wide range of con -
ditions:
 ● trauma:
 ● soft-tissue loss (skin, tendons, nerves, muscle);
 ● hand and lower limb injury;
 ● faciomaxillary;
 ● burns;
 ● cancer:
 ● skin, head and neck, breast, soft tissue sarcoma;
 ● congenital:
 ● clefts and craniofacial malformations;
 ● skin, giant naevi, vascular malformations;
 ● urogenital;
 ● hand and limb malformations;
 ● miscellaneous:
 ● Bell’s (facial) palsy;
 ● pressure sores;
 ● aesthetic surgery;
 ● chest wall reconstruction.
Figure 42.3 A severely contracted hand following burn to the dorsal 
aspect.
Figure 42.4 Fine punctate bleeding from a split-thickness skin graft 
donor site.
Summary box 42.1
Split-thickness skin grafts
●● Thicker knife-gap settings give rise to fewer but brisker 
bleeding points on the donor site.
●● Thicker grafts heal with less contracture and are more 
durable.
●● Thinner donor sites heal better.
●● Grafts are hairless and do not sweat (these structures are not 
transferred).
Sir Charles Bell  , 1774–1842, surgeon, Middlesex Hospital, London, UK and from 1835 until his death, Professor of Surgery , the University of Edinburgh,  
Edinburgh, UK.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   635 25/10/2017   08:46CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE636
A few key principles that can also be applied to other sur-
gical specialties should be observed. In many reconstructions, 
success depends upon good rapid wound healing, which itself 
depends upon attention to detail from the surgeon. Adequate 
debridement, careful technique, gentle handling of tissues and 
consideration of blood supply are all key factors that influence 
outcome (Table 42.1).
The placement of incisions can be critical, especially in 
reducing the appearance of scars on the face and in areas of 
tension. When possible, incisions should lie in the lines of 
minimal tension (described by Langer, but frequently differ -
ent from those originally noted) (Figure 42.5).
TABLE 42.1 Plastic surgery principles.
Optimise wound by adequate debridement or resection
Wound or flap must have a good blood supply to heal
Place scars carefully – ‘lines of election’a
Replace defect with similar tissue – ‘like with like’b
Observe meticulous surgical technique
Remember donor site ‘cost’
aLines of election – analogous to Langer’s lines of minimal skin tension.
bMillard DR. Principalization of plastic surgery. Boston: Little & Brown, 1986.
Grafts
Grafts are tissues that are transferred without their blood sup-
ply, which therefore have to revascularise once they are in a 
new site. They include the following:
 ● Split-thickness skin grafts (of varying thickness). These 
are sometimes called Thiersch grafts. They are used to 
cover all sizes of wound, are of limited durability and will 
contract. They may be used to provide valuable temporary 
wound closure before better cosmetic secondary correc -
tion after rehabilitation.
 ● Full-thickness skin grafts (Wolfe grafts) . Used for 
smaller areas of skin replacement where goo d elastic skin 
that will not contract is required (such as fingers, eyelids, 
facial parts).
 ● Composite skin grafts (usually skin and fat, or skin and 
cartilage). Often taken from the ear margin and useful for 
rebuilding missing elements of nose, eyelids and fingertips.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 31.6Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Random /f_lap
(and delay)
Axial /f_lap
1 6
1
1.5
Islanded/pedicled /f_lap
Free /f_lap
Length can be
increased by delay
Donor
site
Can be:
• Fasciocutaneous
• Myocutaneous
• Composite
• Perforator
Figure 42.5 Lines of relaxed skin tension.
Figure 42.6 Skin flaps, from simple to complex.
Karl Ritter von Edenberg Langer , 1819–1887, Professor of Anatomy, Vienna, Austria described these lines in 1862.
Karl Thiersch , 1822–1895, Professor of Surgery, Leipzig, Germany, pioneer of free skin grafts and described his method of skin grafting in 1874.
John Reissburg Wolfe , 1824–1904, ophthalmic surgeon, Glasgow, UK, described full thickness skin grafts in 1875 and in the same year used forearm skin to  
construct an eyelid.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   636 25/10/2017   08:46Classification 637
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
 ● Nerve grafts. Usually taken from the sural nerve, but 
smaller cutaneous nerves may be used.
 ● Tendon grafts. Usually taken from the palmaris longus or 
plantaris tendon (runs just anteromedial to the Achilles 
tendon) and used for injury loss or nerve damage correction.
Flaps
Flaps are tissues that are transferred with a blood supply. They 
therefore have the advantage of bringing vascularity to the 
new area. Flaps can be raised to consist of any specific tis -
sue; for skin the following will illustrate the types that exist 
 (Figure 42.6):
 ● Random flaps. Three sides of a rectangle, bearing no spe -
cific relationship to where the blood supply enters; the 
length to breadth ratio is no more than 1.5:1. This pattern 
can be lengthened by ‘delaying’ the flap, a process in which 
the cuts are partially made and the flap is part lifted at a 
first operation; it is then replaced, thus ‘training’ the blood 
supply from a single border of the rectangle. At a second 
procedure, it is raised further and finally transferred.
 ● Axial flaps. Much longer flaps, based on known blood ves-
sels supplying the skin. This technique was rediscovered 
in the 1960s and 1970s and enables many long thin flaps 
to be safely moved across large distances.
 ● Pedicled/islanded flaps. The axial blood supply of these 
flaps means that they can be swung round on a stalk or even 
fully ‘islanded’ so that the business end of the skin being 
transferred can have the pedicle buried (Figure 42.7).
 ● Free flaps. The blood supply has been isolated, discon -
nected and then reconnected using microsurgery at the 
new site (Figure 42.8).
 ● Composite flaps. Various tissues are transferred together, 
often skin with bone or muscle (osseocutaneous or myocu-
taneous flaps, respectively).
 ● Perforator flaps. This description refers to a whole new 
subgroup of axial flaps, in which tissues are isolated on 
small perforating vessels that run from more major blood 
vessels to supply the surface.
Skin substitutes
One solution to the problem presented by major skin loss 
with inadequate skin donor sites has been to use artificially 
engineered skin substitutes. These vary from thin sheets of 
autologous keratinocytes, to artificial collagen matrices with 
embedded fibroblasts and a keratinocyte sheet covering. They 
are costly, but are becoming widely used, and it is likely that 
tissue-engineered products will continue to be developed in 
an attempt to solve difficult reconstructive problems.
Tissue expansion
This technique is valuable in using ‘local’ tissue for recon -
struction. The natural ability of tissue to expand has been 
harnessed clinically since the experiments of Austad and the 
clinical work of Radovan in the 1970s. It is a technique bor -
rowed from nature, and it is observed during pregnancy when 
skin expands over the underlying mass. It involves placing 
a device – usually an expandable balloon constructed from 
silicone – beneath the tissue to be expanded, and progres -
sively enlarging the volume with fluid while the overlying tis-
sue accommodates to the changed vascular pressure (Figure 
42.9). The fluid (usually sterile saline coloured blue in Figure 
42.9) is introduced via a self-sealing port attached to a fill -
ing tube that enters the balloon. It may be introduced as fre-
quently as can be tolerated by the patient until the tissues are 
Figure 42.7 (a–c) Islanded pedicled flap used from the instep to 
resurface a heel defect.
(a)
(b)
(c)
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   637 25/10/2017   08:46CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE638
stretched enough to be used for reconstruction. The tissues 
expanded do not hypertrophy, but there are major changes in 
the collagen structure.
The process is time-consuming, although it can be very 
valuable in problematic cases. It is invaluable for sharing 
remaining areas of scalp hair after severe burns, removing 
major congenital skin naevi and restoring full-thickness skin 
over previously grafted limb wounds.
It must never be used under irradiated tissues (such as 
mastectomy sites), which will not expand but necrose.
Figure 42.8  (a–d) Fr ee lateral arm fasciocutaneous flap used to 
resurface a tendo Achilles defect.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 42.9 Tissue expander.
Summary box 42.2
Tissue expansion
Advantages
●● Well-vascularised tissue
●● Tissue next to defect, so likely to be of similar consistency
●● Good colour match
Disadvantages
●● Multiple expansion episodes (sometimes painful)
●● Cost of device
●● High incidence of infection and extrusion (especially limbs)
Vacuum-assisted closure
The use of negative pressure applied to a tissue defect has pos-
itive effects on wound closure, as well as making difficult and 
complex wounds more manageable during the early stages of 
granulation.
Exudate is removed and the suction pressure affects angio-
genesis and tissue regeneration. The technique can be applied 
as part of early wound management before definitive surgical 
closure has been planned, or in some cases to avoid the need 
for surgery altogether. The foam sponge dressing is connected 
by a tube to a negative pressure pump that can be controlled 
to give intermittent suction (Figure 42.10).
Implants and prosthetics
Many tissue deficiencies cannot be adequately reconstructed 
with autologous tissue, however sophisticated the technique 
used. In such circumstances, implants are part of the recon -
structive surgical ‘toolbox’; they include solid and soft 
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   638 25/10/2017   08:46Treatment and complications 639
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
silicone materials, many forms of filler including collagen and 
polymers, and osseointegratable anchor points for prosthesis 
fixation.
Lipofilling and transfer
The use of fat as a reconstructive tissue is longstanding, but 
has recently become a well-established tool in the armamen -
tarium of plastic surgery. It follows the systematisation of the 
technique for harvesting and subsequent management of the 
fat by Sydney Coleman in the late 20th century. Early scepti-
cism for the value of the technique has given way to a recogni-
tion that a proportion (variable) of transferred fat can indeed 
survive injection, and the high volume of stromal and stem 
cells within fat give it possible advantages for whatever area it 
is used to manage. Current debate surrounds the best method 
for each stage in harvesting and preparation, including what 
preliminary infiltration to use, what dimension cannula is 
least destructive, whether centrifugation of the aspirate is of 
value and how best to place the transferred liquid.
The main use for small-volume fat transfer to date has 
been to provide autologous permanent filling of facial defects 
and scars. Such small volumes can be harvested and trans -
ferred under local anaesthesia, and should be used with care 
to avoid intravascular escape of fat that can produce emboli 
and associated injury. Larger volumes of fat have been used to 
‘lipo-fill’ residual defects after conventional breast reconstruc-
tion as well as postinjury subcutaneous fat deformities. There 
is also some evidence that such transfers, rich in stromal and 
stem cells, have a beneficial effect on the adverse tissue dam-
age induced by radiotherapy, and advances in this area are 
anticipated.
ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSTIC 
PLANNING
Formation of a definitive treatment plan, carefully considering 
all available options for care with the whole of the patient’s 
needs in mind, is a vital component of wise plastic surgical 
practice. This is never more so than when managing major 
trauma cases in the acute setting or when planning major 
cancer management, which might be staged over a period 
of treatments and procedures. If the reconstructive surgeon 
can be involved in early wound debridement and incisions, 
vital flap pedicles can be protected and the functional and 
cosmetic outcome made optimal. This pattern of shared team 
care has become the norm in many units demonstrating good 
outcomes from major trauma salvage.
The initial assessment of wounds involves adequate 
removal of devitalised tissue, assessment of which vital struc-
tures will need reconstruction immediately and which might 
be better reconstructed later, and assessment of the degree of 
contamination involved, which will require further cleaning. 
Further planning will include the definitive soft-tissue cover 
of the wound and functional rehabilitation with full psycho -
social rehabilitation.
TREATMENT AND 
COMPLICATIONS
Split-thickness skin grafts
Split-thickness skin grafts are taken with either hand-held 
(Figure 42.11) or powered skin knives (Figure 42.12). The 
most used donor site is the thigh, with the buttock preferable 
in children and cosmetically sensitive individuals. For larger 
grafts, almost any flat surface can be harvested, including the 
scalp if shaved (a very good and useful donor site). The thick-
ness of the graft harvested, ease of graft ‘take’ and donor site 
healing must be weighed against the lack of durability of thin 
split-thickness skin grafts.
Figure 42.10  VAC™ device used to temporarily close a ster nal 
dehiscence prior to definitive debridement and flap cover.
Figure 42.11 Hand-held skin knife (a) and harvesting skin with a 
hand-held knife (b).
(b)
(a)
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   639 25/10/2017   08:46CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE640
Split grafts can be perforated to allow exudates to escape 
and improve ‘take’; they can be further meshed to allow 
expansion (Figure 42.13). This is carried out on a device that 
cuts a series of slits along the skin, allowing it to expand from 
a ratio of anything from 1:1.5 to about 1:6.
Grafts will only take on a bed on which they can become 
vascularised. Preparation of the wound bed is therefore an 
essential part of a successful graft (Figure 42.14). Graft fail -
ure is commonly caused by pus, exudate or residual dead tis-
sue beneath the skin, haematoma or shearing forces. A clean 
healthy wound bed with a meshed graft tied in place to stop 
movement will encourage success. The group A β-haemolytic 
Streptococcus can destroy split grafts completely (and also con-
vert a donor site to a full-thickness defect) and so the pres-
ence of this microorganism is a contraindication to grafting.
Full-thickness skin grafts
Small dermal grafts (Wolfe grafts) can be taken from behind 
the ear, the groin creases and the neck, with easy direct clo -
sure of the donor site. Older people can sustain larger har -
vests because of skin laxity. Large full-thickness skin graft 
use is uncommon and requires great care to obtain a good 
take. Large donor sites require secondary split-thickness skin 
grafting. Major secondary burn contractures of the face and 
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
Figure 42.12  Power dermatome harvest 
of a split-thickness skin graft, with the cor -
rect method of providing skin tension (a–d), 
and dressing of the donor site with adhesive 
material (e).
Figure 42.13  Split-thickness skin graft 
mesher (a) and meshed skin applied to the 
wound (b).
(a) (b)
Figure 42.14 Clean-
ing a wound of 
excessive granulation 
tissue before grafting.
flexion creases can achieve remarkable functional and cos-
metic improvement using such large grafts, particularly as the 
remaining facial muscle function can still produce a more nat-
ural appearance than when covered by a bulky full-thickness 
skin flap. Smaller full-thickness grafts are useful for contrac-
ture release around sensitive facial and extremity structures.
Technique
The shape of the graft needed is drawn and copied onto a 
small template (paper or cloth), which is used to transfer the 
same shape to the donor site. Full-thickness skin is cut; grafts 
take best if additional underlying fat is removed, after which 
the graft is applied with normal skin tension and tied down 
with a pressure dressing. The graft will remain vulnerable to 
shearing forces for several weeks after application.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   640 25/10/2017   08:46Treatment and complications 641
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Flaps
Local flaps
A local flap is raised next to a tissue defect in order to recon -
struct it. Basic patterns include (Figure 42.15):
 ● Transposition flap. The most basic design, leaving a graft-
able donor site (Figure 42.16);
 ● Z-plasty. For lengthening scars or tissues;
 ● Rhomboid flap. For cheek, temple, back and flat surface 
defects;
 ● Rotation flap. For convex surfaces;
 ● Advancement flap. For flexor surfaces; may need triangles 
excised at the base to make it work (commonly called 
Burow’s triangles);
 ● V-to-Y advancement. Commonly used for fingertips and 
extremities;
 ● Bilobed flap. For convex surfaces, especially the nose (Fig-
ure 42.17);
 ● Bipedicle flap. For eyelids, rarely elsewhere.
TRANSPOSITION FLAP
Z-PLASTY
Two triangular transposition /f_laps interposed
Pivot
point
A
B
B
A
A
A
B
B
A
B
A
B
Defect
Donor
defect
(grafted or
sometimes
closed
primarily)
1
45 6
23
BILOBED FLAP
Secondary
/f_lap
Uses a /f_lap to close a convex defect, and a second smaller /f_lap
to close the donor site
BIPEDICLE FLA P
A  ‘bucket-handle’ /f_lap supplied from both ends.
Useful to r ebuild the lower eyelid
Flap
Flap
Tissue
defect
RHOMBOID 
FLAP
A  parallelogram-
shape d
transposition
/f_lap
RO TATION FLAP
Flap
a´
a
a
a
b b
a´ a
Figure 42.15 Local flap diagrams: (a) transposition and Z-plasty flaps; (b) bilobed and bipedicled flaps; (c) rhomboid and r otation flaps. 
(continued overleaf)
(a)
(b)
(c)
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   641 25/10/2017   08:46CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE642
All flaps must be raised in the subcutaneous plane. Gentle 
undercutting of margins helps to close the donor site. The art 
of making local flaps work is to pull available local spare lax 
skin into the defect, so that the scar when closed sits in a good 
‘line of election’. Local flaps are usually not based on specific 
blood vessels, but are very useful in head and neck and smaller 
defect reconstructions. Good planning is essential to gain the 
best result from these flaps.
ADVANCEMENT FLAP
Simple rectangular
(with or without Burow’s triangle excision at base)
Usually multiple
to release band
scars over joints
Two Burow’s
triangles can
be excised at
base of /f_lap to
make it slide
This is one of the
most effective
means of releasing
moderate isolated
band burn scars
over /f_lexion creases
Defect
e.g. cut /f_ingertip
V to Y
Y to V
Flap
Area of
scar
shaded
1
3
5
4
2
Burn  scar
with long
ellipse
around it
Add in the
horizontal
lines to the
zig-zag;
each becomes
a ‘Y’
The /f_inished wound
will look something
like this
Pad it well, and be
sure to splint open
when not exercising
The cut lines
will look
something like
this
Advance the
tips of the
zig-zags into
the spaces
a´ a´aa b´ b´bb
Mark a long
zig-zag along
the scar
Karl August von Burow , 1809–1974, surgeon, Konigsberg, Germany.
(d) (e)
Figure 42.15 (continued) Local flap diagrams: (d) advancement flaps; (e) multiple Y-to-V plasty for burn scar.
Summary box 42.3
Local flaps
Benefits
●● Best local cosmetic tissue match
●● Often a simple procedure
●● Local or regional anaesthesia option
Disadvantages
●● Possible local tissue shortage
●● Scarring may exacerbate the condition
●● Surgeon may compromise local resection
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   642 25/10/2017   08:46Treatment and complications 643
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Figure 42.16 (a–c) Example of transposi -
tion flap (in this case from the glabellar ar ea 
to an inner canthal defect); (d and e) appear-
ance at 1 month post-transfer.
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
Figure 42.17 (a–c) Example of a bilobed 
flap (in this case fr om the nose to a defect 
on the tip following excision of a basal cell 
carcinoma); (d) appearance at 6 weeks 
post-transfer.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   643 25/10/2017   08:46CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE644
Figure 42.18 (a ,  b) Y-to-V flap to release axillary contracture.
(a) (b)
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 42.19 (a–d) Trapezius pedicled 
myocutaneous flap to an area of recurrent 
squamous carcinoma in the neck.
Combined local flaps
In some circumstances, such as burn contracture release, local 
flaps can usefully be combined to import surplus tissue from 
a wide area adjacent to a scar or defect that needs removal. 
Examples are the W-plasty and the multiple Y -to-V plasty, 
which is a very versatile means of releasing an isolated band 
scar contracture over a flexion crease (Figure 42.18).
Distant flaps
To repair defects in which local tissue is inadequate, distant 
flaps can be moved on long pedicles that contain the bloo d 
supply. The pedicle may be buried beneath the skin to create 
an island flap or left above the skin and formed into a tube.
The most common means of moving flaps long distances 
while still attached are with a long muscular pedicle that con-
tains a dominant blood supply (a myocutaneous flap) (Figure 
42.19) or with a long fascial layer that likewise contains a 
major septal blood supply (a fasciocutaneous flap) (Figure 
42.20). These flaps can carry large composite skin parts for 
reconstruction very great distances, e.g. from the abdomen to 
the chest (for breast reconstruction), from the chest to the 
face (for oral cancer reconstruction) and from the calf to the 
knee.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   644 25/10/2017   08:47Treatment and complications 645
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
There are a vast number of carefully described myocutane-
ous and fasciocutaneous flaps throughout the body, all of which 
are based on known blood vessels. They are reliable when the 
anatomy of the blood supply is known by the surgeon and the 
skin is raised carefully in continuity with the underlying fascia 
or muscle, through which the small perforating vessels run to 
supply the piece of skin that is being transferred. They are the 
‘workhorse’ of plastic surgery worldwide because they do not 
require complex equipment to raise them and they can solve 
the majority of reconstructive problems.
Microsurgery and perforator flaps
With fine instruments and materials, it has become common-
place to be able to disconnect the blood supply of the flap 
from its donor site and reconnect it in a distant place using 
the operating microscope.
The free tissue transfer is now the best means of recon -
structing major composite loss of tissue in the face, jaws, lower 
limb and many other body sites, as long as resources allow it 
(Figure 42.21). The operative procedure is similar whether 
the defect is newly produced from a recent injury or cancer 
Figure 42.20 (a) Defect at the ankle with the flap to be transferred 
outlined and the position of the perforating vessels (identified with 
hand-held Doppler device) marked with crosses; (b) flap raised 
with preserved septal perforators to skin paddle clearly visible; (c) 
flap rotated into position to cover the defect; proximal donor defect 
covered with a split- thickness skin graft (case courtesy of Mr David 
Johnson FRCS(Plast)).
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 42.21 (a–c) Large myocutaneous fr ee flap (latissimus dorsi) to cover an exposed cranial defect following the excision of advanced 
basal cell carcinoma (case courtesy of Mr David Johnson FRCS(Plast)).
(a) (b) (c)
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   645 25/10/2017   08:47CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE646
resection or whether it is to be used for the secondary correc-
tion of a deformity, such as rebuilding a mastectomy defor -
mity. At the site of the defect, the surgeon must be sure that 
all contaminated and dead tissue has been thoroughly cleared 
and cleaned, a process commonly described as debridement, 
although that term strictly refers to the release of constricting 
tissue. If this removal of poorly viable tissue is in doubt, then 
consideration should be given to delaying the reconstruction.
The surgeon must then find a suitable blood supply for the 
tissue transfer at the site to be reconstructed. A good arterial 
flow in and venous return out, without external tissue pres-
sure (such as from surrounding wound induration), is of para-
mount importance in achieving a successful transfer. The flap 
is then raised (Table 42.2) and transferred using magnification 
(Figure 42.22). Free muscle transfers should be reanastomo-
sed within 1–2 hours if possible; fasciocutanous flaps are more 
robust and can survive slightly greater ischaemic times.
to cater for the specific reconstructive and aesthetic require -
ments of treatment. This has led to numerous combinations 
of tissue raised on common vascular pedicles (Figure 42.23).
Combined flaps
The difficulty presented by defects needing multiple parts to 
reconstruct is now often managed using various forms of ‘com-
bined flap’. These use parts fully separated (but blood supplied 
by a single vascular pedicle) in order to make reconstruction 
more flexible and therefore not only better functioning but 
also cosmetically more accurate.
‘Conjoined’ flaps have two or more ‘territories’ of tissue 
supplied by separate pedicles. These may be conjoined by 
skin in continuity at the extremes of each pedicle’s reach 
(such as the raising of a latissimus dorsi flap in continuity 
with a groin flap with a pedicle at each end), or be separate 
perforator-based territories on the same ‘mother’ blood supply.
‘Chimeric’ flaps again have multiple flap territories, each 
with an independent vascular supply, but are independent of 
any physical connection except when they are linked by a 
common feeder vascular pedicle (Figure 42.22). Such flaps 
have become amongst the most widely used, in circumstances 
when several elements of soft tissue need reconstructing, 
along with perhaps a bony element as well as a functional 
muscle transfer. The antero-lateral thigh flap is very amenable 
to separation into several parts and muscle elements, as is the 
scapular/subscapular array of flaps.
The chimeric principle can be extended yet further by 
the joining of additional flaps to the main flap-feeding vessels 
using microsurgical anastomosis. This is to prefabricate the 
most suitable tissue element for the reconstructive purpose 
in hand, which although requiring considerable technical 
expertise to accomplish, can achieve excellent outcomes in 
single-staged procedures.
Supermicrosurgery
In the last decade, Koshima’s description of anastomosing 
vessels with a diameter of 0.8  mm or less has been utilised 
to improve on perforator flap donor site morbidity, as well 
as speed of flap harvest. So-called ‘perforator to perforator’ 
anastomoses can make reconstruction very accurate in skilled 
hands. It begins to make the previously constrained selection 
of flap donor sites and recipient vessels redundant, with terms 
such as ‘free style free flap’ being coined to describe such ver-
satility in reconstructive work.
The technique has also been used to advance the art of 
lymphatico-venous anastomosis to treat lymphoedema. In 
correctly selected cases and with good facilities, such surgery 
has begun to offer new therapeutic options to those with 
chronically morbid conditions.
Care of flaps and monitoring
After a flap has been moved, it should be observed for tissue 
colour, warmth and turgor, and be pressed to assess blanching 
and capillary refill time. Loss of arterial inflow results in pale, 
cold, flaccid tissue; loss of venous outflow results in blue con-
gestion, increased turgor, rapid capillary refill and initially a 
warm flap. In a pedicled flap, such venous congestion may be 
relieved by releasing suture tension; applying leeches to suck 
Summary box 42.4
Free tissue transfer (or free flap)
Advantages
●● Being able to select exactly the best tissue to move
●● Only takes what is necessary
●● Minimises donor site morbidity
Disadvantages
●● More complex surgical technique
●● Failure involves total loss of all transferred tissue
●● Usually takes more time unless the surgeon is experienced
TABLE 42.2 Common free tissue transfer donor sites.
Muscle only Latissimus dorsi
Rectus abdominis
Gracilis
Myocutaneous Latissimus dorsi
Transverse rectus abdominis
Fasciocutaneous Radial forearm flap
Scapular
Lateral arm 
Anterolateral thigh 
Groin
Osseous Fibula (may be cutaneous as well)  
Forearm (taking sliver of radius bone)  
Iliac crest
Fascial Temporoparietal
Miscellaneous Jejunum – for oesophageal reconstruction 
Pectoralis minor – for facial reanimation  
Omentum – for chest wall and limb defects
Further developments have led to surgeons dissecting 
distant flaps free from the carrier muscle or fascia, to reduce 
the donor morbidity further. These distant ‘perforator’ flaps 
increase the flexibility of the use of the flap tissue while 
reducing donor site problems. Flap design has moved towards 
delivering individualised tissue transfers that are customised 
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   646 25/10/2017   08:47Treatment and complications 647
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
Figure 42.22 Large ‘chimeric flap’ of latissimus dorsi and 
serratus anterior muscles (a), to cover a complex open 
wound of the foot and ankle (b), illustrating the donor site 
(c, d) and fully covered defect (e, f)  (case courtesy of Mr 
David Johnson FRCS(Plast)).
(a)
(b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
out excess venous blood is a last resort when no other means 
of restoring venous drainage can be obtained.
The most common causes of flap failure are:
 ● poor anatomical knowledge when raising the flap (such 
that the blood supply is deficient from the start);
 ● flap inset with too much tension;
 ● local sepsis or a septicaemic patient;
 ● the dressing applied too tightly around the pedicle;
 ● microsurgical failure in free-flap surgery (usually caused by 
problems with surgical technique);
 ● tobacco smoking by patient.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   647 25/10/2017   08:47CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE648
Figure 42.23  Composite nasal recon -
struction using free vascularised tempo -
roauricular flap. (a) Defect on the nose for 
reconstruction following previous radiother-
apy and recent Moh’s controlled excision 
of tumour; (b) flap of pinna harvested for 
transfer; (c) donor site and (d) following 
direct closure; (e) flap transferred using 
microanastomosis to facial vessel branches; 
(f) flap in situ at 3 months (courtesy of Mr 
Henk Giele, FRACS).
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f)
‘Wet, warm and comfortable’
The best advice for postoperative flap care for major tissue 
transfers is to keep the patient ‘wet, warm and comfortable’. 
This means that the patient should be well hydrated with a 
hyperdynamic circulation, a very warm body temperature and 
well-controlled analgesia to reduce catecholamine output.
Reconstructing complex areas
Certain areas, such as the eyelids, nose, lips, ears, genitalia, 
fingers, breast and intraoral structures, often require a combi-
nation of methods to produce the most functional and accept-
able outcome for the patient. Planning such reconstruction 
involves considering each cosmetic subunit involved in the 
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   648 25/10/2017   08:47Future trends 649
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE
defect and bringing the best tissue to rebuild it. An example 
is the Indian forehead rhinoplasty of Sushruta, which involves 
transposition of a pedicled fasciocutaneous flap from forehead 
to nose, with the donor site usually thin skin grafted, but occa-
sionally closed primarily in small flaps. It remains the finest 
means of transporting cosmetically correct tissue to the nose.
FUTURE TRENDS
Vascularised composite 
allografting (VCA)
Plastic surgeons have long sought to use transplanted tissue 
to solve the problems posed by the most severe tissue defects. 
Esser, in the early twentieth century, pioneered much inno-
vative surgery and urged research into this area. Later, Joe 
Murray, a plastic surgeon in the United States, undertook the 
first kidney transplant and was awarded the Nobel Prize for 
his work. Improved understanding of immunology and means 
of tolerance induction are now leading to the use of trans -
planted composite tissues for the most intractable cases of loss 
of tissue following injury and cancer.
In the latter part of the 20th century, the constraints of 
total systemic immunosuppression alongside the difficulties 
in overcoming the inherent problems of cutaneous immuno -
sensitivity led to transplants being confined predominantly to 
solid organs in clinical practice.
Recent refinements in immune suppression therapy and 
anticipated advances in tolerance induction strategies have 
opened the door to the use of more complex transplants 
including skin for non-life-threatening disorders. The first 
hand transplant was performed in Lyon, France in 1998, and 
limb transplantation now has an established place in recon -
structive plastic surgery. Other composite allografts have 
followed, including facial tissue and abdominal wall recon -
struction (Figure 42.24).
Johannes Fredericus Samuel Esser , 1877–1946, born in Leyden, Netherlands. He was a Dutch plastic surgeon who pioneered reconstructive surgery on soldiers 
wounded in the First World War and is thought to have coined the term ‘stent’ in 1917 to describe his use of a dental impression compound invented in 1856 by 
the English dentist Charles Stent (1807–1885) to create a form for facial reconstruction.
Joseph E Murray , b.1919, Professor Emeritus of Plastic Surgery, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, shared the 1990 Nobel Prize for Physi-
ology or Medicine with E Donnall Thomas for his work on organ and cell transplantation. Murray’s interest in transplantation began during his military service in 
the Second World War. The early experiences with skin transplantation for burns in pilots formed the basis for Murray’s interest in solid organ transplantation. He 
performed the world’s first kidney transplantation in identical twins in Peter Brent Brigham Hospital, Boston in 1954.
Figure 42.24 Abdominal wall transplant: (a) open abdomen with 
transplanted small bowel that cannot be closed using the patient’s 
own skin cover; (b) donor transplant abdominal wall element har -
vested; (c) abdominal wall with transplant in situ (courtesy of Mr Henk 
Giele, FRACS).
(a)
(b)
(c)
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   649 25/10/2017   08:47CHAPTER 42  Plastic and r econstructive surgery
PART 6 | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE650
As immunotolerance strategies develop (especially the 
probable use of TReg cell therapy in some form or other) it is 
likely that there will be a burgeoning of microsurgically trans-
ferred VCAs to facilitate complex reconstruction throughout 
the body. This will precede the development of more sophisti-
cated tissue engineered substitutes that are decades away from 
use for more complex composite tissue reconstructions.
Tissue and bioengineering
Improved understanding of tissue behaviour is leading to 
numerous innovations in wound manipulation using biolog -
ical mechanisms. Tissue-engineered biological substitutes for 
tendon, nerve, larynx and other vital structures are becoming 
established, and will greatly influence the spectrum of recon-
structive procedures in the coming years (see Chapter 4).
Novel polymers and biologically tolerated materials are 
also being developed to act as nerve conduits, facial muscle 
substitutes and self-inflating expansion devices. The interface 
of new material science with reconstructive surgery is still in 
its infancy.
FURTHER READING
Achauer BM, Erikson E, Guruyon R et al. (eds). Plastic surgery indications, 
operations and outcomes, vols 1–5. St Louis: Mosby, 2000.
Cormack GC, Lamberty BGH. The arterial anatomy of skin flaps . Edin-
burgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1986.
Geddes CR, Morris SF , Neligan PC. Perforator flaps: evolution, classifi-
cation, and applications. Ann Plastic Surg 2003; 50: 90–9.
Koshima I, Soeda S. Inferior epigastric artery skin flaps without rectus 
abdominis muscle. Br J Plastic Surg 1989; 42: 645–8.
MacGregor AD, MacGregor IA. Fundamental techniques in plastic surgery, 
10th edn. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
Mustarde JC, Jackson IT. Plastic surgery in infancy and childhood . Edin-
burgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1988.
Nabri IA. El Zahrawi (936–1013), the father of operative surgery. Ann R 
Coll Surg Engl 1983; 65: 132–4.
Neligan P C (ed). Plastic surgery, 3rd edn , vols 1–6. Philadelphia: 
Saunders, 2012.
Wei F-C, Mardini S. Flaps and reconstructive surgery, 1st edn . Philadel-
phia: Saunders, 2010. ISBN 978-0721605197.
Weinzweig J. Plastic surgery secrets plus. St Louis: Mosby, 2010.
06_42-B&L27_Pt6_Ch42.indd   650 25/10/2017   08:47PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
43 Cranial neurosurgery ............................................................................... 652
44 The eye and orbit ...................................................................................... 672
45 Cleft lip and palate: developmental abnormalities of the  
face, mouth and jaws ............................................................................... 686
46 The ear, nose and sinuses ...................................................................... 703
47 Pharynx, larynx and neck ....................................................................... 725
48 Oral cavity malignancy ............................................................................ 760
49 Disorders of the salivary glands ........................................................... 776
Head and Neck
7
07_43A-B&L27_Pt7.indd   651 25/10/2017   08:48Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
43
Learning objectives
 • To recognise the features of raised intracranial 
pressure, hydrocephalus and infection typical to acute 
neurosurgical presentations.
 • To be familiar with aneurysmal subarachnoid 
haemorrhage and other causes of intracranial 
haemorrhage.
 • To recognise common brain tumours, their presentation, 
investigation and treatment.
 • To be aware of common developmental and other 
pathologies encountered in paediatric neurosurgical 
practice.
 • To understand the indications and approaches available 
for the management of epilepsy, pain syndromes and 
movement disorders.
 • To note key practical and ethical issues relating to 
consent and risks, Creutzfeldt–Jacob disease (CJD) 
precautions and diagnosis of brainstem death.
Cranial neurosurgery
RAISED INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
The importance of intracranial pressure (ICP) management 
in the context of head injury has been discussed elsewhere 
(Chapter 24). Likewise, intracranial pressure is key to presen-
tation and management across the spectrum of cranial neu-
rosurgery.
Clinical features of raised ICP
Symptoms of raised ICP include a ‘high pressure headache’, 
worse on coughing or bending forward; low pressure head-
aches, encountered after excessive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
drainage, are typically worse on standing. High pressure head-
aches may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting, blurred 
vision and double vision; cranial nerve compression can 
result in eye movement and pupil abnormalities. Fundoscopy 
can detect papilloedema (Figure 43.1), but this takes time to 
develop so may be absent in the acute phase.
In infants, the fontanelle is tense and bulging, with an 
increase in head circumference and bulging scalp veins. As 
pressure rises, conscious level is impaired. In children Pari-
naud’s syndrome results from dorsal midbrain compression, 
with a loss of upgaze known as sunsetting (Figure 43.2).
Raised ICP requires urgent evaluation and management: 
delay risks progression to cerebral herniation (see Chapter 24) 
resulting in cardiovascular instability, neurological deficit and 
death. Vision may also deteriorate rapidly and irreversibly.
Figure 43.1 Papilloedema. The optic disc is swollen with blurred margins.
 Figure 43.2 Parinaud’s syndrome with sunsetting.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   652 25/10/2017   08:50Hydrocephalus 653
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Investigation of raised ICP
Causes of raised ICP include mass lesions, cerebral oedema 
and hydrocephalus. Where raised ICP is suspected, computed 
tomography (CT) is a first line investigation to demonstrate 
these and other pathologies, and to evaluate the degree of 
mass effect and the patency of the basal cisterns, the spaces 
surrounding the brainstem. This is key to management since 
lumbar puncture in the setting of raised ICP can result in 
downward herniation of brain structures. Many pathologies, 
as well as the anatomy relating to potential treatments such as 
third ventriculostomy, may be better visualised on magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). Where high pressure is suspected 
but not clearly demonstrated by imaging, ICP monitoring by 
placement of a transducer in the brain substance allows con -
tinuous monitoring over hours or days (Figure 43.3).
Physiology of CSF flow
CSF flows from the lateral ventricles through the foramen of 
Monro to the third ventricle, then down the cerebral aque -
duct to the fourth ventricle, where it exits to the subarach -
noid space via the midline foramen of Magendie and the  
lateral foramina of Luschka (Figure 43.4). CSF is reabsorbed 
into the arachnoid villi along the superior sagittal sinus.
Obstructive and communication 
hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus almost always reflects obstruction to cir -
culation (an obstructive hydrocephalus) or failure of 
re absorption (a communicating hydrocephalus) (Table 
43.1) (Figures 43.5–43.7). The distinction is important 
since obstructive hydrocephalus especially can cause very 
Normal brain
Time
Pressure
P1
P2 P3
P3P2P1
Injured brain
Figure 43.3 The intracranial pressure waveform. The P1 percussion 
wave corresponds to arterial pulsation. Reduced brain compliance in 
the setting of traumatic brain injury among others is associated with 
a prominent P2 tidal wave. The P3 dicrotic wave represents venous 
pulsation.
Summary box 43.1
Raised intracranial pressure
Acutely raised ICP is a neurological emergency. The presentation 
includes:
●● Headache
●● Nausea and vomiting
●● Diploplia and blurred vision
●● Drowsiness then coma
Alexander Monro, 1733–1817, Professor of Anatomy at Edinburgh University, a post also held by his father, Alexander Monro (primus), and son, Alexander 
Monro (tertius)
Francois Magendie, 1783–1855, physician and Professor of Pathology and Physiology, Paris, also described the Magendie sign, a downward and inward rotation 
of the eye due to a cerebellar lesion.
TABLE 43.1 Aetiology of hydrocephalus.
Obstructive hydrocephalus Lesions within the ventricle
Lesions in the ventricular wall
Lesions distant from the ventricle 
but with a mass effect
Communicating hydrocephalus Post haemorrhagic
CSF infection
Raised CSF protein
Excessive CSF production 
(rare)
Choroid plexus papilloma/
carcinoma
CSF , cerebrospinal fluid.
HYDROCEPHALUS
The total CSF volume is normally about 150 mL. Production 
from the walls of the ventricles and the choroid plexus is 
about 20 mL per hour. Hydrocephalus refers to an increase in 
CSF volume with ventricular enlargement, often presenting 
symptoms of raised ICP .
Lateral ventricle
Foramen of Monro
Third ventricle
Fourth ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Figure 43.4 ‘CSF pathways’. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is pr oduced 
by the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles and flows through the 
ventricular system to exit into the subarachnoid space through the 
foramina of Magendie and Luschka in the fourth ventricle.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   653 25/10/2017   08:50CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK654
diagnostic value, deriving an opening pressure and assess -
ment of the CSF contents. It is also therapeutic; drainage 
of typically between 10 and 30 mL of CSF , with the goal of 
halving the opening pressure, can relieve the hydrocephalus 
at least temporarily.
Treatment of hydrocephalus in the emergency setting 
usually involves CSF diversion, for example using an exter -
nal ventricular drain. Management is discussed further under 
Treatment of hydrocephalus. Disorders of CSF flow with 
poorly understood mechanisms manifest in two syndromes: 
normal pressure hydrocephalus and idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (IIH).
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
This is an important cause of dementia since it is readily 
reversible. It typically presents with the triad of gait 
disturbance, incontinence and cognitive decline. It may 
occur de novo or on a background of previous brain insults 
including subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH), head injury, 
meningitis and tumour. Ventriculomegaly is evident on 
imaging, although this is also seen in the context of cortical 
atrophy due to other dementia pathologies. The CSF pressure 
at lumbar puncture (LP) is typically normal, but it is believed 
that intermittent elevations in pressure may be involved in 
the aetiology. Lumbar infusion testing involves insertion of a 
fine drain at LP , followed by measurement of the CSF pressure 
changes associated with a fluid challenge administered 
through this. This allows evaluation of the likely benefit from 
definitive treatment by shunt insertion.
Figure 43.5 Pathological specimen of a hydrocephalic brain.
Figure 43.6 Pineal region tumour (arrow) causing obstructive hydro-
cephalus.
sudden deterioration with coma and death, and because 
lumbar puncture in this context carries a risk of herniation  
of the brainstem and cerebellar tonsils due to the resulting 
differential pressure changes (sometimes termed ‘coning’). 
For communicating hydrocephalus, lumbar puncture is of 
Figure 43.7 Gross hydrocephalus in a neonate with very prominent 
temporal horns (arrows) and fourth ventricle.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   654 25/10/2017   08:50Hydrocephalus 655
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Hg. Intrathecal antibiotics may also be delivered through the 
EVD. Lumbar drains are an alternative means of temporary 
CSF diversion, often used to manage CSF leaks resulting from 
communicating hydrocephalus.
Ventriculoperitoneal shunts
Ventriculoperitoneal shunting comprises insertion of a ven -
tricular catheter into the frontal or occipital horn of the  
lateral ventricle, while a distal catheter is tunnelled sub-
cutaneously to the abdomen. Ventriculoatrial and ventric-
ulopleural shunting is also possible, and lumbar-peritoneal 
shunts may be used in communicating hydrocephalus or 
IIH. A shunt valve, with an opening pressure that may be 
high, medium or low, is inserted at the junction of these 
catheters (Figure 43.8). Selection of the shunt valve is a 
balance and must be tailored to each patient: high pressure 
valves may fail to allow adequate CSF drainage, whereas low 
pressure valves can overdrain (see below). An anti-siphon 
system may be incorporated to prevent excessive drainage 
in the standing position. Programmable valves offer vari -
able opening pressures, adjusted magnetically using a device 
applied externally over the valve. The valve system will also 
typically incorporate a CSF reservoir, which allows for per -
cutaneous sampling.
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
This condition presents with features of raised ICP with -
out an underlying tumour, explaining the old terms for the 
condition, pseudotumour cerebri or benign intracranial 
hypertension. This description is misleading, since IIH can 
progress rapidly to blindness. The patient, typically a young 
overweight female, describes a headache typical of raised 
pressure, and visual deterioration. Examination may reveal 
papilloedema, and occasionally cranial nerve palsies. Imag-
ing is unremarkable, but LP demonstrates a raised opening 
pressure >25 mm Hg. The diagnosis is one of exclusion and 
the aetiology is not well understood. Impaired CSF resorption 
may reflect raised venous pressure, either as a result of sinus 
thrombosis or secondary to raised intra-abdominal pressure in 
obese patients. Weight loss and cessation of certain medica -
tions including the oral contraceptive pill is often effective. 
This is combined with medical therapy using acetazolamide 
to reduce CSF production. For patients with visual field loss 
or visual failure, despite medication, lumboperitoneal or ven-
triculoperitoneal shunting is offered. Optic nerve sheath fen-
estration by an ophthalmologist may also be employed.
Summary box 43.2
Hydrocephalus and disorders of CSF flow
●● Obstructive or communicating hydrocephalus may occur as a 
result of neurosurgical pathology or its treatment
●● CT is the first line of investigation. For communicating 
hydrocephalus, LP can confirm raised CSF pressure and 
relieve it temporarily
●● Idiopathic intracranial hypertension results in symptomatic 
raised CSF pressure without ventricular enlargement, 
typically in young, overweight women. CSF diversion may be 
necessary to prevent permanent visual loss
●● Normal pressure hydrocephalus is a potentially reversible 
cause of dementia, presenting with gait disturbance, 
incontinence and cognitive decline
Treatment of hydrocephalus
Acute obstructive hydrocephalus is an emergency because of 
the risk of rapid progression to coma and death, sometimes 
with very sudden deterioration, a ‘hydrocephalic attack’. It 
may be relieved by addressing the underlying pathology, for 
example by excision of a tumour responsible for an obstruc -
tive hydrocephalus. Most often, however, temporary ven -
tricular drainage is required, either as an emergency in an 
obtunded or deteriorating patient or as a precaution during 
definitive surgery considering the possibility for postopera-
tive swelling.
External ventricular drain
External ventricular drains (EVDs) are an effective tempo-
rary measure to relieve hydrocephalus. Most commonly they 
are inserted to the right of midline, anterior to the coronal 
suture, so that the catheter tip rests adjacent to the foramen 
of Monro in the lateral ventricle. The catheter is then con -
nected to a drain set such that CSF drains when the ventric -
ular pressure exceeds a threshold typically set at 10–20 mm 
Figure 43.8 Examples of ventriculoperitoneal shunt valves.
Shunt complications
Overdrainage can result in low-pressure headaches, which are 
typically worse on standing. Collapse of the ventricles can 
cause accumulation of fluid or blood in the subdural space, 
resulting in subdural hygroma or subdural haematoma. The 
slit ventricle syndrome describes the situation in children 
treated with shunts, whose ventricles and subarachnoid 
spaces are underdeveloped, resulting in poor brain compli -
ance. In these patients normal fluctuations in ICP are exag-
gerated so that coughing and straining may cause symptoms of 
raised ICP . Any shunt blockage may not be evident on scan, 
as the ventricles fail to enlarge.
Shunts are vulnerable to disconnection, infection and 
blockage, with the result that 15–20% require replacement 
within 3 years. Seventy five per cent of infections present 
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   655 25/10/2017   08:50CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK656
Brain abscess and empyema
Abscesses arise when the brain is exposed directly, for exam -
ple as a result of fracture or infection of an air sinus, or at 
surgery. They also result from haematogenous spread, typi -
cally in association with respiratory and dental infections, or 
endocarditis. In 25% of cases, no underlying primary infec-
tion is found. The organisms involved are normally bacteria, 
but immunocompromised hosts in particular are vulnerable to 
a broad range of pathogens (Box 43.1).
within 1 month, reflecting introduction at the time of 
insertion. Risk factors include very young patients, open 
myelomeningocoele, long operation time and staff movement 
in and out of theatre. The shunt is removed, and external CSF 
drainage or serial lumbar puncture instituted to cover a course 
of antibiotic therapy. Once CSF sampling confirms resolution 
of the infection and a normal protein concentration, a shunt 
can be inserted at a new site.
The majority of blockages are attributable to cellular and 
proteinaceous debris, especially due to infection, but choroid 
plexus adhesion, blood clot or failure of the valve mechanism 
may also be responsible.
Endoscopic third ventriculostomy
This procedure is especially useful in obstructive hydroceph -
alus due to aqueduct stenosis. A neuroendoscope is inserted 
into the frontal horn of the lateral ventricle and then into 
the third ventricle via the foramen of Monro. The floor of the 
ventricle is then opened between the mammillary bodies and 
the pituitary recess. Free drainage between the third ventricle 
and the adjacent subarachnoid cisterns is then possible, with-
out the infection risk posed by implanted tubing. Reblock-
age of this route is common, however, and many patients will 
subsequently require a shunt. Rare but serious complications 
include damage to the basilar artery, or fornicial damage 
resulting in permanent memory impairment.
Summary box 43.3
Treating hydrocephalus
●● Temporary CSF diversion can be achieved with an EVD
●● In the long term a shunt, usually connecting the lateral 
ventricles with the peritoneal cavity in the abdomen (VP 
shunt), is the mainstay of management
●● Shunt blockage and infection are common complications
Summary box 43.4
Meningitis
●● A feared complication of neurosurgery and of head injury
●● CT head allows exclusion of raised ICP prior to LP
●● CSF should be sent for microscopy and culture, and for assay 
of protein and glucose levels
●● Treatment, pending identification of an organism, is with 
broad-spectrum antibiotics including anaerobic cover
INTRACRANIAL INFECTION
Meningitis
Meningitis describes inflammation of the meninges of the 
brain and spinal cord, most commonly and most seriously 
due to bacterial infection. The clinical features of meningeal 
irritation or meningism are fever, headache, neck stiffness 
and photophobia. Community-acquired bacterial meningitis 
can progress rapidly without antibiotic treatment to subpial 
encephalopathy, venous thrombosis, cerebral oedema and 
death. Meningitis as a complication of head injury or surgery 
typically follows a more insidious course, but nonetheless 
remains a feared complication requiring prompt intervention. 
Typical organisms are Staphylococcus aureus, Enterobacteria-
ceae, Pseudomonas and pneumococci.
Meningitis after head injury is common, affecting 25% of 
patients with base of skull fracture and CSF leak. Repair of the 
CSF leak may be required, and empirical antibiotics should 
have activity against commensal nasal organisms including 
gram-positive cocci and gram-negative bacilli in the presence 
of symptoms/signs of clinical meningitis.
Box 43.1 Common causative organisms.
●● Sinus/mastoid infection: aerobic and anaerobic streptococci; 
bacteroides; enterobacteria; staphylococci; Pseudomonas
●● Haematogenous spread: bacteroides; streptococci
●● Penetrating trauma: Staphylococcus aureus; clostridia; 
bacillus; enterobacteria
●● Food contamination: Toxoplasma, pork tapeworm (producing 
neurocysticercosis)
●● Immunocompromise (e.g. HIV/AIDS): protozoal (e.g. 
Toxoplasma), fungal (e.g. Cryptococcus), viral (e.g. JC 
virus producing multifocal leukoencephalopathy) and 
mycobacterial abscesses are encountered
Typical presenting features include low-grade fever , con-
fusion, seizures and focal deficits, often with equivocal blood 
markers of inflammation; blood cultures should be obtained 
at an early stage. CT scan with contrast is the initial imaging 
modality of choice. Hypodense oedematous brain representing 
early cerebritis is visible in the first few days (Figure 43.9). 
The classic appearances of a smooth-walled, well-defined, ring- 
enhancing mass develop as the abscess matures (Figure 43.10). 
The distinction between abscess and tumour can be difficult 
and has important management implications, since abscesses 
generally require urgent drainage. Diffusion-weighted MRI is a 
valuable tool in this context (Figure 43.11).
Early surgical drainage of abscesses is the mainstay of man-
agement, helping to prevent dangerous complications: mortality 
for these patients is about 4%, but is greater than 80% in the case 
of ventriculitis due to rupture of an abscess into the ventricles. 
Intravenous antibiotic therapy is administered, broad spectrum 
initially and then according to sensitivities of the organisms 
responsible once identified. Treatment should last at least 
6 weeks, but a switch to oral therapy may be appropriate after 
an interval and in consultation with microbiology. Up to 50% 
of patients with brain abscess will develop seizures at some stage, 
therefore prophylactic anticonvulsants should be considered.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   656 25/10/2017   08:50Intracranial infection 657
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Subdural empyema
Subdural empyema refers to an infective collection in the 
subdural space. This may develop as a result of sinusitis, mas-
toiditis or meningitis, and can complicate trauma or surgery. 
Figure 43.12 shows a subdural empyema associated with 
osteomyelitis of the frontal bone and associated scalp swelling 
(Pott’s puffy tumour). In empyema, pus will generally collect 
in the parafalcine region and over the convexity, triggering 
inflammation and thrombosis in the cortical veins, which 
helps to explain the high mortality of 8–12%. Presentation 
mimics that of meningitis and cerebral abscess; typical CT 
appearances are of hypodense or isodense subdural collection, 
with contrast enhancement at the margins, and a degree of 
swelling and midline shift. The empyema may be difficult to 
visualise especially on non-contrast CT. LP should not be per-
formed given the risk of herniation.
Figure 43.9 Axial computed tomography scan with contrast of a 
patient with frontal sinusitis pr esenting with seizures. Early cerebritis 
is evident in the left frontal region (arrow).
Figure 43.10  Axial computed tomography scan with contrast of 
the same patient as in Figure 43.9  2 weeks later. A ring-enhancing 
smooth-walled lesion is evident, an abscess suitable for image-
guided drainage.
Figure 43.11 The right frontal lesion evident on T2-weighted mag -
netic resonance imaging (MRI) (main image) exhibits high signal on 
diffusion-weighted MRI sequences (top right inset) indicative of brain 
abscess.
Summary box 43.5
Brain abscesses
●● Presenting features are those of infection and of intracranial 
mass lesion
●● Imaging reveals a ‘ring-enhancing lesion’, with tumour usually 
the main differential
●● Early diagnosis, usually followed by drainage, is key for good 
outcome.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   657 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK658
especially when population or individual risk factors are 
present. TB can result in a diverse but overlapping spectrum 
of pathology, including in the head:
 ● tuberculous meningitis – this commonly affects young 
children; CT demonstrates intense meningeal enhance-
ment, and hydrocephalus is a common sequela;
 ● tuberculoma – discrete tumour-like granulomas at the base 
of the cerebral hemispheres, presenting with mass effect;
 ● tuberculous abscess – seen predominantly in immunocom-
promised hosts, this represents progression of a tubercu -
loma with prominent central caseating necrosis;
 ● miliary tuberculosis – describes a diffuse distribution of 
multiple small tuberculomas through brain substance.
Where the meninges are involved, lymphocytes can be 
expected to predominate in the CSF , rather than the poly -
morphs seen with other bacterial meningitides. The increase in 
protein content and reduction in glucose concentration are also 
less marked. Ziehl–Neesen staining for myobacteria is frequently 
negative, and polymerase chain reaction testing offers relatively 
rapid diagnosis compared to culture for acid-fast bacilli which 
may take weeks. A 20–30 mL CSF sample allows spinning to 
increase the culture yield. Management is with anti-tuberculous 
therapy; hydrocephalus may require shunt insertion.
VASCULAR NEUROSURGERY
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
‘Spontaneous’ subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) is usually the 
result of bleeding from a ruptured aneurysm (~80% of SAH) or 
an arteriovenous malformation (A VM). Most ruptured aneu-
rysms are located in the circle of Willis, at branch points in 
the arterial tree associated with turbulent blood flow (Figure 
43.13). A distinct subgroup of SAH patients suffer bleeds con-
fined to the basal cisterns anterior to the midbrain and pons, 
without an underlying lesion evident on angiogram. This 
is termed perimesencephalic SAH,  is believed to represent 
venous bleeding and has an excellent prognosis.  Aneurysms 
may also develop as a result of infective infiltration of arterial 
walls in the context of bacteraemia (mycotic aneurysm), often 
in the setting of intravenous drug use or infective endocarditis. 
Pseudoaneurysms may also develop after trauma or after surgery.
Aneurysmal bleeding has an incidence of 10–15 per 
100 000 population per year. Risk factors include age, female 
sex, hypertension, smoking, cocaine abuse and a family his -
tory with two first-degree relatives affected. A range of genetic 
disorders, in particular adult polycystic kidney disease, fibro -
muscular dysplasia, neurofibromatosis type 1, Ehlers–Danlos 
and Marfan’s syndromes, are known to predispose patients to 
this condition.
Craniotomy or craniectomy allows drainage of the collec-
tion and relieves raised ICP and is the treatment of choice. 
Burrhole drainage, and occasionally IV antibiotics without 
surgical intervention, may also be considered.
Summary box 43.6
Subdural empyema
●● Presenting features are similar to those of meningitis or 
cerebral abscess
●● Typically a crescentic collection with a contrast-enhancing rim 
is evident on CT
●● Drainage is the mainstay of treatment
Percival Pott, 1714–1788, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described the ‘Puffy Tumour’ in 1760. In 1756 he sustained a broken leg after a fall 
from his horse. As he lay on the ground, he sent a servant to buy a door which acted as a stretcher. While his surgeons were contemplating amputating his leg, he 
persuaded them to splint the leg instead as a result of which he recovered completely. Although some think that Pott’s fracture of the ankle was described after 
this injury of his, it is not so. He sustained a compound fracture of the femur. Pott was the first to link an environmental factor to the aetiology of cancer when he 
demonstrated that chimney sweeps developed squamous cell scrotal cancer.
Thomas Willis, 1621–1675, Sedleian Professor of Natural Philosophy at Oxford, was the first anatomist to number the cranial nerves in the order used today.
Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) infection of the central nervous system 
(CNS) represents haematogenous spread from primary 
pulmonary foci. A high index of suspicion is required, 
Figure 43.12 Axial computed tomography scan with contrast show-
ing a right hemisphere subdural empyema (short arrow) and a right 
frontal Pott’s puffy tumour (long arrow) (osteomyelitis of the frontal 
bone).
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   658 25/10/2017   08:51Vascular neurosurgery 659
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Investigation
CT scan is the imaging of first choice, and, when performed 
within 12 hours of ictus, will confirm bleeding in more than 
98% of cases. This makes a diagnostic LP unnecessary (Figure 
43.14).
The sensitivity of a CT scan, however, deteriorates to less 
than 50% at 1 week after a bleed. In light of this, patients 
with a suggestive history and negative CT scan will require 
LP, especially where presentation is delayed. The CSF super -
natant should be analysed by spectrophotometry (visual 
inspection is not reliable) for the spectra of haemoglobin 
breakdown products oxyhaemoglobin and bilirubin. These are 
clearly detectable in samples taken at least 6 and preferably 12 
hours after SAH, but not in CSF mixed with fresh blood due 
to traumatic puncture, and analysed immediately. Failure to 
exclude SAH with an appropriate delayed LP may necessitate 
formal cerebral angiography, and the risks this entails.
Catheter angiography generally involves access to both 
vertebral and carotid arteries through the femoral artery under 
local anaesthetic. This allows visualisation of the vascular 
anatomy by injection of contrast medium with simultaneous 
screening (Figures 43.15 and 43.16) . The serious potential 
risks include ischaemic stroke or arterial dissection (1–2%), 
and renal failure or allergic reactions attributable to contrast.
Surgical/interventional management
CT angiography has a high sensitivity for aneurysms and A VMs, 
but digital subtraction angiography remains the gold standard.
Aneurysms demonstrated may be removed from the circu-
lation surgically by craniotomy and ‘clipping’ or by endovas -
cular embolisation, also known as ‘coiling’. Sometimes mesh 
stents may also be used to help secure the metal coils within 
the aneurysm sac as part of this procedure. Class 1 evidence 
suggesting a lower risk of poor outcomes, at least for small 
anterior circulation aneurysms, has driven the uptake of 
coiling. However, a surgical approach remains necessary or 
History and examination
The typical presentation of a SAH includes a ‘thunderclap’ 
headache, which is both sudden and severe and is outside the 
patient’s normal experience. Some patients describe prodromal 
headaches preceding the event, potentially representing aneu-
rysm growth or subclinical bleeds. The sudden onset occurs 
commonly but not exclusively during exertion, and may be asso-
ciated with seizure (10%), unresponsiveness (50%) and vomit-
ing (70%). Sometimes it is difficult to establish whether SAH 
has caused a fall, or whether a fall with head injury is responsible 
for the SAH. Approximately one-third of SAHs are incorrectly 
diagnosed at initial presentation. They are then at high risk of 
succumbing to early complications, especially a rebleed.
Neurological examination may be normal (‘good clinical 
grade’) or the patient may have focal deficits and an impaired 
conscious level (‘poor grade’). The World Federation of Neu-
rological Surgeons (WFNS) grading of SAH is measured 
against the condition of the patient after resuscitation rather 
than at the time of ictus (Table 43.2). A painful third nerve 
palsy is typically the result of compression from a posterior 
communicating artery aneurysm. Meningitic features of neck 
stiffness and photophobia often develop over hours. Intraoc-
ular haemorrhages, classically subhyaloid, may be visible on 
fundoscopy. The combination of SAH and vitreous haemor -
rhage is known as Terson’s Syndrome and occurs in 15–20% 
of patients. Papilloedema should be sought, but may not be 
evident early in the course of a developing hydrocephalus.
Anterior cerebral
artery
36%
Anterior
communicating
artery
38%
Middle
cerebral
artery
Basilar
artery
Vertebral
artery
Posterior
cerebral
artery
21%
5%
Posterior
communicating
artery
Figure 43.13 Common sites of aneurysm in the circle of Willis.
TABLE 43.2 World Federation of Neurological Surgeons 
(WFNS) grading of subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Grade Glasgow Coma Scale Focal deficitsa
I 15 –
II 13–14 –
III 13–14 +
IV 7–12 ±
V 3–9 ±
aFocal deficit = dysphasia or limb weakness.
Figure 43.14  Diffuse subarachnoid bleeding from a ruptured 
anterior communicating artery aneurysm extends to the prepontine 
and ambient cisterns around the brainstem, and into both Sylvian 
fissures.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   659 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK660
Neurological deterioration should prompt a repeat scan to 
exclude evidence of rebleeding and of hydrocephalus. This is  
typically the communicating type, which is a common sequela 
of haemorrhage. Where these complications are not demon-
strated, deterioration is often attributable to delayed ischaemic 
neurological deficit (DNID), which commonly develops 3 to 
10 days after aneurysmal haemorrhage and can progress rap -
idly to infarction. The process is attributed to cerebral vaso -
spasm in response to, and correlating with, the blood load. 
This process can be visualised angiographically, and the veloc-
ity of bloodflow in the cerebral vasculature, measured using 
transcranial Doppler ultrasound, provides an indirect assess -
ment of the degree of stenosis. Outcomes are optimised by the 
prophylactic administration of nimodipine and maintenance 
of fluid volume, typically with 2.5–3 litres per day of normal 
saline. In established vasospasm, the goal is to maintain cere-
bral perfusion by administration of fluid and inotropes.
Hyponatraemia is a frequent complication of SAH, attributed 
to cerebral salt wasting in the context of fluid depletion, 
and otherwise to the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
preferable in many cases. A rebleed risk of 4% in the first 
24  hours, then  1.5% per day thereafter is quoted for aneu-
rysms, and 80% of patients who rebleed have an eventual 
poor outcome. For this reason, and to permit optimal man -
agement of vasospasm, the current consensus favours early 
intervention, despite the surgical challenges presented by 
brain swelling and blood load.
Overall survival of SAH is about 50%, and one-third of 
survivors remain dependent. Only 50% of WFNS grade 1 
patients return to work. Treated aneurysms can regrow and 
rebleed, especially after coiling, so that a programme of sur -
veillance is necessary.
Unruptured aneurysms represent a thorny management 
problem: incidentally detected small anterior circulation 
aneurysms represent a minimal bleeding risk. Screening, even 
in high risk groups, is therefore of questionable benefit.
Medical management
Patients should be placed on bed rest with hourly neuro obser-
vations. They require strict input–output monitoring and 
intravenous fluid replacement with normal saline initially. 
Oral nimodipine at a dose of 60 mg every 4 hours reduces 
the rate of poor outcome (see Vasospasm below). Analgesics, 
laxatives, anti-emetics, gastric protection and compression 
stockings are also likely to be necessary. After resuscitation, 
the priorities in subarachnoid haemorrhage are:
1 to prevent rebleeding by identifying and controlling any 
underlying lesion;
2 to recognise and manage:
 ● neurological complications, especially vasospasm (or  
delayed ischaemic neurologic deficit) and hydrocephalus;
 ● systemic complications, including electrolyte imbal-
ance, severe hypertension, cardiac infarct and arrhyth-
mia, and neurogenic pulmonary oedema.
These goals are best served by early transfer of the patient 
to a neurosurgical centre. In elderly patients with a poor 
WFNS grade, a decision to offer only supportive management 
may be appropriate.
Figure 43.15 There is a small saccular aneurysm of the pericallosal 
branch of the anterior cerebral artery.
Figure 43.16 (a) A giant aneurysm of the internal carotid artery. 
(b) Angiographic embolisation (coiling) of the giant aneurysm. Note 
the single displaced coil passing into the distal internal carotid artery 
and then the middle cerebral artery.
(a)
(b)
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   660 25/10/2017   08:51Vascular neurosurgery 661
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
ischaemic strokes in the posterior fossa or in the middle 
cerebral artery territory. Importantly , this surgery may be 
life-saving but cannot reverse focal deficits. Young patients 
with haematomas close to the cortical surface, demonstrating 
progressive neurological deterioration, represent good surgical 
candidates. Posterior fossa clot is also a strong indication for 
surgery because of the potential for rapid deterioration due 
to brainstem compression and hydrocephalus. A substantial 
minority of intracerebral bleeds are attributable to focal 
vascular lesions (see above). This must be considered when 
planning any surgery, and may be an indication for acute 
vascular imaging in discussion with neurovascular specialists. 
Delayed follow-up imaging is often recommended to exclude 
underlying tumour as a cause for bleed.
hormone secretion. This is associated with a higher incidence of 
DNID, and practical management, irrespective of the underlying 
pathology, is based on sodium replacement, with hypertonic 
infusions if necessary. Fluid restriction is not appropriate in these 
patients since this risks further compromising perfusion.
Summary box 43.7
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
●● Most result from rupture of an aneurysm of the circle of Willis
●● Plain CT and LP are first line investigations
●● Even ‘good grade’ patients treated promptly have a significant 
morbidity due to vasospasm, cardiac arrhythmias, neurogenic 
pulmonary oedema, etc.
Summary box 43.8
Intracerebral haemorrhage
●● These account for 10–15% of strokes
●● Presentation is with headache, focal deficits and signs of 
raised ICP
●● High blood pressure may be chronic so should only be 
reduced with care
●● Anticoagulants should be reversed
●● In fit patients, clot evacuation is an option to relieve raised 
ICP but not reverse deficits
●● Further imaging may be required to exclude an underlying 
vascular or neoplastic lesion
Intracerebral haemorrhage
Spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage accounts for 10–15% 
of strokes and has a mortality of 40% at 1 year. The majority 
occur in the context of hypertension or amyloid angiopathy, 
or as a complication of ischaemic stroke. Coagulation dis -
orders, especially patients being treated with warfarin, are a 
major risk factor.
Patients typically present with sudden focal deficit and 
reduced conscious level. Following initial resuscitation, 
these patients will require CT scan to establish the diagnosis, 
and the size and position of the bleed (Figure 43.17). They 
require reversal of anticoagulation, ongoing hourly neuro 
observations and blood pressure monitoring. High blood pres-
sure may be longstanding and associated with adaptations to 
autoregulation, so attempts at lowering it acutely with intra-
venous antihypertensives should be made only if the values 
are very high (e.g. mean arterial pressure >130 mm Hg).
Craniotomy and evacuation may be used to alleviate 
raised ICP , just as it can be in a subgroup of patients with 
Figure 43.17 Large acute intracerebral haemorrhages in the right 
frontal and parietal lobes ar e evident, with surrounding oedema and 
midline shift.
Vascular malformations
Vascular malformations are usually congenital in origin, with 
certain key exceptions discussed below . They may present 
with headaches, pulsatile tinnitus, seizures or focal deficit, or 
else acutely with rupture and haemorrhage.
AVMs are responsible for a small proportion of subarach -
noid and intracerebral haemorrhages. Vessels and calcification 
may be apparent on CT or MRI, and the lesion is confirmed 
on angiography (Figure 43.18)
When A VMs present with bleeding, there is an approx -
imately 4% risk of rebleed per annum. The risk is particularly 
high in the first 6 weeks and where the bleed is from an aneurysm 
related to the A VM. Surgery is the generally preferred treatment, 
but this may not be possible for some lesions which are large, in 
eloquent brain or with deep venous drainage. Radiosurgery and 
endovascular embolisation with tissue glue are options here.
Vein of Galen malformations are A VMs feeding into an 
embryological venous remnant dorsal to the brainstem pre -
senting in childhood. High-flow malformations may cause 
cardiac failure. They may be treated by embolisation.
Dural arteriovenous fistulae (DA VFs) are shunts between 
dural arteries and veins or sinuses. They are proposed to arise 
as a result of vessel remodelling in response to dural sinus 
thrombosis and subsequent recanalisation. They may pres -
ent with subarachnoid, intracerebral or subdural bleeding, 
or with headache and pulsatile tinnitus. A carotid cavernous 
fistula is a spontaneous or traumatic DA VF between the inter-
nal carotid artery and surrounding cavernous sinus, typically 
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   661 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK662
symptomatic carotid stenosis, and a debatable role for the 
procedure in patients with no previous transient ischaemic 
episodes.
Moya moya disease describes the progressive obliteration 
of one or both internal carotid arteries, thought to repre -
sent an autoimmune process. The development of external 
carotid circulation collaterals produces the angiographic ‘puff 
of smoke’ appearance responsible for this Japanese-derived 
name. It presents in youth or early middle age with isch -
aemia or haemorrhage. Untreated, the majority of patients 
suffer major deficit or die within 2 years. Ischaemia may be 
addressed by a variety of bypass techniques, for example by 
anastomosing the superficial temporal artery (arising from the 
external carotid) to the middle cerebral artery.
BRAIN TUMOURS
The term ‘brain tumour’ applies to a wide array of pathologies 
detailed in the World Health Organisation (WHO) classifi -
cation. Many are malignant, but even histologically benign 
tumours may carry a grave prognosis where they encroach on 
key structures that also limit surgical access. The commonest 
brain tumour is a metastasis. Primary brain tumours represent 
1.5% of all cancers, with an incidence of 19 per 100 000 per-
son years. Nevertheless, many, especially glial tumours, pres -
ent commonly in younger age groups and are incurable, so 
they account for disproportionate morbidity and mortality.
Classification
The WHO classifies primary brain tumours on the basis of cell 
of origin and histological grade. A simplified classification is 
shown in Figure 43.20.
Common adult primary brain tumours include gliomas, 
meningiomas (15–20% of total), pituitary adenomas (10–15% 
of total) and vestibular schwannomas. Grade 1 is applied to 
‘benign’ lesions, while grade 4 implies high-grade malignancy.
Aetiology
The common primary brain tumours mentioned above occur 
sporadically. There is no proven risk due to environmental 
factors, except for radiation exposure, but genetic abnormali-
ties may also predispose (Table 43.3).
Presentation
Most tumours present with one or more features belonging 
to three cardinal categories: these are seizure, raised ICP and 
focal neurological deficit. Pituitary adenomas may also pres -
ent with endocrine disturbance.
Seizures
Seizures are a common presenting feature, especially of low-
grade gliomas arising in the cortical hemispheres. Simple 
partial seizures, involving focal twitching or similar with pre-
served consciousness, are the rule, but temporal location will 
commonly produce complex partial seizures, and any seizure 
may progress to a secondary generalized tonic-clonic fit.
producing eye pain, ocular muscle palsies and exophthalmos. 
Angiography is diagnostic.
Cavernomas (Figure 43.19) are venous anomalies, 
demonstrated on MRI but not with angiography, which may 
require operation if they cause progressive deficits, intractable 
epilepsy or recurrent bleeding.
Related lesions, usually clinically silent, include develop-
mental venous anomalies and capillary telangectasia.
Figure 43.18  An arteriovenous malformation supplied by the 
anterior cer ebral, middle cerebral and middle meningeal arteries is 
demonstrated at the 4 o’clock position in this angiogram.
Occlusive vascular disease
In a subgroup of young patients with completed posterior fossa or 
non-dominant middle cerebral artery territory infarcts, there is a 
role for decompressive craniectomy in the acute setting to man-
age the brain swelling and raised ICP associated with the infarct.
There is class 1 evidence for the role of carotid endar -
terectomy in reducing the risk of stroke in patients with 
Figure 43.19 A brainstem cavernoma (arrow).
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   662 25/10/2017   08:51Brain tumours 663
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Raised intracranial pressure). Where the differential diagno-
sis of abscess can be confidently excluded (see Brain abscess), 
mass effect is controlled initially using high-dose glucocorti-
coids (e.g. dexamethasone) to reduce swelling. Acute deteri-
oration in this group may represent a developing obstructive 
hydrocephalus due to compression of CSF drainage pathways 
(see Hydrocephalus), a neurosurgical emergency.
Focal neurological deficit
A focal deficit progressive over time, as opposed to the sudden 
onset of a vascular accident, is suspicious of tumour. Lesions 
generally produce characteristic deficits due to local pressure 
effect, and reflecting location (Table 43.4).
Patients who have had a seizure should be started on an 
antiepileptic drug, usually phenytoin, levetiracetam or carba-
mazepine. Therapeutic levels of phenytoin can be achieved 
rapidly with intravenous loading, but its enzyme-inducing 
effect can complicate the administration of chemotherapy. 
Routine prophylaxis in patients with tumours who have no his-
tory of seizures is not recommended, although a short course at 
the time of craniotomy for tumour excision may be warranted.
Raised intracranial pressure
Headache is a presenting feature in only about 50% of patients. 
It is classically worse in the morning and on straining, and 
accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Pressure effect devel -
ops due to tumour mass effect and surrounding oedema, espe-
cially in fast growing metastases and high-grade gliomas (see 
BRAIN TUMOURS
Neuroepithelial
Gliomas
Pineal
tumours
Neuronal
tumours
AstrocytomasOligodendrogliomas Ependymomas and
choroid plexus tumours
Extra-axial
Meningioma
Vestibular
schwannoma
Metastasis + 
lymphoma
Germ cell tumour
Pituitary 
tumours
Tumour-like
malformations
Craniopharyngioma
Dermoid/epidermoid
Colloid
cyst
Medulloblastoma/
PNET
Figure 43.20 Brain tumour classification. A simplified schema encompassing some of the key brain tumour categories. Highlighted in bold are 
the pathologies discussed in more detail in this chapter.
TABLE 43.3 Chromosomal abnormalities associated with 
brain tumours.
Syndrome Gene defect Tumour
Neurofibromatosis 
type 1
Neurofibromin (Chr 
17)
Astrocytomas; 
neurofibromas
Neurofibromatosis 
type 2
Schwannomin (Chr 
22)
Acoustic neuromas 
(bilateral); 
meningiomas
Cowden’s disease PTEN (Chr 10) Astrocytomas
Hereditary non-
polyposis colorectal 
cancer
Multiple Astrocytomas
Li–Fraumeni 
syndrome
p53 (Chr 17) Astrocytomas
Common brain tumours
Cerebral metastases
Cerebral metastases (Figure 43.21) are the most common 
intracranial tumours, and affect about one quarter of can -
cer sufferers, a proportion that is increasing with extended 
survival associated with more effective treatment of primary 
cancers. The tumours of origin and their contribution to the 
burden of cerebral metastases is detailed in Table 43.5. In gen-
eral patients with multiple cerebral metastases are not suitable 
for surgery. Occasionally, diagnostic biopsy may be warranted 
where the primary is unknown. In patients with good func-
tional status and well controlled systemic disease, craniotomy 
for resection of a single metastasis, and exceptionally up to 
three metastases, may be considered.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   663 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK664
TABLE 43.4 Patterns of deficit generally associated with 
certain tumours.
Tumour location Expected deficit
Pituitary (e.g. pituitary 
adenoma)
Bitemporal hemianopia; gaze 
palsies
Cerebellopontine angle (e.g. 
vestibular schwannoma)
Hearing loss; balance disturbance; 
tinnitus
Anterior skull base 
(e.g. olfactory groove 
meningioma)
Anosmia; ipsilateral optic atrophy; 
contralateral papilloedema (Foster-
Kennedy syndrome)
Occipital (e.g. glioma, 
metastasis)
Homonymous hemianopia with 
central sparing
Parietal (dominant 
hemisphere)
Acalculia; agraphia; left-right 
disorientation; finger agnosia 
(Gerstmann syndrome)
Parietal (e.g. glioma) Sensory inattention; dressing 
apraxia; astereognosis
Temporal (e.g. glioma) Memory disturbance; contralateral 
superior quadrantanopia; dysphasia 
(dominant hemisphere)
Frontal (e.g. glioma) Personality change; gait 
disturbance; urinary incontinence
Brainstem (e.g. brainstem 
glioma)
Multiple cranial nerve deficits; long 
tract signs; nystagmus
Posterior fossa (e.g. 
medulloblastoma)
Ataxia; hydrocephalus
Robert Foster Kennedy, British neurologist, awarded the Chevalier de la Legion d’honneur for his service in French front line field hospitals in World War 1.
Josef Gerstmann, Austrian neurologist who fled to America in 1938 to escape the Nazis.
Summary box 43.9
Brain tumours
●● Most brain tumours will present with one or more feature 
related to the following triad:
Raised ICP
Seizures
Focal deficit
Glioma
These are tumours of glial cell origin, with subtypes includ -
ing astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, ependymomas and 
mixed tumours. The diagnosis is histological, but imaging 
often predicts both a glial origin and the grade of tumour 
(Figure 43.22): MRI of the head with and without contrast 
is the preferred modality, generally combined with CT of the 
chest/abdomen/pelvis to exclude an extracranial primary, 
since metastasis is usually the main differential diagnosis. 
Diffusion-weighted MRI sequences are valuable in excluding 
another differential diagnosis, brain abscess, which is associ -
ated with prominent restricted diffusion in these images.
Initial management of these tumours should generally 
include high-dose steroids to alleviate any mass effect, com -
bined with a proton pump inhibitor to address the potential 
steroid side effect of stomach ulcers. Antiepileptics are admin-
istered where seizures are a presenting feature, or are likely in 
Figure 43.21 T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging with con -
trast. Two right occipital lung metastases are demonstrated. They are 
well demarcated and enhance with gadolinium contrast.
TABLE 43.5 Tissue of origin for brain metastases 
(approximate).
Origin Percentage
Lung 40
Breast 15
Melanoma 10
Renal/genitourinary 10
Other/unknown 25
Figure 43.22 Computed tomography with contrast demonstrates a 
heterogeneous right fr ontoparietal lesion with mass effect and mid -
line shift, almost certainly a glioblastoma multiforme. A magnetic 
resonance imaging scan with and without contrast will aid evaluation.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   664 25/10/2017   08:51Brain tumours 665
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
total excision with a clear dural margin and 30% at ten years 
for subtotal excision. Lesions that are difficult to approach 
surgically may be managed with radiotherapy or stereotactic 
radiosurgery.
view of temporal location. Surgical resection is usually the 
primary treatment, aiming to reduce disease burden and to 
obtain tissue for diagnosis. Except for the grade I pilocytic 
astrocytoma, which typically occurs in children, gliomas are 
notable for their diffuse infiltration into surrounding brain, 
so that recurrence after even macroscopically complete resec-
tion is the rule.
Low-grade gliomas (WHO grade II) have a peak incidence 
in the fourth decade of life, and commonly present with sei -
zures initially. Where tumours encroach on eloquent cortex, 
especially the speech areas of the dominant hemisphere, 
awake craniotomy allows mapping of function with surface 
electrodes at operation, to limit resection and minimise post-
operative deficit. High-grade gliomas include anaplastic astro-
cytoma (WHO grade III) and glioblastoma (WHO grade IV), 
the commonest glial tumour (Figure 43.23). They typically 
present de novo with peak incidence in the fifth and sixth 
decades of life, respectively, or they may represent transfor -
mation of previously diagnosed, or clinically silent, low-grade 
gliomas. Active treatment consists of maximal resection, 
high-dose focused radiation therapy, and chemotherapy 
administered locally as carmustine wafers at the time of resec-
tion and/or systemically with oral temozolomide. Median sur-
vival for glioblastoma remains just over 12 months.
Meningioma
Meningiomas are usually benign lesions, although anaplastic 
variants do occur. They arise from the meninges, and typically 
present due to mass effect from the tumour, compounded 
by vasogenic oedema in the adjacent brain and obstructive 
hydrocephalus where CSF drainage is impaired. Imaging will 
demonstrate a contrast-enhancing mass distinct from the 
brain with a dural base (Figure 43.24).
These are generally slow-growing lesions. Smaller lesions, 
perhaps detected incidentally in an elderly patient, may well 
warrant a ‘watch-and-wait’ approach. If the lesion is large 
or positioned so as to impinge on key structures, the patient 
may require steroids and early surgery. The degree of resec -
tion predicts recurrence, with rates of 10% at ten years for 
Figure 43.23 Pathological specimen of glioblastoma multiforme.
Figure 43.24  On T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging an 
extra-axial, durally-based lesion is seen to arise in the region of the 
falx. This is a meningioma.
Summary box 43.10
Common supratentorial brain tumours
●● Metastases and gliomas are common tumours arising within 
brain substance, appearing as ‘ring-enhancing’ lesions on 
contrast CT. Surgery is usually life-extending rather than 
curative
●● Meningiomas arise from the meninges around the brain and 
typically enhance uniformly on contrast CT. Most are benign 
and amenable to curative resection
●● MRI is usually the best modality for evaluating brain tumours. 
Diffusion-weighted sequences help to exclude abscess when 
glioma or metastasis is suspected
●● Metastasis is the main differential diagnosis, and CT of the 
body is useful in identifying extracranial primary tumours
●● Steroids with proton-pump inhibitor cover are administered to 
control swelling and mass effect in the short term
Pituitary tumours
Most tumours in the sellar region are benign pituitary adeno-
mas, but pathology in this region can also include malignant 
variants, craniopharyngioma, meningioma, aneurysm and 
Rathke’s cleft cyst (Figure 43.25).
Microadenomas are less than 10  mm in size and usually 
present incidentally or with endocrine effects. Macroadeno -
mas are larger than 10 mm, and often present with visual field 
deficits. Thirty per cent of adenomas are prolactinomas, 20% 
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   665 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK666
of the chiasm with any evidence of visual compromise is the 
main indication for urgent surgical intervention.
Surgical resection is usually performed by a transsphenoidal 
approach through the nose, using a microscope or endoscope. 
Sometimes large tumours also require a craniotomy. After 
operation patients are at risk of CSF leak (3%), and pituitary 
insufficiency. Diabetes insipidus resulting from manipulation 
of the pituitary stalk is common in the immediate postopera -
tive period and usually resolves spontaneously. Where it is sus-
pected, the patient will require hourly measurement of urine 
output, and blood and urine samples for calculation of sodium 
concentration and osmolality. If confirmed, the condition can 
be managed with DDA VP in consultation with endocrinology.
Pituitary apoplexy is the syndrome associated with hae -
morrhagic infarction of a pituitary tumour. It presents with 
sudden headache, visual loss and ophthalmoplegia with or 
without impaired conscious level. Endocrine resuscitation 
with intravenous steroids is the priority, and surgical decom-
pression may be required.
Vestibular schwannoma
These are nerve sheath tumours arising in the cerebellopontine 
angle, which present with hearing loss, tinnitus and balance  
problems. Facial numbness and weakness are less common, 
while large tumours may present with features of brainstem com-
pression or hydrocephalus. The differential diagnosis includes 
meningioma, metastasis and epidermoid cyst (Figure 43.26).
are non-functioning, 15% secrete growth hormone and 10% 
secrete ACTH.
Features of note in the initial assessment include any his -
tory of galactorrhoea (suggestive of prolactinoma), and Cush-
ingoid or acromegalic features pointing to ACTH- or growth 
hormone-secreting tumours, respectively. Baseline assessment 
of pituitary function should include serum prolactin, follicle-  
stimulating hormone and luteinising hormone together with 
testosterone in males or oestradiol in females, thyroid func -
tion tests and fasting serum growth hormone and cortisol. 
Preoperative prolactin levels are crucial since prolactinomas 
may be managed without the need for surgery. Prolactinomas 
are managed initially with dopamine agonists such as bromoc-
ryptine and cabergoline. Growth hormone-secreting tumours 
may also respond to dopamine agonists or to somatostatin ana-
logues such as octreotide. The cortisol level is also important, 
since deficiency must be corrected, especially in the periopera-
tive period. Diagnosis of ACTH-secreting tumours can be diffi-
cult and may require the use of specialised tests such as petrosal 
sinus sampling and the dexamethasone suppression test.
Effective treatment requires close cooperation between 
the neurosurgical team and an endocrinologist. Compression 
Harvey Williams Cushing, 1869–1939, Professor of Surgery at Harvard University Medical School, credited as the father of modern neurosurgery, and described 
the eponymous disease, but also pioneered new techniques in bacteriology, blood pressure measurement and electrocautery.
Figure 43.25  Non-functioning pituitary macroadenoma (arrow) 
compressing the optic chiasm superiorly, extending into the right cav-
ernous sinus and encasing the right carotid artery.
Figure 43.26  The appearances of a meningioma in the left cer -
ebellopontine angle (CPA) (long arrow), with a coexisting vestibular 
schwannoma in the right CPA (short arrow).
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   666 25/10/2017   08:51Paediatric neurosur gery 667
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
of symptomatic or enlarging lesions is usually surgical, involv-
ing excision, endoscopic fenestration into a cistern or ventri-
cle, or shunting for hydrocephalus. Cyst types include:
 ● arachnoid cyst: typically middle fossa, CSF enclosed in an 
envelope of arachnoid mater;
 ● colloid cyst: occur in the roof of the third ventricle, 
believed to represent embryonic endoderm remnants;
 ● dermoid and epidermoid cysts: epithelial lined structures 
arising from displaced ectodermal remnants, typically in 
the posterior fossa (midline) and cerebellopontine angle 
respectively;
 ● porencephalic cysts: brain cavities lined with gliotic white 
matter, containing CSF in communication with the ven -
tricles or subarachnoid space.
Neural tube defects
Failure of closure of the neural tube is associated with folate 
deficiency, family history and some anticonvulsants. Prenatal 
screening, using serum alphaprotein levels and ultrasound, 
and diagnostic testing, using amniocentesis, are possible. The 
spectrum of conditions associated with failed closure of the 
posterior neuropore includes the conditions described below.
Spina bifida occulta
A congenital absence of a spinous process, without exposure 
of meninges or neural tissue, but presenting a characteristic 
shallow hair-covered hollow at the base of the spine. This is 
common and rarely clinically significant. Sometimes it may 
be associated with tethered cord syndrome, which involves 
thickening of the filum terminale, resulting in traction on the 
cord. Presentation is with progressive deficits, spasticity, blad-
der dysfunction or scoliosis, and treatment involves surgical 
exploration and untethering of the cord.
Meningocoele
A sac of meninges, covered by skin and containing CSF 
alone, herniates through an anterior or posterior bony defect.
Myelomeningocoele
A herniating sac of meninges without covering skin contains 
spinal cord, nerves or both. This is always associated with  
Chiari II malformation (see below). Open myelomeningocoele 
presents a high infection risk and requires early surgical repair.
Lipomyelomeningocoele
Adipose tissue adherent to the spinal cord herniates through 
a bony defect to the sacrolumbar soft tissue. This may be asso-
ciated with bladder dysfunction and require surgical relief of 
the resultant cord tethering.
Failure of closure of the anterior neuropore produces anen-
cephaly, which is uniformly fatal; the spectrum of spinal dys -
raphisms, however, is replicated in the skull. Cranium bifidum 
is a failure of fusion, often in the occipital region. This may be 
associated with herniation of meninges and CSF (meningo -
coele) and, potentially, also brain substance (encephalocoele) 
(Figure 43.27).
Small intracanalicular tumours (within the internal audi-
tory canal) may be managed with surveillance. For interme-
diate size tumours, radiosurgery is an alternative to operation. 
Large lesions (>4 cm), especially with brainstem compression, 
will require excision and consideration of ventriculoperito -
neal shunt to relieve hydrocephalus. Translabyrinthine, ret -
rosigmoid and middle fossa approaches are possible, the latter 
options offering potential preservation of hearing in smaller 
tumours with some intact function at presentation. In remov-
ing larger tumours, it is often impossible to preserve hearing, 
or indeed facial nerve function.
Brain tumours in children
Brain tumours are the most common solid tumours in chil -
dren.
Neonates develop predominantly neuroectodermal 
tumours in supratentorial locations:
 ● teratoma;
 ● primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET);
 ● high-grade astrocytoma;
 ● choroid plexus papilloma/carcinoma.
Older children tend to suffer infratentorial tumours, espe-
cially:
 ● medulloblastoma (an infratentorial PNET);
 ● ependymoma;
 ● pilocytic astrocytoma.
Summary box 43.11
Skull base and paediatric tumours
●● Pituitary tumours typically present with endocrinological 
disturbance (microadenomas) or visual deficits due to 
compression (macroadenomas). Some of these tumours 
are managed surgically, in close cooperation with 
endocrinologists
●● Vestibular schwannomas (acoustic neuromas) are benign 
nerve sheath tumours, usually presenting with hearing 
loss, tinnitus and balance problems. Their proximity to the 
brainstem allows them to cause significant morbidity and 
mortality, and can present a major surgical challenge
●● A large variety of mostly neuroectodermal brain tumours 
represent the most common solid organ tumours in children
PAEDIATRIC NEUROSURGERY
Paediatric neurosurgery presents a wide range range of iso -
lated and syndrome-associated developmental abnormalities 
including cysts, neural tube defects and posterior fossa malfor-
mations. In general these present with combinations of devel-
opmental delay, seizures and macrocephaly or hydrocephalus. 
Early fusion of one or more cranial sutures, craniosynostosis, 
is also a common neonatal presentation.
Cysts
These benign fluid-filled intracranial lesions typically present 
incidentally or with mass effect or hydrocephalus. Treatment 
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   667 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK668
Figure 43.27 An occipital encephalocoele.
Posterior fossa malformations
Chiari malformations involve cerebellar herniation through 
the foramen magnum:
 ● Normal: up to 5 mm of cerebellar tonsillar descent through 
the foramen magnum;
 ● Chiari I: >5 mm of tonsillar descent: presents typically 
in young adults with cough headaches and neurolog -
ical disturbance reflecting brainstem/cerebellar com -
pression and/or formation of a fluid-filled syrinx in the 
spinal cord as a result of disordered CSF flow. Shunting 
and foramen magnum decompression are the mainstay 
of treatment;
 ● Chiari II: descent of the tonsils and vermis associated 
with myelomeningocoele and hydrocephalus, so clinically 
apparent in infancy.
Dandy Walker malformations present in infancy with 
macrocephaly, developmental delay and hydrocephalus; most 
patients have associated abnormalities in the CNS and other 
organ systems. Imaging demonstrates a hypoplastic cerebellar 
vermis, with the posterior fossa occupied by a large thin-
walled cyst. Treatment usually involves shunt placement.
Craniosynostosis
Normal fusion of the coronal, lambdoidal, squamosal and 
sagittal sutures occurs between 6 and 12 months of age;  
others such as the frontal suture fuse later. Craniosynos-
tosis is the premature fusion of one (simple craniosynos -
tosis) or more (complex craniosynostosis) cranial sutures, 
preventing growth perpendicular to the suture. This results 
in a range of skull deformities ( Table 43.6; Figures 43.28  
and 43.29) and hydrocephalus. Syndromic craniosynos -
tosis, often associated with abnormalities of the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor genes, is accompanied by develop -
mental delay and other abnormalities. The surgical treat -
ment aims to correct deformity and prevent development 
of raised ICP .
TABLE 43.6 Types of craniosynostosis.
Type Suture involved Clinical features
Scaphocephaly Sagittal suture Narrow boat-
shaped head
Brachycephaly Coronal suture Shortened/
broad forehead
Microcephaly All sutures involved Small head
Plagiocephaly Unilateral coronal/
lambdoid suture
Asymmetric 
skull
Trigonocephaly Metopic suture Pointed narrow 
forehead
Summary box 43.12
Paediatric neurosurgery
Children manifest a range of developmental pathologies requiring 
neurosurgical management including:
●● Cysts
●● Neural tube defects
●● Posterior fossa abnormalities
●● Craniosynostosis
●● In general intracranial pathologies present with features 
including developmental delay, seizures, macrocephaly and 
hydrocephalus
FUNCTIONAL NEUROSURGERY
Where most neurosurgery seeks to avoid disruption of neural 
tissue as far as possible, functional procedures aim to relieve 
epilepsy, movement disorders or pain by ablation or stimula-
tion of brain tissue and nerves.
Epilepsy
Up to 10% of the population will suffer a seizure at some point 
in their lives, and epilepsy, a syndrome of recurrent unpro -
voked seizures, represents the most common neurological 
disorder. About 20–30% of patients fail to achieve adequate 
seizure control with drugs, and many of these focal epilepsies 
may benefit from surgery. Where a primary lesion such as a 
tumour, A VM or cavernoma is present, lesionectomy alone 
may be appropriate. In other cases the clinical picture, includ-
ing seizure type, focal features and investigation results, can 
be used to identify the seizure focus. Dual pathology refers to 
the presence of an extrahippocampal lesion plus hippocampal 
atrophy, important because removal of both the lesion and 
the atrophic hippocampus will be necessary to achieve seizure 
control.
Investigation
MRI is a mainstay, demonstrating for example reduced hippo-
campal volume and distorted architecture in mesial temporal 
sclerosis. Nuclear medicine modalities including single-  
photon emmision CT and positron emission tomography are 
sometimes used to demonstrate ictal and inter-ictal metabolic 
abnormalities.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   668 25/10/2017   08:51Functional neurosur gery 669
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Electroencephalography entails recording from an array of 
scalp electrodes, and comparison between ictal and inter-ictal 
recordings. This is especially helpful in lateralising the focus 
of complex partial seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy, and is 
combined with video monitoring of the seizure in a videote-
lemetry suite. A more detailed localisation may be achieved 
invasively by the preoperative placement of subdural or depth 
electrodes or by intraoperative electrocorticography.
Neuropsychological evaluation is used to evaluate the 
patient’s preoperative function looking for concordant focal 
impairments, and, using the Wada test (Box 43.2), to assess 
the risk of postoperative language and memory deficits in 
temporal lobe epilepsy surgery.
Figure 43.28  (a–c) Characteristic appearance of scaphocephaly 
due to sagittal suture synostosis.
Figure 43.29  Axial computed tomography scan showing severe 
trigonocephaly due to premature fusion of the metopic suture.
Box 43.2
Wada test. Sodium amytal is injected into each internal carotid 
artery in turn, with simultaneous speech and memory testing to 
localise function. The aim is to confirm language laterality that 
resection on the side of the lesion will not significantly impair 
verbal memory functions.
Juhn Atsushi Wada, b.1924 Tokyo, appointed as Professor of Neurology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, in 1956. The test is also known as 
‘intracarotid sodium amobarbitol’ procedure.
(a)
(c)
(b)
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   669 25/10/2017   08:51CHAPTER 43  Cranial neurosur gery
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK670
ing or brushing the teeth. The pain is often attributable 
to impingement on the nerve by the superior cerebellar  
artery or other vessels, as first postulated by Walter Dandy. 
Occasionally another primary lesion is responsible; for 
example bilateral trigeminal neuralgia in younger patients 
is suggestive of multiple sclerosis. Where medications such 
as gabapentin and carbamazepine cannot achieve control, 
surgical options include:
 ● Craniotomy and microvascular decompression : this 
is designed to address the proposed origin of the neuro -
pathic pain, by applying material between the nerve and  
adjacent vessel to prevent direct contact and stimulation. 
It achieves long-lasting relief of symptoms in about 80% 
of patients, but is associated with the standard risks of 
craniotomy and a significant incidence of cranial nerve 
deficit.
 ● Peripheral nerve injections can achieve good short-term 
relief of pain restricted to small areas supplied by terminal 
branches of the trigeminal.
 ● Percutaneous Gasserian rhizolysis: this involves needle 
placement under radiological guidance at the Gasserian 
ganglion in Meckel’ s cave. This permits lesioning of the 
ganglion by glycerol injection, radiofrequency thermoco -
agulation or balloon compression, with the aim of disrupt-
ing aberrant pain transmission. A similar effect can also be 
achieved using stereotactic radiosurgery. Facial numbness 
and late recurrence of pain are common after these pro -
cedures.
James Parkinson, 1755–1824, general practitioner, Shoreditch, London, UK.
Surgical management
The seizure focus may be resected, generally where it is in 
non-eloquent brain, or otherwise a disconnection can be per-
formed. Awake craniotomy, allowing mapping particularly of 
speech centres, is increasingly employed.
Mesial temporal epilepsy is commonly medically refrac -
tory and can be addressed surgically by amygdalohippo -
campectomy or resection of the temporal lobe including the 
mesial structures. The extent of resection is limited by the 
potential for damage to the optic tracts and to speech areas 
in the dominant hemisphere. With careful patient selection, 
cure rates of up to 70% or greater can be achieved.
Functional or, rarely, anatomical hemispherectomy (Fig-
ure 43.30) may be performed for specific epilepsy syndromes 
associated with hemiplegia, such as infantile hemiplegia syn-
drome. This is usually considered in the early years of life when 
plasticity and potential for functional recovery is greatest.
Disconnection procedures include corpus callosotomy, 
used for patients suffering drop attacks, and subpial transec-
tions to isolate a seizure focus in eloquent brain from the sur-
rounding cortex.
Vagal nerve stimulators can be implanted in severe drug 
refractory epilepsy, with electrodes applied to the vagus nerve 
in the carotid sheath in the neck. This option can achieve 
effective seizure control, especially in children, although the 
mechanism is not clear.
Movement disorders
Prior to the development of levodopa drug therapy , surgical 
ablation of the subthalamic nucleus or globus pallidus interna 
(GPi) was a mainstay of management for Parkinson’s. Inhi-
bition of the action of these centres remains a valuable tool 
later in the course of the disease as the therapeutic window 
using levodopa narrows, but this is now generally achieved 
using deep brain stimulation with electrodes. This offers the 
advantage of an adjustable and reversible effect, and can 
be performed bilaterally where equivalent lesioning surgery 
would likely result in deficits.
Deep brain stimulation is also an option for other move -
ment disorders where less invasive approaches are ineffective. 
These include dystonias, which may be amenable to bilateral 
GPi stimulation, and essential tremor where the Vim nucleus 
of the thalamus is the target.
Pain syndromes
Neurosurgical approaches to the relief of pain may address 
the underlying aetiology directly or may seek to interrupt  
or modulate the transmission responsible for the pain. The 
contrasting approaches are demonstrated in the manage -
ment of trigeminal neuralgia. This manifests, generally in 
middle age or later, with paroxysmal lancinating pain in 
the distribution of one or more divisions of the trigeminal 
nerve. The pain occurs without other neurological distur -
bance, and may be triggered by trivial stimuli such as eat-
Figure 43.30  Coronal T2-weighted magnetic r esonance image 
following anatomical hemispherectomy.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   670 25/10/2017   08:51Further reading 671
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Risks of craniotomy
The risks associated with craniotomy are important to appre-
ciate in discussing operations with patients and family, and in 
evaluating patients who deteriorate postoperatively . Specific 
risks depend on the anatomy of each approach and the figures 
quoted in brackets will vary significantly between individual 
procedures and even between centres:
 ● infection (5%) and wound breakdown;
 ● intracerebral haemorrhage;
 ● seizures;
 ● CSF leak;
 ● permanent neurological deficit;
 ● death (1%).
Brainstem death
This is defined as the irreversible loss of cerebral and brain -
stem function. Brainstem death is legally equivalent to death, 
and is a precondition for the harvesting of organs for trans -
plant from heart-beating donors.
Diagnosis requires:
 ● identification of the cause of irreversible coma;
 ● exclusion of reversible causes of coma;
 ● clinical demonstration of the absence of brainstem function.
In the UK, this entails testing twice, by two clinicians, to 
demonstrate the absence of:
 ● response to pain;
 ● respiratory drive (apnoea despite a pCO2 >6.7 kPa);
 ● pupillary light reflex;
 ● corneal reflex;
 ● vestibulo-ocular reflex;
 ● oculo-cephalic reflex;
 ● gag reflex.
FURTHER READING
Greenberg MS. Handbook of neurosurgery, 8th edn. New York: Thieme, 
2016. The accepted everyday reference handbook for trainee neu -
rosurgeons.
Patton J. Neurological differential diagnosis, 2nd edn. New York: Springer, 
1998. Clear explanations of neurological and neurosurgical pathol -
ogy supported by the best illustrations available in the field.
Samandouras G. The neurosurgeon’s handbook. Oxford: Oxford Publish -
ing, 2010. A more concise and readable handbook offering a good 
overview of core material.
Treatment of pain elsewhere may also be based on lesion-
ing of nerve tracts. For example, pain related to brachial 
plexus infiltration or injury , may be treated by sectioning 
the spinothalamic tract (cordotomy) or the dorsal root entry 
zone (DREZ operation). These approaches are limited by the 
potential for producing deficits, and especially by the occur -
rence of deafferentation (‘phantom limb’) pain syndromes, 
which are particularly unpleasant and difficult to treat.
Electrical stimulation is used to modulate pain transmis -
sion: for example spinal cord stimulators can be applied to a 
range of pain syndromes especially associated failed spinal sur-
gery. Deep brain stimulation targeting the periaqueductal grey 
and sensory thalamic nuclei has a role in chronic pain arising 
in the context of thalamic stroke. Implanted devices may also 
be used for intrathecal delivery of opiates for pain control, or 
baclofen to alleviate spasticity.
Summary box 43.13
Functional neurosurgery
●● Intractable epilepsy can be treated surgically by implantation 
of a vagal nerve stimulator or by resection of one or more 
seizure foci
●● Deep brain stimulation using implanted electrodes has largely 
replaced lesioning of these structures for management of 
drug-refractory Parkinson’s disease
●● Microvascular decompression is offered for trigeminal 
neuralgia, and other neuropathic pain syndromes may 
respond to lesioning of nerve tracts
PRACTICAL AND ETHICAL 
ISSUES
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) is a rare transmissible 
spongiform encephalopathy producing a rapidly progressive 
dementia, and is uniformly fatal. The causative agent seems 
to be a misfolded protein, a prion, which is not destroyed by 
conventional sterilisation techniques. UK practice involves 
undertaking preoperative checks to exclude any risk factors 
for CJD infection. These include family history, receipt of 
pituitary-derived human growth hormone, cadaveric dura 
mater grafts and previous brain or spinal surgery prior to 1997. 
Where risk factors are present, instruments must be quaran -
tined or destroyed postoperatively.
07_43B-B&L27_Pt7_Ch43.indd   671 25/10/2017   08:51Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand and appreciate:
 • The anatomy of the eye and orbit
 • The common ocular disorders and their symptoms and 
specific signs
 • The value of special investigations
 • When specialist referral is appropriate
 • Recent advances in ocular surgery
The eye and orbit
44
OCULAR ANATOMY 
Adnexae
The lids comprise skin, connective tissue, the orbicularis oculi 
(cranial nerve VII) and the tarsal plate, with multiple meibo-
mian glands opening posterior to the lashes and lined with 
conjunctiva, which is reflected onto the sclera. The upper 
lid is elevated by the levator muscle (cranial nerve III) and 
has a horizontal strip of sympathetically innervated Müller’s 
muscle, giving rise to 2  mm of ptosis in Horner’s syndrome. 
The frontalis muscle may also contribute to eyelid elevation, 
particularly when the levator muscle is weak. Both lids are 
attached to the orbital rim by the medial and lateral canthal 
tendons. Both have a rich vascular supply and are innervated 
by the V1 division of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) 
above and the V2 division below.
Lacrimal system
The almond-shaped lacrimal gland lies under the upper outer 
orbital rim and opens into the upper conjunctival fornix  
through 10–15 ducts. Tears are swept across the globe by the lids 
and evaporate or pass into the upper and lower lid puncta, and 
then into the canaliculi to join the common canaliculus, which 
passes into the lacrimal sac under the medial canthal tendon. 
The sac is drained by the nasolacrimal duct into the nose, open-
ing in the inferior meatus under the inferior turbinate.
The globe
The cornea is the 12 mm-diameter window of the eye, 550 
micrometres thick centrally on average; its clarity is due to 
the regular arrangement of collagen bundles and relative 
dehydration. It merges into the sclera at the corneoscleral 
junction (the limbus), the insertion of the bulbar conjunc -
tiva. The sclera, which is 1 mm thick, comprises four-fifths of 
the wall of the eye, and gives attachment to the extraocular 
muscles (Figure 44.1). It is perforated by the long and short 
posterior ciliary arteries and the vortex veins and is contig -
uous with the optic nerve sheath. The uvea comprises iris, 
Superior
rectus
Retina
Choroid Sclera
Lens
Conjunctiva
Cornea
Canal of
Schlemm
Vascular
choroid
Ciliary body
Iris
Uvea
Macula
Optic
nerve
Central retinal
artery
Inferior
rectus Vitreous
humour
Figure 44.1 Anatomy of the eye.
Johannes Peter Müller , 1801–1858, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, Berlin, Germany.
Johan Friedrich Horner , 1831–1886, Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, Switzerland, described this syndrome in 1869.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   672 25/10/2017   08:52Periorbital and orbital swellings 673
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
ciliary body and vascular choroid. Photoreceptor cells in the 
outer retina sense light and send impulses to retinal ganglion 
cells in the inner retina via bipolar cells. The retinal pigment 
epithelium underlies the photoreceptors and is responsible for 
reprocessing of photopigments. The optic nerve conveys the 
axons of retinal ganglion cells from the eye to the brain. The 
most high-resolution part of the retina, the macula, lies at the 
posterior pole within the vascular arcade. The biconvex lens 
and capsule are suspended by the lens zonules, over 300 tiny 
fibres attached to the ciliary muscle. Aqueous humour arises 
from the ciliary processes, hydrates the vitreous gel, passes 
through the pupil into the anterior chamber between the iris 
and the cornea and then drains out through the trabecular 
meshwork into Schlemm’s canal in the drainage angle and 
from there to the episcleral venous circulation. The balance 
between production and drainage of aqueous humour deter -
mines the intraocular pressure, which in most normal eyes is 
regulated at a level of 10–21 mmHg. The inner retina is sup -
plied by the central retinal artery and drained by the central 
retinal vein.
Orbit
The orbit is four-sided and pyramidal in structure, housing 
the globe, optic nerve, the four rectus and two oblique mus -
cles, the lacrimal gland, orbital fat, the cranial nerves III, IV , 
V and VI, the ophthalmic artery with its tributaries and the 
ophthalmic veins, which anastamose anteriorly with the face 
and posteriorly with the cranial cavity. Above is the frontal 
lobe of the brain, temporally the temporal fossa, inferiorly the 
maxillary sinus and nasally the lacrimal sac and ethmoidal 
and sphenoidal air sinuses. The optic nerve passes through 
the optic canal to the chiasm, with other nerves and vessels 
passing through the superior ophthalmic fissure.
PERIORBITAL AND ORBITAL 
SWELLINGS
Swellings related to the 
supraorbital margin
Dermoid cysts
Dermoid cysts are benign congenital choristomas of the orbit 
that originate from fetal bone suture lines during develop -
ment, most commonly the frontozygomatic suture (Figure 
44.2) although they may also occur more medially. Dermoid 
cysts account for about half of childhoo d orbital neoplasms 
and consist of keratinised epithelium and adnexal structures 
such as sweat glands and hair follicles. They often cause a 
bony depression and they may have a dumbbell extension 
into the orbit, which is of particular importance should they 
need to be excised. Dermoid cysts can also erode the orbital 
plate of the frontal bone to become attached to dura and for 
this reason it is important to image the area by computed 
tomography (CT) before excision.
Neurofibromatosis
Neurofibromatosis may also produce swellings above the eye. 
The diagnosis can usually be confirmed by an examination of 
the whole body, as there are often multiple lesions. Proptosis 
can also result (Figure 44.3). Other ophthalmic features may 
be present.
Figure 44.2 External angular dermoid.
Friedrich Schlemm , 1795–1858, Professor of Anatomy, Berlin, Germany.
Heinrich Meibom (Meibomius) , 1638–1700, Professor of Medicine, History and Poetry, Helmstadt, Germany, described these glands in 1666.
Figure 44.3 Neurofibroma in the orbit with proptosis, and also simi-
lar lesions in the forehead.
Swellings of the lids
Meibomian cysts (chalazion)
These are the most common lid swellings (Figure 44.4). A 
meibomian cyst is a chronic granulomatous inflammation of 
a meibomian gland. It may occur on either upper or lower 
lids and presents as a smooth, painless swelling. It can be felt 
by rolling the cyst on the tarsal plate. It can be distinguished 
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   673 25/10/2017   08:52CHAPTER 44  The eye and orbit
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK674
from a stye (hordeolum), which is an infection of a hair fol -
licle and is usually painful. Persistent meibomian cysts that 
do not resolve with conservative treatment (hot compresses) 
are treated by incision and curettage from the conjunctival 
surface. Styes are treated by antibiotics and local heat.
Basal cell carcinoma (rodent ulcer)
This is the most common malignant tumour of the eyelids 
(Figure 44.5). Basal cell carcinomas may be locally invasive 
but do not tend to metastasise. They are more common on the 
lower lids, often start as a small pimple that ulcerates and has 
raised edges (‘rodent ulcer’) and are usually easily excised in 
the early stages. Histological confirmation that the excision 
is complete is required. More extensive lesions may require 
specialist techniques such as Mohs’ micrographic surgical 
excision controlled by frozen section. Local radiotherapy or 
cryotherapy can be carried out; however, recurrence is more 
common, more aggressive and more difficult to detect.
Swellings of the lacrimal system
Lacrimal sac mucocoele
This occurs from obstruction of the lacrimal duct beyond 
the sac and results in a fluctuant swelling that bulges out just 
below the medial canthus. It can become infected to give rise 
to a painful tense swelling (acute dacryocystitis). If untreated, 
it may give rise to a fistula. Treatment is by performing a 
bypass operation between the lacrimal sac and the nose (a 
dacryocystorrhinostomy). Watering of the eye can also occur 
due to eversion of the lower lid (ectropion), which causes loss 
of contact between the lower punctum and the tear film, or 
Figure 44.4 Meibomian cyst (courtesy of Mr D Spalton, FRCS).
Frederic E. Mohs , 1910–2002, developed the technique of microgaphic surgical excision while a medical student at University of Wisconsin, USA.
Jacob Antonius Moll , 1832–1913, ophthalmologist of The Hague, The Netherlands.
Edward Zeis , 1807–1868, Professor of Surgery, Marburg, (1844–1850), who later worked at Dresden, Germany, described these glands in 1835.
Summary box 44.1
Basal cell carcinomas
●● Basal cell carcinomas are the most common malignant eyelid 
tumour
●● Treatment is by wide local excision with careful 
histopathological margin control
●● All unusual eyelid lesions (especially in the elderly) should be 
biopsied
Figure 44.5 Rodent ulcers (courtesy of Mr J Beare, FRCS).
Figure 44.6 Cyst of Moll.
Other lid swellings
Other types of lid swelling are less common. They include 
squamous cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma, seba -
ceous cyst, papilloma, keratoacanthoma, cyst of Moll (sweat 
glands) (Figure 44.6) or Zeis (sebaceous glands) and mollus-
cum contagiosum. When molluscum contagiosum occurs on 
the lid margin, it can give rise to a mild viral chronic kerato-
conjunctivitis and should be curetted or excised.
Carcinoma of the meibomian glands and rhabdomyo -
sarcomas are rare lesions; they need to be treated by radical 
excision. Atypical or meibomian cysts that recur should be 
biopsied to exclude sebaceous gland carcinoma.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   674 25/10/2017   08:52Periorbital and orbital swellings 675
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
from reflex hypersecretion as a result of irritation, for example 
by inturning lashes in entropion, and these must be distin -
guished from a mucocoele.
Lacrimal gland tumours
These are swellings of the lacrimal glands, which lie in the 
upper lateral aspect of the orbit. Eventually they lead to 
impairment of ocular movements and displacement of the 
globe forwards, downwards and inwards. Pathologically the 
tumours resemble parotid tumours and they can be pleomor -
phic adenomas with or without malignant change, carcino -
mas or mucoepidermoid tumours.
Orbital swellings
Orbital swellings result in displacement of the globe and limi-
tation of movement. A full description of orbital swellings is 
outside the realm of this text, but some of the most common 
causes include the following:
 ● Pseudoproptosis. This results from a large eyeball, as 
seen in congenital glaucoma or high myopia.
 ● Orbital inflammatory conditions  that result in orbital 
cellulitis (Figure 44.7).
 ● Haemorrhage after trauma or retrobulbar injection.
 ● Neoplasia affecting the lacrimal gland, the optic nerve, 
the orbital walls or the nasal sinuses (e.g. glioma [neurofi-
bromatosis, Figure 44.3], meningioma and osteoma (Fig-
ure 44.8).
 ● Thyroid eye disease (Figures 44.9–44.11). This is the 
most common cause of unilateral and bilateral proptosis 
in adults and may occur in the absence of active thyroid 
disease or after thyroidectomy.  Management of severe 
thyroid eye disease may require large doses of systemic ste-
roids, radiotherapy or even orbital lateral wall decompres-
sion if the eyeball is threatened by exposure or optic nerve 
compression. The disease is often more severe in smokers 
and those with poorly controlled thyroid function. CT 
Figure 44.7 Orbital cellulitis.
Figure 44.8 Radiograph showing an osteoma on the nasal side of 
the orbit giving rise to proptosis.
Figure 44.9 Computed tomogram of the orbit in dysthyroid exoph -
thalmos, showing swollen muscles (courtesy of Dr Glyn Lloyd).
Figure 44.10 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a cor onal view 
of the orbit, showing enlarged muscles in thyroid disease (courtesy of 
Dr Juliette Britton).
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   675 25/10/2017   08:52CHAPTER 44  The eye and orbit
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK676
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans are useful 
in diagnosis. MRI with STIR sequences is particularly 
useful for identification of active inflammation within the 
orbital tissues.
 ● Pseudotumour, or malignant lymphoma.
 ● Haemangiomas of the orbit (Figure 44.12).
 ● Tumour metastases. These are rare. In children they 
usually arise from neuroblastomas of the adrenal gland, 
whereas in adults the oesophagus, stomach, breast and 
prostate can be sites of primary lesions.
Diagnostic aids
Diagnostic aids include radiography, CT, MRI, ultrasonogra-
phy and, less commonly, tomography and orbital venography.
Treatment
Treatment is directed to the cause of the lesion taking care 
to prevent exposure of the eye, diplopia or visual impairment 
from optic nerve compression.
INTRAOCULAR TUMOURS
Children
Retinoblastoma, the most common ocular malignancy of 
childhood, is a malignant tumour of the retina that can be 
bilateral in around one-third of cases. Half of cases are hered-
itary (autosomal dominant) due to mutation of the RB1 gene 
on chromosome 13 and children with a family history should 
be carefully monitored from birth. Remaining cases occur 
sporadically. Inherited retinoblastoma is more likely to be 
bilateral. Retinoblastoma is often not spotted until the tumour 
fills the globe and presents as a white reflex in the pupil or as 
a squint (Figure 44.13). The differential diagnosis includes 
retinopathy of prematurity, primary hyperplastic vitreous and 
intraocular infections. If the tumour is large, enucleation may 
be required, but radiotherapy, cryotherapy, chemotherapy or 
laser treatment can cure small lesions. Liaison with a paed -
iatric oncologist is essential.
Figure 44.11 Exophthalmos in dysthyroid eye disease.
Figure 44.12 Capillary haemangioma in a child. An orbital venogram 
demonstrates displacement of the second part of the superior oph-
thalmic vein (arrow) (courtesy of Dr Glyn Lloyd).
Figure 44.13 Retinoblastoma giving rise to a white pupillary reflex. 
This child was first seen with a convergent squint and dischar ged 
without a fundus examination. He was next seen many years later 
with a ‘white reflex’ and died soon after diagnosis (courtesy of 
MA Bedford, FRCS).
Summary box 44.2
Intraocular tumours
●● Any child with a white pupil (leukokoria) should be referred 
to an ophthalmologist to exclude retinoblastoma, although 
congenital carataracts may also cause this sign 
●● A blind painful eye may hide a melanoma or other ocular 
tumour
Adults
Malignant melanoma is the most common primary malignant 
tumour of the eye and originates in the pigmented cells of the 
choroid (Figure 44.14), ciliary body or iris. It can present 
with a reduction in vision, a vitreous haemorrhage or by the 
chance finding of an elevated pigmented lesion in the eye. 
Tumour growth is variable but, as a general rule, the more pos-
terior the lesion, the more rapidly progressive it is likely to be. 
Spread may be delayed for many years; however, the liver is 
frequently involved, hence the advice ‘beware of the patient 
with a glass eye and an enlarged liver’. Treatment options vary 
by size and location of the tumour but include laser photo-
coagulation, radioactive plaque, radiotherapy/proton beam 
therapy, enucleation and, in selected cases, local excision. 
Diagnosis is made by direct observation and/or ultrasound, 
which shows a solid tumour, often with low internal reflectiv-
ity on ultrasound (Figure 44.15).
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   676 25/10/2017   08:52Injuries invol ving the eye and adjacent structures 677
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
INJURIES INVOL VING THE EYE 
AND ADJACENT STRUCTURES
Corneal abrasions and ulceration
The cornea is frequently damaged by direct trauma or by 
foreign bodies (Figure 44.16). Ulceration can occur with 
infection, exposure (for example in severely ill patients with 
incomplete eye closure) or after damage to the facial nerve. 
Post-herpetic ulceration is common and serious if not treated. 
Fluorescein instillation illuminated by blue light shows up 
corneal ulceration at an early stage, with areas of epithelial 
loss fluorescing green.
Treatment of sterile corneal abrasions or exposure is by 
topical lubrication or padding of the eye. If bacterial infection 
is suspected, a swab or scrape may be performed for micro -
biological diagnosis and topical antibiotics such as 0.5% 
chloramphenicol or ofloxacin eye drops are commonly used. 
The eye is made more comfortable by the use of mydriatics 
such as cyclopentolate to reduce photophobia. Herpes sim -
plex dendrititc ulcers are treated with aciclovir ointment. 
In countries in the Far and Middle East, chronic infection 
with trachoma can cause corneal opacification and blindness, 
although the worldwide incidence of this condition is falling. 
Corneal grafting is the only cure for an opaque cornea.  Until 
recently, full-thickness penetrating keratoplasty was the only 
corneal graft technique. For some conditions this has largely 
been replaced by lamellar or partial-thickness graft surgery, in 
a technique termed DSEK or ‘Descamets stripping endothe-
lial keratoplasty’. However, penetrating keratoplasy remains 
the treatment of choice for severe corneal damage due to 
infection or injury.  Rarely, osteo-odonto keratoprosthesis 
can be attempted in very severe cases of opaque corneas that 
are not suitable for grafting. Artifical corneal prostheses have 
also been developed. Acanthamoeba is a rare serious cause 
of corneal infection. This infection usually follows the use 
of contact lenses. Specialist management and treatment is 
recommended.
Figure 44.14 Choroidal melanoma.
Figure 44.15 B-scan showing choroidal melanoma (courtesy of Dr 
Marie Reston).
Figure 44.16 Corneal foreign body.
Summary box 44.3
Corneal abrasions
●● A drop of fluorescein dye illuminated by a blue light reveals 
even the smallest corneal abrasion
●● Corneal ulcers are often more serious in contact lens wearers 
and require prompt assessment and treatment
●● Development of white infiltate in/around a corneal abrasion is 
a sign of infection
Blunt injuries to the eye and orbit
The floor of the orbit is its weakest wall and in blunt trauma, 
such as a blow from a fist, it is often fractured without frac-
tures of the other walls. This is called a blow-out fracture. 
Clinical signs are enophthalmos, bruising around the orbit, 
maxillary hypoaesthesia, limitation of upward gaze due to 
entrapment of the inferior rectus muscle leading to vertical 
diplopia. This occurs when the extraocular muscles or orbital 
septa become trapped in the fracture and can be identified 
as a soft-tissue mass in the antrum on a radiograph (Figure 
44.17), although CT scans or tomograms may be necessary. 
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   677 25/10/2017   08:52CHAPTER 44  The eye and orbit
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK678
Surgical repair of the orbital floor with freeing of the trapped 
contents may be necessary if troublesome diplopia persists or 
enophthalmos is marked. A child with an orbital floor fracture 
requires urgent assessment, particularly if upgaze is restricted, 
as trapping of the inferior rectus muscle may cause ischaemia 
and require urgent surgery. If an orbital haemorrhage is too 
extensive to examine the eye, it may be necessary to examine 
the eye under anaesthesia because there may be a hidden per-
foration of the globe. Injuries to the lids and lid margins must 
be repaired, and if the lacrimal canaliculi are damaged, they 
should be repaired if possible, especially the lower canaliculus, 
as 75% of tear drainage goes through it.
Blunt injuries can also cause damage to the optic nerve, 
which can result in blindness and a total afferent nerve defect 
(Figures 44.18 and 44.19).
Blunt ocular injuries
Blunt injuries to the eye can give rise to several problems, 
which include the following:
 ● Iritis. Inflammation; treated with topical steroids.
 ● Hyphaema (blood in the anterior chamber) (Figure 
44.20). Rest and sedation, particularly in children, are 
advised because the main danger in this condition is sec -
ondary bleeding, resulting in an acute rise in intraocular 
pressure and blood staining of the cornea. The use of 
anti-fibrinolytic agents (ε-aminocaproic acid) has been 
advocated and, if the pressure rises, surgery to wash out 
the blood may be necessary.
 ● Subluxation of the lens . This is suspected if the iris, or 
part of the iris, ‘wobbles’ on movement (iridodonesis).
 ● Secondary glaucoma. This is often associated with reces-
sion of the iridocorneal drainage angle.
 ● Retinal and macular haemorrhages and choroidal 
tears (Figure 44.21).
 ● Retinal dialysis. This may lead to a retinal detachment 
and permanent damage to vision (Figure 44.22).
Penetrating eye injuries
These occur when the globe is penetrated, often in road 
traffic and other major accidents (Figure 44.23), and also 
in injuries from sharp instruments. The compulsory wearing 
of seat belts in motor vehicles has substantially reduced the 
incidence of this type of eye injury, by up to 73% in the UK. 
The presence of an irregular pupil suggests prolapse of the iris 
and should arouse suspicion of a penetrating injury. Treat-
ment is prompt primary repair to restore the integrity of the 
globe. If a perforation is suspected, extensive eye examination 
should not be attempted before anaesthesia because this may 
lead to further extrusion of the intraocular contents. If the 
fundal view is poor, ultrasonography and orbital imaging are 
Figure 44.17 Radiograph showing a blow-out fracture of the orbit 
(left) with soft tissue in the antrum (courtesy of Dr Glyn Lloyd).
Figure 44.18 Injury from a ski pole into the right brow. Vision reduced 
to ‘no perception of light’ (courtesy of J Beare, FRCS).
Figure 44.19 Scan of orbit from Figure 44.18 showing a massive 
swelling of the medial rectus (courtesy of J Beare, FRCS).
Figure 44.20  Hyphaema. Blood in the vitreous chamber after a 
concussional injury.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   678 25/10/2017   08:52Injuries invol ving the eye and adjacent structures 679
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
indicated. Secondary corneal grafting, lensectomy and vitrec-
tomy have considerably improved the visual prognosis; these 
must be done by an experienced eye surgeon. Injuries to the 
optic nerves must also be excluded in severe accidents.
Intraocular foreign bodies
Intraocular foreign bodies must always be excluded when 
patients attend the accident and emergency department with 
an eye injury and a history of working with a hammer and 
chisel or a history of a potentially high-velocity injury . Radi-
ography of the orbits must be performed. Ferrous and copper 
foreign bodies should always be removed, sometimes requiring 
the use of a magnet. B-scan ultrasonography can also assist 
in localising foreign bodies when a vitreous haemorrhage 
or cata  ract is present. CT can be used, but MRI is contra -
indicated if a ferrous intraocular foreign body is suspected.
Figure 44.22 Retinal dialysis after a concussional injury.
Figure 44.23 Facial lacerations from a windscreen injury. Beware of 
a perforating eye injury.
Figure 44.21 Retinal haemorrhage from a cricket bat injury (cour -
tesy of J Beare, FRCS).
Summary box 44.4
Penetrating eye injuries
●● A distorted and irregular pupil warrants the careful exclusion 
of a penetrating eye injury
●● Avoid extensive eye examination if globe rupture is suspected 
to avoid worsening the injury prior to surgical repair
Burns
Radiation burns
Corneal injury may occur after exposure to ultraviolet radi-
ation, for example after arc welding or excessive sunlight 
(snow blindness) and sun lamps. Such burns cause intense 
gritty burning pain and photophobia as a result of keratitis 
(corneal inflammation), which starts some hours after expo -
sure. Mydriatic and local steroids with antibiotic drops ease 
the condition, and healing usually occurs after 24 hours.
Thermal burns
If these involve the full thickness of the lids, corneal scarring 
may occur from exposure, and immediate corneal protection 
is necessary. A splash of molten metal may cause marked local 
necrosis and may lead to permanent corneal scarring. T reat-
ment is to remove any debris by irrigation and to instill local 
atropine, antibiotics and steroids to prevent superadded infec-
tion and scarring. Lid reconstruction may be necessary.
Chemical burns
Chemical burns, and especially alkali burns, can be serious 
because ocular penetration occurs quickly and ischaemic 
necrosis can result (Figure 44.24). Immediate copious irri -
gation until the pH is neutral will ensure that the chemical 
is diluted as much as possible, and all particles should be 
removed from the fornices. Treatment can then be continued 
as with thermal burns. Well-fitting goggles should prevent 
such injuries.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   679 25/10/2017   08:52CHAPTER 44  The eye and orbit
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK680
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF 
THE ACUTE RED EYE
This is important in the management of minor ocular com -
plaints and the recognition of conditions that require expert 
attention. Possible causes of the acute red eye include:
 ● subconjunctival haemorrhage;
 ● conjunctivitis;
 ● keratitis;
 ● uveitis;
 ● episcleritis and scleritis;
 ● acute glaucoma.
Any condition with pain, visual impairment or a pupil 
abnormality suggests a more serious diagnosis.
Subconjunctival haemorrhage
This presents as a bright red eye, often noticed incidentally 
with only minimal discomfort and normal vision. Causes 
include coughing, sneezing, minor trauma, hypertension and, 
rarely, a bleeding disorder. Subconjunctival haemorrhages are 
more common in those receiving antiplatelet or anticoagu-
lation therapy. Reassurance and treatment of the underlying 
cause are required.  Most settle within a week, but can recur. 
Conjunctivitis
Symptoms are grittiness, redness and discharge. Causes are 
infective, chemical, allergic or traumatic. In the newborn 
it can be serious; gonococcal and chlamydial infection must 
be excluded. Bacterial conjunctivitis is purulent, usually 
self-limiting and treated with topical broad-spectrum anti -
biotics. Chlamydial and adenovirus infections must be con -
sidered. Adenoviral infections are common and usually affect 
one eye much more in severity and onset, tending to be more 
watery than sticky, and are often associated with a palpable 
preauricular gland.
Vernal conjunctivitis (Figure 44.25) is a form of allergic 
conjunctivitis, characterised by itchy eyes, usually worse in 
the spring and early summer and often associated with other 
allergic problems such as hay fever. Clinically, most signs are 
under the upper lid, which may have a cobblestone appear -
ance instead of a smooth surface.
Giant pupillary conjunctivitis with large papillae under 
the upper lid may be seen in soft contact lens wearers. This 
is usually caused by an allergy to the sterilising solutions and 
lens protein and may be helped by either using a preservative- 
free solution or using daily-wear disposable lenses.
Kaposi’s sarcoma, often associated with HIV infection, can 
rarely present like a subconjunctival haemorrhage (Figure 
44.26).
Considerable conjunctival and corneal irritation can be 
caused by the lids turning in (entropion) (Figure 41.27) or 
turning out (ectropion) (Figures 41.28 and 41.29), and by 
ingrowing lashes. The lids should be repaired surgically to 
their normal position.
Figure 44.24 Chemical burn showing conjunctival necrosis.
Moritz Kaposi , 1837–1902, Professor of Dermatology, Vienna, Austria, described pigmented sarcoma of the skin in 1872.
Figure 44.26 Kaposi’s sarcoma of conjunctiva.
Figure 44.25 Vernal conjunctivitis (spring catarrh) showing cobble -
stone appearance under the upper lid.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   680 25/10/2017   08:52Differential diagnosis of the acut e red eye 681
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Vision is not commonly affected in conjunctivitis but, 
with some viral infections, a keratitis may be present and 
result in visual impairment and pain. All of the other condi -
tions below are painful and usually affect vision.
Keratitis (inflammation of the 
cornea)
Herpes simplex infection presents as a dendritic (branching) 
ulcer, shown easily by staining with fluorescein or Bengal 
Rose. It is treated with aciclovir ointment five times per day. 
The use of steroid drops must be avoided as this can make the 
condition much worse (Figure 44.30).
Corneal ulceration may occur as a result of ingrowing 
lashes or corneal foreign bodies, marginal ulceration and 
infected abrasions. Infected ulcers can occur in patients wear-
ing soft contact lenses or elderly immunocomprimised indi -
viduals. Herpes zoster (shingles) may affect the ophthalmic 
division of cranial nerve V and can give rise to a keratitis and 
uveitis. It is important to avoid the use of steroid drops until a 
diagnosis has been made. Local anaesthetic drops should also 
not be given on a regular basis.
Uveitis
This can be anterior (iritis) or, more rarely, posterior. In ante-
rior uveitis, the pupil is sometimes small and/or irregular due 
to formation of posterior synechiae (adhesions between the 
iris and the lens). There is often circumcorneal injection and 
there may be keratic precipitates present on the posterior sur-
face of the cornea. Pain, photophobia and some visual loss are 
usually present. Posterior uveitis can present with a white eye 
and blurred vision. It usually takes a chronic course. Granu -
lomatous diseases, Beh˛ cet’s disease, Reiter’s syndrome, toxo-
plasmosis and cytomegalovirus infection should be excluded. 
Topical systemic steroids and, sometimes, immunosuppressive 
drugs are useful in treating these conditions; management 
should be under the care of an ophthalmologist.
Bengal Rose (or Rose Bengal)  is dichlortetraiodofluorescein.
Hulusi Behçet , 1889–1948, Professor of Dermatology, Istanbul, Turkey, described this disease in 1937.
Hans Conrad Julius Reiter , 1881–1968, President of the Health Service and Honorary Professor of Hygiene at the University of Berlin, Germany, described this 
disease in 1916.
Figure 44.30 Dendritic staining caused by herpes keratitis.
Figure 44.29 Ectropion, upper lid – chronic staphylococcal infection 
(courtesy of J Beare, FRCS).
Figure 44.28 Ectropion, lower lid (courtesy of J Beare, FRCS).
Figure 44.27 Entropion (courtesy of J Beare, FRCS).
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   681 25/10/2017   08:52CHAPTER 44  The eye and orbit
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK682
Episcleritis and scleritis
Episcleritis or inflammation of the episcleral tissue often 
occurs as an idiopathic condition (Figure 44.31). Scleri-
tis is a less common, more serious, condition in which the 
deeper sclera is involved. There is often an associated uveitis 
and severe pain. Thinning of the sclera may result. Systemic 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or steroids/other immu-
nomodulatory agents may be required to treat the condition 
adequately. Appoximately half of patients with scleritis have 
an underlying systemic disorder. 
Scleritis is often associated with severe rheumatoid con -
ditions. The presence of scleritis suggests that there is active 
systemic disease and this requires systemic work-up including 
renal function tests.
Acute angle closure glaucoma
This usually occurs in older, often hypermetropic, patients. 
The prevalence is much higher in some Asian populations. 
The cornea becomes hazy , the pupil oval, dilated and non- 
reacting, the vision poor and the eye feels hard. In severe 
cases pain may be accompanied by vomiting and the con -
dition can be mistaken for an acute abdominal problem. 
Tonometry (intraocular measurement) and examination of 
the iridocorneal angle by gonioscopy (using a prism placed 
on the cornea) is diagnostic. Urgent treatment to reduce the 
pressure with pilocarpine eyedrops, oral acetazolamide and, if 
refractory, mannitol should be started, followed by YAG laser 
iridotomy, laser iridoplasty, anterior chamber paracentesis or 
surgical iridectomy. The condition is usually bilateral and the 
second eye usually needs a prophylactic iridotomy at the same 
time.
Except for a simple conjunctivitis and subconjunctival 
haemorrhage, which are self-limiting, the management of an 
acute red eye requires expert treatment and a specialist opin-
ion should be sought. A painful eye with a cranial nerve III 
palsy (ptosis, dilated pupil, globe down and out) often sig -
nifies an intracranial aneurysm and should be investigated 
immediately.
PAINLESS LOSS OF VISION
This may occur in one or both eyes, and the visual loss may be 
transient or permanent. Possible causes are:
 ● Acute:
 ● obstruction of the central retinal artery (Figure 
44.32);
 ● obstruction of the central retinal vein (Figure 44.33);
 ● ischaemic optic neuropathy;
 ● migraine and other vascular causes;
 ● vitreous and retinal haemorrhages;
 ● retinal detachment (Figure 44.34);
 ● macular hole, cyst or haemorrhage;
 ● cystoid macular oedema, often after surgery;
 ● hysterical blindness.
 ● Chronic:
 ● cataract;
 ● glaucoma;
 ● macular degeneration.
 ● diabetic retinopathy.
Figure 44.31 Episcleritis.
 Figure 44.33 Central retinal vein occlusion.
Figure 44.32 Retinal artery occlusion.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   682 25/10/2017   08:52Recent developments in e ye surgery 683
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Specialist help should be sought in any case of loss of 
vision. The possibility of temporal arteritis should always be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of sudden visual loss, 
as prompt treatment of this condition is extremely important. 
Elderly patients with sudden visual loss should be specifically 
asked for symptoms of scalp tenderness and jaw claudication 
and temporal arteries should be palpated for pulsation and ten-
derness. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive 
protein should be measured immediately if temporal arte -
ritis is suspected, and the carotid system should be examined 
for bruits and other signs of arteriosclerosis in cases of isch-
aemic optic neuropathy and central retinal artery occlusion. 
Glaucoma, hypertension, hyperviscosity syndromes and dia-
betes should be looked for in cases of central vein thrombosis.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN 
EYE SURGERY
In the last three decades, eye surgery has become a micro -
surgical specialty. Cataract surgery has been transformed by 
changes in local anaesthesia, implants, phacoemulsification 
and small-incision surgery , which allows compressible/fold -
able silicone or acrylic implants to be inserted through a 
2-mm incision. The implant power can be more accurately 
measured by new formulae and the use of A-scan ultrasonog-
raphy or laser wavefront biometry, and multifocal and accom-
modative lenses are now available. An even more recent 
advance in cataract surgery is the development of femtosec -
ond laser technology, which allows extremely controlled cor-
neal incisions, lens capsule opening and lens fragmentation to 
be achieved automatically together with the facility to adjust 
the shape of the cornea at the time of surgery to improve 
visual outcome for some patients. The extent to which this 
technology improves long-term visual outcomes remains to 
be seen.
There are new treatments for eye disorders that involve 
abnormal growth of blood vessels in the back of the eye, 
such as the wet form of age-related macular degeneration. 
Anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) antibodies, 
such as the drug ranibizumab, may be injected directly into 
the vitreous cavity to reduce new vessel proliferation. Intra -
vitreal steroid injections or anti-VEGF agents are now also 
being used to treat patients with macular oedema caused for 
example by diabetic retinopathy or retinal vein occlusion.  
Developments in vitreous surgery have enabled mem -
branes to be peeled off the retina and macular holes to be 
repaired, and have also increased success rates in retinal 
detachment surgery with the additional use of gases and sil -
icone oil or heavy liquid inserted into the vitreous cavity to 
tamponade the retina. Advances in technology have also led 
to to the development of photosensitive chips and camera 
systems that can be implanted into the eye to restore some 
vision in patients with severe and otherwise untreatable mac-
ular diseases.
Some paralytic squints can be helped by the use of adjust-
able sutures or injections of botulinum toxin into the over -
acting muscles. 
Refractive errors can be treated by the excimer laser. These 
can be combined with laser in situ keratomeilusis (LASIK) 
surgery, which involves cutting a corneal flap (by femto sec -
ond laser or surgery) and performing the laser surgery at a 
deeper level. There have been some concerns about defective 
contrast sensitivity and problems with night vision after laser 
correction of myopia. Phakic implants have also been used 
to correct high refractive errors. Corneal topography aids the 
accuracy of corneal and refractive surgery and the increased 
use and quality of CT and MRI scans has revolutionised the 
diagnosis of orbital and intracranial lesions involving the 
optic pathways (Figures 44.35–44.37). 
Fluorescein angiography and ocular coherence tomogra-
phy (OCT) are invaluable in the diagnosis and treatment 
of macular conditions. OCT angiography has recently been 
developed; this allows assessment of the retinal microvascu -
lature without the need for systemically-administered agents. 
This technology may reduce the need for fluroscein angiogra-
phy in the future. OCT as well as scanning laser polarimetry of 
the retinal nerve fibre layer and Heidelberg retinal tomogra -
phy (HRT) are widely used in the diagnosis and management 
of glaucoma. Surgical glaucoma management is also devel -
oping rapidly. Trabeculectomy surgery, where eye pressure is 
reduced by creating a fistula between the anterior chamber 
Figure 44.34 B-scan of a retinal detachment.
Figure 44.35 Magnetic resonance imaging scan, sagittal view. Cra-
niopharyngioma. The mass in the suprasellar cistern is of high signal 
intensity because of the pr oteinaceous fluid that the cyst contains 
(courtesy of Dr Juliette Britton).
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   683 25/10/2017   08:52CHAPTER 44  The eye and orbit
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK684
and the subconjunctival space, remains widely used and has 
become more refined in recent years, with better control of 
wound healing using topical application of anti-scarring drugs 
such as mitomycin C. Alternatives to trabeculectomy have 
been developed using devices such as Baerveldt and Ahmed 
shunts that drain aqueous from the eye to lower the pressure. 
A new revolution is also underway using minimally invasive 
glaucoma surgical techniques, with a variety of tiny devices 
now available to shunt aqueous and reduce eye pressure. 
LASERS IN OPHTHALMOLOGY
Blue-green lasers (argon or frequency-doubled YAG) or diode 
lasers are used to treat the retina in diabetic retinpoathy 
(pan-retinal photocoagulation for proliferative disease or focal 
treatment for leaky microanuerysms) and may also used to close 
retinal tears or breaks that might lead to retinal detachment.  
Argon laser or selective laser trabeculoplasty can be used 
to open the drainge angle to control elevated intraocular 
pressure in open angle glaucoma. Trans-scleral diode photo -
coagulation of the ciliary body is used to treat refactory sec -
ondary glaucoma with uncontrolled ocular pressure.  
Laser iridotomy with the Nd-Yag laser is used to treat both 
the affected and fellow eye in acute angle closure glaucoma. 
The Nd-Yag laser is also used to photodisrupt and clean an 
opaque posterior capsule, which occurs in 5–10% of cases fol-
lowing cataract surgery. 
SURGICAL PROCEDURES
Excision of an eyeball/
enucleation
Indications include a blind, painful eye, a blind, cosmetically 
poor eye/intraocular neoplasm and, in cadavers, for use in cor-
neal grafting.
The operation
The speculum is intro duced between the lids and opened. 
The conjuctiva is picked up with toothed forceps and divided 
completely all round as near as possible to the cornea.  Tenon’s 
capsule is entered and each of the four rectus and two oblique 
muscle tendons is hooked up on a strabismus hook and divided 
close to the sclera. The speculum is now pressed backwards 
and the eyeball projects forwards. Blunt scissors, curved on 
the flat, are insinuated on the inner side of the globe, and 
these are used to sever the optic nerve. The eyeball can now 
be drawn forwards with the forceps, and the oblique muscles, 
together with any other strands of tissue that are still attach -
ing the globe to the orbit, are divided. A swab, moistened 
with hot water and pressed into the orbit, will control the 
haemorrhage. If an orbital implant is inserted to give better 
eye movement, the muscles are sutured to the implant at the 
appropriate sites. The subconjunctival tissues and conjunc -
tiva are closed in layers.
Figure 44.37  Axial enhanced magnetic resonance imaging scan 
showing a mass involving the optic chiasma and extending down the 
optic nerves and tracts.
Figure 44.36  High-resolution computed tomography thr ough the 
orbits showing dense calcification of the optic nerve sheaths typical 
of optic nerve meningioma (courtesy of Dr Juliette Britton).
George G Baerveldt , contemporary, ophthalmologist, Emeritus Professor of Ophthalmology, UC Irvine, CA, USA.
Ike K Ahmed , contemporary, ophthalmologist, Toronto, Canada. 
Jacques Rene Tenon , 1724–1816, surgeon, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   684 25/10/2017   08:52Further reading 685
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Evisceration of an eyeball
Evisceration is preferred to excision in endoophthalmitis, 
minimising the risk of orbital and intracranial spread with 
meningitis. The sclera is transfixed with a pointed knife a 
little behind the corneosclerotic junction, and the cornea is 
removed entirely by completing the encircling incision in the 
sclera. The contents of the globe are then removed with a 
curette, care being exercised to remove all of the uveal tract. 
At the end of the operation the interior must appear perfectly 
white. A ball orbital implant made of acrylic or hydroxy -
apatite may be placed within the orbit behind the sclera to 
improve the appearance when the artificial eye is fitted.
Incision and curettage of chalazion 
(meibomian cyst)
The lid margin is everted to allow the application of a meibo-
mian clamp. The ring of the clamp is placed on the palpebral 
conjunctiva with the granuloma in the centre. An incision 
is made with a small blade in the axis of the gland. The her -
niating granulomatous tissue is removed with a curette and 
the cavity is scraped clean. Recurrent cysts may have to have 
the cyst wall dissected away with scissors. A biopsy may be 
necessary in atypical or recurrent cysts to exclude malignant 
change.
FURTHER READING
Bowling B. Kanski’s Clinical ophthalmology: a systematic approach , 8th 
edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2015.
Denniston A, Murray P . Oxford handbook of ophthalmology , 3rd edn. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
Jackson TL. Moorfields manual of ophthalmology , 2nd edn. London: JP 
Medical Ltd, 2014.
Olver J, Cassidy L. Ophthalmology at a glance . Oxford: Blackwell Pub-
lishing, 2005.
Wills Eye Hospital. The Wills eye manual: office and emergency room 
diagnosis and treatment of eye disease, 6th edn. Philadelphia: Lippin-
cott Williams & Wilkins, 2012.
07_44-B&L27_Pt7_Ch44.indd   685 25/10/2017   08:52Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The aetiology and classification of developmental 
abnormalities of the face, mouth and jaws
 • Perinatal and early childhood management
 • The principles of reconstruction of cleft lip and palate
 • The key features of perioperative care
 • The management of complications associated with cleft 
lip and palate
Cleft lip and palate: developmental 
abnormalities of the face, 
mouth and jaws
45
INTRODUCTION
Developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth and jaws are 
relatively rare and because of the complexity of developmen-
tal abnormalities an ideal classification system is not avail-
able. Consequently, there are a number of different systems 
available, some purely descriptive (e.g. Tessier’s classification 
of clefts), while others apply only to single conditions, such as 
the OMENS (O, orbital alteration; M, mandibular deformity; 
E, ear deformity; N, nerve involvement; and S, soft tissue 
alterations) classification of hemifacial (craniofacial) micro -
somia, which has utility in instituting treatment protocols.
Van der Meulen and his colleagues proposed a classifica -
tion that has significant utility in helping to understand the 
variety and complexity of craniofacial malformations. This 
classification considered the embryological development of 
the craniofacial region firstly in terms of the formation and 
fusion of the processes (branchial arches) – the failure of the 
fusion of these processes leading to clefting disorders, thus 
the failure of fusion between the frontonasal process and the 
maxillary process resulting in a cleft lip, either unilaterally 
or bilaterally; secondly in relation to the formation of bone 
and cartilage. If this is abnormal, it is termed dysostosis or 
dyschondrosis; and thirdly in relation to the formation and 
growth at the sutures between the various bones of the cra-
niofacial skeleton – premature fusion leading to synostosis. 
Superimposed on this concept is the consideration of the 
development of the central nervous system. This leads to a 
number of types of abnormality, as outlined in Table 45.1.
Jacques van der Meulen , b.1929, Professor in Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
TABLE 45.1 Types of developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth and jaws.
Type Examples
Cerebrocranial dysplasias Anencephaly, microcephaly
Cerebrofacial dysplasias Rhinencephalic and oculo-orbital dysplasias
Craniofacial dysplasias with clefting Latero-naosmaxillary, medionasomaxillary, intermaxillary, maxilomandibular clefting
Craniofacial dysplasias with dysostosis Sphenoidal, sphenoidal frontal, frontal, fronto-frontal, fronto-nasoethmoidal, internasal, 
nasal, premaxillo-maxillary, nasomaxillary, maxillo-zygomatic, zygomatic, zygo-auro 
madibular, temporoauromandibular, mandibular, intermandibular
Craniofacial dysplasias with synostosis Craniosynostosis: lambdoid and sagittal. 
Craniofaciosynostosis: metopic, coronal, bicoronal
Faciosynostosis: vomeropremaxillary (Binder syndrome)
Craniofacial dysplasias with dysostosis and 
synostosis
Crouzon, Apert and Pfiffer syndromes
Craniofacial dysplasias with dyschondrosis Achondroplasia
After van der Meulen JC, Mazzola R, Vermey-Keers C, Stricker M et al. A morphogenetic classification of craniofacial malformations. Plast Reconstr Surg 1983; 
71(4): 560–72.
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   686 25/10/2017   08:58Management 687
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
In addition and in common with all classification systems, 
there is another large group of conditions that does not sit 
within the system outlined above.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The incidence of congenital craniofacial anomalies varies in 
different parts of the world and is often not easy to quantify. 
Table 45.2 outlines the various incidences of the more com -
mon craniofacial abnormalities.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of the craniofacial anomalies has, in recent 
years, undergone a massive change on two fronts. Firstly, 
advances in ultrasonography have increased the rate of pre -
natal diagnosis and impacted significantly on management. 
Secondly, the rapid expansion in genetic understanding has 
led to many more mutations being linked to particular phe-
notypes. Despite these advances the diagnosis of the majority 
of these conditions is clinical.
MANAGEMENT
In considering the management of this vast range of heteroge-
neous congenital abnormalities it is very difficult to generalise 
about management protocols. In the majority, management is 
delivered by multidisciplinary teams within specialist centres.
Prenatal management
Should a diagnosis be made or suspected prenatally there have 
been a few reported case of prenatal surgery; however, these 
procedures at present remain experimental and in general the 
options open are for termination or best supportive care in 
preparation for the birth. This can often provide the parents 
a period of time to adjust to the impending birth of a child 
with additional demands and needs. The opportunity to meet 
parents, adults and children who have experienced the same 
condition is often very valuable. Termination and its thera-
peutic uses is obviously a contentious and very personal issue; 
however, some parents may request this for very treatable 
conditions (e.g. isolated cleft lip) and in these circumstances 
the local ethics board must be involved and ultimately on 
occasions the advice of the courts must also be sought.
Neonatal management
In the neonatal period management is aimed at addressing 
the urgent issues relating to the airway, breathing, eye protec-
tion and establishing feeding.
In many craniofacial conditions, the airway can be affected 
and either fully or partially obstructed due to a retropositioned 
hypoplastic maxilla with the tongue falling back to close off 
the upper airway, often compounded by a hypoplastic man-
dible. The trachea itself may also be abnormal and tracheo -
malacia can also lead to respiratory problems. Neonates are 
obligate nasal breathers and some forms of nasal obstruction 
can also precipitate airway symptoms. In the most severe cases 
intubation is not possible as a result of the abnormal anatomy 
and a tracheostomy may be necessary. In emergency situations 
it may be helpful to nurse the baby prone, allowing the tongue 
to fall forward.
In some cases, particularly the syndromic craniosynosto -
ses such as Apert syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome or Crouzon 
syndrome, the combination of the midface retrusion and the 
brachycephalic forehead shape can lead to severe exorbitism. 
In the worst cases this can cause ocular dislocation with the 
eyelids closing behind the globe. In severe exorbitism, the 
eyelids do not close adequately to moisturise and protect the 
cornea and without intervention this may lead to irreversible 
corneal damage.
In neonates with airway embarrassment, even without 
anatomical abnormalities, the effort of breathing can be 
exhausting and this can significantly compromise the ability 
to feed. Structural anomalies can also affect the ability to feed 
and expert input from a specialist feeding nurse is often help-
ful. The use of specialised teats may be helpful, but in some 
cases naso- or orogastric feeding may be necessary.
Management in infancy  
(0−12 months)
At this age treatment falls into two categories: first, that 
directed at major functional issues as a continuum of neona-
tal care; and second, skull surgery in cases of craniosynostosis.
Craniosynostosis results in premature fusion of one or more 
of the skull sutures. The condition may be isolated or part 
of a syndrome. This can result in abnormalities of both the 
skull and, particularly in syndromic cases, the facial skeleton. 
TABLE 45.2 Approximate incidence data from multiple 
sources.
Condition Incidence
Apert syndrome 1 in 100 000
Pfeiffer syndrome 1 in 100 000
Crouzon syndrome 1 in 62 500
Treacher Collins syndrome 1 in 50 000
Unicoronal synostosis 1 in 10 000
Metopic synostosis 1 in 7000
Sagittal synostosis 1 in 5000
Hemifacial microsomia 1 in 3500
Neurofibromatosis 1 in 2600
Cleft lip and palate 1 in 600
Eugene Apert , 1868–1940, physician L’Hôpital des Infants Malades, Paris, France, described this syndrome in 1906.
Rudolf Arthur Pfeiffer , 1931–2012, geneticist, Münster, Germany, described this syndrome in 1964.
Louis Edouard Octave Crouzon , 1874–1938, neurologist, Paris, France, described this syndrome in 1912.
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   687 25/10/2017   08:58CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK688
In 10–20% of single suture cases and a higher proportion of 
syndromic multisuture cases the infants develop raised intra-
cranial pressure, which presents with episodes of distress, 
listlessness and disturbed sleep. This may be associated with 
papilloedema and untreated, can lead to visual failure. The 
diagnosis is confirmed with intracranial pressure monitoring.
Some congenital lesions may obstruct the vision of one 
or both eyes and this needs to be addressed to minimise the 
chances of amblyopia developing. An example of this would 
be the development of a large true haemangioma of the eye -
lids threatening to obscure the child’s vision out of one eye.
In the older child the indications for surgery remain the 
same; however, there is the possibility of surgery to advance 
the mandible in the severely retrognathic patient. This can 
be used to obviate the need for a tracheostomy or allow for 
early decannulation. The most effective technique is distrac-
tion osteogenesis (or distraction histogenesis), which utilises 
the same basic principles as in limb lengthening. The bone is 
cut and a device placed across the osteotomy site and after a 
short latent period the bone ends gradually separate, distract-
ing the callus. In the mandible, unlike the long bones, it is not 
necessary to limit the bone cut to the cortex (corticotomy) 
and a complete osteotomy is used. The technique allows for a 
lengthening of approximately 1 mm per day, after which there 
is a retention period to allow for consolidation of the callus.
Management in early childhood 
(1−12 years)
In early childhood management should be aimed at dealing 
with functional problems, airway obstruction, speech and 
feeding issues, but there is an increasing imperative for surgery 
to address the appearance of the child. There is no doubt that 
visible differences can affect the development, socially and 
emotionally; however, there is a significant role for psycholog-
ical and emotional support for the whole family and in some 
cases for the school community to help the child, family and 
school understand and deal with the additional pressures that 
visible difference makes. Surgery can make a significant dif-
ference for some cases, but for many surgery should be delayed 
as long as possible for an optimal outcome in the long term.
In the older child airway issues can become a problem and 
their identification is more difficult. The usual presentation is 
of sleep apnoea, which often has an insidious onset and the 
history should be actively sought; parents are used to noisy 
snoring and daytime tiredness in the child and may not con -
sider it abnormal. Initial investigation is with a home over -
night oxygen saturation monitor, which if abnormal should 
trigger a comprehensive sleep study. The management of 
obstructive sleep apnoea includes the use of tonsillectomy/
adenoidectomy, midface advancement and mandibular dis -
traction as well as a variety of ventilator support devices.
Management in late childhood to 
maturity
Airway and other functional issues are usually stabilised 
by this time and interventions are aimed at optimising the 
overall appearance. The transition from primary school to 
secondary school is often a period of distress for patients with 
visible differences and their families and if there are press-
ing psychological reasons, corrective surgery can be offered, 
although usually this is best postponed until growth is com-
plete. In general, a comprehensive integrated corrective plan 
should be developed within the multidisciplinary team. This 
would usually address the skeletal and dental abnormalities 
first and secondarily address the soft tissues. The majority of 
the major craniofacial abnormalities should be managed by a 
formal multidisciplinary team.
CLEFT LIP AND PALATE
Clefts of the lip, alveolus and hard and soft palate are the 
most common congenital abnormalities of the orofacial struc-
tures. They frequently occur as isolated deformities but can 
be associated with other medical conditions, particularly con-
genital heart disease. They are also an associated feature in 
over 300 recognised syndromes.
All children born with a cleft lip and palate need a 
thorough paediatric assessment to exclude other congenital 
abnormalities. In certain circumstances genetic counselling 
must be sought if a syndrome is suspected.
Incidence
The incidence of cleft lip and palate is 1:600 live births and 
of isolated cleft palate is 1:1000 live births. The incidence 
increases in Oriental groups (1:500) and decreases in the 
black population (1:2000). The highest incidence reported 
for cleft lip and palate occurs in the Indian tribes of Montana, 
USA (1:276).
Although cleft lip and palate is an extremely diverse and 
variable congenital abnormality, several distinct sub-groups 
exist, namely cleft lip with/without cleft palate (CL/P), cleft 
palate (CP) alone and submucous cleft palate (SMCP).
The typical distribution of cleft types is:
 ● cleft lip alone: 15%;
 ● cleft lip and palate: 45%;
 ● isolated cleft palate: 40%.
Cleft lip/palate predominates in males, whereas cleft palate 
alone appears to be more common in females. In unilateral 
cleft lip the deformity affects the left side in 60% of cases.
Aetiology
Contemporary opinion on the aetiology of cleft lip and pal -
ate is that cleft lip and palate and isolated cleft palate have 
a genetic predisposition and a contributory environmental 
component. A family history of cleft lip and palate in which 
the first-degree relative is affected increases the risk to 1:25 
live births. Genetic influence is more significant in cleft lip/
palate than cleft palate alone, in which environmental factors 
exert a greater influence.
Environmental factors implicated in clefting include 
maternal epilepsy and drugs (e.g. steroids, diazepam and 
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   688 25/10/2017   08:58Anatomy of cleft lip and pal ate 689
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
phenytoin). The role of antenatal folic acid supplements in 
preventing cleft lip and palate remains equivocal.
Although most clefts of the lip and palate occur as an 
isolated deformity, Pierre Robin sequence is an important 
association. This sequence comprises isolated cleft palate, ret-
rognathia and a posteriorly displaced tongue (glossoptosis), 
which is associated with early respiratory and feeding diffi -
culties.
Isolated cleft palate is more commonly associated with a 
syndrome than cleft lip/palate and cleft lip alone. Over 150 
syndromes are associated with cleft lip and palate, although 
Stickler (ophthalmic and musculoskeletal abnormalities), 
Shprintzen (cardiac anomalies), Down, Apert and Treacher 
Collins syndromes are most frequently encountered.
on both sides, producing a flaring of the nose (caused by lack 
of nasolabial muscle continuity), a protrusive premaxilla and 
an area of skin in front of the premaxilla devoid of muscle, 
known as the prolabium (Figure 45.3). As in the unilateral 
cleft lip, the muscular, cartilaginous and skeletal deformities 
influence the mucocutaneous tissues, which must be respected 
in planning the repair of the bilateral cleft lip.
Cleft palate
Embryologically, the primary palate consists of all anatom-
ical structures anterior to the incisive foramen, namely the 
alveolus and upper lip. The secondary palate is defined as the 
remainder of the palate behind the incisive foramen, divided 
into the hard palate and, more posteriorly, the soft palate.
Cleft palate results in failure of fusion of the two palatine 
shelves. This failure may be confined to the soft palate alone 
or involve both hard and soft palate. When the cleft of the 
hard palate remains attached to the nasal septum and vomer, 
the cleft is termed incomplete. When the nasal septum and 
vomer are completely separated from the palatine processes, 
the cleft palate is termed complete.
Soft palate
In the normal soft palate, closure of the velopharynx, which 
is essential for normal speech, is achieved by five different 
muscles functioning in a complete but coordinated fashion. 
Pierre Robin , 1867–1950, Professor, The French School of Dentistry, Paris, France, described this syndrome in 1929.
Gunnar B Stickler , 1925–2010, born in Germany, Chair of Section of Paediatrics and later Paediatric Cardiology, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Robert J Shprintzen , b.1946, surgeon, Syracuse, NY, USA.
John Langdon Haydon Down  (sometimes given as Langdon-Brown) , 1828–1896, physician, The London Hospital, UK, published ‘observations on the ethnic 
classification of idiots’ in the London Hospital Reports in 1866.
Edward Treacher Collins , 1862–1932, ophthalmic surgeon, the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital, and Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK, described this 
syndrome in 1900.
Summary box 45.1
Cleft lip and palate
●● Associated with other congenital abnormalities
●● Incidence varies between 1:300 to 1:2000
●● Aetiology is both genetic and environmental
ANATOMY OF CLEFT LIP AND 
PALATE
Cleft lip
The abnormalities in cleft lip are the direct consequence 
of disruption of the muscles of the upper lip and nasolabial 
region. The facial muscles (Figure 45.1) can be divided into 
three muscular rings of Delaire: the nasolabial muscle ring sur-
rounds the nasal aperture; the bilabial muscle ring surrounds 
the oral aperture; and the labiomental muscle ring envelops 
the lower lip and chin regions.
Unilateral cleft lip
In the unilateral cleft lip, the nasolabial and bilabial muscle 
rings are disrupted on one side, resulting in an asymmetrical 
deformity involving the external nasal cartilages, nasal sep -
tum and anterior maxilla (premaxilla) (Figure 45.2). These 
deformities influence the mucocutaneous tissues causing a dis-
placement of nasal skin onto the lip and a retraction of labial 
skin, as well as changes to the vermilion and lip mucosa. All 
these changes need to be considered in planning the surgical 
repair of the unilateral cleft lip.
Bilateral cleft lip
In the bilateral cleft lip the deformity is more profound but 
symmetrical. The two superior muscular rings are disrupted 
1
A
B
C
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 45.1 The muscle chains of the face: frontal view. The nasal 
cartilages are represented in blue. A, nasolabial (muscles 1–3); B, bila-
bial (muscles 4–6); C, labiomental (muscles 7–9); 1, transverse nasalis; 
2, levator labii superioris alaeque nasi; 3, levator labii superioris; 4, 
orbicularis oris (oblique head) – upper lip; 5, orbicularis oris (horizontal 
head) – upper lip; 6, orbicularis oris – lower lip; 7, depressor anguli 
oris; 8, depressor labii inferioris; 9, mentalis.
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   689 25/10/2017   08:58CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK690
Hard palate
The normal hard palate can be divided into three anatomical 
and physiological zones (Figure 45.5). The central palatal 
fibromucosa is very thin and lies directly below the floor of 
nose. The maxillary fibromucosa is thick and contains the 
greater palatine neurovascular bundle. The gingival fibromu-
cosa lies more lateral and adjacent to the teeth.
In performing surgical closure of cleft palate the changes 
associated with the cleft must be understood to obtain an 
anatomical and functional repair . In complete cleft palate 
the median part of the palatal vault is absent and the pala-
tal fibromucosa is reduced in size. The maxillary and gingival 
fibromucosa are not modified in thickness, width or position.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.2aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
A
B
C
(a)
Figure 45.2 (a) Schematic representation of disruption of the naso-
labial and bilabial muscle chains in unilateral (left) cleft lip. A, nasola -
bial; B, bilabial; C, labiomental. (b) Unilateral cleft lip before muscular 
reconstruction.
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.3aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
A
B
C
(a)
Figure 45.3 (a) Schematic representation of disruption of the naso-
labial and bilabial muscle chains in bilateral cleft lip. A, nasolabial; B, 
bilabial; C, labiomental. (b) Bilateral cleft lip before muscular recon -
struction.
Summary box 45.2
Types of cleft palate
●● May involve the soft palate or the soft and hard palate
●● It is complete when nasal septum and vomer are separated 
from the palatine process
In general, the muscle fibres of the soft palate are orientated 
transversely with no significant attachment to the hard  
palate.
In a cleft of the soft palate (Figure 45.4a) the muscle 
fibres are orientated in an anteroposterior direction, inserting 
into the posterior edge of the hard palate (Figure 45.4b).
(b)
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   690 25/10/2017   08:58Primary management 691
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
PRIMARY MANAGEMENT
Antenatal diagnosis
An antenatal diagnosis of cleft lip, whether unilateral or 
bilateral, is possible by ultrasound scan after 18 weeks of ges -
tation. Isolated cleft palate cannot be diagnosed by antenatal 
scan. When an antenatal diagnosis is confirmed, referral to 
a cleft surgeon is appropriate for counselling to allay fears. 
Photographs of cleft lip shown to parents ‘before and after’ 
surgery are invaluable. Introduction to a parent support group 
and meeting parents of a child with a similar cleft who has 
undergone surgery may also be extremely helpful.
A
(b)
B
C
D
E
Figure 45.4 (a) Cleft of soft palate and incomplete cleft of hard 
palate. (b) Muscles of the soft palate: left, cleft palate; right, normal 
anatomy. A, tensor palati; B, levator palati; C, palatopharyngeus; D, 
palatoglossus; E, musculus uvulae.
(a)
1
2
3
Figure 45.5 The three mucosal zones of the har d palate. 1, palatal 
fibromucosa; 2, maxillary fibromucosa; 3, gingival fibromucosa.
Feeding
Most babies born with cleft lip and palate feed well and 
thrive, provided that appropriate advice is given and support 
is available. Some mothers are successful in breast-feeding, 
particularly when the cleft is incomplete and confined to the 
lip. Good feeding patterns can be established with soft bottles 
(e.g. Mead Johnson) and modified teats (orthodontic, Nuyk). 
Simple measures such as enlarging the hole in the teat often 
suffice. Feeding plates, constructed from a dental impression 
of the upper jaw, are rarely necessary to improve feeding. 
Some babies are provided with an active plate that aims not 
only to improve feeding but also reduce the width of the cleft 
lip and palate prior to surgery. The long-term benefit of such 
a regime remains unproven.
Airway
Major respiratory obstruction is uncommon and occurs exclu-
sively in babies with Pierre Robin sequence. Hypoxic episodes 
during sleep and feeding can be life-threatening. Intermittent 
airway obstruction is more frequent and is managed by nursing 
the baby prone. More severe and persistent airway compro -
mise can be managed by ‘retained nasopharyngeal intubation’ 
to maintain the airway. Surgical adhesion of the tongue to the 
lower lip (labioglossopexy) in the first few days after birth is 
an alternative but less commonly practised method of man -
agement. Early mandibular surgery, in the form of distraction 
osteogenesis, is indicated for a proportion of cases and may 
avoid the need for a tracheostomy.
Summary box 45.3
Antenatal diagnosis and counselling
●● All but isolated cleft palate can be diagnosed by ultrasound 
after 18 weeks’ gestation
●● Parents need counselling and support
Summary box 45.4
Problems immediately after birth
●● Some babies are able to feed normally but others require 
assistance
●● Breathing problems in Pierre Robin sequence may be life 
threatening
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   691 25/10/2017   08:58CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK692
PRINCIPLES OF CLEFT SURGERY
The ultimate goal in cleft lip and palate management is a 
patient with a normal appearance of lip, nose and face, whose 
speech is normal and whose dentition and facial growth fall 
within the range of normal development.
Surgical techniques are aimed at restoring normal anat-
omy. With the exception of rare conditions such as holopros-
encephaly, there is no true hypoplasia of the tissues involved 
on either side of the cleft. There is, however, displacement, 
deformation and underdevelopment of the muscles and facial 
skeleton. Emphasis is placed on muscular reconstruction of 
the lip, nose and face as well as muscles of the soft palate. 
Normal or near-normal anatomy promotes normal function, 
thereby encouraging normal growth and development of lip, 
nose, palate and facial skeleton. An in-depth understanding 
of the anatomy of the cleft is invaluable if the surgeon is to 
achieve normal, or near-normal, anatomical reconstruction.
be present leading to nasal and skeletal deformity. Full mus -
cular exposure and reconstruction is imperative in many 
incomplete clefts if facial symmetry is to be achieved (Figures 
45.10b and 45.11b).
Cleft palate surgery
Cleft palate closure can be achieved by one- or two-stage 
palatoplasty. The surgical principle is mobilisation and 
Surgical techniques
There have been many different surgical techniques and 
sequences advocated in cleft lip and palate management, lead-
ing to considerable debate between surgeons regarding surgi -
cal regime and philosophy; however, all mo dern approaches 
have functional muscle reconstruction as their core prin -
ciple. Cleft lip repair is commonly performed between 3 and 
6 months of age, whereas cleft palate repair is frequently 
performed between 6 and 18 months.
The Delaire technique and sequence (Table 45.3) is one of 
the many regimes currently practised.
Cleft lip surgery
Skin incisions (Figures 45.6 and 45.7)  are developed to 
restore displaced tissues, including skin and cartilage, to their 
normal position, while gaining access to the facial, nasal and 
lip musculature.
Muscular continuity is achieved by subperiosteal under -
mining over the anterior maxilla. Nasolabial muscles are 
anchored to the premaxilla with non-resorbable sutures. 
Oblique muscles of orbicularis oris are sutured to the base 
of the anterior nasal spine and cartilaginous nasal septum. 
Closure of the cleft lip is completed by suturing the horizontal 
fibres of orbicularis oris to achieve a functioning oral sphincter 
(Figures 45.8 and 45.9).
When the cleft lip is incomplete (Figures 45.10a  and 
45.11a), meticulous assessment of the cleft deformity is of 
paramount importance, as complete muscle disruption may 
Summary box 45.5
Surgical anatomy
●● Normal lip, face and nose
●● Underdevelopment and displacement of muscles
●● Restoration of normal anatomy encourages normal facial 
growth and function
TABLE 45.3 Timing of primary cleft lip and palate 
procedures (after Delaire).
Cleft lip alone
Unilateral (one 
side)
One operation 
at 5–6 months
Bilateral (both 
sides)
One operation 
at 4–5 months
Cleft palate alone
Soft palate only One operation 
at 6 months
Soft and hard 
palate
Two operations Soft palate at 6 months
Hard palate at 15–18 months
Cleft lip and palate
Unilateral Two operations Cleft lip and soft palate at 
5–6 months
Hard palate and gum pad 
with or without lip revision at 
15–18 months
Bilateral Two operations Cleft lip and soft palate at 
4–5 months
Hard palate and gum pad 
with or without lip revision at 
15–18 months
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.7aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 42.7bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:45.8bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  3      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.8cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(c)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.8aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
Figure 45.7  (a–c) Skin incisions for bilateral complete cleft lip 
shown in red. Areas for excision shown in grey: mucosa (a) or skin 
(b) (after Delaire).
Figure 45.6 (a, b) Skin incisions (highlighted in red) for left unilateral 
complete cleft lip (after Delaire).
Jean Delaire , Professor of Stomatology and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Nantes, Nantes, France, 1960–1991.
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   692 25/10/2017   08:58Principles of cleft surgery 693
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Figure 45.8 Unilateral complete cleft lip before (a) and after (b) 
muscular reconstruction.
Figure 45.9  Bilateral cleft lip before (a) and after (b) muscular 
reconstruction.
(b)
(a)(a)
(b)
Figure 45.10 Unilateral incomplete cleft lip before (a) and after (b) muscle reconstruction.
(b)(a)
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   693 25/10/2017   08:58CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK694
SECONDARY MANAGEMENT
Following primary surgery, regular review by a multidisci -
plinary team is essential. Many aspects of cleft care require 
long-term review:
 ● hearing;
 ● speech;
 ● dental development;
 ● facial growth.
Hearing
Eustachian tube dysfunction plays a central role in the patho-
genesis of otitis media, with effusion in babies and children 
born with a cleft palate. Children with a cleft lip alone exhibit 
the same frequency of otitis media as their age-matched 
non-cleft counterparts; however, a child with a craniofacial 
anomaly, including cleft lip and palate, is at increased risk of 
Figure 45.11 Bilateral incomplete cleft lip before (a) and after (b) muscular reconstruction.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.13bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.13aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
Figure 45.12 (a, b) Method of repair of cleft palate. First-stage pala-
toplasty to reconstruct muscles of the soft palate. Red lines represent 
incisions and orange areas raw surfaces.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.14bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.14aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
Figure 45.13 (a, b) Schematic representation of closure of the hard 
palate. Second-stage palatoplasty achieved with two-layered closure. 
Red lines represent incisions and orange areas raw surfaces.
(a) (b)
reconstruction of the aberrant soft palate musculature (Figure 
45.12) together with closure of the residual hard palate cleft 
by minimal dissection and subsequent scar formation (Figure 
45.13). Excess scar formation in the palate adversely affects 
growth and development of the maxilla. The philosophy of 
two-stage closure encourages a physiological narrowing of the 
hard palate cleft to minimise surgical dissection at the time of 
the second procedure.
Summary box 45.6
Principles of surgery
●● Cleft lip surgery attaches and reconnects the muscles around 
the oral sphincter
●● Cleft patate surgery aims to bring together mucosa and 
muscles with minimal scarring
●● Two-stage procedures minimises dissection
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   694 25/10/2017   08:58Secondary management 695
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
a sensorineural hearing deficit. All children born with a cleft 
lip and palate should undergo assessment before 12 months of 
age for sensorineural and conductive hearing loss  by audi -
tory brainstem responses and tympanometry, respectively.
Sensorineural hearing loss is managed with a hearing aid 
whereas the management of secretory otitis media remains 
more controversial. Early (6–12 months) prophylactic 
myrin gotomy and grommet insertion temporarily eliminates 
middle ear effusion. Regular audiological testing may be as 
appropriate, reserving surgery for established secretory otitis 
media with infection. No firm evidence is available to support 
the interventional approach over the conservative regime. 
Nevertheless, the relationship between hearing loss and 
potential speech problems remains important. Regular audio-
logical assessment during childhood is of utmost importance.
Speech
Initial speech assessment should be performed early (18 
months) and repeated regularly to ensure that problems are 
identified early and managed appropriately.
Common speech problems associated with cleft lip and 
palate are:
 ● Velopharyngeal incompetence . This is associated with 
increased nasal airflow and resonance producing a nasal or 
‘hypernasal’ quality to speech. It frequently reflects poor 
function of the soft palate associated with inadequate 
muscle repair.
 ● Articulation problems. These arise either as a compen -
satory mechanism to overcome velopharyngeal incom -
petence or, less commonly, are caused by jaw/dental and 
occlusal abnormalities. Videofluoroscopy, nasal airflow 
studies (aerophonoscopy) and nasendoscopy are helpful 
in defining the exact mechanism of the problem, aiding 
management.
 ● Speech problems. These are managed by speech and lan -
guage therapy; secondary palatal surgery, either intravelar 
veloplasty (muscular reconstruction of soft palate) or pha-
ryngoplasty; and speech training devices .
involving the maxillary lateral incisor tooth. These abnor -
malities can occur in both primary and secondary dentition.
All children with cleft lip and palate should undergo reg -
ular dental examination. Dental management should also 
include preventive measures such as dietary advice, fluoride 
supplements and fissure sealants.
A well-maintained and disease-free dentition in child -
hood is an absolute prerequisite for orthodontic treatment.
Summary box 45.7
Associated hearing and speech problems
●● Higher incidence of sensineural and conductive hearing loss
●● Regular hearing tests are important if speech is to develop 
normally
●● Speech problems may result from airflow problems
Summary box 45.8
Dental problems
●● Too many/too few teeth or problems with eruption of teeth are 
common
●● Good dentition is essential for successful reconstructive 
surgery
Orthodontic management
Many children with cleft lip and palate require orthodontic 
treatment. Ortho dontic treatment is commonly carried out 
in two phases:
 ● Mixed dentition (8–10 years) – to expand the maxillary 
arches as a prelude to alveolar bone graft.
 ● Permanent dentition (14–18 years) – to align the den -
tition and provide a normal functioning occlusion. This 
phase of treatment may also include surgical correction of 
a malpositioned/retrusive maxilla by maxillary osteotomy 
(Figure 45.14).
Secondary surgery for cleft lip and 
palate
Good outcome in cleft lip and palate is directly attributable to 
the quality of the primary surgery. Secondary cleft procedures 
include:
 ● cleft lip revision (unilateral and bilateral);
 ● alveolar bone graft;
 ● simultaneous lip revision and alveolar bone graft;
 ● secondary palate procedures (e.g. veloplasty and pharyn -
goplasty, closure of a palatal fistula);
 ● dentoalveolar procedures, including transplantation of 
teeth/insertion of osseo-integrated dental implants;
 ● orthognathic surgery;
 ● rhinoplasty.
Cleft lip revision
Indications for revisional surgery to a previously repaired 
cleft lip are dependent on the site and severity of the residual 
deformity.
Revisional surgery should be delayed for 2 years after pri -
mary lip closure unless the surgeon is of the opinion that the 
initial procedure was inadequate, particularly with respect to 
muscular reconstruction.
Dental
Dental anomalies are common findings in children with cleft 
lip and/or palate. Various phenomena including delayed tooth 
development, delayed eruption of teeth and morphological 
abnormalities are well documented. The number of teeth 
may be reduced (hypodontia) or increased (hyperdontia), 
occurring most commonly in the region of the cleft alveolus 
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   695 25/10/2017   08:58CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK696
Figure 45.14 Correction of midface retrusion by maxillary advancement osteotomy, before (a) and after (b) surgery.
(a) (b)
Indications for revision include:
 ● lip deformity:
 ● malaligned vermilion;
 ● asymmetrical Cupid’s bow;
 ● muscle discontinuity or malalignment;
Figure 45.15 (a) Revision of unilateral complete cleft lip, seen from below. (b) Skin incisions. (c) Wide exposure of nasolabial and orbicularis 
oris muscle. (d) Lip closure highlighting improved nasal symmetry.
(a)
 (b)
 ● nasal deformity:
 ● lateral drift of alar base;
 ● poor nasal tip projection;
 ● deviation of cartilaginous nasal septum into the non-
cleft nostril.
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   696 25/10/2017   08:59Secondary management 697
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
(c)
 (d)
Summary box 45.9
Cleft lip revisional surgery
●● Should be delayed for at least 2 years after primary surgery
●● Aims to improve incomplete primary reconstruction
Residual nasal deformity is an external manifestation of 
incomplete reconstruction of the nasolabial muscle ring.
Examples of lip revision are shown in Figures 45.15–
45.18.
Figure 45.15 (Continued)
Figure 45.16 (a) Asymmetrical Cupid’s bow . Revision of unilateral 
cleft lip – skin markings. (b) Identification and realignment of orbicu-
laris oris muscle. (c) Postoperative appearance.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   697 25/10/2017   08:59CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK698
Figure 45.17 (a) Revision of bilateral cleft lip with reconstruction of 
nasolabial muscles. (b) Skin incisions and development of philtrum. 
(c) Postoperative view – improved nasal and lip symmetry.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 45.18 (a) Revision of left unilateral cleft lip to correct a nasal 
deformity. (b) Skin incision. (c) Postoperative view.
 ● to enhance bony support of the teeth adjacent to the cleft 
alveolus;
 ● to promote closure of the oronasal fistula;
 ● to close residual fistula of the anterior palate;
 ● to provide adequate bone stock to receive an osseo- integrated 
dental implant where a tooth is congenitally absent.
Normally patients undergo a period of ortho dontic 
treatment prior to bone grafting. The maxillary segment is 
expanded orthodontically (if necessary) to widen the cleft 
Alveolar bone grafting
Alveolar bone grafting in a mixed dentition is a well-  
established procedure for patients with a residual alveolar 
cleft associated with cleft lip and palate. The rationale for 
performing alveolar bone grafting includes:
 ● stabilisation of maxillary segments;
 ● to promote eruption of the canine tooth into the cleft site;
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   698 25/10/2017   08:59Secondary management 699
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Figure 45.20 Radiographic appearance of an implant in an alveolar 
bone graft site.
Figure 45.19 (a) Peroperative view of alveolar bone graft demon-
strating defect in alveolus (arrow) (simultaneous lip revision). (b) Can-
cellous bone graft (arrow) packed into the defect.
(a)
(b)
Bone grafting is a highly successful procedure when carried 
out in experienced hands, with over 90% of patients achiev -
ing acceptable interdental alveolar bone height, but it does 
require the interaction of surgeon and orthodontist. When 
the lateral incisor is absent and the canine tooth fails to erupt, 
surgical exposure of the canine tooth may be required to aid 
its eruption. It is a fundamental principle that, following alve-
olar bone grafting, efforts should be made to ensure that a 
tooth erupts into the alveolar bone graft site. Failure to pro -
vide a tooth in the alveolar bone graft site usually results in 
bony resorption in the long term. This can be overcome by 
the insertion of an osseo-integrated implant into the grafted 
site, thereby preserving bone stock (Figure 45.20)
Orthognathic surgery
Impaired growth of the midface (maxilla) is now attributed 
to poor primary surgery. Surgical techniques must endeavour 
to minimise scarring, although in many cases patients also 
have a genetic predisposition to poor midfacial growth. Elec -
tive maxillary advancement or bimaxillary surgery is often 
indicated to restore aesthetics and dental occlusal harmony . 
Orthognathic surgery is usually performed when facial growth 
is complete (16–17 years in female patients, 17–19 years in 
male patients).
The principal dentofacial deformity associated with cleft 
lip and palate is underdevelopment in both the horizontal and 
vertical direction of the maxilla. This jaw size discrepancy can 
be corrected with orthognathic surgery (Figure 45.21)
Open septorhinoplasty
Following revisional cleft lip and palate surgery, orthognathic 
surgery and alveolar bone grafting, many patients still require 
definitive surgical nasal correction. In patients with cleft lip 
and palate, open rhinoplasty is preferred to gain access to 
the external cartilaginous framework, which is frequently 
deformed (Figure 45.22). The principal deformity is a col-
lapse of the lower lateral cartilage on the cleft side together 
with a dislocation of the cartilaginous septum into the non-
cleft nostril. The open method ensures adequate access and 
repositioning of the cartilaginous framework as a tertiary pro-
cedure to improve nasal tip projection, correct septal defor -
mity and relocate alar cartilages. A postauricular onlay graft 
to the middle crus of the cleft nostril lower lateral cartilage 
may be required to enhance good nasal tip projection and 
symmetry.
Summary
The management of children with cleft lip and palate is com-
plex, requiring the skill of a multidisciplinary team. Each 
team should include professionals who are appropriately qual-
ified with specialist training, treating an adequate number of 
patients per year in centralised units. Meticulous record keep-
ing of photography, radiology, dental casts and speech record-
ings are indispensable to permit regular audits and improve 
outcomes.
alveolus. The surgery is best performed before the canine 
tooth erupts (between 8 and 11 years of age). Earlier bone 
grafting may be beneficial not only for the unerupted canine 
tooth but also to promote eruption and bony support to the 
adjacent central and lateral incisor when present. Alveolar 
bone grafting can also be performed simultaneously with sec-
ondary lip revision (Figure 45.19).
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   699 25/10/2017   08:59CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK700
(a)
Figure 45.21 (a) Lateral view of an adult a with previously repaired cleft lip and palate demonstrating mandibular prognathism and maxillary 
retrusion. (b) Postoperative appearance following maxillary advancement and mandibular setback surgery.
(b)
Figure 45.22 (a) Characteristic nasal deformity of a non-functional unilateral cleft lip repair. (b) Incisions for open rhinoplasty. (c) Exposure of 
the cartilaginous skeleton of the external nose. (d) Repositioning of the external nasal cartilages to improve nasal tip projection.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   700 25/10/2017   08:59Developmental abnormalities of the jaws 701
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
DEVELOPMENTAL 
ABNORMALITIES OF THE JAWS
Jaws
Disproportionate growth between the maxilla and mandible 
can occur, which results in derangement of the dental occlu -
sion. The dental occlusion (the way in which the teeth bite 
and mesh together) can be classified into three different sub -
types:
 ● class I: a normal relationship of upper and lower incisors 
and molar dentition;
 ● class II: the mandibular teeth are placed posterior to the 
maxillary teeth;
 ● class III: the mandibular teeth are placed anterior to the 
maxillary teeth.
This classification is usually, but not invariably , the 
consequence of aberrant skeletal development of the max -
illa and mandible, such that in a class II condition there is 
usually underdevelopment of the mandible (mandibular 
retrognathia), whereas in a class III condition there may be 
simultaneous overgrowth of the mandible (mandibular prog -
nathism) and underdevelopment of the maxilla (maxillary 
hypoplasia).
In the Caucasian population the most common defor -
mity of the facial skeleton is underdevelopment of the man -
dible (retrognathia), producing a class II relationship often 
associated with excessive vertical growth of the maxilla. 
Bimaxillary protrusion is rare but is a characteristic of Afri -
can races.
Condylar hyperplasia is an idiopathic condition seen 
in patients between 15 and 30 years of age, more common 
in women than men, in which there is hyperplasia or over -
growth of the neck of the mandibular condyle. This gives an 
asymmetrical growth to the jaw in both a vertical and hori -
zontal plane.
Facial disproportionate growth is also a characteristic of 
many syndromes. Examples include:
 ● Treacher Collins syndrome;
 ● Crouzon syndrome;
 ● Apert syndrome;
 ● Pierre Robin sequence.
Orthognathic surgery
Orthognathic surgery is the term given to the surgical correc-
tion of deformities of the jaw. It is usually undertaken in close 
cooperation between orthodontic and maxillofacial surgeons. 
Surgery is directed at simultaneously changing the position of 
both maxilla and mandible at the end of the growth period. 
This is termed bimaxillary osteotomy. Treatment planning 
usually commences at the age of 12–13 years, in which the 
orthodontist aligns the dental arches in correct relation for 
each jaw. This frequently results in an accentuation of the 
facial deformity at the end of the orthodontic phase of treat -
ment. Treatment normally takes 2 years, in which orthog -
nathic surgery is performed towards the end of orthodontic 
treatment, although orthodontic treatment in the form of 
fixed appliances usually continues postoperatively for up to 
6 months after surgery. Surgical planning should be metic -
ulous and involves clinical examination and cephalometric 
assessment in the form of radiograph analysis, as well as study 
model analysis, working in close cooperation with maxillo -
facial technologists.
Orthognathic surgery is generally carried out through 
intraoral incisions, in which the upper and lower jaws are 
mobilised by achieving osteotomy cuts with saws and drills 
(Figure 45.23). Following mobilisation of the mandible and 
maxilla, the jaws are repositioned and held with titanium 
(a)
(b)
Figure 45.23 (a) Profile of class III skeletal r elationship and maxil -
lary hypoplasia and mandibular prognathism. (b) Lateral skull radio-
graph. (Continued)
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   701 25/10/2017   08:59CHAPTER 45  Cleft lip and palat e: developmental abnormalities of the face, mouth  and jaws
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK702
Figure 45.23 (Continued) (c) Profile following bimaxillary osteotomy. 
(d) Postoperative radiograph following bimaxillary osteotomy demon-
strating internal fixation. (e) Schematic representation of bimaxillary 
osteotomy with maxillary advancement and mandibular retrusion.
(c)
(d)
(e)
FURTHER READING
Brennan P , Schliephake H, Ghali GE, Cascarini L. Maxillofacial surgery, 
3rd edn. St. Louis: Elsevier, 2017.
Hayward R, Jones B, Dunaway D, Evans R. The clinical management of 
craniosynostosis. London: MacKeith Press, 2004.
Sitzman TJ, Marcus JR. Cleft lip and palate: current surgical manage -
ment. Clin Plast Surg 2004: 41(2): xi–xii.
van der Meulen JC,  Mazzola R,  Vermey-Keers C,  Stricker M et al. A 
morphogenetic classification of craniofacial malformations.  Plast 
Reconstr Surg 1983; 71(4): 560–72.
Summary box 45.10
Principles of orthognathic surgery
●● Orthodontist aligns the dental arches
●● Surgery then corrects the jaw deformity
plates and screws placed through an intraoral approach. This 
frequently avoids the use of intermaxillary fixation and allows 
earlier function of the jaws as well as improved early dietary 
intake.
Patients with syndromic conditions such as hemifacial 
microsomia and Crouzon syndrome and Treacher Collins 
syndrome require the services of a craniofacial surgeon. As 
these syndromes are extremely rare, management and sur -
gery should only be carried out in designated centres. The 
principal treatment is to correct the deformity from the cra-
nium downwards, with correction of the cranial deformity 
within the first 3 years of life and correction of the residual 
midfacial and lower facial deformity in childhood and ado -
lescence.
The use of distraction osteogenesis in the management 
of craniofacial deformity has reduced the requirements for 
major orthognathic surgery in patients with severe facial 
deformity.
07_45-B&L27_Pt7_Ch45.indd   702 25/10/2017   08:59Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To be familiar with:
 • The anatomy of the ear
 • The conditions of the outer, middle and inner ear
 • The examination of the ear including hearing tests
 • The basic anatomy of the nose and paranasal sinuses
 • The principles of managing post-traumatic nasal and 
septal deformity
 • The causes and management of epistaxis
To understand that:
 • The outer layer of the tympanic membrane migrates 
outwards
 • The facial nerve can be damaged by trauma and ear 
disease
 • Chronic ear disease can lead to intracranial sepsis
 • There are two types of hearing loss: conductive and 
sensorineural
 • The clinical features of sinus infection, its treatment and 
potential complications
 • The diagnosis and management of chronic 
rhinosinusitis with and without nasal polyposis
 • The common sinonasal tumours, their presentation, 
investigation and principles of treatment
INTRODUCTION
Disorders affecting the ear, nose and sinus are common rea -
sons for primary care attendance; however , few surgeons will 
encounter such diseases in day to day practice. Nonetheless, 
traumatic, infective and neoplastic processes can impact on 
these organs and their anatomical proximity to critical ana -
tomical structures demands a basic understanding in order 
to efficiently diagnose, refer and treat conditions. A full and 
detailed review of the management of ear and nose condi -
tions is beyond the scope of this text. Instead, the aim of this 
chapter is to familiarise the reader with the basic anatomy and 
pathology relevant to patients who present with conditions 
affecting the ear, nose and sinuses.
THE EAR
The mammalian ear is an evolutionary masterpiece. Its highly 
complex ‘three-dimensional anatomy’ is best learnt by dis -
secting cadaver temporal bones.
The external ear
The external and middle ear develop from the first two bran-
chial arches. The external ear canal is 3  cm in length; the 
outer two-thirds is cartilage and the inner third is bony . The 
skin on the lateral surface of the tympanic membrane is highly 
specialised and migrates outwards along the ear canal. As a 
result of this migration most people’s ears are self-  cleaning. 
The external canal is richly innervated and the skin is tightly 
bound down to the perichondrium so that swelling in this 
region results in severe pain.
The lymphatics of the external ear drain to the retroauric-
ular, parotid, retropharyngeal and deep upper cervical lymph 
nodes.
The tympanic membrane and 
middle ear
The anatomy of the tympanic membrane and ossicles is 
shown in (Figure 46.1). The relations of the middle ear are 
important (Figure 46.2). The tympanic membrane and ossi -
cles act as a transformer of vibrations in the air to vibrations 
within the fluid-filled inner ear.
The inner ear
The inner ear comprises the cochlea and vestibular labyrinth 
(saccule, utricle and semicircular canals). These structures are 
embedded in dense bone called the otic capsule.
The cochlea is a coiled shell of two and three-quarter turns. 
Within the cochlea is a spiral structure called the cochlear 
duct (Figure 46.3) containing endolymph that is partitioned 
by Reissner’s membrane from the perilymph of the scala ves -
tibuli, which joins the round window and the basement mem-
brane from the perilymph of the scala tympani, which joins 
the oval window and stapes footplate. The endolymph has a 
46Chapter
The ear, nose and sinuses
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   703 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK704
high concentration of potassium, similar to intracellular fluid, 
and the perilymph has a high sodium concentration and com-
municates with the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Maintenance 
of the ionic gradients is an active process and is essential for 
neuronal activity.
There are approximately 15  500 hair cells in the human 
cochlea. They are arranged in rows of 3500 inner and 12 000 
outer hair cells. The inner hair cells act as mechanicoelectric 
transducers, converting the acoustic signal into an electric 
impulse. The outer hair cells contain contractile proteins 
and serve to tune the basilar membrane on which they are 
positioned.
(a)
The majority of the
ossicles lies out of
sight in the attic
Short process
of malleus
Pars /f_laccida
Handle of malleus
Anterior bulge of
ear canal
Light re/f_lex
Long
process
of incus
Oval
window
Stapes
Round window
niche
Pars tensa
(b)
Figure 46.1 (a) Right tympanic membrane and (b) diagram to illus-
trate the anatomy of the tympanic membrane and ossicles (courtesy 
of Dr Christian Deguine).
Ernst Reissner , 1824–1878, Professor of Anatomy at Dorpat and later at Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland), described the vestibular membrane of the 
cochlea in 1851.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 47.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Hypotympanum
ET
Attic
TM
M
Antrum
Middle cranial fossa
Posterior
cranial fossa
Mastoid
Stylomastoid
foramen
VII
Medial
Posterior
Lateral
Anterior
Figure 46.2 Diagram to show the relationships of the middle ear 
(courtesy of Dr Christian Deguine). ET, Eustachian tube; M, malleus; 
TM, tympanic membrane; VII, facial nerve.
Figure 46.3 The cochlear duct.
Scala vestibuli
Reissner’s membrane
Scala tympani
Tunnel
Cochlear
nerve /f_ibres
Tunnel
/f_ibres
Outer hair
cell nerve
Basilar
membrane
Stria vascularis
Organ of Corti
Tectorial membrane
Scala media
Inner hair cell nerves
1
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   704 25/10/2017   09:01Examination of the ear 705
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Each inner hair cell responds to a particular frequency 
of vibration. When stimulated, it depolarises and passes an 
impulse to the cochlear nuclei in the brainstem.
The vestibular labyrinth consists of the semicircular 
canals, utricle and saccule and their central connections. The 
three semicircular canals are arranged in the three planes of 
space at right angles to each other. Like the auditory system, 
hair cells are present. In the lateral canals, the hair cells are 
embedded in a gelatinous cupula. Shearing forces, caused by 
angular movements of the head, produce hair cell movements 
and generate action potentials. In the utricle and saccule the 
hair cells are embedded in an otoconial membrane, which 
contains particles of calcium carbonate. These respond to 
changes in linear acceleration and the pull of gravity.
Impulses are carried centrally by the vestibular nerve and 
connections are made to the spinal cord, cerebellum and 
external ocular muscles. Its function is to record the position 
and movements of the head.
The sensory nerve supply
The external ear is supplied by the auriculotemporal branch of 
the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve [CN] V) and the greater 
auricular nerve (C2/3), together with branches of the lesser 
occipital nerve (C2.) CNs VII, IX and X also supply small 
sensory branches to the external ear. The middle ear is sup -
plied by the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX).
This complicated and rich sensory innervation means that 
referred otalgia is common and may originate from the nor -
mal area of distribution of any of the above nerves. A classic 
example is the referred otalgia caused by cancer of the larynx.
Taking a thorough history is the most important part of 
the assessment; the symptoms that need to be enquired after 
are listed in Table 46.1.
Summary box 46.1
Applied anatomy
●● The skin on the outer surface of the eardrum migrates 
outwards so that the ear canal is ‘self-cleaning’
●● Infection of the middle ear and mastoid can easily spread to 
the cranial cavity
●● The facial nerve pursues a tortuous course through the middle 
ear
●● The ear has a rich sensory innervation so that ‘referred otalgia’ 
is common
●● Cancer of the larynx can present with otalgia
TABLE 46.1 History taking.
Ask about:
Earache, pain and itch
Hearing loss
Discharge: type, quantity and smell
Tinnitus
Vertigo
Facial weakness
Speech and development (in children)
Past history: head injury, baro- or noise trauma, ototoxics, family 
history and previous ear surgery
Friedrich Heinrich Adolf Rinne , 1819–1868, otologist, Gottingen, Germany, described his test in 1855.
Friedrich Eugen Weber-Liel , 1832–1891, otologist, University of Berlin and Jena, Germany, described the operation of tenotomy of the tensor tympani used for 
certain forms of partial deafness.
Figure 46.4 Tools of the trade: a fibreoptic otoscope, with pneumatic 
attachment and a selection of specula. Also a 512 Hz tuning fork.
Figure 46.5  The correct method of holding the otoscope. Note 
the pinna is retracted to straighten the ear canal. Hold the barr el of 
the otoscope so that the examiner’s little finger is balanced on the 
patient’s cheek; this prevents the speculum impinging on the tym -
panic membrane in case of sudden movement.
and a sensorineural hearing loss. The correct way to hold an 
otoscope is shown in Figure 46.5.
The CNs and especially the function of the facial nerve 
should be examined. Although conversational testing can 
EXAMINATION OF THE EAR
The instruments required for examination are shown in Fig-
ure 46.4. Examination of the ear is part of the general ear, 
nose and throat (ENT) examination. Rinne and Weber tun -
ing fork tests are used to distinguish between a conductive 
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   705 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK706
emissions, caloric testing and electronystagmography (see 
Further reading).
Radiological investigation
Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the temporal bones 
is commonly performed before mastoid surgery to show 
detailed individual anatomy, as well as alerting the surgeon 
to anatomical variants. Pus, bone and air are shown well on 
high-resolution CT (Figure 46.7).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is better than CT at 
imaging soft tissue (e.g. facial and auditory nerve) and is the 
best method for imaging tumours of the acoustic nerves (Fig-
ure 46.8). Diffusion-weighted MRI is also commonly used to 
detect recurrent cholesteatoma.
CONDITIONS OF THE EXTERNAL 
EAR
Congenital anomalies
The external and middle ear originate from the first and 
second branchial arches, but the cochlea is neuroectodermal 
in origin. An individual can have a congenital abnormality 
of the pinna and middle ear with a normal cochlea and 
therefore the potential for normal hearing.
Trauma
A haematoma of the pinna occurs when blood collects under 
the perichondrium. The cartilage receives its bloo d supply 
from the perichondrial layer and will die if the haematoma 
is not evacuated, resulting in a so-called cauliflower ear. A 
generous incision under anaesthetic, with a pressure dressing 
or compressive sutures and antibiotic cover, is recommended 
(Figure 46.9).
Figure 46.6 Audiometry. The patient sits in a soundpr oof room and 
the audiologist presents sounds at different thresholds and records 
the responses.
Figure 46.7 Computed tomography scan showing a normal left ear. 
The air-filled middle ear and the incus and stapes and the lateral and 
semicircular canals and internal acoustic meatus can be seen. In the 
right ear the entire middle ear and mastoid is opaque and filled with 
soft tissue. This is the typical appearance of a cholesteatoma.
Figure 46.9 Haematoma of the pinna.
Figure 46.8  Computed tomography scan showing a vestibular 
schwannoma occluding the left internal acoustic meatus (arrow).
give a useful guide to the level of hearing, pure tone audiom -
etry in a soundproof booth is the best way of establishing the 
air and bone hearing levels (Figure 46.6). Other common 
audiological tests include speech audiometry, tympanometry, 
stapedial reflexes, electric response audiometry, otoacoustic 
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   706 25/10/2017   09:01Conditions of the ext ernal ear 707
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Inflammation and infection
Otitis externa is very common and consists of generalised 
inflammation of the skin of the external auditory meatus. The 
cause is often cotton bud use, moist enviroment, immuno-
compromise, allergies or skin disorders, such as psoriasis and 
eczema. Common pathogens are Pseudomonas and Staphylo-
coccus bacteria, Candida and Aspergillus. Once the skin of the 
ear canal becomes oedematous, skin migration stops and debris 
collects in the ear canal. This acts as a substrate for the patho-
gens. Movement of the pinna elicits pain, which distinguishes 
it from otitis media.
The initial treatment is with a topical antibiotic and ste -
roid ear drops together with analgesia. If this fails, meticulous 
removal of the debris with the aid of an operating micro-
scope is required. Fungal infection can be recognised by the 
presence of hyphae within the canal (Figure 46.11). Fungal 
infection causes irritation and itch. The treatment is meticu-
lous removal of the fungus and any debris, as well as stopping 
any concurrent antibiotics. Systemic antibiotics are rarely 
required for otitis externa but should be used if cellulitis of 
the pinna occurs (Figure 46.12).
Necrotising otitis externa is a rare but important con-
dition. It presents as a severe, persistent, unilateral otitis 
Figure 46.10 Removal of a foreign body from the ear canal can be a 
challenge (courtesy of Dr Christian Deguine).
Summary box 46.2
Trauma of the external ear
●● A haematoma of the pinna requires thorough drainage, 
antibiotics and a compressive dressing or sutures
●● Foreign bodies in the ear canal are most easily removed at the 
first attempt with the aid of a microscope
●● Batteries need to be removed urgently
Figure 46.11 Fungal otitis externa. Note the spores.
Figure 46.12 Cellulitis of the pinna.
Foreign bodies in the ear canal are most easily removed 
at the first attempt by an experienced practitioner with the 
aid of a microscope. General anaesthesia may be required in 
children and those with learning difficulties. Batteries need to 
be removed within the hour (Figure 46.10).
Summary box 46.3
Types of otitis externa
●● Acute bacterial otitis externa is very common and painful; 
treat with topical steroid and antibiotic drops
●● Systemic antibiotics should be reserved for cellulitis of the 
pinna
●● Chronic otitis externa needs the underlying dermatitis to be 
treated
●● Fungal otitis externa itches and can be diagnosed by the 
presence of hyphae and spores; treat with meticulous 
cleaning and stop antibiotics
●● Necrotising otitis externa is a progressive skull base infection 
that occurs in immunocompromised individuals and can be 
life-threatening; intensive long-term antibiotic treatment is 
required
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   707 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK708
Osteomas are true neoplasms, often singular and more lateral 
than exostosis. Other benign tumours include papillomas and 
adenomas.
Malignant primary tumours of the external ear are either 
basal cell or squamous cell carcinomas (Figure 46.14). Both 
may present as ulcerating or crusting lesions that grow slowly 
and may be ignored by elderly patients. Squamous cell carci-
nomas metastasise to the parotid and/or neck nodes. The ear 
canal may be invaded by tumours from the parotid gland and 
postnasal space carcinomas, which ‘creep’ up the Eustachian 
tube. All resectable malignant tumours of the ear are treated 
primarily with surgery, with or without the addition of radia-
tion therapy.
CONDITIONS OF THE MIDDLE 
EAR
Congenital anomalies
Aural atresia and congenital anomalies of the middle ear 
occur in 1/10  000 to 1/20  000 births and are typically uni -
lateral and nonsyndromal but may be associated with other 
branchial arch syndromes (e.g. Pierre Robin, craniofacial dys-
ostosis, Down’s and Treacher Collins syndromes).
Trauma
Trauma to the middle ear can result in a perforated tympanic 
membrane (Figure 46.15a). 90% of such perforations heal 
spontaneously with 6 weeks (Figure 46.15b). Trauma can 
also result in ossicular discontinuity and it is usually the incus 
that is displaced. Damaged ossicular chain and tympanic 
membrane are repaired by ossiculoplasty or tympanoplasty, 
respectively.
Acute otitis media
Acute otitis media (AOM) occurs in 70% of children by the 
age of 2 and 90% by the age of 6. It is characterised by puru-
lent fluid in the middle ear. The tympanic membrane bulges 
Figure 46.13 Exostoses grow from the bony part of the ear canal in 
response to cold and so ar e found in swimmers, surfers and divers. 
Treatment is only required if the exostoses occlude the ear canal.
Bartolomeu Eustachio (Eustachius) , 1513–1574, Professor of Anatomy, appointed physician to the Pope in 1547.
John Langdon Haydon Down , (sometimes given as Langdon-Brown), 1828–1896, physician, The London Hospital, London, UK, published the classification of 
ailments in 1866.
Edward Treacher Collins , 1862–1932, ophthalmic surgeon, The Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital and Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK, described this 
syndrome in 1900.
Figure 46.14 Squamous cell carcinomas of the external ear usually 
originate from the pinna. In this case the tumour is gr owing from the 
canal (courtesy of Mr P Beasley).
Summary box 46.4
Congenital anomalies and trauma of the middle ear
●● Congenital anomalies may be isolated or associated with 
general congenital deformities
●● Traumatic perforations of the tympanic membrane usually heal 
spontaneously but explosive and welding injuries do not
●● A myringoplasty is an operation that repairs the tympanic 
membrane
●● With severe head trauma the incus can be displaced, which 
leads to a conductive hearing loss
externa possibly with facial weakness in an immunocompro -
mised individual (e.g. elderly diabetic patient). Usually the 
infecting organism is Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Osteomyelitis 
of the skull base may result in lower CN palsy (VII–XII). 
Intensive systemic antibiotics are required and the disease 
process should be monitored by high-resolution imaging.
Neoplasms
Exostosis is an area of hyperostosis rather than a neoplasm 
that arises from the bone of the ear canal in individuals who 
swim in cold water (syn: ‘surfer’s ear’) (Figure 46.13). No 
treatment is required unless the exostosis obstructs the canal. 
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   708 25/10/2017   09:01Conditions of the middle ear 709
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
because of pressure from the pus in the middle ear (Figure 
46.16). The child suffers extreme pain until the tympanic 
membrane bursts. The most common infecting organisms are 
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. Treat -
ment is with analgesics and antipyretics. Systemic antibiotics 
should be reserved for children under 2 with bilateral disease 
or those with other risk factors for complications
Complications are rare, but can be categorised as: intra -
temporal – otitis media with effusion, chronic otitis media, 
mastoiditis, facial palsy and labyrinthitis; extratemporal 
extradural such as abscess; extratemporal intradural such as 
meningitis, intracranial abcess and sigmoid sinus thrombosis.
The most common complication is mastoiditis because 
the mastoid air cells connect freely with the middle ear space. 
Mastoiditis (Figure 46.17) requires hospital admission for 
intravenous antibiotics and to monitor for complications. If 
complications arise or the infection does not resolve quickly, 
a cortical mastoidectomy is required, which decompresses the 
mastoid cavity, together with a myringotomy and grommet 
insertion to ventilate the middle ear space.
Otitis media with effusion (glue ear)
Otitis media with effusion (OME) is a middle ear effusion with 
no evidence of infection. It has a bimodal incidence affecting 
40% of 2 year olds and 20% of 5 year olds mainly in the win-
ter months, suggesting an infective aetiology . Infection and 
inflammation of the immature Eustachian tube results in poor 
middle ear ventilation, negative pressure and the transuda -
tion of fluid.
The following symptoms may be associated with glue ear:
 ● hearing impairment, which often fluctuates;
 ● delayed speech;
 ● behavioural problems;
 ● recurrent ear infections (the exudate is an ideal culture 
medium for microorganisms);
 ● reading and learning difficulties at school.
Figure 46.15 (a) Traumatically perforated tympanic membrane. (b) 
The same tympanic membrane 2 days later (courtesy of Dr Christian 
Deguine). (Reproduced from O’Donoghue GM, Bates GJ, Narula A 
(1991) Clinical ENT, with permission from Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.)
(a)
(b)
 Figure 46.16 Acute otitis media of the left ear. Note the bulging tym-
panic membrane.
Figure 46.17 Child with acute mastoiditis whose tympanic mem -
brane is shown in Figure 46.16.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   709 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK710
Otoscopic findings with glue ear
The otoscopic findings of exudative glue ear are of a dull 
drum that is immobile on pneumatic otoscopy. The tympanic 
membrane is retracted and radial blood vessels may be present 
(Figure 46.18).
Figure 46.18 The initial serous transudate of glue ear, left ear (cour-
tesy of Dr Christian Deguine). (Reproduced fr om O’Donoghue GM, 
Bates GJ, Narula A (1991) Clinical ENT, with permission from Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.)
Figure 46.19 Otovent® device.
In children first presenting with bilateral glue ear, 50% 
will be better within 12 weeks, therefore a ‘wait and watch’ 
policy is appropriate. If a bilateral conductive hearing loss 
persists, there is some evidence of reduced IQ and behaviour 
changes. However, speech delays are reversed by age 8.
Medical treatment is of limited value. Valsalva manouvres 
and the Otovent ® device (Figure 46.19 ) are worth trying 
for patients old enough to comply in an attempt to improve 
Eustachian tube function. Surgical insertion of ventilation 
tubes (grommets) (Figure 46.20) and adenoidectomy are 
effective and should be discussed if there is no resolution after 
a period of watchful waiting. A middle ear effusion in adults 
is often associated with an upper respiratory tract infection. A 
persistent unilateral effusion in an adult requires examination 
of the postnasal space to exclude obstructive nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma, which is the most common carcinoma in men in 
southern China.
Summary box 46.5
Acute otitis media and otitis media with effusion
●● Acute otitis media is very common but rarely associated with 
severe complications such as mastoiditis
●● OME is very common in children and usually resolves without 
treatment
●● Persistent OME and/or recurrent AOM is best treated with 
grommets and/or adenoidectomy
●● A persistent middle ear effusion in an adult may be caused by 
a cancer of the postnasal space, especially in Chinese and 
Asian races
Figure 46.20 Ventilation tube in tympanic membrane, left ear (cour-
tesy of Dr Christian Deguine).
Chronic otitis media
Chronic otitis media (COM) is a permenant abnormality of 
the tympanic membrane from previous recurrent AOM and/
or OME. It is classified as active (i.e. inflamation and pus pres-
ent) or inactive. Active and passive are then further subclassi-
fied as mucosal or squamous (Figure 46.21)
Active mucosal COM implies a perforation with otor -
rheoa (ear discharge) due to inflamed middle ear mucosa with 
or without granulation tissue. Inactive mucosal COM implies 
a dry perforation without inflamation. Surgery in the form 
Chronic otitis
media
Active Inactive
Mucosal:
discharging
perforation
Squamous:
cholesteatoma
Mucosal:
dry
perforation
Squamous:
retraction/
atelectasis
Figure 46.21 Classification of chronic otitis media.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   710 25/10/2017   09:01Conditions of the middle ear 711
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
of tympanoplasty (repair of the perforation) is indicated in 
patients getting recurrent infection (to reduce symptoms of 
otorrheoa and prevent further deterioration of the hearing 
due to the ototoxic effects of infection) and where there is 
a likelyhood that it will restore hearing in the operated ear 
to 30 dB or better or to within 15  dB of the contralateral ear 
(this is known as the Belfast rule of thumb).
Active squamous COM is otherwise known as cholestea-
toma and usually presents with persistent otorrheoa and hear-
ing loss as a result of keratinising squamous epithelium within 
the middle ear. The cholesteatoma matrix destroys the struc-
tures in its path through the release of lytic enzymes, inflam -
matory mediators and pressure necrosis. If left, there is a risk of 
all the complications attributable to AOM. The lifetime risk 
of intracerebral abscess is 1/200 in a 30-year-old patient. The 
recommended treatment is mastoid surgery using a drill under 
microscopic or endoscopic guidence to access and remove the 
cholesteatoma. Often the ossicles are involved or eroded so 
an ossiculoplasty (to restore hearing by reconstructing the 
ossicular chain) is performed at the same time.
Otosclerosis
This is an autosomal dominant condition of variable pene-
trance in which excess bone is laid down around the footplate 
of the stapes, impeding mobility of the stapes and resulting in 
a conductive hearing loss (Figure 46.22). A diagnosis should 
be suspected in any patient with a conductive hearing loss 
and a normal tympanic membrane.
The treatment options are simple reassurance, a convet -
ional hearing aid, a stapedotomy operation or bone conduc -
tion hearing aid (Figure 46.23).
Neoplasms
Middle ear tumours are rare with the most common being a 
glomus tumour (Figure 46.24). Glomus tumours arise from 
nonchromaffin paraganglionic tissue. The carotid body tumour 
arising in the neck is an example of this type of tumour. In the 
temporal bone, three types of glomus tumour are recognised 
and classification depends on the location: glomus tympani -
cum (arising in the middle ear), glomus jugularae (arising next 
to the jugular bulb) and glomus vagale (skull base).
Symptoms include pulse synchronous tinnitus, conduc -
tive and sensorineural hearing loss, and lower cranial nerve 
palsies. Palsies of CNs VII, IX, X, XI and/or XII may occur. 
The classic sign is a cherry-red mass lying behind the tym -
panic membrane. The treatment of choice is preoperative 
embolisation followed by surgical excision. Radiotherapy is 
also effective.
Squamous cell carcinoma may also occur within the mid-
dle ear. It usually presents with deep-seated pain and a blood-
stained discharge. Facial paralysis often occurs. Squamous 
carcinomas usually arise in a chronically discharging ear and 
can arise in a chronically infected mastoid cavity. Radical sur-
gical excision with or without radiotherapy provides the only 
chance of cure.
Figure 46.22 Section of normal stapes (a) and section of stapes 
affected by otosclerosis (b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 46.23 The stapedotomy operation showing the piston linking 
the incus to the vein graft, left ear.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   711 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK712
loss, early intervention with a cochlear implant is essential for 
the development of the auditory cortex (Figure 46.26). Most 
cases of profound sensorineural hearing loss are due to loss of 
cochlear hair cells, so an implant inserted through the round 
window can selectively stimulate the cochlear neurones, 
which usually remain intact.
Presbycusis
Presbycusis is characterised by a gradual loss of hearing in 
both ears, with or without tinnitus. The hearing loss usually 
affects the higher frequencies and a classical audiogram is 
shown in Figure 46.27. The consonants of speech lie within 
the high-frequency range, which makes speech discrimina -
tion difficult.
Many patients with presbycusis are concerned that they 
may lose their hearing completely and they need reassurance. 
Figure 46.24 Glomus tumour in the middle ear, left ear.
Summary box 46.6
Neoplasms of the middle ear
●● Highly vascular glomus tumours are rare and may present 
with pulsatile tinnitus
●● Squamous cell cancer usually presents with pain and facial 
paralysis
Charles Howard Usher , 1865–1942, ophthalmologist Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK.
Vaughan Pendred , 1869–1946, general practitioner, Durham, UK.
Anton Jervell , 1901–1987, physician, University of Oslo, Norway.
Fred Lange-Nielsen , 1919–1989, physician and jazz musician, Oslo, Norway.
Petrus Johannes Waardenburg , 1886–1979, ophthalmologist, Utrecht, Nederlands.
Arthur Cecil Alport , 1880–1959, Professor of Medicine, King Faud I Hospital, University of Cairo, Egypt.
Gunnar B Stickler , 1925–2010, paediatrician, Mayo Clinic, USA.
CONDITIONS OF THE INNER EAR
Congenital sensorineural hearing 
loss
Half of congenital sensorineural hearing loss is genetic and half 
is aquired. Of the genetic hearing loss 75% is non-syndromic, 
of which the most common is a connexin 26 gene muta-
tion. Syndromic causes include Usher, Pendred, Jervell and 
Lange-Nielsen, Waardenberg, Treacher Collins, Alport, Stickler 
neurofibromatosis type 2 and branchio-oto-renal syndromes.
Aquired causes are intrauterine infections, including 
rubella, toxoplasmosis and cytomegalovirus infection; perina-
tal hypoxia, jaundice and prematurity; and postnatal menin-
gitis
All newborn babies in the UK are now screened at birth 
for deafness by measuring otoacoustic emisions in response 
to ‘clicks’ in the ear. Children failing this are referred for 
auditory brainstem response to establish hearing thresholds 
(Figure 46.25). If some hearing is present, the early fitment 
of hearing aids can maximise the neural plasticity that is pres-
ent in the developing brain. If a child has a profound hearing 
Figure 46.25 Evoked-response audiometry. A simple non-invasive 
objective test of hearing thresholds. (Repr oduced from O’Donoghue 
GM, Bates GJ, Narula A (1991) Clinical ENT, with permission from 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.)
Figure 46.26 Multichannel cochlear implant (Cochlear Corporation).
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   712 25/10/2017   09:01Conditions of the inner ear 713
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Hearing aid technology has improved dramatically over recent 
years and most patients can derive benefit (Figure 46.28).
Tinnitus
Tinnitus is the perception of sound when no external sound 
source is present. It may have an extrinsic cause; for example, 
the pulsatile tinnitus of a glomus tumour. Usually, however, 
the tinnitus is generated within the internal auditory pathway. 
Thirty per cent of people will experience tinnitus at some time 
in their lives. Tinnitus frequently accompanies presbycusis, as 
well as any other condition that affects hearing. Most individ-
uals habituate to the presence of tinnitus but in some patients 
it proves intrusive. Treatment is with reassurance, masking and 
hearing aids (for patients with hearing loss).
Sudden sensorineural hearing loss
Defined as >30 dB sensorineural hearing loss at 3 frequen -
cies within 3 days. History and examination should focus on 
a cause, which may be infective, neoplastic, traumatic, oto-
toxic, neurological or autoimmune. Investigations such as 
MRI are important (1% of acoustic neuromas present as sud -
den sensorineural hearing loss) but screening blood tests are 
of low yield where there is nothing in the history to suggest 
a cause. Sixty per cent are idiopathic and the recommended 
treatment is oral +/- intratympanic steroids with salvage 
intratympanic steroids for those that do not recover after a 
month.
Trauma
Noise exposure
Hair cells within the cochlea are damaged by sudden acous -
tic trauma (blast injury or gunfire) or prolonged exposure to 
excessive noise. The sensorineural hearing loss that results 
is greatest between 3 and 6 KHz and is often accompanied 
by tinnitus (Figure 46.29). The law in the UK requires that 
workers are protected from noise
Head injury
The otic capsule is the hardest bone in the body but, if trauma 
to the head is severe, temporal bone fractures may occur . 
These are traditionally described as either longitudinal (80%) 
or transverse (20%); however, the majority have longitudinal 
and transverse components. Longitudinal fractures may lead 
to fracture of the external auditory canal, conductive hearing 
loss and CSF otorrhoea. Transverse fractures may involve the 
–20
–0
Frequency (Hz)
Pure-tone audiometry
Hearing level (dB ISO)
125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 6000
0
10
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
20
(a)
–20
–0
Frequency (Hz)
Pure-tone audiometry
Hearing level (dB ISO)
125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 6000
0
10
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
20 X X
X
X
X
X
(b)
Figure 46.27 Typical audiogram of presbycusis: (a) right ear; (b) left ear.
Figure 46.28 Modern hearing aid.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   713 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK714
facial nerve leading to palsy and labyrinth leading to a sen -
sorineural hearing loss that is permanent. Profound vertigo 
occurs initially, followed by gradual compensation.
Drug ototoxicity
Antibiotics such as aminoglycosides, vancomycin and eryth-
romycin, loop diuretics such as frusemide, chemotherapy 
agents such as cisplatin and carboplatin, and salicylates such 
as aspirin and quinine are all ototoxic. Recognition of risk 
factors, such as poor renal function in patients being treated 
with aminoglycosides, is therefore important. Although many 
topical ear drops contain aminoglycosides, there is little 
 evidence that short periods of topical treatment cause senso -
rineural hearing loss
Balance disorders
Vertigo is the halucination of movement.
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is the most 
common form of vertigo. It is caused by otoliths (calcium 
carbonate crystals) within the posterior semicircular canal 
abnormally triggering the ampullary hair cells. Typically, the 
vertigo is triggered by turning, only lasts for a few seconds and 
is not associated with other otological symptoms. A positive 
Hallpike test confirms the diagnosis. The condition is usu -
ally self-limiting but recovery may be expediated by an Epley 
manoeuvre.
Vestibular neuronitis
Infection or inflamation of the supererior vestibular nerve, 
often caused by a upper respiratory or chest infection, results 
in persistent vertigo lasting a few days. If the hearing is also 
affected, this is known as labrinthitis. Treatment is supportive 
with vestibular sedatives such as prochlorperazine in the first 
week followed by early mobilisation. There is emerging evi -
dence for systemic steroids as well.
Menière’s disease
It has been said that not only can clinicians not agree on the 
cause of Menières disease, they cannot even agree on the spell-
ing. There is certainly evidence of endolymphatic hydrops 
(long-standing high pressure changes within the inner ear) in 
pathological specimens of patients who have had the condi -
tion. The condition is characterised by a triad of symptoms: 
intermittent attacks of vertigo, a unilateral fluctuating sen -
sorineural hearing loss and tinnitus. The patient often has a 
sensation of pressure in the affected ear before an attack. The 
hearing loss typically affects the lower frequencies. The ver -
tigo characteristically lasts between 30 minutes and 6 hours 
and is often accompanied by nausea and vomiting. The inves-
tigations include pure tone audiometry and an MRI scan to 
exclude an acoustic neuroma. The only evidence-based treat-
ment is intratympanic therapy whereby repeated injections of 
dexamethasone or gentamicin are given into the middle ear. 
Traditional medical treatment starts with a low salt diet, beta-
histadine and diuretics, but this is not evidence based
Charles Skinner Hallpike , 1900–1979, aural surgeon, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK.
John W Epley , contemporary, Director, Portland Otology Clinic, Portland, Oregon, USA, established his clinic in 1975; he developed the Epley manoeuvre for 
treating benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).
Prosper Menière , 1799–1862, physician, The Institute of Deaf Mutes, Paris, France, described this condition in 1861.
–20
–0
Frequency (Hz)
Pure-tone audiometry
Hearing level (dB ISO)
125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 6000
0
10
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
20
X
X
X X
X
X
(b)
–20
–0
Frequency (Hz)
Pure-tone audiometry
Hearing level (dB ISO)
125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 6000
0
10
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
20
(a)
Figure 46.29 A typical audiogram of noise damage: (a) right ear; (b) left ear.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   714 25/10/2017   09:01Conditions of the inner ear 715
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Vestibular migraine
Five times more prevalent than Menière’s disease, this condi-
tion presents with similar symptoms but without the  hearing 
loss or tinnitus. It is thought that the migrainous process 
affects the labyrinth and therfore treatment is along the lines 
of migraine management, with attention paid to risk factors 
such as dietary triggers, and prophlatic medication such 
as propranolol, tricyclic antidepressants and antiepileptic 
medication.
Facial paralysis
Seventy-five per cent of all facial palsies are due to Bell’s palsy. 
This probably results from a herpes simplex viral infection of 
the facial nerve. The nerve swells and is compressed within 
the temporal bone. Early treatment with high-dose steroids 
and eye protection is mandatory. Not all facial nerve palsies 
are due to viral infection and a thorough otoneurological 
examination is required. The facial nerve can be damaged 
at the cerebellopontine angle, within the internal auditory 
meatus, within the middle ear, at the skull base and within 
the parotid gland. It is essential to consider these potential 
sites of facial nerve damage in any patient with CN VII para-
lysis and perform an MRI scan if appropriate.
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
This is caused by herpes zoster virus and is characterised by 
facial paralysis, pain and the appearance of vesicles on the 
tympanic membrane, ear canal, pinna or inside of the cheek 
(Figure 46.30). It ay be accompanied by vertigo and senso -
rineural hearing loss (CN VIII). Treatment with aciclovir is 
effective if given early.
Neoplasms
These are uncommon but can present with sensorineural hear-
ing loss, tinnitus and vertigo. Acoustic neuromas, which are 
actually schwannomas of the vestibular division of CN VIII, 
are the most common, followed by meningiomas. Acoustic 
Sir Charles Bell , 1774–1842, surgeon, The Middlesex Hospital, London, UK, and from 1835 until his death, Professor of Surgery, The University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK
James Ramsay Hunt , 1874–1937, Professor of Neurology, The Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeon, New York, USA.
Figure 46.30 Herpes zoster infection of cranial nerve (CN) VII (a) and CN VIII (b) with vesicles on the pinna.
(a)
 (b)
Summary box 46.7
Facial paralysis
●● The facial nerve passes through the middle ear and mastoid
●● When considering a paralysis, think ‘complete’ or ‘partial’
●● Protect the eye: carry out a full otoneurological examination to 
find the cause
●● If acute, consider steroids
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   715 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK716
neuromas grow slowly and somewhat unpredictably and as 
they expand can cause CN palsies, brainstem  compression 
and raised intracranial pressure. The early symptoms are a 
unilateral sensorineural hearing loss or unilateral tinnitus, 
or both. Therefore, it is essential to perform an MRI on all 
patients with persistent unilateral sensorineural hearing loss 
or tinnitus. Relatively asymptomatic acoustic neuromas that 
are less than 2  cm in diameter and growing less than 2  mm a 
year (70%) are generally treated with a ‘watch, wait and res -
can’ policy or occasionally stereotactic radiotherapy. Tumour 
volumes greater than 2  cm in diameter are often best treated 
by skull base surgery in the form of a translabyrinthine, retro-
labyrinthine or middle fossa approach.
Summary box 46.8
Conditions of the inner ear
●● Presbycusis is the bilateral high-frequency loss associated 
with ageing
●● Unilateral tinnitus or sensorineural hearing loss needs to be 
investigated to exclude acoustic neuroma
●● Sudden sensorineural hearing loss needs immediate 
treatment with steroids and routine MRI to exclude acoustic 
neuroma
●● Menière’s disease presents with the triad of sensorineural 
hearing loss, tinnitus and vertigo
THE NOSE AND SINUSES
BASIC ANATOMY OF THE NOSE 
AND PARANASAL SINUSES
The supporting structures of the nose are shown in Figure 
46.31. The septum consists of the anterior quadrilateral car -
tilage, the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid and the vomer 
(Figure 46.32). The lateral wall of the nasal cavity contains 
the superior, middle and inferior turbinates, which warm and 
moisten nasal airflow (Figure 46.33). There are paired fron -
tal, sphenoid, maxillary and anterior and posterior ethmoid 
sinuses. The anterior nasal sinuses (frontal, maxillary and 
anterior ethmoid) drain into the middle meatus (between the 
middle turbinate and lateral wall of nose). The posterior eth-
moid and sphenoid sinuses drain into the superior meatus and 
sphenoethmoidal recess (between the superior turbinate and 
nasal septum), respectively (Figures 46.34 and 46.35).
Glabella
Nasal bone
Upper lateral
cartilage
Orbit
Frontal process
of maxilla
Lower lateral cartilage
Fibroareolar tissue
Figure 46.31 The nasal skeleton.
Frontal sinus
Perpendicular
plate of ethmoid
Septal cartilage
Anterior nasal spine
Sphenoid sinus
Vomer
Palatine bone
Figure 46.32 The left side of the nasal septum.
Superior turbinateMiddle turbinate
Inferior turbinate
Figure 46.33 The right lateral nasal wall.
Frontal sinus
Frontal recess
Maxillary ostium
Nasolacrimal
duct opening
B
A
SM
MM
IMC
Sphenoid sinus
Sphenoid
ostium
Openings of
posterior
ethmoid cells
Openings of
anterior
ethmoid cells
Figure 46.34 The right lateral nasal wall with turbinates removed to 
show the sinus ostia. A, insertion of superior turbinate; B, insertion of 
middle turbinate; C, insertion of inferior turbinate; IM, inferior meatus; 
MM, middle meatus; SM, superior meatus.
Superior turbinate
Superior meatus
Middle turbinate
Middle meatus
Inferior turbinate
Inferior meatus
Orbit
Ethmoid sinus
Maxillary antrum
Maxillary ostium
Figure 46.35 Coronal section through the left maxillary and ethmoid 
sinuses.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   716 25/10/2017   09:01Trauma to the nose and paranasal sinuses 717
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
The nasal fossae and sinuses receive their blood supply 
via the external and internal carotid arteries. The external 
carotid artery supplies the interior of the nose via the maxil-
lary and sphenopalatine arteries. The greater palatine artery 
supplies the anteroinferior septum via the incisive canal. The 
contribution from the internal carotid artery is via the ante -
rior and posterior ethmoidal arteries, which are branches of 
the ophthalmic artery (Figure 46.36). All of these arteries 
anastomose to form a plexus of vessels (Kiesselbach’s plexus) 
on the anterior part of the nasal septum. Venous drainage is 
via the ophthalmic and facial veins and the pterygoid and 
pharyngeal plexuses. Intracranial drainage into the cavernous 
sinus via the ophthalmic vein is of particular clinical impor -
tance because of the potential for intracranial spread of nasal 
sepsis.
TRAUMA TO THE NOSE AND 
PARANASAL SINUSES
Fracture of the nasal bones
Blunt injury to the nose may fracture the nasal bones (Fig-
ure 46.37). The fracture line can extend into the lacrimal 
bone and tear the anterior ethmoidal artery, producing cata-
strophic haemorrhage. This may be delayed, occurring only 
as the soft-tissue swelling subsides, reducing the tamponade 
effect on the torn vessel.
Violent trauma to the frontal area of the nose can result 
in a fracture of the frontal and ethmoid sinuses with poten -
tial extension into the anterior cranial fossa. Dural tears and 
brain injuries, either open or closed, are then at risk from sino- 
nasal ascending infection, which may progress to meningitis 
or brain abscess. CSF rhinorrhoea is a certain sign of a dural 
tear. CSF rhinorrhoea can be confirmed by collecting a sample 
of the fluid and sending for beta-2 transferrin. A bony defect 
in the anterior skull base following trauma can be identified 
on high-resolution CT. The CSF leak will often settle with 
conservative management but if persistent, can be repaired 
endoscopically.
Management of fractured nasal bones
Fractured nasal bones are normally accompanied by exten -
sive overlying soft-tissue swelling and bruising, which may 
hinder the assessment of any underlying bony deformity. 
Reviewing after 4–5 days when the soft-tissue swelling has 
diminished will allow a better assessment of any deformity. If 
there is a significant degree of nasal deformity, then this can 
be corrected by manipulation of the nasal bones under local 
or general anaesthesia. This should be carried out within 3 
weeks of the injury while the bony fragments are still mobile. 
After this period, if there is significant cosmetic or functional 
issues, a septorhinoplasty can be performed at least 6 months 
following the injury.
Wilhelm Kiesselbach , 1839–1902, Professor of Otology, Erlangen, Germany.
Johann Ludwig Wilhelm Thudichum , 1829–1901, biochemist and general practitioner, London, UK.
EXAMINATION OF THE NOSE 
AND PARANASAL SINUSES
Internal inspection of the nasal fossae can be achieved to a 
limited extent with the use of a Thudichum’s speculum. The 
anterior nasal septum, nasal vestibule and anterior inferior 
turbinate can be assessed. A more detailed examination of the 
nose is possible with the use of either rigid or flexible endo -
scopes.
IMAGING OF PARANASAL 
SINUSES
Plain radiographs are of limited value in the assessment of 
sinus disease. CT is far superior in demonstrating sinus 
pathology and to assess bony anatomy to plan any surgical 
intervention. CT scans are acquired and reconstructed to pro-
duce images in axial, coronal and sagittal planes. The three 
planes allow the drainage of the frontal sinus to be identified 
and important surgical landmarks can be reviewed preop -
eratively, including the cribiform plate, anterior skull base, 
lamina papyracea and location of the anterior ethmoid artery. 
MRI is useful in sinus pathology to assess any intracranial or 
orbital extension of disease.
Kiesselbach’s
plexus
Facial artery
Anterior
ethmoidal
artery
Posterior
ethmoidal
artery
Sphenopalatine
artery
Greater palatine
artery
Figure 46.36  Arterial blood supply to the left side of the nasal 
septum.
Figure 46.37 Fracture of the nasal bones with displacement of the 
bony nasal complex to the right side.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   717 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK718
THE NASAL SEPTUM
Septal deformity
Deviation of the nasal septum may occur naturally or arise as a 
result of nasal trauma and is readily apparent on anterior rhi-
noscopy (Figure 46.38). Surgical correction can be achieved 
by a submucous resection (SMR) of the septum where the 
deformed septal cartilage is excised while preserving a caudal 
and dorsal strut for support (Figure 46.39). The alternative 
is a septoplasty procedure during which the septal cartilage is 
preserved but the anatomical abnormalities giving rise to its 
deformity, such as a twisted maxillary crest or inclination of 
the bony septum posteriorly, are corrected.
Complications of septal surgery include septal perforation. 
If too much cartilage is excised in the SMR procedure, loss 
of support to the dorsum of the nose may result in a supra-tip 
depression or drooping of the tip of the nose.
Summary box 46.9
Nasal trauma
●● Do not overlook a septal haematoma
●● Displaced nasal bone fractures should be reduced within 3 
weeks of injury
●● Severe persistent epistaxis after trauma suggests lacrimal 
bone fracture and injury to the anterior ethmoid artery
●● CSF rhinorrhoea indicates a fracture involving the anterior 
skull base with a dural tear
Deviated septum
Narrow airway
Contralateral
inferior turbinate
hypertrophy
Figure 46.38 Coronal section through the anterior nasal fossae with 
deviated nasal septum to the right side.
Nasal bone
Frontal sinus
Perpendicular
plate ethmoid
Vomer
Palatine bone
Caudal strut
Dorsal strut
Septal cartilage
that can be
excised in SMR
Figure 46.39 Area of cartilage that can be r emoved in submucous 
resection (SMR) leaving dorsal and caudal strut for support.
Septal injury
A blunt injury of moderate force may lead to lateral displace-
ment or deformity of the septal cartilage, restricting the nasal 
airway. Unlike the nasal bones the nasal septum cannot be 
manipulated back into position and requires a formal septo -
plasty procedure to restore the anatomy and the patency of 
the nasal airways.
Bleeding under the mucoperichondrium of the septum will 
cause a septal haematoma and nasal obstruction. Untreated, 
a septal haematoma will progress to abscess formation and 
ultimately result in necrosis of the septal cartilage, septal per-
foration and nasal collapse. A septal haematoma should be 
treated by incision and drainage of the blood clot, insertion 
of a small silicone drain and packing of the nasal fossa. A 
broad-spectrum prophylactic antibiotic should be prescribed. Summary box 46.10
Causes of septal perforations
●● Trauma
Iatrogenic following septal surgery
Nose picking
Following a septal haematoma from nasal injury
●● Infection
Syphilis
Tuberculosis
●● Vasculitis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
●● Tumours
●● Toxins
Chrome salts
Cocaine
●● Idiopathic
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 46.09Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Septal
prosthesis
Septal
perforation
Figure 46.40  Anterior and lateral views of septal perforation 
occluded with prosthesis.
Septal perforation
A hole in the nasal septum causes a turbulent airflow through 
the nose and a resulting sensation of nasal blockage, extensive 
nasal crusting, bleeding and whistling. The causes of septal 
perforation are listed in Summary box 46.10.
Septal perforations seldom heal spontaneously. A great 
variety of operations have been described to close septal per -
forations but none has met with universal success. These have 
included closing the perforation using cartilage or synthetic 
material and covering with local flaps. Alternatively, the 
perforation may be occluded by inserting a Silastic biflanged 
prosthesis or ‘septal button’ (Figures 46.40 and 46.41). 
In some cases, particularly those patients with significant 
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   718 25/10/2017   09:01Epistaxis 719
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
identified using rigid nasendoscopy and controlled with the 
use of a topical vasoconstrictor, and then dealt with directly 
using electrocautery. However, posterior bleeding, as seen in 
the elderly, may require anterior nasal packing either with 
whistling and bleeding from the posterior edge, the perfora -
tion can be enlarged and mucosa folded around the posterior 
edge to stabilise it.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a systemic idiopathic 
autoimmune disease affecting the nose, lungs and kidneys. 
Mucosal granulations on the nasal septum destroy cartilage, 
producing a septal perforation with saddle deformity of the 
nose. Laboratory findings include a high erythrocyte sedimen-
tation rate, impaired creatinine clearance and antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA) in most cases.
EPISTAXIS
The causes of epistaxis are listed in Table 46.2. The most com-
mon site of bleeding is from Kiesselbach’s plexus in Little’s 
area of the anterior portion of the septum (see Figure 46.36). 
Anterior bleeding is common in children and young adults as 
a result of nose blowing or picking. In the elderly, anticoag-
ulants and hypertension are the underlying causes of arterial 
bleeding from the posterior part of the nose.
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (Osler’s disease) 
gives rise to recurrent multifocal bleeding from thin-walled 
vessels deficient in muscle and elastic tissue (Figure 46.42).
Juvenile angiofibroma is an uncommon condition 
that affects adolescent boys and may lead to massive life-  
threatening episodes of bleeding. Diagnosis is made with 
contrast CT or MRI. Anterior bowing or indentation of the 
posterior antral wall (Holman–Miller or antral sign) is the 
 classical finding, but may be seen in other expansive lesions 
in this area. It is a very vascular tumour, which should not be 
biopsied because of the risk of uncontrollable haemorrhage. 
Excision is best carried out by an experienced surgeon and is 
usually performed endoscopically often using image guidance 
(Figure 46.43). Preoperative embolisation of the feeding 
blood vessels may help to reduce blood loss during surgery.
Management of epistaxis
Anterior bleeding from Kiesselbach’s plexus may be con -
trolled by silver nitrate cautery under local anaesthesia. Even 
in more posterior epistaxis, the bleeding point can often be 
James Laurence Little , 1836–1885, Professor of Surgery, The University of Vermont, Montpelier, VT, USA.
Erik Adolf von Willebrand , 1870–1949, physician, Diakonissanstaltens Hospital, Helsinki, (Helsingfors), Finland, described hereditary pseudohaemophilia in 
1926.
Sir William Osler , 1849–1919, Professor of Medicine successively at McGill University, Montreal, Canada, The University of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA, and 
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, finally becoming Regius Professor of Medicine at Oxford University, Oxford, UK, in 1904.
Figure 46.41 Silastic prosthesis for septal perforation.
TABLE 46.2 Causes of epistaxis.
Local Nose picking
Nasal trauma
Nasal foreign bodies
Tumours
Infection
Granulomatous disorders
Juvenile angiofibroma
Systemic Hypertension
Warfarin therapy
New anticoaglants (rivaroxaban)
Aspirin, clopidogrel therapy
Haemophilia
von Willebrand’s disease
Leukaemia
Haemorrhagic telangiectasia
Figure 46.42 Osler’s disease showing multiple telangiectasia.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   719 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK720
Vaseline-impregnated ribbon gauze or a non-absorbable 
sponge. There are also many haemostatic, absorbable materi-
als that can be used to pack the nose to help control bleeding. 
An alternative to anterior packing is the use of an inflatable 
epistaxis balloon catheter (Figure 46.44). The catheter 
is passed into the nose and the distal balloon is inflated in 
the nasopharynx to secure it. The proximal balloon, which 
is sausage shaped, is then inflated within the nasal fossa to 
compress the bleeding point. Although usually effective, they 
can be uncomfortable.
Postnasal packing may be required in refractory cases 
whereby a gauze pack is positioned in the nasopharynx under 
general anaesthesia. Endoscopic sphenopalatine artery clip -
ping is an effective treatment for significant epistaxis not 
responding to direct cautery or nasal packing.
For uncontrolled life-threatening epistaxis in which the 
above methods have proved ineffective, haemostasis is secured 
by vascular ligation. Depending on the origin of bleeding it 
may be necessary to ligate the internal maxillary artery in the 
pterygopalatine fossa (which can be accessed endoscopically) 
and the anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries. An alter -
native measure is external carotid artery ligation above the 
origin of the lingual artery. Another option is to involve the 
interventional radiologist for possible embolisation. It is also 
important to recognise, and if possible treat, any factors 
contributing to the epistaxis, such as clotting or platelet 
abnormalities.
In Osler’s disease, anterior nasal packing is best avoided 
if at all possible because it is most likely to lead to further 
mucosal trauma and bleeding. High-dose oestrogen induces 
squamous metaplasia of the nasal mucosa and has been used 
effectively in treating this condition.
Figure 46.43 Endoscopic resection of juvenile angiofibroma using 
image-guidance (merged computed tomography and magnetic 
resonance imaging scans).
Figure 46.44 Epistaxis balloon catheter.
Summary box 46.11
Epistaxis
●● The most common causes are nose picking, hypertension and 
anticoagulant therapy
●● Young people bleed from the anterior septum – Kiesselbach’s 
plexus
●● Elderly people bleed from the posterior part of the nose
●● Epistaxis is ideally treated with direct cautery to bleeding 
point under endoscopic guidance
●● Silver nitrate cautery can be used to control anterior bleeding
●● Moderate bleeding may require anterior nasal packing
●● Severe bleeding may require anterior and posterior nasal 
packing
●● Persistent bleeding may require endoscopic sphenopalatine 
artery ligation
RHINOSINUSITIS
Rhinosinusitis is inflammation of the sinonasal mucosa and is 
defined as the presence of nasal congestion or nasal discharge 
and at least one of facial pain or hyposmia with endoscopic 
and/or CT changes to confirm the diagnosis. It can be divided 
into acute rhinosinusitis (ARS) and chronic rhinosinusitis 
(CRS) depending on the timing of symptoms. Symptoms 
are present for less than 12 weeks in ARS and more than 
12 weeks in CRS.
Acute rhinosinusitis
ARS is thought to result from bacterial superinfection of 
virally damaged mucosa. The commonest bacteria involved 
are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae and 
Moraxella catarrhalis. Upper dental sepsis may also predispose 
to acute maxillary sinusitis. Patients with maxillary sinusitis 
have a mucopurulent discharge, facial pain and nasal obstruc-
tion. Irritation of the superior alveolar nerve may give rise 
to referred upper toothache. In ARS nasendoscopy reveals 
inflammed and swollen nasal mucosa with mucopurulent 
secretions in the middle meatus. Dental sepsis from anaerobic 
organisms causes around 10% of cases of maxillary sinusitis. 
The resultant mucopurulent nasal secretion has a foul taste 
and smell. Plain sinus radiographs may show a fluid level in 
the antrum or complete opacity (Figure 46.45). However, 
plain radiographs are now seldom used and have been super -
ceded by CT scans to investigate ARS. CT scans confirm 
opacifiction and mucosal thickening of the maxillary sinus as 
well as providing anatomical detail prior to endoscopic surgi-
cal intervention (Figure 46.46).
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   720 25/10/2017   09:01Rhinosinusitis 721
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
prolonged. Topical nasal decongestants, such as ephedrine 
nasal drops, will often encourage the sinus to drain and top -
ical corticosteroids are used to reduce inflammation. Saline 
douches can also be beneficial.
Antral lavage under local or general anaesthesia was pre-
viously used to confirm the diagnosis and provided the oppor-
tunity to obtain samples for bacteriology. Nowadays, pus in 
the middle meatus can simply be sampled endoscopically in 
clinic and antral lavage is rarely performed. Endoscopic sinus 
surgery allows a more functional approach to diseases of the 
paranasal sinuses and enables the drainage pathways of the 
paranasal sinuses to be opened. Most cases of ARS can be 
treated conservatively with antibiotics and topical treatment. 
Surgery is used for those patients unresponsive to medical 
management or with complications. The majority of patients 
with ARS who require surgery are treated endoscopically. 
However, in some cases an open surgical approach may be 
necessary.
Complications
Complications as a result of ARS include orbital and intra -
cranial problems. The spread of infection from the sinuses 
occurs either through diploic veins or directly through 
bone erosion. This can result in epidural, subdural or cere -
bral abscesses, or meningitis/encephalitis. Cavernous sinus 
thrombosis may also result and can present with bilateral 
ptosis, proptosis, retro-ocular pain, opthalmoplegia, papil -
loedema and spiking fevers.
Orbital complications of ARS are more common. Most 
often this is related to ethmoid sinus infection (Figure 
46.47). An opthalmology review is essential due to the threat 
to vision and IV antibiotics covering aerobic and anaero-
bic organisms are used. If there are any concerns regarding 
the eye, including proptosis, chemosis, opthalmoplegia, 
or reduced visual acuity, then CT with contrast is required 
Frontal sinus
Air//f_luid
level
Infraorbital
rim
Infraorbital
foramen
Figure 46.45  Plain radiograph showing the fluid level in the left 
maxillary antrum and total opacity of the right antrum.
Acute frontoethmoidal sinusitis can also occur and pres -
ents with mucopurulent discharge, facial pain (including 
frontal headache), nasal congestion and hyposmia. Again, 
mucopus is seen on endoscopy in the middle meatus and is 
investigated with CT.
Treatment
Penetration of antibiotics into chronically inflamed sinus 
mucosa is reduced and, therefore, treatment may need to be 
Summary box 46.12
Acute rhinosinusitis
●● The most common causative organisms are Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella cattarhalis
●● Anaerobic infection of the maxillary sinus may result from 
dental sepsis
●● Acute infection should be treated with antibiotics, topical 
decongestants and corticosteroids
●● Endoscopic sinus surgery may be required
Figure 46.46  Coronal computed tomography scan showing left-
sided maxillary sinus opacification due to maxillary sinusitis.
Summary box 46.13
Complications
●● Orbital – cellullitis, abscess
●● Orbital infections may threaten sight
●● Intracranial spread may cause meningitis, cerebral abscess or 
cavernous sinus thrombosis
●● Osteomyelitis of the bones, particularly frontal, may occur
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   721 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK722
 (Figure 46.48). If an abscess is identified, then this should be 
drained (endoscopically or open).
Osteomyelitis of the frontal bones can also occur as a result 
of ARS. If the anterior table of the frontal sinus is involved, 
it can present with significant swelling of the skin of the fore-
head and a mass (Pott puffy tumour).
Chronic rhinosinusitis
CRS is common affecting around 11% of the population. The 
cause is unknown but a number of factors have been linked 
to CRS including ciliary dyskinesia, allergy, asthma, bacteria 
(Staphylococcus aureus) and fungi, and a number of host factors 
including anatomical variations (deviated septum, concha 
bullosa of the middle turbinates). CRS can be divided into 
CRS with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) and without (CRSsNP).
Pathology
Nasal polyps are benign swellings of the sinus mucosa of 
unknown origin. Histologically, the polyps contain an oedem-
atous stroma infiltrated with inflammatory cells and eosino -
phils. Inflammatory polyps tend to be bilateral and extend 
into the middle meatus. A single large polyp arising from the 
maxillary antrum is referred to as an antrochoanal polyp (Fig-
ure 46.49). This usually fills the nose and eventually pro -
lapses posteriorly down into the nasopharynx.
Clinical features
CRSwNP patients present with nasal obstruction, watery 
rhinorrhoea, postnasal drip and often hyposmia/anosmia. 
Pain does not tend to be a significant feature. Polyps are eas -
ily identifiable within the nose as pale semitransparent grey 
masses, which are mobile and insensitive when palpated with 
a fine probe. This allows them to be distinguished from hyper-
trophied turbinates (Figure 46.50). In CRSsNP the middle 
meatus is often congested, with mucopus present.
Malignancy should be considered in adults with uni -
lateral nasal polyps whereas in children such polyps must 
be dis tinguished from a meningocoele or encephalocoele by 
high-resolution CT scanning of the anterior cranial fossa. 
Nasal polyps are unusual in children; however, they do occur 
in conjunction with cystic fibrosis in 10% of cases.
Figure 46.47  Left periorbital cellulitis complicating acute left 
ethmoiditis.
Figure 46.48 Axial computed tomography scan showing a subperi-
osteal abscess in the left orbit.
Summary box 46.14
Chandler classification of orbital complications of 
sinusitis
●● I – preseptal cellulitis
●● II – orbital cellulitis
●● III – subperiosteal abscess
●● IV – orbital abscess
●● V – cavernous sinus thrombosis
Figure 46.49 Antrochoanal polyp.
Percivall Pott , 1714–1788, surgeon, London, UK.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   722 25/10/2017   09:01Tumours of the nose and sinuses 723
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Management
Medical treatment for CRSwNPs with systemic steroids will 
often reduce the size of the nasal polyps and give short-term  
relief of nasal blockage. Unfortunately, the polyps tend to recur 
when the treatment stops. Topical corticosteroid drops and 
sprays are also used along with saline douching. In CRSsNP , 
in addition to topical treatments a long course of low-dose 
antibiotics (macrolides) can be used in those patients with a 
normal IgE. Surgical treatment is indicated in patients that 
do not respond to medical treatment. Endoscopic nasal pol-
ypectomy and functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is 
performed following a CT scan which confirms the extent of 
disease and shows the important bony anatomy preoperatively. 
Serious complications following FESS include CSF leak and 
orbital problems, including orbital haematoma, and so it is 
important to review the level and symmetry of the anterior 
skull base and the integrity of the lamina papyracea on the CT 
scan prior to surgery. Endoscopic polypectomy is performed 
using a powered nasal microdebrider (Figure 46.51).
Image guidance can be used in endoscopic sinus surgery, and 
extended endoscopic procedures such as pituitary and anterior 
skull base surgery, to provide real-time feedback of instrument 
position in the nose based on preoperative CT or MRI scans.
TUMOURS OF THE NOSE AND 
SINUSES
Tumours arising in the nose or paranasal sinuses may present 
with unilateral nasal obstruction, persistent unilateral ante-
rior rhinorrhoea, postnasal drip, epistaxis, unilateral blood-
stained rhinorrhoea, facial swelling or proptosis.
Benign tumours
Simple papillomas or viral warts can grow inside the nasal 
vestibule. They can be confused with carcinomas and are best 
excised for histological diagnosis.
Osteomas of the nasal skeleton are not uncommon and are 
usually detected on radiology as an incidental finding (Fig-
ure 46.52). In symptomatic individuals the osteoma can be 
removed endoscopically or via an open procedure.
Inverted (transitional cell) papillomas can occur both 
in the nasal cavity and the nasal sinuses. They are inverted 
papillomas because histologically the hyperplastic epithelium 
inverts into the underlying stroma. The papillomas are cov -
ered with transitional epithelium. Calcification within the 
tumour may be seen on CT along with sclerosis of bone at 
the margins of the growth (Figure 46.53). Inverted papillo-
mas can undergo malignant change. Full surgical resection is 
required and this can usually be performed endoscopically.
Figure 46.50 Nasal polyp in the right nasal vestibule.
Summary box 46.15
Nasal polyps
●● Polyps are insensitive to touch and are mobile
●● Inflammatory polyps are usually bilateral
●● Unilateral nasal polyps should be removed for histology
●● Bleeding polyps may indicate malignancy
●● Meningocoele and encephalocoele must be excluded in 
children with polyps
●● Polyps are removed using a powered microdebrider
Right ethmoid
sinuses Osteoma
Middle
turbinate
Inferior
turbinate
Figure 46.52 Coronal computed tomography scan showing a small 
osteoma in the left ethmoid sinus adjacent to the orbit.
Figure 46.51 Powered nasal microdebrider.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   723 25/10/2017   09:01CHAPTER 46  The ear, nose and sinuses
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK724
Malignant tumours
The most common malignant tumours to occur within the 
nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are squamous cell carci-
noma (Figure 46.54), adenoid cystic carcinoma and ade-
nocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma has been linked to exposure 
to hard wood dust in the furniture industry. Adenoid cystic 
carcinomas arise from minor salivary glands, which can be 
found in the nose. Suspicious signs of invasion of neighbour -
ing tissues include diplopia, proptosis, loosening of the teeth 
(Figure 46.55), trismus, CN palsies and regional lymphade-
nopathy. Figure 46.56 shows invasion of a left maxillary 
antral carcinoma into adjacent structures, including the orbit, 
on an MRI scan.
Patients with sinus or intranasal malignancy are best man-
aged in a combined clinic where the expertise of ear, nose and 
throat (ENT) surgeons, maxillofacial surgeons and oncolo-
gists can be employed.
Figure 46.53 Coronal computed tomography scan showing exten -
sive inverted papilloma involving the left maxillary antrum and ethmoid 
sinuses.
Figure 46.54 Squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal septum.
Figure 46.55 Maxillary antral carcinoma presenting through an oro-
antral fistula.
Figure 46.56  Coronal magnetic r esonance imaging scan of the 
paranasal sinuses showing extensive left maxillary antral car cinoma 
invading adjacent structures.
Summary box 46.16
Tumours of the nose and sinuses
●● Unilateral nasal blockage, discharge and bleeding are often 
presenting symptoms in nasal or sinus tumours
●● Osteomas are often asymptomatic
●● Inverted papilloma is a benign tumour, which presents as a 
unilateral polyp that can undergo malignant change
●● Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignant 
tumour
●● Almost 50% of sinonasal cancers arise on the lateral nasal 
wall and 33% in the maxillary antrum
●● Multidisciplinary management of malignant sinonasal 
tumours requires input from Ear, Nose and Throat surgeons, 
maxillofacial surgeons and oncologists
FURTHER READING
Fokkens WJ, Lund VJ, Mullol J, et al. European position paper on 
rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps. Rhinol Suppl 2012; 23: 1–298.
Gleeson MJ (ed). Scott-Brown’s otolaryngology: head and neck surgery, 7th 
edn. London: Hodder Arnold, 2008.
07_46-B&L27_Pt7_Ch46.indd   724 25/10/2017   09:01Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The relevant anatomy, physiology, disease processes 
and investigations of the pharyngolarynx and neck
 • The diagnosis and emergency treatment of airway 
obstruction
 • The aetiology, natural history, management and 
prevention of squamous cell carcinoma of the upper 
aerodigestive tract
CLINICAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
The pharynx
The pharynx is a fibromuscular tube forming the upper part of 
the respiratory and digestive passages. It extends from the base 
of the skull to the level of the sixth cervical vertebra at the 
lower border of the cricoid cartilage where it becomes contin-
uous with the oesophagus. It is divided into three parts: the 
nasopharynx, oropharynx and hypopharynx (Figure 47.1).
Nasopharynx
The nasopharynx lies anterior to the first cervical vertebra. 
The adenoids, which constitute the superior component of 
Waldeyer`s ring, are situated at the junction of the roof and 
posterior wall of the nasopharynx. Waldeyer`s ring is a ring 
of lymphoid tissue comprising, in addition to the adenoids, 
the palatine and lingual tonsils of the oropharynx. It is sit -
uated at the entry to the air and food passages and is con -
stantly exposed to new inspired or ingested antigenic stimuli. 
Accordingly, it is an important part of the mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissues (MALT), which process antigen and present 
it to T helper cells and B cells (Figure 47.2) thereby facilitat-
ing a first-line immune response mechanism, which is partic-
ularly important in childhood. The tissue of Waldeyer’s ring 
undergoes physiological hypertrophy during early childhood 
as the child is exposed to increasing amounts of antigenic 
stimuli, and there is often a similar hypertrophy of the cervi -
cal lymph nodes.
The Eustachian tubes, leading from the middle ear cleft, 
open into the postero-superior aspect of the lateral wall. Dor-
sal and superior to the openings, bounded anteriorly by a ridge 
formed by the salpingopharyngeus muscle, are the fossae of 
Rosenmüller, a common site for the development of nasopha-
ryngeal carcinoma.
Heinrich Wilhelm Gottfried Waldeyer-Hartz , 1836–1921, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Berlin, Germany.
Bartolomeo Eustachio (Eustachius) , ?1513–1574, appointed physician to the Pope in 1547, and Professor of Anatomy, Rome, Italy, in 1549.
Johann Christian Rosenmüller , 1771–1820, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Leipzig, Germany.
Nasopharynx
Oropharynx
Hypopharynx
Figure 47.1 The component parts of the pharynx.
47Chapter
Pharynx, larynx and neck
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   725 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK726
Oropharynx
This is bounded superiorly by the soft palate, inferiorly by the 
upper surface of the epiglottis and anteriorly by the anterior 
faucial pillars and the vallate papillae of the tongue. The pal-
atine tonsils are situated in the lateral wall between the ante-
rior and posterior pillars of the fauces. The lateral wall, and 
in particular the tonsil, takes its blood supply from the facial 
artery, which may be closely related to the lower pole, and lat-
erally a plexus of paratonsillar veins, which may be the source 
of serious venous bleeding following tonsillectomy.
Hypopharynx
The superior border of the hypopharynx is the level of the 
laryngeal inlet. Its inferior border is the lower border of the 
cricoid cartilage where it continues into the oesophagus. The 
hypopharynx is commonly divided into three areas: the right 
and left piriform fossae, the posterior pharyngeal wall and the 
postcricoid region. The mucosa of these areas is, however, 
continuous so disease processes, such as squamous cell carci -
noma, often involve more than one area as a result of submu-
cosal spread.
The multifaceted, complex process of swallowing is medi-
ated via efferent fibres passing to the medulla oblongata 
through the second division of the trigeminal nerve (V), glos-
sopharyngeal nerve (IX) and vagus nerve (X) (Figure 47.3). 
The afferent pathway is from the nucleus ambiguus and is 
mediated via the glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X) and hypo-
glossal (XII) nerves. Damage to these major cranial nerves 
at any point along their pathway, by trauma or disease, may 
cause dysphagia and/or aspiration.
Videofluoroscopy, in which the passage of a bolus of radi -
opaque liquid or solid from the point at which it enters the 
oral cavity down to its passage within the stomach is exam -
ined radiologically, is the investigation of choice when inves-
tigating swallowing (dys)function.
Anatomic relationships of the pharynx
Some of these are illustrated in Figure 47.4.
PARAPHARYNGEAL SPACE
This potential space lies lateral to the pharynx and extends 
from the base of the skull above to the superior mediastinum 
below. It is occupied by the carotid vessels, internal jugular 
vein, deep cervical lymph nodes, the last four cranial nerves 
and the cervical sympathetic trunk.
Infection and necrosis of the cervical lymph nodes in the 
parapharyngeal space most commonly occurs from infections 
Retropharyngeal nodes
Tonsillar
lymph nodes
Glands of the
jugular chain
Submaxillary
lymph nodes Submental lymph nodes
Adenoids
Lymphoid tissue
around the
Eustachian tube
Faucial tonsils
Lingual tonsil
Figure 47.2 Waldeyer’s ring.
Oral
Pharyngeal
Oesophageal
(a)
Superior
pharyngeal
constrictor
muscle
Middle
pharyngeal
constrictor
muscle
Inferior
pharyngeal
constrictor
muscle
Cricopharyngeus
muscle
Oesophagus
(b)
Figure 47.3 The three phases of swallowing (a) and the muscles (b).
Tongue
Valleculae
Mandible
EpiglottisHyoid
Aryepiglottic fold False cord
True vocal fold
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Figure 47.4 Sagittal diagram of the upper aerodigestive tract.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   726 25/10/2017   09:03Clinical anatomy and physiology 727
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
of the tonsils or teeth (particularly the third lower molar 
tooth). As the parapharyngeal space is not anatomically 
divided, infection may therefore spread from the skull base 
cranially to the superior mediastinum caudally and conse -
quently often presents a surgical challenge.
RETROPHARYNGEAL SPACE
This potential space lies posterior to the pharynx, bounded 
anteriorly by the posterior pharyngeal wall and its covering 
buccopharyngeal fascia and posteriorly by the prevertebral 
musculature and its overlying prevertebral fascia. It contains 
the retropharyngeal lymph nodes, which are usually paired 
lateral nodes but which are separated by a tough midline 
fibrous condensation that connects the prevertebral and buc-
copharyngeal fascia.
As with the lymphoid tissue of Waldeyer`s ring, these 
nodes are more active in infancy and young children, and it is 
at this age that they are most likely to be involved in inflam -
matory processes, which, if severe, may affect swallowing and 
respiration as a consequence of gross swelling and suppuration 
of the retropharyngeal space.
Larynx
It is important to appreciate that the main function of the 
larynx is not the production of voice but the protection of the 
tracheobronchial airway and lungs. In order to achieve this, 
the larynx, together with the base of the tongue, forms the 
protective sphincter that closes off the airway during swal-
lowing. It is only an evolutionary by-product that, in humans 
and some other mammals, the larynx is responsible for the 
production of sound.
The larynx comprises a cartilaginous framework (that may 
ossify in later life), which consists of the hyoid bone above, 
the thyroid and cricoid cartilages and the intricate arytenoid 
cartilages posteriorly.
The cricoid cartilage is the only complete ring in the 
entire airway and bounds the subglottis, which is the narrow-
est point of the airway. This is the most common site for dam-
age from an endotracheal tube used for intensive care unit 
ventilation in seriously ill patients.
A purely anatomical description of the larynx divides it 
into the supraglottis, glottis and subglottis (Figure 47.5). The 
true vocal folds (often incorrectly called the vocal cords) are 
normally white in contrast to the pink mucosa of the rest of 
the larynx and airway. The true vocal folds meet anteriorly 
at the midlevel of the thyroid cartilage, whereas posteriorly 
they are separate and attached to an arytenoid cartilage. This 
arrangement produces the ‘V’ shape of the glottis (Figure 
47.6).
Nerve supply
The sensory nerve supply to the larynx above the vocal folds 
is from the superior laryngeal nerve and below the vocal folds 
it is from the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Both these nerves are 
branches of the vagus nerve (X). The motor nerve supply to 
the larynx is from the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which sup -
plies all intrinsic muscles. Only one of these intrinsic muscles, 
the posterior cricoarytenoid, abducts the vocal folds during 
respiration. All other intrinsic muscles adduct the cords. As 
all of the intrinsic muscles of the larynx are supplied by the 
recurrent laryngeal nerve, damage to this nerve, or to the 
vagus nerve above the recurrent laryngeal nerve branch, will 
cause paralysis of the vocal fold on the side of the damage.
Phonation/speech
The larynx functions by closing the vocal fold against the air 
being exhaled from the lungs, but the rise in subglottic pres -
sure forces the vocal folds apart slightly for an instant of time, 
resulting in an accompanying sinusoidal wave-like vibration 
of the vocal fold epithelium. The opening and closing occurs 
in rapid sequence to produce a vibrating column of air, which 
is the source of sound that can be articulated by the structure 
of the oral cavity to produce speech.
Paralysis or disease of the vocal folds or closely associated 
laryngeal structures will give rise to disturbance of the sound, 
producing hoarseness.
The functions of the larynx are given in Summary box 
47.1.
Epiglottis
Epiglottis
Hyoid
Pre-epiglottic space
Ventricular fold
(false cord)
Laryngeal ventricle
Vocal fold (true cord)
Cricothyroid space
Tracheal cartilage
Supraglottis
Glottis
Subglottis
Supr
Hyoid
Thyrohyoid
ligament
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricothyroid
ligament
Cricoid
cartilage
Trachea
Arytenoid
cartilage
Cricoid
Figure 47.5 Anatomy of the larynx.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   727 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK728
Tongue base
Vocal fold
Trachea
Arytenoid
cartilage
Epiglottis
Views on indirect laryngoscopy
Aryepiglottic
fold
Posterior
pharyngeal
wall
(a) Vocal folds abducted (open)
(b) Vocal folds adducted (closed)
(c) Larynx in abduction
Figure 47.6 A view of the larynx on indirect laryngoscopy: (a) vocal 
folds abducted; (b) vocal folds adducted; (c) normal larynx in abduc-
tion.
Summary box 47.1
Functions of the larynx
Protection of the lower respiratory tract by
●● Closure of the laryngeal inlet
●● Closure of the false cords
●● Closure of the glottis
●● Cessation of respiration
●● Cough reflex
Phonation
●● Vocal folds produce sound by quasi-periodic vibration
Respiration
●● Control of pressure
Fixation of chest
●● Aids lifting, straining and climbing
extends from the inferior border of the mandible to the 
sternum below, and is bounded by the midline and the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. The posterior triangle extends 
backwards to the anterior border of the trapezius muscle 
and inferiorly to the clavicle. The upper part of the ante -
rior triangle, above the hyoid bone, is commonly subdivided 
into the submandibular triangle above the digastric muscle 
and the submental triangle below . The lymphatic drainage 
of the head and neck is of considerable clinical importance 
(Figure 47.7). The most important chain of nodes are the 
jugular nodes (also called cervical), which run adjacent to 
the internal jugular vein. The other main groups are the 
submental, submandibular, pre- and postauricular, occipital 
and posterior triangle nodes.
A system of levels is used to describe the location of 
these neck nodes (Figure 47.8). Of particular note are 
Submental nodes
Submandibular
nodes
Periauricular
nodes
Jugulodigastric
nodes
Upper deep
cervical nodes
Jugulo-omohyoid
node
Supraclavicular
nodes
Figure 47.7 Distribution of cervical lymph nodes.
Submental and
submandibular
Upper jugular
Middle jugular
Posterior triangle
Lower jugular
Anterior
compartment
Figure 47.8 The level system for describing the location of lymph 
nodes in the neck. Level 1, submental and submandibular group; level 
II, upper jugular gr oup; level III, middle jugular group; level IV, lower 
jugular group; level V, posterior triangle group; level VI, anterior com-
partment group.
Neck
The neck is divided into anterior and posterior triangles 
by the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The anterior triangle 
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   728 25/10/2017   09:03Clinical examination 729
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
the jugular nodal levels include levels II, III and IV , which 
relate to the upper, middle and inferior third of the carotid 
sheath, respectively. The level II nodes, which contain the 
large jugulodigastric node, drain the naso- and oropharynx, 
including the tonsils, posterolateral aspects of the oral cav -
ity and the superior aspects of the larynx and piriform fos -
sae. They are the most common sites of enlargement and 
may be palpated along the anterior border of the sternoclei -
domastoid muscle.
Metastatic spread of squamous cell carcinoma (80% of 
head and neck cancer) most commonly occurs with tumours 
of the nasopharynx, tongue base, tonsil, piriform fossae and 
supraglottic larynx. When an enlarged neck node is detected 
and malignant disease is suspected, these five primary sites 
must be carefully examined.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Pharynx and larynx
Before examination of the pharynx, the oral cavity should 
be examined with the aid of a good light and tongue 
depressors. Historically , a reflecting mirror on the head 
was used as a source of examination light. However, most 
practitioners in the resource-rich world now use a head-
band-mounted fibreoptic light source. Either option per -
mits the use of both hands to hold instruments. Inspection 
should include the buccal mucosa and lips, the palate, the 
tongue and floor of the mouth, all surfaces of the teeth and 
gums, opening and closing of the mouth and dental occlu -
sion. Patients should be asked to elevate the tongue to the 
roof of the mouth and protrude the tongue towards both 
the right and the left. Intraoral palpation may be required 
gently using one or two fingers to feel any swellings. Intra-
oral palpation may be combined with extraoral palpation of 
the submental and submandibular lymph nodes and salivary 
glands to aid the characterisation and/or localisation of any 
swelling detected.
Following examination of the oral cavity, the orophar -
ynx is then inspected with the tongue depressor placed 
firmly onto the tongue base to depress it inferiorly. Care 
much be taken to, if possible, avoid provoking a gag reflex. 
The anterior and posterior faucial pillars, the tonsil, retro -
molar trigone and posterior pharyngeal wall should all be 
inspected for colour changes, ulceration, pus, foreign bodies 
and swellings. Pain and trismus as a consequence of phar -
yngolaryngeal or neck pathology may add to the difficulty 
of the examination, but are significant clinical findings in 
their own right.
While angled mirrors and a headlight may be used in 
expert hands, modern flexible fibreoptic endoscopes passed 
through the nose, with or without topical anaesthesia, allow 
high-quality examination of the entire nasopharynx, oro -
pharynx, larynx and often the hypopharynx in almost every 
patient. Moreover, a camera attached to the endoscope per -
mits the taking of high-quality photographs to record and 
present pertinent clinical findings. A rigid 0° fibreoptic endo-
scope (Hopkin`s rod) is often used in preference to inspect 
the nasal cavities and nasopharynx.
Neck
The patient should be examined in the sitting position with 
the whole neck exposed so that both clavicles are clearly seen. 
The neck is inspected from the front and the patient asked to 
swallow, preferably with the aid of a sip of water. Movements 
of the larynx and any swellings in the neck are noted. The 
patient should be asked to protrude the tongue if there is a 
midline neck swelling, as a thyroglossal duct cyst will move 
upwards with the tongue protrusion. The neck is then exam -
ined from behind with the chin flexed slightly downwards to 
remove any undue tension in the strap muscles, platysma and 
sternocleidomastoids.
On examining for a lump in the neck, it is often helpful 
to ask the patient to point to the lump first. Ask if the lump 
is tender. The neck is palpated bilaterally in a sequential 
manner comparing the two sides of the neck. All five pal-
pable neck node levels (I–V) should be examined system -
atically.
If malignancy is suspected (hard, irregular or fixed to 
overlying skin or to deep structures), inspection of the naso -
pharynx, tonsils, tongue base, piriform fossae and supraglottic 
larynx is essential.
Summary box 47.2
Key points of history and examination
Mouth
●● Adequate light source and two spatulas to examine the mouth
●● Examine
Teeth, gums, gingival sulci
Buccal mucosa, opening of parotid duct
Floor of mouth
Hard and soft palate
Retromolar trigone region
Anterior and posterior faucial pillars, tonsils
Posterior pharyngeal wall
Tongue (observe full movements)
●● Palpate
Salivary glands/ducts
Larynx, oropharynx and hypopharynx
●● Indirect laryngoscopy
Mirror and headlight
●● Direct flexible fibreoptic pharyngolaryngoscopy
Nasopharynx
●● Rigid Hopkins’ rod endoscopy
●● Flexible fibreoptic nasendoscopy
Neck
●● Inspection
Tongue protrusion
Observe swallowing
●● Palpation
If a mass is palpable, evaluate for size, site, shape, 
consistency, superficial and deep fixation, fluctuation, 
transillumination, auscultation
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   729 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK730
INVESTIGATION OF THE 
PHARYNX, LARYNX AND NECK
Plain lateral radiographs
Plain lateral radiographs of the neck and cervical spine may 
show soft tissue abnormalities, although their sensitivity 
and specificity is low; of particular importance is the depth 
and outline of the prevertebral soft tissue shadow on sagittal 
section as an indication of retropharyngeal pathology. The 
outline of the laryngotracheal airway may be a useful guide 
to the presence of disease in the pharynx and larynx. There 
should be no air within the upper oesophagus. If air is seen, 
endoscopy is advised. Radiopaque foreign bodies may be seen 
impacted in the pharynx, larynx or upper oesophagus on these 
radiographs (Figure 47.9).
Barium swallow
Barium (or water-soluble contrast if a pharyngeal or oesopha-
geal perforation is suspected) liquid video fluoroscopic studies 
record the movement of a small quantity of radiopaque liq -
uid and allow detailed evaluation of the oral and pharyngeal 
phases of swallowing (Figure 47.10).
Computed tomography scanning
Computed tomography (CT) scanning provides high reso -
lution imaging of disease in the pharynx, larynx and neck. 
Intravenous contrast given at the same time as the CT scan 
(dynamic scanning) further improves the demonstration of 
disease in these areas (Figure 47.11).
Figure 47.9 Plain lateral radiograph showing normal anatomy.
Figure 47.10 Videofluoroscopy image showing liquid barium in the 
upper pharynx in a normal swallow.
Other imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used to give 
better soft tissue definition and is preferred for tumour stag -
ing in some centres. Drawbacks of this approach include a 
reduction in image quality due to movement artefact, poorer 
definition of bony and cartilaginous structures and upstaging 
of tumours due to oversensitivity (Figure 47.12). Ultra-
sound scanning can be useful in differentiating solid lesions 
(e.g. malignant lymph nodes from cystic lesions such as a 
branchial cyst) and is particularly helpful when attempting 
fine-needle aspiration.
If a head and neck malignancy is suspected, then CT 
imaging of the thorax should also be performed as the rate 
of synchronous primary bronchogenic tumours, while not 
particularly high (~5%), is significant and if detected, will 
change treatment options.
Figure 47.11 Axial computed tomography scan through the larynx 
at the level of the glottis.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   730 25/10/2017   09:03Investigation of the pharynx, l arynx and neck 731
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Fine-needle aspiration cytology
This is the investigation of choice when attempting to deter-
mine the nature of a neck or thyroid mass. Fine-needle aspi -
ration cytology (FNAC) is considerably aided by ultrasound 
or CT guidance to the extent the ultrasound-guided FNAC is 
now routine in many units around the world. The technique 
is safe and well tolerated and has high diagnostic sensitivity 
and specificity, especially when diagnosing cervical lymph 
node enlargement and performed by a practitioner with a 
high volume practice.
Angiography or digital subtraction 
vascular imaging
These techniques may be indicated if a vascular lesion such 
as a carotid body tumour is suspected. Angiography may have 
a therapeutic role to play by facilitating embolisation of the 
lesion.
Figure 47.12 Axial magnetic resonance imaging scan at the same 
level as Fig. 47.11.
Direct pharyngoscopy and 
laryngoscopy
Examination of the pharynx, larynx and neck under gen-
eral anaesthesia may be required if a primary head and neck 
malignancy is suspected or there are problems with the rou -
tine examination of patients, such as an inadequate view 
as a result of trismus from pain, poor patient compliance or 
large obstructive pharyngeal or laryngeal pathology. These 
examinations may be further aided by the use of an operating 
microscope or rigid straight and angled (30° and 70°) endo -
scopes (Hopkins’ rods) (Figure 47.13).
The advantages and disadvantages of laryngeal examina -
tion techniques are given in Summary box 47.3.
Figure 47.13 A rigid Hopkins’ rod or endoscope.
Harold Horace Hopkins , 1918–1994, Professor of Applied Optics, The University of Reading, Reading, UK, invented the rigid rod endoscope (Hopkins’ rod, 
1954), and contributed to the development of the fibres for flexible endoscopes.
Summary box 47.3
Advantages and disadvantages larynx and pharynx 
examination techniques
Flexible nasendoscopy
●● Well tolerated examination
●● Can also examine nasal passages and postnasal space
●● Need fibreoptic light source
Rigid endoscopy
●● Can be used with stroboscope for evaluation of voice
●● High definition view
●● Needs fibreoptic light source
●● Bulky and difficult if prominent gag reflex present
Laryngeal mirror
●● Does not need fibreoptic light source
●● No record of exam, small image
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   731 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK732
DISEASES OF THE PHARYNX
 ● recurrent acute otitis media or prolonged serous otitis 
media, usually longer than 3 months’ duration;
 ● recurrent rhinosinusitis*;
 ● postnasal discharge*.
*Relative indications
Operative technique
With the patient placed in a prone position with the neck 
in a neutral position, the adenoid tissue is removed with a 
guarded curette pressed against the roof of the nasopharynx 
before sweeping downwards to deliver the excised adenoid 
into the oropharynx (Figures 47.15 and 47.16). A postnasal 
swab is placed into the nasopharynx until all haemorrhage 
NASOPHARYNX
Enlarged adenoid
The most common cause of an enlarged adenoid (there is only 
one nasopharyngeal adenoid, despite the common use of the 
term ‘adenoids’) is physiological hypertrophy in childhood. 
The size of the adenoid alone is not an indication for removal. 
Of more importance is the consequences of hypertrophy (e.g. 
nasal obstruction). Adenoid hypertrophy is often associated 
with hypertrophy of the other lymphoid tissues of Waldeyer’s 
ring. Of particular note, if excessive adenoidal hypertrophy 
causes blockage of the nasopharynx in association with ton-
sil hypertrophy, the upper airway may become compromised 
during sleep causing, obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA).
Obstructive sleep apnoea
This condition is becoming increasingly diagnosed in chil -
dren and is important because it can cause sleep deprivation 
and secondary cardiac complications. It has been implicated 
in some cases of sudden infant death syndrome. The most 
common symptom is snoring, which is typically irregular, 
with the child actually ceasing respiration (apnoea) and then 
restarting with a loud inspiratory snort. The child is often 
restless and may take up strange sleep positions as he or she 
tries to improve the pharyngeal airway. Surgical removal of 
the tonsils and adenoid is curative, but it is important to avoid 
sedative premedications and opiate analgesics postoperatively 
because they may further depress the child’s respiratory drive.
OSA may also occur in adults, where the obstruction may 
result from nasal deformity, a hypertrophic soft palate asso-
ciated with an altered nasopharyngeal isthmus, obesity and 
general narrowing of the pharyngeal airway, or supraglottic 
laryngeal pathology. The initial investigation may include a 
sleep study, during which measurement of the patient’s sleep 
pattern and arterial oxygenation are undertaken. Continu-
ous positive airway pressure devices may ameliorate OSA by 
splinting the obstruction open. Surgery may also be indicated, 
depending on the level(s) of the obstruction.
Hypertrophy of adenoid tissue most commonly occurs 
between the ages of 4 and 10, but the adenoid tissue usually 
undergoes spontaneous atrophy during puberty, although 
some remnants may persist into adult life (Figure 47.14). 
The relationship of adenoid enlargement to recurrent secre -
tory otitis media or recurrent acute otitis media is not entirely 
clear.
Adenoidectomy
Adenoid tissue can be removed alone or in conjunction with 
a tonsillectomy. The indications for adenoidectomy are:
 ● obstructive sleep apnoea associated with postnasal 
obstruction;
Figure 47.14 Plain lateral radiograph showing a large pad of ade -
noid tissue (arrow) in the postnasal space.
Figure 47.15 St Clair Thomson adenoid curette.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 45.16Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.16 Curettage of the adenoid.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   732 25/10/2017   09:03Nasopharynx 733
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
has ceased. A mirror can be used to guide the direction of the 
adenoid curette. Alternatively, suction monopolar diathermy 
may be used to remove adenoid tissue.
Reactionary or secondary haemorrhage during the recov-
ery period may require a nasopharyngeal pack under a further 
anaesthetic. This can occasionally cause respiratory depres -
sion in children and adults, and strict observation is required 
while the pack is in place.
Tumours of the nasopharynx
Benign
There are two main types of benign tumour of the naso -
pharynx: the angiofibroma and the antrochoanal polyp. Both 
are rare.
ANGIOFIBROMA
This tumour is confined to young male patients most com -
monly between the ages of 8 and 20 years. It usually causes 
progressive nasal obstruction, recurrent severe epistaxis, 
purulent rhinorrhoea and occasionally loss of vision because 
of compression of the optic nerve by superior extension of 
the tumour through the skull base. Although the tumour is 
rare, these symptoms in a young male patient should always 
arouse suspicion. The tumour is more common in northern 
India, although the reasons for this are unknown. Clinical 
examination typically shows a mass in the nasal cavity or 
nasopharynx, but CT scanning best demonstrates the extent 
of the tumour and any associated bony erosion. MRI scan -
ning defines the soft tissue extent and, with these two modern 
investigations, angiography is rarely indicated. Biopsy should 
be avoided unless clinical and radiological examinations are 
not diagnostic because of the risk of bleeding.
Surgical resection requires adequate exposure either 
through a midfacial approach or lateral rhinotomy (Figures 
47.17 and 47.18). Both allow ligation of the feeding maxil -
lary artery. More recently, endoscopic resection has been used 
for smaller lesions.
ANTROCHOANAL POL YP
This relatively uncommon lesion is a benign mucosal polyp 
that arises in the maxillary antrum and prolapses into the 
nasal cavity where it expands backwards into the nasophar -
ynx and occasionally into the oropharynx (Figures 47.19 
and 47.20). It may mimic an angiofibroma from which it is 
distinguished by its avascularity and pale colour, as well as its 
site of origin, which is determined on endoscopic examina -
tion and imaging. It requires complete removal via an endo -
scopic approach through the middle meatus of the maxillary 
sinus or, occasionally, via an open Caldwell–Luc approach.
Malignant
NASOPHARYNGEAL CARCINOMA
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma has a marked geographically 
variable incidence. In most parts of the world, the tumour 
Figure 47.17 Intraoperative photograph showing exposure during a 
midfacial degloving approach.
George Walter Caldwell , 1834–1918, otolaryngologist, who practised successively in New York, San Francisco, and Los Angeles, USA, devised this operation for 
treating suppuration in the maxillary antrum in 1893.
Henri Luc , 1855–1925, otolaryngologist, Paris, France, described his operation in 1889.
Figure 47.18  Intraoperative photograph showing an incision in 
 lateral rhinotomy.
Figure 47.19 Intraoral view showing a fleshy polyp hanging in the 
oropharynx.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   733 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK734
is rare with an annual incidence of 1 case per 100 000 popu-
lation; however, among southern Chinese populations the 
rate is 30–50 cases per 100 000 population. The aetiology of 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma is multifactorial. Genetic suscepti-
bility, early infection by the Epstein–Barr virus and consump-
tion of traditional diets, particularly salted fish, are known to 
contribute.
an increased incidence in teenagers and young adults and 
then again in the 50–60 age group.
Clinical features Symptoms are closely related to the 
position of the tumour in the nasopharynx and the degree 
of regional and/or distant spread. Early symptoms are often 
minimal and may be ignored by both patient and doctor. 
Approximately 50% of patients will present with a malig -
nant node or nodes in the neck, indicating an advanced 
tumour. While investigation of the lymph node will involve 
fine-needle aspiration or a biopsy, such a clinical presentation 
mandates an immediate thorough examination of the naso-
pharynx. In about 5% of patients, the nasopharynx may look 
normal or minimally asymmetrical but contains submucosal 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. MRI or CT of the head and neck 
should be performed as part of the diagnostic work-up and 
even if a nasopharyngeal mass is not identified clinically or 
radiologically, a biopsy of the nasopharynx, targeting the fossa 
of Rosenmüller is essential if there is suspicion of nasopha-
ryngeal malignancy. In contrast, nasal complaints (obstruc-
tion +/- rhinorrhoea) occur in one-third of patients and aural 
symptoms of unilateral deafness as a consequence of Eusta -
chian tube obstruction and secretory otitis media occur in 
approximately 20%. Neurological complications with cranial 
nerve palsies as a result of disease in the skull base occur rel -
atively late in the disease, but are a poor prognostic sign, as 
is trismus resulting from tumour involvement of the medial 
pterygoid.
Michael Anthony Epstein , born 1921, formerly Professor of Pathology, The University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
Yvonne Barr , 1931–2016, virologist who emigrated to Australia. Epstein and Barr discovered this virus in 1964.
Figure 47.20 Axial computed tomogram of an antrochoanal polyp 
(as seen in Fig. 47.19), with opaque maxillary antrum and a mass in 
the nasal cavity and nasopharynx.
Summary box 47.4
Aetiological factors in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
●● Genetic (e.g. Cantonese)
●● Infective (e.g. Epstein–Barr virus)
●● Environmental (e.g. salted fish)
The majority of nasopharyngeal tumours are undifferenti-
ated with a characteristic morphology, comprising over 90% 
of nasopharyngeal malignancy in endemic areas. Rare epi -
thelial tumours are adenocarcinoma and adenoid cystic car -
cinoma, which arise from minor salivary glands. B- and T-cell 
lymphomas also occur in the nasopharynx and should not be 
confused with the more common undifferentiated carcinoma. 
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma has a bimodal distribution with 
Summary box 47.5
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma: main presenting 
complaints
Systemic
●● Cervical lymphadenopathy
Local
●● Unilateral serous otitis media, otalgia
●● Nasal obstruction, bloody discharge, epistaxis
●● Cranial nerve palsies, especially III–VI then IX–XII
●● Trismus
Investigation This is by direct inspection with a flexi -
ble or rigid nasendoscope and biopsy under topical or gen -
eral anaesthesia. Serological investigation for Epstein–Barr 
virus-associated antigenic markers in combination with the 
clinical and histological examination is valuable for the early 
detection of disease. Highly sensitive assays for antiviral anti-
bodies together with virus-associated serological markers are 
useful in early detection and in post-treatment surveillance. 
Immunoglobulin (Ig) A antiviral capsid antigen antibody and 
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   734 25/10/2017   09:03Oropharynx 735
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
early antigen antibody have been evaluated in mass surveys 
in southern China and have been found to be an excellent 
screening method for early detection of nasopharyngeal carci-
noma in high-risk groups.
Imaging This is essential for staging and to determine the 
extent of disease. The imaging of choice is MRI with gad -
olinium and fat suppression. This allows for assessment of 
brain parenchyma, cavernous sinus and the closely associ -
ated cranial foramina. CT or positron emission tomography 
(PET)-CT of the head, neck and chest has a major role in 
planning radiotherapy and assessing the response to treat -
ment, diagnosing recurrence and detecting complications.
Treatment The primary treatment of nasopharyngeal car -
cinoma, depending on the stage of disease, is with external 
beam or intensity modulated radiotherapy +/- cisplatin-based 
chemotherapy, as the majority of the tumours are chemora -
diosensitive, undifferentiated squamous cell carcinomas. Sur-
gery is usually reserved for regional recurrence in the neck. 
For early disease, 5-year disease-free survival rates of more 
than 75% are common; however, in advanced disease the 
results are less good, with 5-year disease-free survival rates of 
30–50%.
OROPHARYNX
Acute tonsillitis
This common condition is characterised by a sore throat, 
fever, general malaise, dysphagia, enlarged upper cervical 
nodes and sometimes referred otalgia. Approximately half the 
cases are bacterial, the most common cause being a pyogenic 
group A streptococcus. The remainder are viral and a wide 
variety of viruses have been implicated, in particular infec -
tious mononucleosis (glandular fever), which may be mis-
taken for bacterial tonsillitis.
On examination, the tonsils are swollen and erythema-
tous, and yellow or white pustules may be seen on the palatine 
tonsils, hence the name ‘follicular tonsillitis’ (Figure 47.21). 
A throat swab should be taken at the time of examination as 
well as blood for Paul–Bunnell testing to confirm or refute the 
diagnosis of glandular fever.
Treatment
Paracetamol or similar analgesia may be administered to 
relieve pain and gargles of glycerol–thymol are soothing. The 
condition is frequently sensitive to benzyl- or phenyoxymeth-
ylpenicillin (penicillin V) and these are given until antibiotic 
sensitivities are established. Ampicillin is avoided as it may 
precipitate a rash in patients with infectious mononucleosis. 
Most cases resolve in a few days.
Quinsy
This is an abscess in the peritonsillar region that causes 
severe pain and trismus (Figure 47.22). The trismus caused 
by spasm induced in the pterygoid muscles may make exam -
ination difficult but may be overcome by instillation of local 
anaesthesia into the posterior nasal cavity (anaesthetising the 
sphenopalatine ganglion) and the oropharynx. Inspection 
reveals a diffuse swelling of the soft palate just superior or lat-
eral to the involved tonsil, displacing the uvula medially. In 
more advanced cases, pus may be seen pointing underneath 
the thin mucosa.
Treatment
In the early stages, intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics 
may produce resolution. However, if there is frank abscess for-
mation, incision and drainage of the pus can be carried out 
under local anaesthesia. A small scalpel is best modified by 
winding a strip of adhesive tape around the blade so that only 
1 cm of the blade projects. In teenagers and young adults, the 
John Rodman Paul , 1893–1971, Professor of Preventative Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
Walls Willard Bunnell , 1902–1966, American physician. Paul and Bunnell described this test in 1932.
Figure 47.21 Acute follicular tonsillitis.
Figure 47.22 Quinsy (peritonsillar abscess).
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   735 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK736
patient sits upright and an incision is made approximately mid-
way between the base of the uvula and the third upper molar 
tooth (Figure 47.23). This may produce immediate release of 
pus, but, if not, a dressing forceps is pushed firmly through the 
incision and, on opening, pus may then be encountered. In 
small children, general anaesthesia is required.
Ideally, the procedure should be undertaken when the 
tonsils are not acutely infected, and it is important to discuss 
factors that may increase the tendency to bleed. Blood trans-
fusion is rarely required, but it is normal practice to type and 
screen blood for cross-match in children under 15 kg in weight.
Dissection tonsillectomy is carried out under general 
anaesthesia. The mucosa of the anterior faucial pillar is 
incised and the tonsil capsule identified. Using blunt dissec -
tion, the tonsil is separated from its bed until only a small 
inferior pedicle is left (Figure 47.24). It is then separated 
from the lingual tonsil. A tonsil swab is placed in the tonsillar 
bed and pressure applied for some minutes, following which 
bleeding points may be controlled by ligature or by bipolar 
diathermy. (Coblation and laser dissection is commonly used 
in the resource-rich world in an attempt to reduce postopera-
tive pain and bleeding.)
Incision
Figure 47.23 Site of incision in a peritonsillar abscess.
Chronic tonsillitis
Chronic tonsillitis usually results from repeated attacks of 
acute tonsillitis in which the tonsils become progressively 
damaged by inflammatory processes and provide a reservoir 
for infective organisms.
Tonsillectomy
Recurrent acute tonsillitis is the most common relative indica-
tion for tonsillectomy in children and adolescents, although it 
is important that these attacks are well documented, frequent 
and do not simply constitute a minor viral sore throat. Chronic 
tonsillitis more frequently affects young adults in whom it is 
important to establish that chronic mouth breathing secondary 
to nasal obstruction is not the main problem rather than the 
tonsils themselves. Absolute indications for tonsillectomy are 
when the size of the tonsils is contributing to airway obstruc-
tion or a malignancy of the tonsils is suspected (Table 47.1).
TABLE 47.1 Indications for tonsillectomy.
Absolute Sleep apnoea, chronic respiratory tract obstruction, 
cor pulmonale
Suspected tonsillar malignancy
Relative Documented recurrent acute tonsillitis
Chronic tonsillitis
Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
Tonsillar asymmetry
Tonsillitis resulting in febrile convulsions
Diphtheria carriers
Systemic disease caused by β-haemolytic 
Streptococcus (nephritis, rheumatic fever)
Figure 47.24 Removal of the tonsils.
Following surgery, the patient is kept under close obser -
vation for any systemic or local evidence of bleeding, with 
regular pulse and blood pressure measurements and observa -
tion to monitor whether the patient is swallowing excessively 
(Figure 47.25). Postoperatively, patients are encouraged to 
eat normally. Paracetamol is preferred to non-steroidal anal -
gesics. Patients are allowed home on the same or following 
day and are warned that they may experience otalgia as a 
result of referred pain from the glossopharyngeal nerve and 
that secondary haemorrhage may occur up to 10 days follow -
ing the surgery.
Haemorrhage is the most common complication in the 
immediate postoperative period. Local pressure may help 
in mild cases, but reactionary haemorrhage usually requires 
return to theatre for definitive treatment, particularly in 
younger patients. Under general anaesthesia, it may be pos -
sible to identify a bleeding spot, but often a more generalised 
ooze is observed and suturing of the tonsil bed combined with 
the application of haemostatic gauze and bipolar diathermy is 
often more successful than attempted placement of ligatures.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   736 25/10/2017   09:03Oropharynx 737
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Late haemorrhage is sometimes secondary to infection 
and patients are usually started on broad-spectrum intrave-
nous antibiotics. Any residual clot in the tonsil fossa should 
be removed and regular gargling with a dilute solution of 
hydrogen peroxide may be beneficial. Significant or persistent 
bleeding may require a further general anaesthetic and hae -
mostasis, which may require diathermy and/or undersewing of 
the granulating, sloughy tonsil fossa. Postoperative tonsillar 
haemorrhage is still a serious and life-threatening complica-
tion and should not be underestimated, particularly in the 
younger patient.
Acute retropharyngeal abscess
This is the result of suppuration of the retropharyngeal lymph 
nodes and, again, is most commonly seen in children, with 
most cases occurring under the age of 1 year. It is associated 
with infection of the upper aerodigestive tract, and is fre-
quently accompanied by severe general malaise, neck rigid-
ity, dysphagia, drooling, a croupy cough, an altered cry and 
marked dyspnoea.
Dyspnoea may be the prominent symptom and may also 
be accompanied by febrile convulsions and vomiting. These 
children should always be carefully examined by the most 
senior clinicians available. Inspection of the posterior wall of 
the pharynx may show gross swelling and an abscess pointing 
beneath the thinned mucosa.
In countries where diphtheria still occurs, an acute retro-
pharyngeal abscess may be confused with this, but the pres -
ence of the greyish–green membrane aids differentiation. 
Occasionally, a foreign body, most commonly a fish bone 
which has perforated the posterior pharyngeal mucosa, will 
give rise to a retropharyngeal abscess in older children and 
young adults. Intravenous antibiotics are commenced imme -
diately but surgical drainage of the abscess is often necessary. 
It requires experienced anaesthesia because, on induction, 
care must be taken to avoid rupturing the abscess. The air -
way is protected by placing the child in a head down position 
while a pair of dressing forceps, guided by the finger, may be 
thrust into an obvious abscess in the posterior wall and the 
contents evacuated. On other occasions, an approach ante-
rior and medial to the carotid sheath via a cervical incision 
may be preferable.
Chronic retropharyngeal abscess
This condition is now rare and is most commonly the 
result of an extension of tuberculosis of the cervical 
spine, which has spread through the anterior longitudinal 
ligament to reach the retropharyngeal space. In addition 
to the retropharyngeal swelling seen intraorally, there 
may be fullness behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle on 
one side. In contrast to an acute retropharyngeal abscess, 
this condition occurs almost solely in adults. Radiology 
usually shows evidence of bone destruction and loss of the 
normal curvature of the cervical spine. The spine may be 
quite unstable and undue manipulation may precipitate a 
neurological event.
In contrast to an acute abscess, a chronic retropharyngeal 
abscess must not be opened into the mouth, as such a proce -
dure may lead to secondary infection. Drainage of the abscess 
may not be necessary if suitable treatment of the underlying 
tuberculosis disease is instituted. If it is necessary , drainage 
should be carried out through a cervical incision anterior to 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle with an approach anterior 
and medial to the carotid sheath to enter the retropharyngeal 
space. The cavity is opened and suctioned dry after taking 
biopsy material. Occasionally, surgery is required to decom -
press or stabilise the spinal cord if there is a progressive neuro-
logical deficit.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.25Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.25 Positioning of the patient after tonsillectomy.
Summary box 47.6
Complications of tonsillectomy
Anaesthetic
●● Traumatic intubation
●● Cardiopulmonary arrest
●● Malignant hyperthermia
Surgical
●● Haemorrhage (immediate or late)
●● Infection
●● Pain/otalgia
●● Postoperative airway obstruction
●● Velopharyngeal insufficiency
Parapharyngeal abscess
Parapharyngeal abscess may be confused with a peritonsillar 
abscess, but the maximal swelling is behind the posterior fau-
cial pillar and there may be little oedema of the soft palate. 
The patient is usually a young child and there may be a severe 
general malaise and obvious neck swelling. In early cases, 
admission to hospital and the institution of fluid replacements 
coupled with intravenous antibiotics may produce resolution. 
In advanced cases, drainage and intravenous antibiotics are 
required. With an obvious abscess pointing into the orophar-
ynx, drainage may be carried out with a blunt instrument or 
the glove finger, but general anaesthesia is frequently required 
and the expertise of a senior anaesthetist, good illumination 
and good suction are absolutely essential. A large parapharyn-
geal abscess may compromise both the airway and swallowing. 
MRI or CT scanning of the head and neck is often an invalu-
able aid to diagnosis and management as it allows assessment 
of the extent of the abscess and facilitates planning of the 
optimal surgical approach.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   737 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK738
Glandular fever (infectious 
mononucleosis)
This systemic condition is usually caused by the Epstein–Barr 
virus, but similar features can be caused by cytomegalovirus 
or toxoplasmosis. The tonsils are typically erythematous with 
a creamy grey exudate and appear almost confluent, usually 
symmetrical. In addition to the discomfort and dysphagia, 
patients may drool saliva and have respiratory difficulty, par -
ticularly on inspiration. They commonly have a high tem -
perature and gross general malaise with marked cervical or 
generalised lymphadenopathy. Occasionally, an enlarged 
spleen or liver may be detected. The condition is most fre -
quent in teenagers and young adults. The diagnosis can be 
confirmed by serological testing showing a positive Paul–
Bunnell test, an absolute and relative lymphocytosis, and the 
presence of atypical monocytes in the peripheral blood.
Treatment
Analgesia and maintenance of fluid intake are important. A 
small number of patients require admission to hospital if the 
airway is compromised or if oral intake of fluids is not possi -
ble, and a short course of steroids may be helpful. Antibiotics 
are of little value and ampicillin is contraindicated because 
of the frequent appearance of a widespread skin rash. Rarely, 
if the airway is severely compromised, an elective tracheos -
tomy under local anaesthesia is safer and less traumatic than 
an emergency intubation. Emergency tonsillectomy is contra-
indicated because of the generalised pharyngeal oedema and 
compromised airway.
Human immunodeficiency virus
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) can affect the 
ear, nose and throat (ENT) system at any point during the dis-
ease. The initial seroconversion may present with the symp-
toms of glandular fever, which is followed by an asymptomatic 
period of variable length. In the pre-AIDS period, before the 
full-blown symptoms of the AIDS-related complex, many 
patients have minor upper respiratory tract symptoms that 
are often overlooked, such as otitis externa, rhinosinusitis 
and a non-specific pharyngitis. As the patient moves into the 
full-blown AIDS-related complex, a persistent, generalised 
lymphadenopathy is frequently found affecting the cervical 
nodes, which is usually due to follicular hyperplasia. However, 
patients may also develop tumours such as Kaposi’s sarcoma, 
sometimes seen in the oral cavity, and high-grade malignant 
B-cell lymphoma affecting the cervical lymph nodes and 
nasopharynx. In addition, multiple ulcers may be found in the 
oral cavity or pharynx associated with herpesvirus infection. 
Severe candida may affect the oral cavity, pharynx, oesoph -
agus or even larynx, and a hairy leucoplakia may affect the 
tongue (Figure 47.26).
The globus syndrome
A wide variety of patients experience the feeling of a lump 
in the throat (from the Latin globus = lump). The symptom 
most commonly affects adults between 30 and 60 years of age. 
This feeling is not true dysphagia as there is no difficulty in 
swallowing. Most patients notice the symptom more if they 
swallow their own saliva ( i.e. a forced, dry swallow) rather 
than when they eat or drink.
The aetiology of this common symptom is unknown, but 
some patients may have gastro-oesophageal reflux or spasm 
of their cricopharyngeus muscle. Radiological and endoscopic 
investigation may be necessary to exclude an underlying cause 
and/or for patient reassurance.
Pharyngeal pouch
A pharyngeal pouch is a protrusion of mucosa though Kil -
lian’s dehiscence, a weak area of the posterior pharyngeal 
wall between the oblique fibres of the thyropharyngeus and 
the transverse fibres of cricopharyngeus at the lower end of 
the inferior constrictor muscle (Figure 47.27). These fibres, 
along with the circular fibres of the upper oesophagus, form 
the physiological upper oesophageal sphincter mechanism. 
Why the pouch forms is not yet clear, even with modern vid-
eofluoroscopic and manometric studies. Many patients with 
pharyngeal pouches have been demonstrated to have normal 
relaxation of the upper oesophageal sphincter mechanism in 
relation to swallowing, but others have been shown to have 
incomplete pharyngeal relaxation, early cricopharyngeal 
contraction and abnormalities of the pharyngeal contraction 
wave. When enlarged, the pouch almost invariably deviates 
to the left hand side, why this is the case is also unclear.
Moritz Kaposi , 1837–1902, Professor of Dermatology, Vienna, Austria, described pigmented sarcoma of the skin in 1872.
Gustav Killian , 1860–1921, Professor of Laryngology at Freiburg, and later at Berlin, Germany.
Figure 47.26 Intraoral view showing hairy tongue in a human immu-
nodeficiency virus-positive patient.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   738 25/10/2017   09:03Oropharynx 739
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Clinical features
Patients suffering from this condition are commonly more 
than 60 years of age and it is more common in men than 
women. As the diverticulum enlarges, patients may experi-
ence regurgitation of undigested food, sometimes hours after 
a meal, particularly if they are bending down or turning over 
in bed at night. They sometimes wake at night with a feeling 
of tightness in the throat and a fit of coughing. Occasionally, 
they may present with recurrent, unexplained chest infections 
as a result of aspiration of the contents of the pouch. As the 
pouch increases in size, patients may notice gurgling noises 
from the neck on swallowing and the pouch may become 
large enough to form a visible swelling in the neck.
Radiological examination
A thin emulsion of barium is given to the patient as a barium 
swallow (Figure 47.28) or ideally as part of a videofluoro -
scopic swallowing study. Care should be exercised in patients 
who cough on swallowing, indicating they may have aspira -
tion. A small volume of barium is sufficient to outline the 
pharynx, pouch and upper oesophagus. The videofluoroscopic 
study gives additional information about the pharyngeal con-
traction waves and the performance of the upper oesophageal 
sphincter.
Treatment
Surgery is indicated when the pouch is associated with pro -
gressive symptoms and particularly when a prominent crico -
pharyngeal bar of muscle associated with abnormality of the 
upper oesophageal sphincter mechanism causes considerable 
dysphagia. In elderly patients, a decision to operate may be 
influenced by their general condition. However, surgical 
intervention is mandated in all but the most poorly patients 
as, in most cases, it is the pouch that is contributing signifi -
cantly to the underlying debilitation. Of particular impor -
tance is the risk of recurrent pneumonia from aspiration and 
overspill of pouch contents, as well as increasing dysphagia 
as the pouch opening becomes larger than the oesophageal 
opening and the enlarged pouch exerts extramural pressure 
on the oesophagus. Accordingly, preoperative chest physio-
therapy and attention to the respiratory, cardiovascular and 
nutritional aspects of the patient are important.
The preferred surgical technique is endoscopic stapling 
of the diverticular wall. A double-bladed rigid endoscope is 
passed, with one blade in the diverticulum and one blade 
positioned in the oesophagus. Opening of the bivalve scope 
reveals the pathonmonic ‘bar’ formed by the cricopharyngeus 
muscle and overlying mucosa, which forms the boundary 
between the posterior wall of the oesophagus and the anterior 
wall of the pouch. At this stage the pouch should be emptied 
of food content and the mucosa should be inspected for the 
rare occurrence of carcinoma in the pouch. An endoscopic 
linear stapler is then introduced to sit astride of the ‘bar’. One 
jaw of the stapler is placed in the oesophagus, the other in the 
pouch. The stapler is fired dividing the wall separating the 
two. The process should be repeated until the bottom of the 
pouch is reached. This has the effect of opening the pouch, 
incorporating it as part of the oesophageal wall and dividing 
the cricopharyngeus muscle. If the patient is symptom free 
after the procedure, they may start graded per-oral intake and 
early discharge. Division of the ‘bar’ using CO 2 laser, as an 
alternative to stapling, is gaining popularity in some centres.
Occasionally, usually because of inadequate endoscopic 
access, an open excision of the pouch becomes necessary. In 
the classic external operation, the opening to the pouch is 
first identified using a pharyngoscope and a nasogastric tube 
placed into the oesophageal lumen for postoperative nutri -
tion. This initial endoscopy is often difficult because the nor-
mal oesophageal opening is small compared with the lumen of 
the pouch, but it may be better visualised using a Dohlman’s 
rigid endoscope. The pouch may be packed with ribbon gauze 
to further aid identification of its neck.
A lower neck incision along the anterior border of the left 
sternocleidomastoid muscle, or a transverse crease incision, 
is used and the muscle and carotid sheath are retracted later -
ally and the trachea and larynx medially. The pouch is found 
medially behind the lower pharynx and is carefully isolated 
and dissected back to its origin at Killian’s dehiscence. It is 
then excised and the pharynx closed in two layers or, if it 
Figure 47.27 A pharyngeal pouch.
Figure 47.28 Barium swallow showing a pharyngeal pouch.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   739 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK740
is small, the pouch may be invaginated into the pharyngeal 
lumen before closing the muscle layers. In all cases, a myot -
omy dividing the fibres of the cricopharyngeus muscle and the 
upper oesophageal circular muscle fibres must be performed. 
The wound is usually closed with drainage and the patient fed 
through a nasogastric tube for 3–7 days.
The average operating time with an endoscopic proce -
dure is 20–30 minutes compared with 60–90 minutes with 
an external procedure. Inpatient stay is also decreased for 
patients undergoing an endoscopic procedure. The endo-
scopic technique is associated with a high symptomatic suc-
cess rate and a low morbidity, which is particularly important 
in the elderly.
Complications
The classic operation has been associated with wound infec-
tion, mediastinitis, pharyngeal fistula formation, recurrent 
laryngeal nerve palsy and stenosis of the upper oesophagus. 
Endoscopic division is associated with the same risks but 
at much lower rates. The recurrence rates between the two 
procedures appears to be equal; longer-term follow up will 
establish this. Endoscopic stapling will also allow for safe 
reoperation if necessary.
In light of this risk–benefit difference, it is an option, if 
the main reason preventing endoscopic stapling is prom -
inent incisors, to offer extraction of the upper incisors to 
facilitate access for stapling. If available, primary osseointe -
grated implants could be inserted at the time of stapling to 
allow dental restoration. This approach, despite the dental 
extractions, is still less risky than an open procedure.
Sideropenic dysphagia
Prolonged iron deficiency anaemia may lead to dysphagia, 
particularly in middle-aged women. In addition, they may 
have koilonychia, cheilosis and angular stomatitis together 
with lassitude and poor exercise tolerance. The dysphagia is 
caused by a postcricoid or upper oesophageal web and these 
patients have a higher incidence of postcricoid malignancy. 
The syndrome is associated with the names of Plummer and 
Vinson, Paterson and Brown Kelly.
Tumours of the oropharynx
Benign
Benign tumours of the oropharynx are rare, papillomas being 
the most common. These are usually incidental findings and 
are rarely of any importance.
Malignant
The most important epithelial tumour is squamous cell carci-
noma, which constitutes approximately 90% of all  epithelial 
tumours in the upper aerodigestive tract (Figures 47.29 
and 47.30). In the oropharynx, the proportion is less (70%) 
because of the higher incidence of lymphoma (25%) and 
salivary gland tumours (5%). Because of the rich lymphatic 
drainage of the oropharynx, cervical node metastases are 
common. They may be the only presenting feature with an 
apparent occult primary tumour often being unsuspected and 
missed in the tonsil or tongue base.
AETIOLOGY
While it has been long established that oropharyngeal squa -
mous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is strongly associated with 
cigarette smoking and consumption of alcohol, over recent 
decades there has been a near epidemic increase in human 
papillomavirus-associated OPSCC (HPV+OPSCC) in the 
resource-rich world, with prevalences up to 70% being com -
monly reported in the USA, UK and Northern Europe. Why 
Henry Stanley Plummer , 1874–1937, physician, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA, described this syndrome in 1912.
Porter Paisley Vinson , 1890–1959, physician, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, who later practised in Richmond, VA, USA.
Donald Rose Paterson , 1863–1939, surgeon, The Ear, Nose and Throat Department, The Royal Infirmary, Cardiff, UK.
Adam Brown Kelly , 1865–1941, surgeon, The Ear, Nose and Throat Department, The Royal Victoria Infirmary, Glasgow, UK.
 Vinson, Paterson and Kelly all described this syndrome independently in 1919.
Figure 47.29 Squamous cell carcinoma of the right tonsil.
Figure 47.30 Squamous cell carcinoma of the soft palate.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   740 25/10/2017   09:03Hypopharynx 741
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
this increase has happened recently is unclear and is the subject 
of ongoing research. That HPV+OSCC constitutes a separate 
disease entity is undoubted. In contrast to patients presenting 
with HPV+OPSCC, those presenting with HPV-OPSCC are 
typically younger and fitter and smoke and drink less alcohol. 
Moreover, although the presenting features of HPV+OPSCC 
(multiple large cystic cervical lymph nodes with a high prev -
alence of extracapsular spread [ECS]) are usually associated 
with poor outcome, paradoxically, HPV+ tumours respond 
far better to treatment than their HPV- counterparts. Again, 
why this is the case is unclear and is the subject of much ongo-
ing research.
TREATMENT
Treatment varies with facilities around the world, but early 
stage tumours may be cured by radiotherapy, laser excision 
or more conventional excision. Intermediate or late stage 
disease is usually managed with open surgery and reconstruc -
tion using myocutanous pedicles or free flaps, or concurrent 
chemoradiotherapy. Recurrent disease following radiother -
apy +/- chemotherapy is a surgical challenge and usually 
requires open surgery and reconstruction. Neck dissection is 
required in most cases where surgery is the primary treatment 
modality and is also required for patients who have only par -
tially responded following chemoradiotherapy. Postoperative 
dysphagia with aspiration as a result of interference in the 
complex neuromuscular control of the second phase of swal -
lowing is a particular problem in these patients. The advent 
of HPV+OPSCC has created a clinical need to define novel 
de-intensified treatments that maintain current advantageous 
survival rates while reducing the late morbidity of treatment. 
Management of such tumours should be multidisciplinary and 
is best carried out in a major centre undertaking this work on 
a regular basis.
Lymphoma of the head and neck
Lymphomas of the head and neck may arise in nodal or extran-
odal sites and both Hodgkin’s disease and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma commonly present as lymph node enlargement 
in the neck. Hodgkin’s disease is rare in the oropharynx, but 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma accounts for 15–20% of tumours 
at this site in some countries. Most are of the B-cell type and 
have features in common with other MALT tumours. Further 
evaluation with CT scanning of the thorax and abdomen and 
bone marrow evaluation are essential. FNAC of neck lymph 
nodes is now mandatory (although excision biopsy to improve 
tissue yield is still often required to establish a grading diagno-
sis) and flow cytometry of the aspirates has aided in diagnosis 
and classification of lymphomas.
Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice for localised 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and may give control rates as 
high as 75% at 5 years. For disseminated non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma, systemic chemotherapy is preferred.
HYPOPHARYNX
Tumours of the hypopharynx
Benign
Benign tumours of the hypopharynx are very rare, the most 
common being the fibroma and the leiomyoma. They show a 
smooth, constant mass lying in the lumen of the hypopharynx 
or oesophagus.
Malignant
Malignant tumours of the hypopharynx are almost exclusively 
squamous cell carcinomas and typically behave aggressively . 
The tumours are usually classified according to their probable 
anatomical site of origin from the piriform fossa, postcricoid 
region or posterior pharyngeal wall. Marked differences in the 
incidence of these tumours occur globally because of factors 
such as iron-deficiency anaemia (see Sideropenic dysphagia, 
page 740). They may be associated with marked submucosal 
spread, which further complicates evaluation. Tumours aris -
ing from the piriform fossa and posterior pharyngeal wall may 
spread to upper or lower cervical nodes. Tumours arising in 
the postcricoid area typically metastasise to paratracheal and 
paraoesophageal nodes, which may not be palpable. As with 
other non-HPV head and neck cancers, alcohol and tobacco 
are two principal carcinogens. Postcricoid carcinoma, though 
rare, is more common in women than men.
The diagnosis of hypopharyngeal carcinoma should be 
considered in all patients presenting with dysphagia, hoarse -
ness or referred otalgia, particularly if they have a history of 
smoking or significant alcohol consumption.
Fibreoptic endoscopic examination in the clinic may 
show only subtle signs such as oedema or pooling of saliva 
unilaterally in the piriform fossa. Note should also be made 
that this region is not well seen on flexible gastroscopy. The 
preferred investigation is with direct rigid pharyngoscopy and 
oesophagoscopy with biopsy under a general anaesthetic. All 
regions of the neck must be assessed in a systematic manner. 
Fine-needle aspirate is advocated for suspicious nodes.
RADIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION
As for other head and neck cancers, a suspected primary 
tumour requires an MRI or CT scan of the neck together with 
a CT scan of the thorax and upper abdomen.
TREATMENT
Squamous cell carcinoma of the hypopharynx commonly 
presents late and carries a poor prognosis. Early lesions may 
be treated with radiotherapy or transoral endoscopic carbon 
dioxide laser resection and a neck dissection plus postoper -
ative radiotherapy. Non-surgical strategies for intermediate 
and late stage disease, designed to preserve function, rely 
on chemoradiotherapy. Major open excisional surgery is 
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, Curator of the Museum and Demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described lymphadenoma in 1832.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   741 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK742
 generally used for recurrence after radiotherapy or as primary 
excision in advanced disease. Total laryngectomy and either 
partial or total pharyngectomy followed by pharyngeal recon-
struction involving myocutaneous or free flap reconstruction 
(e.g. jejunum or anterolateral thigh) or gastric transposition 
is commonly required (Figure 47.31). Swallowing and voice 
rehabilitation are necessary to support patients after this 
major surgery if they are to adjust and maintain some quality 
of life.
Summary box 47.7
Tumours of the hypopharynx
●● Variable symptoms – discomfort, pain, dysphagia, hoarseness
●● Awareness increased by history of smoking and alcohol
●● Expert examination with nasendoscopy
●● Referral to multidisciplinary team for detailed assessment and 
treatment – radiotherapy +/- chemotherapy, transoral laser or 
extensive surgery
EMERGENCIES
Stridor
Stridor means noisy breathing. It may be inspiratory or expi -
ratory, or occur in both phases of respiration. Inspiratory 
stridor is usually due to an obstruction at or above the vocal 
folds and is most commonly the result of an inhaled foreign 
body or acute infections such as epiglottitis. Expiratory stridor 
is usually from the lower respiratory tract and gives rise to 
a prolonged expiratory wheeze. It is most commonly associ -
ated with acute asthma or acute infective tracheobronchitis. 
Biphasic stridor is usually due to obstruction or disease of the 
tracheobronchial airway and distal lungs.
Summary box 47.8
Stridor
Inspiratory
●● Foreign body or epiglottitis
Expiratory
●● Acute asthma or infective tracheobronchitis
Biphasic
●● Obstruction, disease of tracheobronchial airway or distal 
lungs
Figure 47.31 Total pharyngolaryngectomy specimen showing hypo-
pharyngeal carcinoma (hypopharynx opened from the posterior).
DISEASES OF THE LARYNX
Stridor in children
Infants and children presenting with stridor need careful 
assessment with a full history and examination as appropriate. 
If, on presentation, a child is cyanosed and severely unwell, 
the airway must be secured as soon as possible, but a brief 
history with important pointers can often be obtained from 
the parents.
History
In infants in the first year of life, it is important to establish 
if the stridor is associated with particular activities such as 
swallowing, crying or movement. These may suggest con -
genital laryngomalacia or subglottic stenosis. If the stridor is 
exacerbated by feeding, particularly in the first 4 weeks of life, 
this suggests a vascular ring compressing the oesophagus or 
tracheo-oesophageal fistula. If the cry is weak or abnormal, 
this suggests a vocal fold palsy. If the problem only occurs in 
association with an upper respiratory tract infection and, in 
particular, is biphasic, this would suggest congenital subglot -
tic stenosis. In a young child, inspiratory stridor and drooling 
suggest acute epiglottitis, whereas biphasic stridor without 
drooling suggests laryngotracheobronchitis or croup.
Examination
It is important when possible to observe the child carefully at 
rest. Once a baby starts to cry, it may be impossible to study 
its resting respiratory pattern for some time. Ask the mother, 
not a nurse or a colleague, to move a baby or young child 
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   742 25/10/2017   09:03Emergencies 743
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
into  different positions, such as face down and supine, and 
watch for changes in respiratory pattern and level of distress. 
Observe any drooling and, with neonates and infants, always 
try to watch the child being fed, listening to the trachea and 
chest with a stethoscope if possible. Always examine the 
whole child, looking for any evidence of congenital abnor -
malities before attempting any examination of the throat.
If a child is stridulous and drooling, do not attempt to lay 
it down and do not attempt to look inside the mouth. These 
manoeuvres are potentially life-threatening as the child may 
aspirate a large quantity of thick saliva contained within the 
oral cavity. It is particularly important in acute epiglottitis as 
the aspiration of thick saliva may be associated with further 
laryngeal spasm and a respiratory arrest. Restlessness, increas-
ing tachycardia and cyanosis are important signs of hypoxia. 
If the child is not distressed and drooling, and not markedly 
stridulous, he/she may be cooperative enough that it is pos-
sible to look inside the mouth and check the palate, tongue 
and oropharynx. In stridulous children, particularly neonates 
and infants, a transcutaneous oximeter is invaluable. A resus-
citation trolley with the necessary equipment for emergency 
intubation or tracheostomy should be close at hand if at all 
possible before commencing examination.
Investigation
Plain lateral radiographs of the neck and a chest radiograph 
can be obtained but only if the child’s condition permits. If a 
child is severely stridulous, they should not be sent to a radi-
ography department without access to medical staff or resus -
citation equipment.
Examination under anaesthesia is essential in all children 
whose diagnosis remains in doubt. This requires a high level 
of skill and appropriate rigid laryngoscopes, bronchoscopes, 
endoscopic Hopkins’ rods and an operating microscope should 
be made available if possible. Equipment should be available 
at all times to undertake an urgent tracheostomy to establish 
or maintain an airway.
Acute epiglottitis
In children acute epiglottitis is of rapid onset. It tends to 
occur in children of 2 years of age and over. Stridor is usually 
asso ciated with drooling of saliva. The condition is caused 
by Haemophilus influenzae  infection, which initially causes 
a severe pharyngitis that extends to involve the laryngeal 
inlet, causing inflammation and oedema. Further progression 
involves the whole of the supraglottic larynx, with severe 
oedema of the aryepiglottic folds and epiglottis being the 
most notable component, hence the commonly used term 
‘acute epiglottitis’.
These children frequently require intensive management 
with emergency intubation or tracheostomy followed by oxy-
genation, humidification, continuous oximetry and antibi-
otics such as ampicillin or chloramphenicol. There may be 
associated septicaemia so blood cultures should be obtained. 
Attempted examination with a spatula into the mouth may 
precipitate a respiratory arrest and should be avoided. The 
incidence of acute epiglottitis has plummeted where Hae-
mophilus influenzae vaccination programmes are in place.
Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)
Croup is usually of slower onset than acute epiglottitis and 
occurs most commonly in children under 2 years of age. It is 
usually viral in origin and the cases often occur in clusters. 
The children have biphasic stridor, and are often hoarse with 
a typical barking cough. Airway intervention is required less 
often, but admission to hospital with oxygenation and humid-
ification, coupled with antibiotics, may be necessary if there 
are signs of secondary infection.
Foreign bodies
Both children and adults may inhale foreign bodies. Y oung 
children will attempt to swallow a wide variety of objects, 
but coins, beads and parts of toys are particularly common. In 
adults, the aspiration is usually food, particularly inadequately 
chewed bones and meat. This is more common in elderly 
edentulous adults. Occasionally, portions of dentures may be 
inhaled, particularly in association with road traffic accidents.
Clinical features
The history is paramount and a history of foreign body inges-
tion or inhalation in a child, even though the pain, dyspha -
gia, coughing, etc. may have settled, should always be taken 
seriously.
Adults usually have a clear recall, which facilitates diag-
nosis. Fish bones may lodge in the tonsils or base of tongue 
with minimal symptoms, but small fish bones may give rise to 
delayed para- and retropharyngeal abscess formation.
Examination
Examination may be prevented by trismus, pain and anxiety , 
but the presence of a foreign bo dy may be suspected by a sal -
ivary pool within the piriform fossa or adjacent oedema and 
erythema of the pharyngolaryngeal mucosa.
Summary box 47.9
Acute paediatric stridor
Congenital
●● Laryngomalacia
●● Laryngeal web
●● Subglottic stenosis
Acquired
●● Inflammatory
Angioneurotic oedema
●● Traumatic
Impacted foreign body, laryngeal fracture
●● Infective
Epiglottis, laryngotracheobronchitis
●● Neurological
Vocal fold palsy
●● Neoplasia
Benign laryngeal papillomatosis
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   743 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK744
Radiology
Radiology may be helpful but is not critical. Fish bones are 
often invisible on plain radiographs and a normal plain radio-
graph does not exclude a foreign body within the pharynx, 
larynx, oesophagus or lungs.
Specialised studies may help in cases of doubt, using a 
CT scan or a gastrografin swallow in the case of a suspected 
oesophageal foreign body.
Treatment
In the case of an inhaled foreign body causing severe stridor 
in a neonate or infant, it may be removed either by hooking 
it from the pharynx with a finger or by inverting the child 
carefully by the ankles and slapping his/her back. In a larger 
child, it may be more appropriate to bend the child over your 
knee with the child’s head hanging down and again strike the 
child firmly between the shoulders. In the case of adults, an 
impacted laryngeal foreign body may be coughed out using 
a Heimlich manoeuvre. This involves standing behind the 
patient, clasping the arms around the lower thorax, such that 
the knuckles of the clasped hands come into contact with 
the patient’s xiphisternum, and then a brief, firm compres -
sion of the lower thorax may aid instant expiration of the 
foreign body. If none of these immediate emergency measures 
removes the foreign body and the patient is cyanosed and 
severely stridulous, an immediate cricothyroidotomy or tra -
cheostomy may be necessary. In less urgent cases, and when 
a foreign body is strongly suspected, endoscopy under general 
anaesthesia may be indicated.
Other causes of acute 
pharyngolaryngeal oedema
Angioneurotic oedema, radiotherapy, laryngeal trauma associ-
ated with road traffic accidents, corrosives, scalds and smoke 
ingestion may all cause significant pharyngolaryngeal oedema, 
in addition to the acute infective conditions mentioned above. 
Hoarseness is the predominant symptom along with dyspha -
gia prior to the increase in dyspnoea. If flexible laryngoscopic 
examination is possible, marked oedema of the supraglottis 
and pharynx can be seen. Humidified oxygen, adrenaline 
nebulisers, systemic antihistamines and steroids may be valu-
able. Morphine should not be given as it may cause respiratory 
depression and respiratory arrest. If the dyspnoea progresses, 
intubation or tracheostomy will be necessary.
TRACHEOSTOMY AND 
OTHER EMERGENCY AIRWAY 
MEASURES
This procedure relieves airway obstruction or protects the air-
way by fashioning a direct entrance into the trachea through 
the skin of the neck. Tracheostomy may be carried out as 
an emergency for acute airway obstruction when the larynx 
cannot be intubated, but it is not always an easy procedure, 
particularly in an obese patient. An easier alternative for the 
inexperienced is insertion of a large intravenous cannula or a 
small tube into the cricothyroid membrane, which lies in the 
midline immediately below the thyroid cartilage. The time to 
do a tracheostomy is when you first think it may be necessary.
If time allows, the following should be undertaken:
 ● inspection and palpation of the neck to assess the laryngo-
tracheal anatomy in the individual patient;
 ● indirect or direct laryngoscopy;
 ● assessment of pulmonary function by auscultation.
Whenever possible, the procedure should be adequately 
explained to the patient beforehand, with particular emphasis 
on the inability to speak immediately following the opera -
tion. Ample reassurance is required that they will not have 
‘lost’ their voice permanently. The indications for tracheos-
tomy are shown in Summary box 47.10.
Henry Jay Heimlich , 1920–2016, thoracic surgeon, Xavier University, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
Summary box 47.10
Indications for tracheostomy
Acute upper airway obstruction
●● For example, an inhaled foreign body, a large 
pharyngolaryngeal tumour, or acute pharyngolaryngeal 
infections in children
Potential upper airway obstruction
●● For example, after or prior to major surgery involving the oral 
cavity, pharynx, larynx or neck
Protection of the lower airway
●● For example, protection against aspiration of saliva in 
unconscious patients as a consequence of head injuries, 
maxillofacial injuries, comas, bulbar poliomyelitis or tetanus
Patients requiring prolonged artificial respiration
●● Best performed within 10 days of ventilation
Emergency tracheostomy
If a skilled anaesthetist is unavailable, local anaesthesia is 
employed, but in desperate cases when the patient is uncon -
scious, none is required. In patients who have suffered 
severe head and neck trauma and who may have an unsta -
ble cervical spine fracture, cricothyroidotomy may be more 
suitable. If it is possible, the patient should be laid supine 
with padding placed under the shoulders and the extended 
neck kept as steady as possible in the midline. This aids 
palpation of the thyroid and cricoid cartilage between the 
thumb and index finger of the free hand. The movements 
of the fingers of the free hand are important in this tech-
nique. The operation is more difficult in small children and 
thick-necked adults as the landmarks are difficult to palpate 
(Figures 47.32 and 47.33) .
A vertical midline incision is made from the inferior 
aspect of the thyroid cartilage to the suprasternal notch and 
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   744 25/10/2017   09:03Tracheostomy and other emergency airway measures 745
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
continued down between the infrahyoid muscles. There may 
be heavy bleeding from the wound at this point, particularly 
if the neck is congested as a result of the patient’s efforts to 
breathe around an acute upper airway obstruction. No steps 
should be taken to control this haemorrhage, although an 
assistant and suction are valuable. The operator should feel 
carefully for the cricoid cartilage using the index finger of the 
free hand while retracting the skin edges by pressure applied by 
the thumb and middle finger. If the situation is one of extreme 
urgency, a further vertical incision straight into the trachea at 
the level of the second, third and fourth ring should be made 
immediately without regard to the presence of the thyroid 
isthmus. The knife blade is rotated through 90º, thus opening 
the trachea. At this point the patient may cough violently as 
blood enters the airway. The operator should be aware of this 
possibility and avoid losing the position of the scalpel in the 
open trachea. Any form of available tube should be inserted 
into the trachea as soon as possible and blood and secretion 
sucked out. Once an airway has been established, haemostasis 
is then secured. With the emergency under control, the tra -
cheostomy should be refashioned as soon as possible.
Should additional equipment and more time be avail -
able once the cricoid cartilage has been identified, blunt fin-
ger  dissection inferiorly can be used to mobilise the thyroid 
isthmus, which should be clipped and divided, clearing the 
trachea before making a vertical incision through the second 
to the fourth rings. A tracheal dilator is inserted through the 
tracheal incision and the edges of the tracheal wound are sep-
arated gently. This is likely to induce coughing and so, partic-
ularly in cases where there is a suspected infection risk, as far 
as possible care should be taken to minimise the risk of con -
taminating the operator(s). A tracheostomy tube is inserted 
into the trachea and the dilator removed. It is important that 
the surgeon keeps a finger on the tube while the assistant ties 
the attached tapes around the patient’s neck. Return the neck 
to a neutral position before tying the tapes firmly.
Elective tracheostomy
The advantage of an elective surgical procedure is that there 
is complete airway control at all times, unhurried dissection 
and careful placement of an appropriate tube. Close cooper -
ation between the surgeon, anaesthetist and scrub nurse is 
essential, and attention to detail will markedly reduce pos -
sible complications and morbidity from the procedure.
Following induction of general anaesthesia and endo-
tracheal intubation, the patient is positioned with a combi-
nation of head extension and placement of an appropriate 
sandbag under the shoulders (Figure 47.34). There should 
be no rotation of the head. Children’s heads should not be 
overextended, as it is possible to enter the trachea in the fifth 
and sixth rings in these circumstances. A transverse incision 
may be used in the elective situation (Figure 47.35). The 
tracheal isthmus is divided carefully and oversewn and ten -
sion sutures placed either side of the tracheal fenestration in 
children (Figure 47.36). A Bjork flap may be used in adults 
(Figures 47.37 and 47.38).www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.32Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.32 Position of the skin incision in an emergency trache -
ostomy.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.33Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.33 An incision in the trachea in an emergency tracheos -
tomy.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.34Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.34 Position of the patient for elective tracheostomy.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   745 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK746
The advantages of a Bjork flap outweigh the potential 
disadvantages, as performed correctly it is safe and allows 
reintroduction of a displaced tube with the minimum of 
difficulty, reducing the risk of replacing the displaced tube 
in a false track anterior to the trachea into the superior 
mediastinum.
The inferiorly based flap is created by starting with an 
incision into the trachea between the first and second or 
 second and third tracheal rings. In order to reduce the risk of 
subglottic stenosis, damage to the first tracheal ring should be 
avoided at all costs. A stay suture is inserted around the car -
tilage at the free edge of the flap. Lateral incisions are made 
in a caudal direction extending through two tracheal rings to 
create the flap. One option is to leave the stay suture attached 
and taped to the chest wall to allow retraction of the flap to 
obliterate the pretracheal space when replacing a displaced 
tube. An alternative is to suture the free edge of the flap to the 
edge of the inferior transverse skin incision.
In a paediatric patient a vertical incision is made between 
the second and third tracheal rings. No tracheal tissue is 
removed. Prior to incision of the trachea, vertical stay sutures 
are placed lateral to the midline through the tracheal rings 
and left in place. These can provide traction for the trachea 
and allow for rapid tracheostomy tube reinsertion if acciden -
tal decannulation occurs prior to the establishment of the 
tract. Some surgeons will suture skin flaps to the trachea for 
additional safety. It is essential to stick to the midline during 
dissection as more lateral dissection risks a pneumothorax, as 
the cupula of the cervical pleura extends in to the neck on 
either side of the trachea.
Viking Olaf Bjork , 1918–2009, formerly cardiac surgeon, Karolinska Sjukset, Stockholm, Sweden.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.35Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.35 Position of the skin incision in an elective tracheos -
tomy.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:48.36Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.36 Tracheal fenestration in an elective tracheostomy.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.37Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.37 Bjork flap.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.38Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.38 Fenestration in a Bjork flap.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   746 25/10/2017   09:03Tracheostomy and other emergency airway measures 747
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Percutaneous tracheostomy
As an alternative to open tracheostomy, a percutaneous tra -
cheostomy is commonly performed in the critical care set -
ting. A transverse skin incision is made at the level of the first 
and second tracheal rings, blunt dissection of the midline is 
then performed. A 22-gauge needle is inserted between the 
second and third tracheal rings. When air is aspirated into 
the syringe, the guidewire is intro duced. Sequentially larger 
dilators are then inserted over the guide wire to create a 
suitable sized tracheostome. Finally, the tracheotomy tube is 
introduced along the guidewire and dilator. The guidewire 
and dilator are removed, the cuff of the tracheotomy tube is 
inflated and the breathing circuit is connected. The endotra-
cheal tube can then be removed.
Patients must have appropriate anatomy and no limitation 
of neck movement. If any doubt arises as to the suitability of 
a patient for percutaneous tracheostomy, a surgical approach 
should be adopted. Percutaneous tracheostomy is rarely per -
formed in children.
Tracheostomy tubes
Most modern tracheostomy tubes are made of plastic (Fig-
ure 47.39). Tubes of various sizes with varying curves, angles, 
cuffs, inner tubes and speaking valves are available. After a 
newly fashioned tracheostomy is created, a cuffed tube is used 
initially to protect the airway from secretions or bleeding. 
This may be changed after 3–4 days to a non-cuffed tube. The 
pressure within the tube cuff should be carefully monitored 
and should be low enough so as not to occlude circulation 
in the mucosal capillaries, which promotes scar tissue for -
mation and subglottic stenosis. When in position, the tube 
should retained by double tapes threaded through the flanges 
and passed around the patient’s neck. It is important that the 
patient’s head is flexed when the tapes are tied, otherwise they 
may become slack when the patient is moved from the posi -
tion of extension, thereby resulting in a possible displacement 
of the tube if the patient coughs. Alternatively, the flanges 
of the plastic tube may be stitched directly to the underlying 
neck skin. A removable inner tube, which is easily cleaned, 
should always be used to prevent lumen occlusion by thick-
ened, dried secretions from the trachea.
All forms of tracheostomy and cricothyroidotomy bypass 
the upper airway and have the following advantages:
 ● the anatomical dead space is reduced by approximately 50%;
 ● the work of breathing is reduced;
 ● alveolar ventilation is increased;
 ● the level of sedation needed for patient comfort is decreased 
and, unlike endotracheal intubation, the patient may be 
able to talk and eat with a tube in place.
However, there are several disadvantages:
 ● loss of heat and moisture exchange in the upper respira -
tory tract;
 ● desiccation of tracheal epithelium, loss of ciliated cells 
and metaplasia;
 ● the presence of a foreign body in the trachea stimulates 
mucous production; where no cilia are present, the muco-
ciliary stream is therefore impeded;
 ● the increased mucus is more viscid and thick crusts may 
form and block the tube;
 ● although many patients with a tracheostomy can feed 
satisfactorily, there is some splinting of the larynx, which 
may prevent normal swallowing and lead to aspiration; 
this aspiration may be silent.
Postoperative treatment is designed to counteract these 
effects and frequent suction and humidification are most 
important. A trolley must be placed by the bed containing 
a tracheal dilator, duplicate tubes and introducers, retractors 
and dressings. Oxygen is at hand and, in the initial period, 
a nurse must be in constant attendance. Humidification will 
render the secretions less viscid and a sucker with a catheter 
attached should be on hand to keep the tracheobronchial tree 
free from secretions.
Figure 47.39 Modern plastic tracheostomy tube with intr oducer, 
low-pressure cuff and inner cannula.
Summary box 47.11
Tracheostomy: postoperative management
●● Suction – efficient, sterile and as often as required
●● Humidification (with or without oxygen)
●● A warm, well-ventilated room
●● Position of the tube and patient
●● Spare tube, introducer, tapes, tracheal dilator
●● Change of tube, inner tube, possible speaking valve
●● Physiotherapy
●● Initiation of local decannulation protocols where indicated
Complications of tracheostomy
The intraoperative, early and late postoperative complica -
tions of tracheostomy are listed in Table 47.2.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   747 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK748
OTHER EMERGENCY AIRWAY 
PROCEDURES
Fibreoptic endotracheal 
intubation
In most emergency situations, endotracheal intubation is 
the most direct and satisfactory method of securing the air -
way. Nasotracheal ‘awake’ intubation in expert hands is also 
a well-established technique and is particularly useful if the 
patient has trismus, severe mandibular injuries, cervical spine 
rigidity or an obstructing mass within the oral cavity. This 
is facilitated by passing a fibreoptic endoscope through the 
 centre of an endotracheal tube, hence guiding it into the 
 larynx and trachea under direct vision.
Laryngeal mask airway
The laryngeal mask airway (LMA) is a wide-bore airway 
with an inflatable cuff at the distal end, which forms a seal in 
the pharynx around the laryngeal inlet. Provided the laryn -
gotracheal airway is clear, the LMA provides a clear and 
secure airway. The technique can easily be learnt by non-  
anaesthetists and secures an airway in most cases. It comes 
in a range of sizes covering infants to large adults. It is par -
ticularly useful in cases of difficult intubation where mouth 
opening is unimpeded (Figure 47.40).
Transtracheal ventilation
This technique is simple and effective and allows ventilation 
for periods in excess of 1 hour providing time to allow for more 
elective intubation. The cricothyroid membrane is located 
by palpation of the neck with the index finger, and a 14- or 
16-gauge plastic sheathed intravascular needle and a 10  mL 
syringe containing a few millilitres of lidocaine are intro-
duced in the midline and directed downwards and backwards 
into the tracheal lumen. The needle is advanced steadily and 
negative pressure is placed on the syringe until bubbles of air 
are clearly seen (Figure 47.41). The tissues of the neck may 
be infiltrated with the anaesthetic if desired and the tracheal 
mucosa likewise partly anaesthetised by the introduction of 
1–2 mL after gaining the lumen. The needle is removed and 
the plastic sheath cannula remains in the tracheal lumen and 
must be carefully held and fixed in place by the operator so 
that it does not come out of the lumen into the soft tissues of 
the neck. It is attached by means of a Luer connection to the 
high-pressure oxygen supply. Ventilation may be undertaken 
in a controlled manner with a jetting device, with the chest 
being observed for appropriate movements.
If there is severe obstruction of the laryngopharynx by the 
foreign body or tumour, the exhaled outflow of gases can be 
TABLE 47.2 Tracheostomy: complications.
Intraoperative complications Haemorrhage
Injury to paratracheal structures, particularly the carotid artery, recurrent laryngeal nerve 
and oesophagus
Damage to the trachea
Early postoperative complications Apnoea caused by a fall in the PCO2
Haemorrhage
Subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax
Accidental extubation, anterior displacement of the tube, obstruction of the tube lumen 
and tip occlusion against the tracheal wall
Infection
Swallowing dysfunction
Late postoperative complications Difficult decannulation
Tracheocutaneous fistula
Tracheo-oesophageal fistula, tracheoinnominate artery fistula with severe haemorrhage
Tracheal stenosis
Figure 47.40 Laryngeal mask airway being inserted.
Luer  was a German instrument maker who was working in Paris, France, at the end of the 19th century.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   748 25/10/2017   09:03Laryngeal disease causing voice disor ders 749
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
aided by the placement of one or two further cannulas as exha-
lation ports. This procedure gains extremely rapid control of 
ventilation and requires a minimum of technical expertise. Its 
only notable complication is surgical emphysema of the neck 
tissues if the cannula dislodges from the tracheal lumen.
Cricothyroidotomy
Cricothyroidotomy has the advantages of speed and ease 
requiring minimal equipment and surgical expertise and has 
great value in the emergency setting when conditions are not 
optimal to perform a tracheostomy.
The patient’s neck is extended and the area between the 
prominence of the thyroid cartilage and the cricoid cartilage 
below is palpated with the index finger of the free hand. In 
the emergency situation, a vertical skin incision is recom -
mended with dissection rapidly carried down to the cricothy-
roid membrane. A 1  cm transverse incision is made through 
the membrane immediately above the cricoid cartilage and 
the scalpel twisted through a right angle to gain access to 
the airway. If available, an artery forceps, dilator or tracheal 
hook will improve the aperture and insertion of an available 
tube (Figures 47.42 and 47.43). As soon as practicably pos-
sible, the cricothyroidotomy should be converted to a tra -
cheostomy. Although there is debate about the frequency of 
subglottic stenosis following this procedure, there is general 
agreement that it is much increased if any long-term ventila-
tion is undertaken via even a modestly size tracheostomy tube 
through the cricothyroid membrane.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.42Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.41 Transtracheal needle introduction.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 43.43Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.42 Incision in a cricothyroidotomy.www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.44Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.43 Insertion of a tube after cricothyroidotomy.
LARYNGEAL DISEASE CAUSING 
VOICE DISORDERS
Vocal nodules
These are fibrous thickenings of the vocal folds at the junc -
tion of the middle and anterior third (Figure 47.44 ) and 
result from vocal abuse; they are known as singers’ nodules in 
adults and screamers’ nodules in children. Speech therapy is 
therefore the preferred treatment and the lesions will resolve 
spontaneously in most cases. Occasionally, the nodules will 
need to be surgically removed using modern microlaryngo-
scopic dissection or laser techniques, but speech therapy will 
still be required for postoperative voice rehabilitation.
Vocal fold polyps
These are usually unilateral and may be associated with an 
acute infective episode, cigarette smoking or vocal abuse 
(Figure 47.45). Speech therapy is again indicated, but they 
do usually require removal by microdissection or laser surgery.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   749 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK750
Laryngeal papillomata
These are rare benign tumours occurring mainly in children, 
but can also present in adults. They are most commonly found 
on the vocal folds, but may spread throughout the larynx and 
tracheobronchial airway (although this is less likely in adults) 
(Figure 47.46). They are caused by papillomaviruses and 
need repeated removal by carbon dioxide laser or microsur -
gery to maintain a reasonable voice and airway. These patients 
are best managed in specialist centres, with the appropriate 
expertise. Antiviral treatment is of doubtful value. Papilloma 
vaccination is, to date, of unproven benefit.
Summary box 47.12
Causes of hoarseness
●● Mucosal disease (e.g. vocal nodule, polyps or laryngeal 
papillomatosis, acute or chronic laryngitis)
●● Neurological disease (e.g. vocal fold palsy)
●● Neoplasia (e.g. laryngeal tumours)
●● Non-specific voice disorders, functional dysphonia
Figure 47.44 Vocal fold nodules.
Figure 47.45 A vocal fold polyp.
Figure 47.46 Laryngeal papillomata.
Acute laryngitis
This often occurs as part of an upper respiratory tract infec -
tion in association with a cough and pharyngitis. Usually 
viral, it may be localised to the larynx and it settles quickly 
if the voice is rested during the acute inflammation. Steam 
inhalations are soothing along with mild analgesia, but anti -
biotics are unnecessary.
Summary box 47.13
Warning
●● Hoarseness lasting for 3–4 weeks should always be referred 
for an ENT opinion
Chronic laryngitis
Chronic laryngitis may be specific and can be caused by myco-
bacteria, syphilis and fungi. Treatment is directed towards the 
causative organism. Non-specific laryngitis is common, the 
main predisposing factors being smoking, chronic upper and 
lower respiratory sepsis and voice abuse. Gastro-oesophageal 
reflux has been implicated as a factor in laryngitis, vocal fold 
nodules and polyps, but the evidence is controversial. How-
ever, anti-reflux medication and proton pump inhibitors are 
commonly prescribed. Diagnosis of chronic laryngitis should 
not be made unless the larynx has been fully evaluated by a 
laryngologist.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   750 25/10/2017   09:03Laryngeal disease causing voice disor ders 751
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Vocal fold palsy
This may be unilateral or bilateral (Figure 47.47). Uni lateral 
cord palsy is most commonly idiopathic. In non-  idiopathic 
cases, left vocal fold palsy is most common because of the 
long intrathoracic course of the left recurrent laryngeal 
nerve, which arches around the aorta and may be commonly 
involved in inflammatory and neoplastic conditions involv -
ing the left hilum or lung apex. Lung cancer should be con -
sidered the cause of a left vocal palsy until proved otherwise.
Tumours of the nasopharynx, larynx, thyroid gland or 
oesophagus may also cause vocal cord palsy. Bilateral vocal 
fold paralysis is uncommon and tends to occur after thyroid 
surgery or head injuries.
On anaesthetic reversal, acute dyspnoea occurs as a result of 
the paramedian position of both vocal folds, which reduce 
the airway to 2–3 mm and which tend to get sucked together 
on inspiration. In severe cases, tracheostomy or intubation is 
necessary immediately, otherwise death occurs from asphyxia.
Investigation of vocal fold paralysis is by a CT scan from 
the skull base (including posterior fossa) to the diaphragm. 
Approximately 20–25% of vocal fold paralysis occurs with -
out known pathology and spontaneous recovery may occur. 
When compensation does not occur, a unilateral paralysed 
fold may be medialised by injection or external thyroplasty.
In bilateral vocal fold palsy, surgery may be carried out to 
remove a portion of the posterior aspect of one vocal fold or a 
portion of one arytenoid cartilage. These procedures are most 
easily performed endoscopically with a carbon dioxide laser. 
They increase the size of the posterior glottic airway, allow-
ing the patient to be decannulated or even avoid an initial 
tracheostomy.
Tumours of the larynx
Benign tumours of the larynx are extremely rare. Squamous 
cell carcinoma is the most common malignant tumour, being 
responsible for more than 90% of tumours within the larynx. It 
is the second most common head and neck cancer (oral cavity is 
more common) and previously usually occurred in elderly male 
smokers. However, over the past decades, the incidence among 
women has risen as a consequence of increased smoking habits. 
The incidence of laryngeal cancer in the three compartments, 
supraglottis, glottis and subglottis, varies around the world. The 
glottis is generally the most common site for cancer in patients 
in the UK, followed by the supraglottis (Figure 47.48).
Clinical features
Patients typically present with voice change. If an early diag-
nosis can be made (i.e. confined to one vocal fold), treatment 
with radiotherapy or carbon dioxide laser excision is associ-
ated with a 5-year disease-free survival of approximately 90%. 
This rate drops dramatically once the lymphatically rich 
supraglottis or subglottis is involved because of spread to neck 
nodes. Tumour spread to just one neck gland reduces by half 
the overall prognosis for the patient.
Investigations
Direct laryngoscopy, preferably a microlaryngoscopy, together 
with angled (30° and 70°) Hopkins’ rod examination, allows 
precise determination of the extent of the tumour and biopsy 
confirms the histology. CT and MRI give further details of 
the extent of larger tumours, demonstrating spread outside 
the larynx and suspicious nodal involvement within the neck, 
which may not be obvious clinically. The tumour–node–
metastasis (TNM) classification of laryngeal cancer is given 
in Table 47.3.
Treatment
EARLY LARYNGEAL CANCER (T1 AND T2)
Early stage supraglottic and glottic tumours are optimally 
treated with either radiotherapy or endoscopic surgical 
(a) (b)
Figure 47.47 Vocal fold positions: (a) normal; (b)  unilateral vocal 
fold palsy.
Summary box 47.14
Causes of vocal fold palsy
Congenital (infants)
Acquired
●● Traumatic
Direct to neck
Post-surgical (e.g. thyroidectomy)
●● Infective
Viral (rare)
●● Neoplastic
Carcinoma of the lung involving the left hilum
Carcinoma of the nasopharynx, larynx, thyroid and 
oesophagus
●● Vascular
Aortic aneurysm
●● Neurological
Lower motor neurone disease
Clinical features
Unilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy of sudden onset pro-
duces hoarseness, difficulty in swallowing liquids and a weak-
ened cough. These symptoms may be short-lived and the voice 
may return to normal within a few weeks as the muscles in the 
opposite vocal fold compensate and move it across the midline 
to meet the paralysed vocal fold, which usually lies in the para-
median position. Bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy is an 
occasional and serious complication of total thyroidectomy . 
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   751 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK752
 resection, with the aim of preservation of some function. 
Although both modalities are associated with similar survival 
rates, transoral laser resection is commonly used as it usually 
involves day case surgery and more therapeutic options are 
available for the small mumber of patients who suffer local 
recurrence.
ADVANCED LARYNGEAL CANCER (T3 AND T4)
Organ preservation should be a priority when treating T3 
 larynx cancer. The non-surgical standard of care is con -
current chemoradiotherapy, while a variety of open partial 
laryn gectomy procedures are also available but these are best 
undertaken in specialist centres.
T4 disease is usually best treated with total laryngectomy 
and adjuvant postoperative radiotherapy or chemoradio -
therapy.
After the larynx has been removed, the remaining trachea 
is brought out onto the lower neck as a permanent tracheal 
stoma and the hypopharynx, which is opened at the time of 
the operation, is closed to restore continuity for swallowing 
(Figure 47.49). Thus the upper aero- and digestive tracts are 
permanently disconnected. Part or all of the thyroid gland 
and associated parathyroid glands may also be removed, 
depending on the extent of the disease.
Vocal rehabilitation
The loss of the larynx as a generator of sound does not prevent 
patients speaking as long as an alternative source of sound can 
be created by vibration in the pharynx. This can be achieved 
in one of three ways:
1 A small one-way valve may be inserted through the 
back wall of the tracheal stoma into the pharynx (Fig-
ure 47.50). This allows air from the trachea to pass into 
Figure 47.48  A total laryngectomy specimen with a transglottic 
tumour.
TABLE 47.3 Tumour–node–metastasis (TNM) classification 
of laryngeal carcinoma.
T – primary tumour
■ TX Primary tumour cannot be assessed
■ T0 No evidence of primary tumour
■ Tis Carcinoma in situ
■ Supraglottis
– TI Tumour limited to one subsite of supraglottis, with 
normal vocal fold mobility
– T2 Tumour invades more than one subsite of 
supraglottis, with normal vocal fold mobility
– T3 Tumour limited to larynx with vocal fold fixation 
and/or invades post-cricoid area, medial wall of 
piriform sinus or pre-epiglottic tissues
– T4 Tumour invades through cartilage and/or extends 
to other tissues beyond the larynx (e.g. to 
oropharynx, soft tissues of neck)
■ Glottis
– T1 Tumour limited to vocal fold(s) (may involve anterior 
or posterior commissures) with normal mobility
– T1a Tumour limited to one vocal fold
– T1b Tumour involves both vocal folds
– T2 Tumour extends to supraglottis and/or subglottis, 
and/or with impaired vocal fold mobility
– T3 Tumour limited to the larynx with vocal fold 
fixation
– T4 Tumour invades through thyroid cartilage and/or 
extends to other tissues beyond the larynx (e.g. to 
oropharynx, soft tissues of the neck)
■ Subglottis
– T1 Tumour limited to the subglottis
– T2 Tumour extends to vocal fold(s) with normal or 
impaired mobility
– T3 Tumour limited to the larynx with vocal fixation
– T4 Tumour invades through thyroid cartilage and/or 
extends to other tissues beyond the larynx (e.g. to 
oropharynx, soft tissues of the neck)
N – regional lymph nodes
■ N0 No regional lymph node metastases
■ N1 Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node 3 cm or less 
in greatest diameter
■ N2 Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node more than 
3 cm or in multiple ipsilateral nodes or in bilateral or 
contralateral nodes
M – distant metastasis
Stage grouping
Stage 0 Tis N0 M0
Stage I T1 N0 M0
Stage II T2 N0 M0
Stage III T1 N1 M0
T2 N1 M0
T3 N0, N1 M0
Stage IV T4 N0, N1 M0
Any T N2, N3 M0
Any T Any N M1
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   752 25/10/2017   09:03Lump in the neck 753
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
the pharynx, but does not allow food and liquid to pass 
into the airway. These valves must not be confused with 
tracheostomy tubes. Like all foreign bodies, the speaking 
valves are associated with minor complications, such as 
the formation of granulations, bleeding or leakage of pha-
ryngeal contents, and have an ongoing financial cost due 
to the need for regular replacement.
2 An external battery-powered vibrating device when applied 
to the soft tissues of the neck produces sound, which is 
turned into speech by the vocal tract comprising the 
tongue, pharynx, oral cavity, lips, teeth and nasal sinuses.
3 Oesophageal speech when air is swallowed into the 
pharynx and upper oesophagus. On regurgitating the air, a 
segment of the pharyngo-oesophageal mucosa vibrates to 
produce sound, which is modified by the vocal tract into 
speech (Figure 47.51).
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.50Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.49  Transverse closure of the pharynx with an endo -
tracheal tube in the end tracheostome.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 48.52Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 47.50  A Blom–Singer valve with a tracheo-oesophageal 
 fistula and an outer stoma valve.
Figure 47.51 Production of oesophageal speech.
DISEASES OF THE NECK
LUMP IN THE NECK
On presentation, a careful history and examination is essen-
tial. The clinical signs of size, site, shape, consistency, fixation 
to skin or deep structures, pulsation, compressibility , transil-
lumination or the presence of a bruit must be established and 
recorded.
Branchial cyst
A branchial cyst develops from the vestigial remnants of the 
second branchial cleft, is lined by squamous epithelium and 
contains thick, turbid fluid. The cyst usually presents in the 
upper neck in early or middle adulthood and is found at the 
junction of the upper third and middle third of the sternomas-
toid muscle at its anterior border. It is a fluctuant swelling that 
may transilluminate and is often soft in its early stages so that 
it may be difficult to palpate.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   753 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK754
mouth areas. The swelling may be bilateral and is soft and 
partially compressible, visibly increasing in size when the 
child coughs or cries. The characteristic that distinguishes it 
from all other neck swellings is that it is brilliantly translu -
cent. The cheek, axilla, groin and mediastinum are other less 
frequent sites for a cystic hygroma.
The behaviour of cystic hygromas during infancy is unpre-
dictable. Sometimes the cyst expands rapidly and occasionally 
respiratory difficulty ensues, requiring immediate aspiration 
and even occasionally a tracheostomy. The cyst may become 
infected.
Summary box 47.15
Diagnosis of a lump in the neck
History
Physical signs
●● Size
●● Site
●● Shape
●● Surface
●● Consistency
●● Fixation: deep/superficial
●● Pulsatility
●● Compressibility
●● Transillumination
●● Bruit
If the cyst becomes infected, it becomes erythematous and 
tender and the differential diagnosis is broadened. Ultrasound 
and fine-needle aspiration both aid diagnosis and treatment 
is by complete excision, which is best undertaken when the 
lesion is quiescent. Although the anterior aspect of the cyst 
is easy to dissect, it may pass backwards and upwards through 
the bifurcation of the common carotid artery as far as the pha-
ryngeal constrictors. It passes superficial to the hypoglossal 
and glossopharyngeal nerves, but deep to the posterior belly of 
the digastric. These structures and the spinal accessory nerve 
must be positively identified to avoid damage. In patients over 
40 years of age, a high index of suspicion for a necrotic meta-
static lymph should exists and malignancy should be excluded 
before excision.
Branchial fistula
A branchial fistula (Figure 47.52) may be unilateral or bilat-
eral and is thought to represent a persistent second branchial 
cleft. The external orifice is nearly always situated in the lower 
third of the neck near the anterior border of the sternocleido-
mastoid, while the internal orifice is located on the anterior 
aspect of the posterior faucial pillar just behind the tonsil. 
The internal aspect of the tract may, however, end blindly 
at or close to the lateral pharyngeal wall, constituting a sinus 
rather than a fistula. The tract is lined by ciliated columnar 
epithelium and, as such, there may be a small amount of 
recurrent mucopurulent discharge onto the neck. The tract 
follows the same path as a branchial cyst and requires com-
plete excision to avoid recurrence.
Cystic hygroma
Cystic hygromas ( Figure 47.53) usually present in the neo -
nate or in early infancy, and occasionally may present at birth 
and be so large as to obstruct labour. The cysts are filled with 
clear lymph and lined by a single layer of epithelium with a 
mosaic appearance. Swelling usually occurs in the neck and 
may involve the parotid, submandibular, tongue and floor of 
(a)
(b)
Figure 47.52 (a) Plain radiograph with radiopaque dye in the fistula 
tract. (b) Probing of the fistula tract. (c) Excision of the fistula tract.
(c)
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   754 25/10/2017   09:03Trauma to the neck 755
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Treatment
Treatment must include excision of the whole thyroglos -
sal tract, which involves removal of the bo dy of the hyoid 
bone and the suprahyoid tract through the tongue base to 
the vallecula at the site of the primitive foramen caecum, 
together with a core of tissue on either side. This operation 
is known as Sistrunk’s operation and prevents recurrence, 
most notably from small side branches of the thyroglossal 
tract.
TRAUMA TO THE NECK
Wounds above the hyoid bone
The cavity of the mouth or pharynx may have been entered 
and the epiglottis may be divided via the pre-epiglottic 
space. These wounds require repair with absorbable sutures 
on a formal basis under a general anaesthetic. If there is 
any degree of associated oedema or bleeding, particularly in 
relation to the tongue base or laryngeal inlet, it is advisable 
to perform a tracheostomy to avoid any subsequent respira -
tory distress.
Wounds of the thyroid and cricoid 
cartilage
Blunt crushing injuries or severe laceration injuries to the 
laryngeal skeleton can cause marked haematoma formation or 
swelling and rapid loss of the airway. There may be significant 
disruption of the laryngeal skeleton. These patients should 
not have an endotracheal intubation for any length of time, 
even if this is the initial emergency way of protecting the air-
way. The larynx is a delicate three-tiered sphincter and the 
presence of a foreign body in its lumen after severe disruption 
gives rise to major fibrosis and loss of laryngeal function. These 
injuries are frequently require a low  tracheostomy,  following 
Figure 47.53 Cystic hygroma.
Definitive treatment involving complete excision of the 
cyst at an early stage is best if possible. Injection of a scleros -
ing agent is an alternative strategy and may reduce the size of 
the cyst; however, they are commonly multicystic and there -
fore complete resolution is a challenge.
Thyroglossal duct cysts
Embryology
The thyroid gland descends early in fetal life from the base 
of the tongue towards its position in the lower neck with the 
isthmus lying over the second and third tracheal rings. At the 
time of its descent, the hyoid bone has not been formed and 
the track of the descent of the thyroid gland is variable, pass-
ing in front, through or behind the eventual position of the 
hyoid body. Thyroglossal duct cysts represent a persistence of 
this track and may therefore be found anywhere in or adjacent 
to the midline from the tongue base to the thyroid isthmus. 
Rarely, a thyroglossal cyst may contain the only functioning 
thyroid tissue in the body.
Clinical features
The cysts almost always arise in the midline but, when they 
are adjacent to the thyroid cartilage, they may lie slightly to 
one side of the midline. Classically, the cyst moves upwards 
on swallowing and with tongue protrusion, but this can also 
occur with other midline cysts such as dermoid cysts, as it 
merely indicates attachment to the hyoid bone.
Thyroglossal cysts may become infected and rupture 
onto the skin of the neck presenting as a discharging sinus. 
Although they often occur in children, they may also present 
in adults, even as late as the sixth or seventh decade of life 
(Figure 47.54).
Figure 47.54 A patient with a thyroglossal fistula from a cyst in the 
midline of the neck.
Walter Ellis Sistrunk, Jr. , 1880–1933, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Baylor University College of Medicine, Dallas, TX, USA.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   755 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK756
which the larynx can be carefully explored,  damaged carti-
lages repositioned and sutured or plated, and the paraglottic 
space drained.
An indwelling stent of soft sponge shaped to fit the laryn-
geal lumen and held by a nylon retaining suture through the 
neck may be left in place for 5–10 days to minimise web-
bing. This stent can be removed endoscopically after cutting 
the retaining suture and, as the laryngeal damage heals, the 
patient may then be decannulated.
Division of the trachea
Wounds of the trachea are rare. They should all be formally 
explored and, in order to obtain adequate exposure, it is usu -
ally necessary to divide and ligate the thyroid isthmus. A small 
tracheostomy below the wound followed by repair of the tra -
chea with a limited number of submucosal sutures is appropri-
ate. In self-inflicted wounds, the recurrent laryngeal nerves, 
which lie protected in the tracheo-oesophageal grooves, are 
rarely injured. Primary repair of the nerve is rarely possible 
but may be undertaken at the time of formal exploration of a 
major neck wound.
Neurovascular injury
Penetrating wounds of the neck may involve the common 
carotid or the external or internal carotid arteries. Major hae-
morrhagic shock may occur. Venous air embolism may occur 
as a result of damage to one of the major veins, most com -
monly the internal jugular. Compression, resuscitation and 
exploration under general anaesthetic, with control of ves-
sels above and below the injury and primary repair, should 
be undertaken. All cervical nerves are vulnerable to injury, 
particularly the vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves and cer-
vical sympathetic chain.
Thoracic duct injury
Wounds to the thoracic duct are usually iatrogenic and usu-
ally left sided, occurring when lymph node level IV is dis-
sected during a neck dissection. When damage to the duct 
is not recognised at the time of operation, chyle may subse -
quently leak from the wound in amounts up to 2 litres per day 
with profound effects on nutrition.
Treatment
Should the damage be recognised during an operation, the 
proximal end of the duct must be ligated. Ligation of the duct 
is not harmful because there are a number of anastomotic 
channels between the lymphatic and venous system in the 
lower neck. If undetected, chyle usually starts to discharge 
from the neck wound within 24 hours of the operation. On 
occasion, firm pressure by a pad to the lower neck may stop 
the leakage, but frequently this is unsuccessful and the wound 
should be re-explored and the damaged duct ligated.
INFLAMMATORY CONDITIONS 
OF THE NECK
Ludwig’s angina
Ludwig described a clinical entity characterised by a brawny 
swelling of the submandibular region combined with inflam-
matory oedema of the mouth. These clinical features, as well 
as accompanying putrid halitosis define the condition.
The infection is often caused by a virulent streptococ-
cal infection associated with anaerobic organisms. There 
may also be an underlying oral cavity cancer. The infection 
tracks deep to the mylohyoid muscle causing oedema and 
inflammation such that the tongue is displaced upwards 
and backwards, giving rise to dysphagia and subsequently to 
painful obstruction of the airway. Unless treated, cellulitis 
may extend beneath the deep fascial layers of the neck to 
involve the larynx, causing glottic oedema and further air -
way compromise.
Antibiotic therapy should be instituted as soon as possible 
using intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics, with anaerobic 
cover. If the swelling does not subside rapidly with such treat-
ment, or in advanced cases where pus is evident, a curved 
submental incision may be used to drain both submandibular 
triangles. The mylohyoid muscle may be incised to decom -
press the floor of the mouth and corrugated drains placed in 
the wound, which is then lightly sutured. This operation may 
be conducted under local anaesthetic. Rarely, a tracheostomy 
may be necessary.
Cervical lymphadenitis
Cervical lymphadenitis is common due to infection or inflam-
mation in the oral and nasal cavities, pharynx, larynx, ear, 
scalp and face.
Acute lymphadenitis
The affected lymph nodes are enlarged and tender, and there 
may be varying degrees of general constitutional disturbance 
such as pyrexia, anorexia and general malaise. The treatment 
in the first instance is directed to the primary focus of infec -
tion, for example tonsillitis or a dental abscess.
Chronic lymphadenitis
Chronic, painless lymphadenopathy may be caused by tuber -
culosis in young children or adults, or be secondary to malig -
nant disease, most commonly from a squamous cell carcinoma 
in older individuals. Lymphoma and/or HIV infection may 
also present in the cervical nodes.
Wilhelm Friedrich von Ludwig , 1790–1865, Professor of Surgery and Midwifery, Tubingen, Germany
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   756 25/10/2017   09:03Primary tumours of the neck 757
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Treatment
The patient should be treated using appropriate chemother -
apy, dependent on the sensitivities derived from the abscess 
contents. If an abscess fails to resolve despite appropriate 
chemotherapy and general measures, occasionally excision of 
the abscess and its surrounding fibrous capsule is necessary , 
together with the relevant lymph nodes. If there is active 
tuberculosis of another system, for example pulmonary TB, 
then removal of tuberculous lymph nodes in the neck is inap-
propriate. The matted nodes are associated with significant 
fibrosis making surgery difficult to the extent that the sacrifice 
of adjacent structures such and the internal jugular vein or 
sternocleidomastoid muscle may be necessary. The resected 
nodes should be sent for both histology and microbiology.
PRIMARY TUMOURS OF THE 
NECK
Neurogenic tumours
Chemodectoma (carotid body tumour)
This is a rare tumour that has a higher incidence in areas 
where people live at high altitudes because of chronic hypoxia 
leading to carotid body hyperplasia. The tumours most com -
monly present in the fifth decade and approximately 10% of 
patients have a family history. There is an association with 
phaeochromocytoma. The tumours arise from the chemo -
receptor cells on the medial side of the carotid bulb and, at 
this point, the tumour is adherent to the carotid wall. The 
cells of the chemodectoma are not hormonally active and the 
tumours are usually benign with only a small number of cases 
producing proven metastases (Figure 47.55).
CLINICAL FEATURES
There is often a long history of a slowly enlarging, painless 
lump at the carotid bifurcation. About one-third of patients 
present with a pharyngeal mass that pushes the tonsil medi -
ally and anteriorly. The mass is firm, rubbery, pulsatile, mobile 
from side to side but not up and down, and can sometimes be 
emptied by firm pressure, after which it slowly refills in a pul-
satile manner. A bruit may also be present. Swellings in the 
parapharyngeal space, which often displace the tonsil medi -
ally, should not be biopsied from within the mouth.
INVESTIGATIONS
When a chemodectoma is suspected, a carotid angiogram can 
be carried out to demonstrate the carotid bifurcation, which 
is usually splayed, and a blush, which outlines the tumour 
vessels. MRI scanning also provides excellent detail in most 
cases. This tumour must not be biopsied and fine-needle aspi-
ration is also contraindicated.
TREATMENT
Because these tumours rarely metastasise and their overall rate 
of growth is slow, the need for surgical removal must be con -
sidered carefully as complications of surgery are potentially 
serious. The operation is best avoided in elderly patients. 
Radiotherapy has no effect. In some cases it may be possible 
Summary box 47.16
Causes of cervical lymphadenopathy
Inflammatory
●● Reactive hyperplasia
Infective
●● Viral
For example, infectious mononucleosis, HIV
●● Bacterial
Streptococcus, Staphylococcus
Actinomycosis
Tuberculosis
Brucellosis
●● Protozoan
Toxoplasmosis
Neoplastic
●● Malignant
Primary (e.g. lymphoma)
Secondary (e.g. squamous cell carcinoma)
Known primary
Occult primary
Tuberculous adenitis
This condition most commonly affects children or young 
adults, but can occur at any age. The deep upper cervical nodes 
are most commonly affected, but there may be a widespread 
cervical lymphadenitis with matted nodes. In most cases, the 
tubercular bacilli gain entrance through the ipsilateral tonsil. 
In approximately 80% of patients, the tuberculous process is 
limited to the clinically affected group of lymph nodes, but a 
primary focus in the lungs must always be suspected.
As renal and pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) occasionally 
co-exist, the urine should be examined carefully. Rarely, the 
patient may develop a natural resistance to the infection 
and the nodes may be detected at a later date as evidenced 
by calcification on radiography. This can also be seen after 
appropriate general treatment of tuberculosis adenitis. If 
treatment is not instituted, the caseated node may liquefy and 
break down with the formation of a cold abscess in the neck. 
The pus is initially confined by the deep cervical fascia, but 
after weeks or months, this may become eroded at one point 
and the pus flows through the small opening into the space 
beneath the superficial fascia. The process has now reached 
the well-known stage of a ‘collar-stud’ abscess. The superficial 
abscess enlarges steadily and, unless suitably treated, a dis-
charging sinus results.
Investigation
Fine-needle aspirate taken from neck nodes with a suspicion 
of TB should be tested for presence of acid-fast bacilli. Sys -
temic investigation should not be neglected, with chest x-ray 
and Mantoux testing useful first line investigations. Depend -
ing on country of origin, where TB is diagnosed or suspected, 
the co-existence of other infectious diseases such as HIV and 
malaria should not be overlooked.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   757 25/10/2017   09:03CHAPTER 47  Pharynx, larynx and neck
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK758
to dissect the tumour away from the carotid bifurcation but, 
at times, when the tumour is large, it may not be separable 
from the vessels and resection will be necessary, such that all 
appropriate facilities should be available to establish a bypass 
while a vein autograph is inserted to restore arterial continu -
ity in the carotid system.
Vagal body tumours
Vagal paragangliomas arise from nests of paraganglionic tissue 
of the vagus nerve just below the base of the skull near the 
jugular foramen. They may also be found at various sites along 
the nerve down to the level of the carotid artery bifurcation. 
They also present as slowly growing and painless masses in 
the anterolateral aspect of the neck, and may also have a long 
history, commonly of 2–3 years, before diagnosis. They may 
spread into the cranial cavity. Diagnosis is confirmed by CT 
and MRI scanning and additional MR angiogram or arteriog-
raphy if necessary. Treatment is surgical excision following 
appropriate consent of resulting hoarseness.
Peripheral nerve tumours
Schwannomas are solitary and encapsulated tumours attached 
to or surrounded by nerve, although paralysis of the associ -
ated nerve is unusual. The vagus nerve is the most common 
site. Neurofibromas also arise from the Schwann cell and may 
be part of von Recklinghausen’s syndrome of multiple neu -
rofibromatosis. Multiple neurofibromatosis is an autosomal 
dominant, hereditary disease and the neurofibromas may be 
present at birth and often multiple.
Diagnosis requires CT or MRI scanning to differentiate 
them from other parapharyngeal tumours but, on occasions, 
the diagnosis must wait until excision.
Secondary carcinoma
Metastatic spread of squamous cell carcinoma to the cervical 
lymph nodes is a common occurrence from head and neck 
primary cancers and may be the presenting feature of the 
disease. The nasopharynx, tonsil, tongue, piriform fossa and 
supraglottic larynx must be carefully examined by panendos -
copy for the primary growth before considering biopsy or any 
surgery on the neck. Investigation is further assisted by ultra-
sound and fine needle aspirate of the neck node.
Management
The management of malignant cervical lymph nodes depends 
on the overall treatment regime:
 ● if surgery is being used to treat the primary disease and 
the cervical nodes are palpable and >3  cm, they may be 
excised with the primary lesion as part of a neck dissec -
tion;
 ● if radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy is used initially with 
resolution of the primary tumour, but there is subsequent 
residual or recurrent nodal disease, then this situation will 
require cervical lymph node dissection.
Type of neck dissection
CLASSICAL RADICAL NECK DISSECTION (CRILE)
The classic operation involves resection of the cervical 
lymphatics and lymph nodes and those structures closely 
 associated: the internal jugular vein, the accessory nerve, the 
submandibular gland and the sternocleidomastoid muscle. 
These structures are all removed en bloc and in continuity 
with the primary disease if possible. The main disability that 
follows the operation is weakness and drooping of the shoul -
der due to paralysis of the trapezius muscle as a consequence 
of excision of the accessory nerve.
Pulmonary artery
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Carotid bodies
Vagus nerve
Aorticopulmonary
bodies
Internal
jugular
vein
Glomus jugulare
Ganglion nodosum
Tympanic bodies
Figure 47.55 Sites for chemodectomas.
Friedrich Theodor Schwann , 1810–1882, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, successively at Louvain (1839–1848) and Liege (1848–1880), Belgium, described 
the neurilemma in 1839.
Friedrich Daniel von Recklinghausen , 1833–1910, Professor of Pathology, Strasbourg, France, described generalised neurofibromatosis in 1882.
George Washington Crile , 1864–1943, Professor of Surgery, The Western Reserve University, and one of the founders of the Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, 
USA.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   758 25/10/2017   09:03Further reading 759
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
MODIFIED RADICAL NECK DISSECTION
In selected cases, one or more of the three following struc -
tures are preserved: the accessory nerve, the sternocleidomas-
toid muscle or the internal jugular vein. Otherwise, all major 
lymph node groups and lymphatics are excised. Careful note 
should be made of whichever structures are preserved.
SELECTIVE NECK DISSECTION
In this type of dissection, one or more of the major lymph 
node groups is preserved along with the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle, accessory nerve and internal jugular vein. In these 
circumstances, the exact groups of nodes excised must be doc-
umented.
SUMMARY
The anatomical and physiological performance of the 
pharyngolarynx is involved in the important mechanisms of  
breathing, coughing, voice production and swallowing. A variety 
of congenital, traumatic, infectious and neoplastic conditions 
disturb these functions, giving rise to the common symptoms of 
pain, swelling, hoarseness, dyspnoea and dysphagia.
Squamous cell carcinomas are the most common malig -
nancies, accounting for approximately 80% of all head and 
neck tumours. Their incidence and anatomical site vary 
around the world, but they are mainly caused by the prevent-
able aetiological agents of smoking and alcohol, although 
nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal squamous carcinomas 
have additional genetic and environmental factors. All head 
and neck cancers have a high morbidity and mortality, and 
require expert treatment.
FURTHER READING
Bull P , Clarke R. Diseases of the ear, nose and throat . Oxford; Blackwell, 
2007.
Dhillon R, East C. Nose and throat, head and neck surgery , 4th edn. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2013.
Gleeson MJ, Clarke R. (eds) Scott Brown’s otolaryngology: head and neck 
surgery, 7th edn. London: Hodder & Arnold, 2008.
Lau A, Jacques T, Tandon S, Lesser T. Evidence-based emergency ENT 
care. Createspace, 2015.
Probst R, Grevers G, Iro H. Basic otorhinolaryngology. Stuggart: Georg 
Thieme, 2006.
Wackym PA, Snow JB (eds). Ballenger’s otorhinolaryngology head and neck 
surgery, 18th edn. Raleigh, NC: PMPH, 2016.
Watkinson J, Gilbert RW (eds) Stell & Maran’s textbook of head and 
neck surgery and oncology, 5th edn. London: Hodder & Arnold, 
2012.
07_47-B&L27_Pt7_Ch47.indd   759 25/10/2017   09:03Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
48Chapter
Oral cavity malignancy
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The relationship between oral (pre)malignancy and the 
use of alcohol and tobacco
 • The cardinal features of premalignant and malignant 
lesions of the oral cavity
 • The investigation and treatment of these patients
INTRODUCTION
Globally, oral cancer remains a relatively uncommon disease, 
accounting for only 1.5% of all malignant tumours; however, 
there remains wide diparities in the burden of disease in spe -
cific geographic areas, such as the Indian subcontinent. Cur -
rent evidence suggests that the incidence of oral cavity cancer 
is increasing; however, these increases are overshadowed by 
the rapid change in oropharyngeal cancer incidence.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The principal aetiological agents are tobacco and alcohol. In 
Europe and North America this is mainly through cigarette 
smoking combined with alcohol abuse. Synergism between 
alcohol abuse and tobacco use in the development of squa -
mous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head and neck is well 
established. While the human papillomavirus (HPV; specif-
ically HPV16) is playing a significant role in the increasing 
incidence of oropharyngeal cancer in resource-rich nations, 
its role in the oral cavity appears to be limited (<5% of inci -
dent tumours being HPV positive) and without clear rele-
vance to outcomes. Risk factors associated with cancer of the 
oral cavity are outlined in Summary box 48.1.
In the Indian subcontinent, the use of ‘pan’ (a combi -
nation of betel nut, areca nut, lime and tobacco) as well as 
reverse smoking (smoking a cheroot with the burning end 
inside the mouth) are responsible for the high incidence of 
oral cancer. Betel quid appears to be the major carcinogen, 
although there is also a relationship between slaked lime and 
the areca nut and cancer.
INCIDENCE
The estimated age standardised ratio (ASR) for oral cavity 
cancer is 2.7 per 100 000 in 2012, with the proportion of inci-
dent cancers being greater in men than in women (typically 
2:1). Oral cancer predominantly effects people over the age 
of 65. Geographic variation is incidence is profound with the 
highest ASRs evident in Papua New Guinea and Southern 
Asia countries (notably Sri Lanka, Pakistan).
ANATOMY
The oral cavity extends from the skin–vermilion border of 
the lips anteriorly to the junction of the hard and soft palate 
Summary box 48.1
Risk factors associated with cancer of the head and 
neck
●● Tobacco
●● Alcohol
●● Areca nut/pan masala
Poor nutrition
●● Inherited conditions (inc. Fanconi anaemia, Li-Fraumeni 
syndrome)
●● Human papillomavirus
Guido Fanconi , 1892–1979, Swiss paediatrician, named several conditions including Fanconi anaemia, a rare genetic disorder of DNA repair leading to bone 
marrow failure and the development of haematological and solid malignancies typically within early life.
Frederick Pei Li  (1940–2015), Boston, MA, USA, and Joseph F Fraumeni, Jr., b.1933, NIH, MD, USA, described a familial syndrome of soft tisuue sacromas, 
breast cancer and other malignancies in 1969.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   760 25/10/2017   09:05Pathology 761
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
superiorly and the line of the circumvallate papillae on the 
junction of the posterior one-third third and anterior two-
thirds of the tongue posteriorly. The anatomical sites that 
are frequently involved in mouth cancer include the floor of 
the mouth, the lateral border of the anterior tongue, buccal 
sulcus and the retromolar trigone (Figure 48.1). The retro-
molar trigone is defined as the attached mucosa overlying the 
ascending ramus of the mandible posterior to the last molar 
tooth and extending superiorly to the maxillary tuber  osity. 
It is essential to appreciate the anatomical boundries of the 
oral cavity when defining tumour sites, particularly with 
respect to prognosis; the aetiological influence of HPV and 
its implication of improved outcomes is restricted to tumours 
of the  oropharynx (in particular tonsillar and base of tongue 
 subsites).
Histology
SCC is the predominant histology for tumours arising in the 
oral cavity. Tumours mainly arise from the mucosal epithe -
lium, although malignant salivary gland tumours from the 
minor salivary glands are a rare but important group of lesions. 
Lymphomas, particularly around Waldeyer’s ring (tonsils, 
tongue base, lingual tonsil regions, posterior one-third of the 
tongue), make up the last of the three principal pathological 
groups of oropharyngeal cancer.
Chronic exposure of the mucosal surface to carcinogenic 
substances (i.e. tobacco and alcohol) can produce multiple 
subclinical sites of carcinoma that can at any stage develop 
into malignant tumour. This pathological process supports 
the preventive measures of smoking cessation and alcohol 
rehabilitation in patients with both premalignant lesions and 
those with established head and neck cancer. This seeks to 
minimise the occurrence of disease progression in those with 
premalignant disease and, in those undergoing treatment 
for malignancy, it improves treatment efficacy (particulrly 
smoking cessation prior to radiotherapy) and to minimise 
synchronous and metachronous tumours development (see 
below).
Premalignant lesions
The majority of oral carcinomas are not preceded by or associ-
ated with clinically obvious premalignant lesions. There are, 
however, a group of oral pathological conditions in which an 
association with malignant transformation exists.
Clinical features
Leucoplakia
Leucoplakia is a clinical term used to describe any white patch 
or plaque that cannot be rubbed off or characterised clinically 
or pathologically as another disease. It is purely a descriptive 
term with no histological correlation. Leucoplakia varies 
from a small, well-circumscribed, homogenous white plaque 
to an extensive lesion involving large surface areas of the oral 
Retromolar
trigone
Figure 48.1 Common anatomical sites (blue) for oral squamous cell 
carcinoma.
PATHOLOGY
The anatomy of the oral cavity is complex and the course 
of the nerves, blood vessels, lymphatic pathways and fascial 
planes influences the spread of disease. The role that different 
anatomical sites play in prognosis is conflicted in the liter -
ature with both oral tongue and buccal cancer having been 
reported to carry worse outcomes. Whether this is a feature 
of anatomy or variation in biological aggression has yet to be 
demonstrated.
At a histological level, grade of malignancy, the pres-
ence of perineural invasion, the degree of cellular cohesion 
at the advancing front and angioinvasion all carry negative 
prognosic influence and correlate directly with regional and 
distant metastases. Evidence of extracapsular spread or exten-
sion (ECS or ECE) beyond the lymph node capsule in nodal 
metastases is a reliable predictor of poor outcome and has 
been included in the 8th edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging 
Manual (2017).
Summary box 48.2
Conditions associated with malignant transformation
High-risk lesions
●● Erythroplakia (homogenous or speckled)
●● Proliferative verrucous leucoplakia
●● Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
Medium-risk lesions
●● Oral submucous fibrosis
●● Syphilitic glossitis
Low-risk/equivocal-risk lesions
●● Oral lichen planus
●● Discoid lupus erythematosus
●● Discoid keratosis congenita
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   761 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK762
mucosa. It may be smooth or wrinkled, fissured and vary in 
white colouration depending on the thickness of the lesion. 
Approximately 2% of the general population have such lesions 
and the frequency with which dysplasia is present in the lesion 
varies up to approximately 20% in less homogenous lesions.
Speckled leucoplakia
This is a variation of leucoplakia arising on an erythematous 
base (Figure 48.2). It has the highest rate of malignant trans-
formation.
Erythroplakia
Occurring less frequently than leucoplakia (0.02–0.5% in 
Asian population), erythroplakia is defined as a lesion of the 
oral mucosa that presents as a bright red velvety plaque that 
cannot be characterised clinically or pathologically as any 
other recognisable condition. The lesions may be irregular 
in outline and distinct from adjacent normal mucosa (Figure 
48.3). The surfaces may be nodular or broadly atrophic in 
nature and frequently display contact bleeding. These lesions 
can coexist with leucoplakia. The risk of malignancy (or in-situ 
change) within erythroplakia is high and therefore biopsy is 
essential, after which surgical ablation is frequently necessary.
FIELD CHANGE AND SECOND 
PRIMARY TUMOURS
The diffuse and chronic exposure of the mucosa of the 
upper aerodigestive tract to carcinogenic substances (e.g. 
tobacco and alcohol) causes widespread adverse changes 
in the mucosal epithelium. The consequence of the diffuse 
exposure is the development of separate tumours at different 
anatomical sites. These may present simultaneously, within 
6 months (synchronous), or may be delayed (metachronous). 
Slaughter, in 1953, first proposed the concept of field change 
or ‘cancerisation’. Separate primary tumours may not represent 
distinct genetic mutational events but rather the same clonal 
origin of cells, which migrate to separate sites in the upper 
aerodigestive tract. Nevertheless, minimising exposure of the 
mucosal surfaces to potential insults is the cornerstone of long-
term management for patients with head and neck cancer.
Patients who develop a first tumour in the oral cavity and 
the oropharynx are more likely to develop a second primary 
tumour (approximately 15%, a third of which are in the head 
and neck). In total, 80% of these are metachronous tumours, 
of which 50% develop within the first 2 years of initial presen-
tation (Figure 48.4). Synchronous second primary tumours 
in the head and neck are uncommon.
Potential for malignant change
The potential risk for malignant transformation includes:
 ● severity/grade of dysplasia;
 ● increases with increasing age of the patient;
 ● increases with increasing size of the lesion;
 ● may be higher in smokers (although contradictory evi-
dence exists to suggest non-smokers are at higher risk);
Figure 48.2  Speckled leucoplakia on the lateral border of the 
tongue. Histology confirmed carcinoma in situ.
Figure 48.3 Erythroplakia of the left soft palate and lateral pharyn -
geal wall.
Figure 48.4 Metachronous tumour in the right mandibular alveolus 
after previous partial glossectomy and forearm flap reconstruction.
Danely P Slaughter , ?1911–2014, otolaryngologist, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   762 25/10/2017   09:05Premalignant conditions 763
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
 ● increases with alcohol consumption;
 ● depends on the anatomical site of the premalignant lesion;
 ● is particularly high for premalignant lesions on the lat-
eral/ventral surface of the tongue, particularly in younger 
women, even in the absence of associated risk factors.
PREMALIGNANT CONDITIONS
Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis
Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis produces dense plaques 
of leucoplakia, particularly around the commissures of the 
mouth. The lesions occasionally extend on to the vermilion 
and even the facial skin (Figure 48.5). These lesions have 
a high incidence of malignant transformation, thought to 
be the result of invasion of the lesion by Candida albicans. A 
small percentage of patients have an associated immunologi -
cal defect, which encourages the invasion of C. albicans, ren-
dering the patient susceptible to malignant transformation. 
Specific management of chronic hyperplastic candidiasis 
includes prolonged (6 weeks) topical antifungal treatment or 
systemic antifungal treatment (2 weeks). If the lesions persist 
after medical therapy, particularly when dysplasia is evident 
on biopsy, surgical excision should be considered.
be treated with intralesional steroids. Surgical excision/release 
and reconstruction may lead to short-term benefit only for 
fibrous bands to recur at the same site or progress at other sites.
Research strongly indicates that oral submucous fibrosis is 
significantly associated with the use of pan masala areca nut, 
with or without concurrent alcohol use. Cessation of usage 
may halt the process but not necessarily lead to improvement. 
Tobacco smoking alone is not associated with oral submucous 
fibrosis.
Proliferative verrucous leucoplakia
Proliferative verrucous leucoplakia is a rare progressive exo -
phytic variant of leucoplakia, which is frequently multifocal 
and carries a high (>50%) risk of malignant tranformation. It 
is a rare, yet distinct entity, frequently arising in the absence 
of traditional risk factors for oral premalignancy. Diagnosis 
is made on the basis of combined clinical and histopatho-
logical grounds. It may be localised and typically affects the 
gingivae or, more commonly, as a widespread varient, affects 
several oral mucosal sites. There is controversy as to the best 
approach to management; however, long-term surveillance is 
essential given the condition’s propensity to undergo malig -
nant transformation.
Sideropenic dysphagia (Plummer–
Vinson and Paterson–Kelly 
syndromes)
There is a well-known relationship between sideropenia (iron 
deficiency in the absence of anaemia) and the development of 
oral cancer. Sideropenia is common in Scandinavian women 
and leads to epithelial atrophy, which renders the oral mucosa 
vulnerable to irritation from topical carcinogens. Correction 
of the sideropenia with iron supplements reduces the epithe -
lial atrophy and risk of malignant transformation.
Henry S Plummer , 1874–1936 physician, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN, USA.
Porter P Vinson , 1890–1959, surgeon, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Donald Rose Paterson , 1863–1939, surgeon, Ear, Nose and Throat Department, The Royal Infirmary, Cardiff, UK.
Adam Brown Kelly , 1865–1941, surgeon, Ear, Nose and Throat Department, The Royal Victoria Infirmary, Glasgow, UK.
Figure 48.5  Chronic hyperplastic candidiasis of the left buccal 
mucosa.
Oral submucous fibrosis
Oral submucous fibrosis is a progressive disease in which fibrous 
bands form beneath the oral mucosa. Scarring pro duces con-
tracture, resulting in limited mouth opening and restricted 
tongue movement. The condition is almost entirely confined 
to the Asian population and is characterised pathologically by 
epithelial fibrosis with associated atrophy and hyperplasia of the 
overlying epithelium (Figure 48.6). The epithelium also shows 
changes of epithelial dysplasia. Restricted mouth opening can 
Figure 48.6 Oral submucous fibrosis of the right buccal mucosa and 
soft palate.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   763 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK764
CLASSIFICATION AND STAGING
TNM staging
Staging of head and neck cancer is defined by the American 
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and follows the TNM 
system. The system also takes into account the pretreatment 
radiological findings (either on computed tomography (CT) 
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)) of the tumour. The 
T classification indicates the extent of the primary tumour 
and the N classification relates to the extent of regional 
neck metastases to the cervical lymph no des. The recent 
publication of the 8th edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging 
Manual (2017) has introduced profound changes, firstly on 
the basis of tumour aetiology (with variation on the basis 
of HPV status in oropharyngeal cancer) and secondly, on 
depth of tumour invasion as well as on greatest dimensional 
size. Further, as noted above, ECS or ECE is recognised as 
a finding worthy of upstaging of nodal stage. The introduc-
tion of these changes into clinical practice has yet to be 
decided in many geographic regions. The original 7th Edi-
tion of the TNM staging for oral cavity cancer is outlined in  
Table 48.1.
The M classification relates to distant metastasis. The risk 
of distant metastasis is related more closely to the extent of 
nodal disease than to the size of the primary tumour. Tumours 
close to the midline are at a greater risk of developing bilat -
eral or contralateral cervical node metastasis.
Patterns of lymph node metastasis
The cervical lymph nodes are divided into five principal 
levels, as outlined in Figure 48.7.
The spread of tumour from the primary site has been well 
described. SCC in the oral cavity and lips tends to metastasise 
to lymph nodes at levels I, II and, to a lesser extent, level III 
unless higher levels are also positive. However (albeit infre -
quently), for SCC of the oral tongue there is a risk of skip 
metastasis directly to lymph node levels III or IV , without the 
involvement of higher-level lymph node groups. Importantly, 
there is also a recognised risk of contralateral neck metastasis 
even in well lateralised tumours of the oral tongue. Tumours 
arising in the oropharynx commonly metastasise to lymph 
node levels II, III and IV , as well as retropharyngeal and con-
tralateral nodal groups.
Distant metastases are relatively uncommon but sites 
involved include lung and, to a lesser extent, the brain, liver, 
bone and skin.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Between 25% and 50% of patients with cancer of the oral 
cavity present late, particularly in regions of the resource-
poor world and in areas of social deprevation in more affluent 
TABLE 48.1 The TNM staging system.
Primary tumour (T)
TX Primary tumour cannot be assessed
T0 No evidence of primary tumour
Tis Carcinoma in situ
T1 Tumour <2 cm in greatest dimension
T2 Tumour >2 but <4 cm
T3 Tumour >4 cm but <6 cm
T4 Tumour invades adjacent structures (e.g. mandible, skin)
Regional lymph nodes (N)
NX Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis
N1 Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node <3 cm in 
greatest dimension
N2a Metastasis in a single ipsilateral lymph node >3 cm but not 
more than 6 cm
N2b Metastasis in multiple ipsilateral lymph nodes, none >6 cm 
in greatest dimension
N2c Metastasis in bilateral or contralateral lymph nodes, none 
greater than 6 cm in greatest dimension
N3 Metastasis in any lymph node >6 cm
Distant metastasis
M0 No evidence of distant metastasis
M1 Evidence of distant metastasis
Stage
0 Tis N0 M0
I T1 N0 M0
II T2 N0 M0
III T3 N0 M0
T1, T2, T3 N1 M0
IV T4 N0 M0
Any T N2 M0
Any T N3 M0
Any T Any N M1
I II
III
IV
V
Figure 48.7 Cervical lymph nodes: (I) submandibular; (II) upper deep 
cervical; (III) mid-cervical; (IV) lower cervical; (V) posterior triangle.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   764 25/10/2017   09:05Investigations 765
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
nations. The reasons for delay in presentation are multifacto-
rial and not easily generalisable when considered in a global 
context.
Lip cancer
Lip cancer presents early as it is readily visible to the patient. 
It usually arises as an ulcer on the vermilion border (Figure 
48.8). In total, 95% of carcinomas of the lip arise on the 
lower lip and 15% arise in the central one-third and commis-
sures, reflecting the aetiological influence of UV (sunlight) 
radiation on the more exposed lower lip. Tumours tend to 
spread laterally over the mucosal surface. Lymph node metas-
tases, usually to the submental or submandibular nodes, occur 
in approximately 5% of cases and reflect aggressive disease 
behaviour when apparent.
the primary tumour or referred to adjacent structures in the 
case of otalgia stemming from tumours invading the lateral 
tongue. With advancing stage of disease comes increased risk 
of nutritional impairment as a result of pain and restricted 
oral intake. In contrast to oropharyngeal malignancy, aware -
ness of nodal metastasis (lump in the neck) is less common in 
the absence of a known primary tumour.
The duration of symptoms is highly variable, from several 
weeks to many months.
INVESTIGATIONS
When a clinical diagnosis of oral cancer is suspected, a com -
prehensive protocol of investigations should be instituted. 
A tissue diagnosis, typically by way of incisional biopsy, is 
essential. Formal examination under anaesthetic is desirable, 
particularly for advanced stage disease, not only to carry out 
the biopsy, but also to palpate and examine the extent of the 
tumour, which can be exquisitely tender in the conscious 
patient. Under the same anaesthetic, extraction of teeth with 
a dubious prognosis can be performed. The biopsy should be 
generous and include the most suspicious area of the lesion, as 
well as normal adjacent tissue. Areas of necrosis or gross infec-
tion should be avoided. In circumstances where the  diagnosis 
Figure 48.8 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip.
Oral cavity
Clinical presentation is markedly dependent on the anatom -
ical site and state but classically involves mucosal ulceration 
with rolled margins, combinations of exophytic and endo-
phytic neoplastic tissue, contact or spontaneous bleeding 
(Figure 48.9). Where involving tooth bearing areas, there 
may be loss of periodontal/bone support and subsequent 
mobility. Pain can be a feature and this may be at the site of 
Summary box 48.3
Clinical features of oral cancer that warrent 
investigation
●● Persistent oral swelling for >3 weeks
●● Mouth ulceration for >3 weeks
●● Sore tongue
●● Difficulty swallowing
●● Jaw or facial swelling
●● Painless neck lump
●● Unexplained tooth mobility
●● Trismus
(a)
(b)
Figure 48.9 (a) Ulcerative squamous cell carcinoma of the anterior 
floor of the mouth. (b) Exophytic squamous cell carcinoma of the 
right lateral border of the tongue.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   765 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK766
has already been made and where combined modality treat -
ment proposed, consideration of insertion of a percutaneous 
endoscopic gastrostomy can be made at this stage.
Radiography
Plain radiography of the jaw is undertaken to facilitate ade -
quate dental assessment rather than as a means to assessed for 
evidence of bone invasion.
Magnetic resonance imaging
The investigation of choice for cancer of the oral cavity, oro-
pharynx and neck, will vary depending on institution pro -
tocol, resources and local expirtise. CT and MRI are both 
viable alternatives; however, MRI suffers less degredation by 
metallic dental restorations and provides excellent visualisa -
tion of soft-tissue infiltration of the tumour (Figure 48.10). 
Ideally it should be performed before diagnostic biopsy as 
biopsy frequently distorts the image of the primary tumour. 
The specificity and sensitivity of MRI in diagnosing cervical 
node metastasis are similar to that of CT. Patients who suf -
fer with claustrophobia may have difficulty in tolerating the 
investigation. Contrast enhancement (in particular gadolin-
ium), suppression techniques and variation in image sequence 
acquisition (e.g. Short Tau Inversion-Recovery; STIR) can 
aid interpretation. CT of the primary site and neck is an alter-
native favoured in some institutions.
Positron emmission tomography 
combined with CT
Positron esmission tomography combined with CT 
(PET-CT) of the whole bo dy uses the anatomical capability 
of CT scanning in concert with radiolabelled tracers capa -
ble of localising to specific tissues. The most widely used 
tracer is 18 fluoro-dexoyglrucose (FDG), which is trans -
ported and trapped within hypermetabolic tissues (typically 
cancerous or inflammed tissues, or those that are predict -
ably physiologically active). Evidence-based guidelines 
suggest targetted use of PET scanning in the work-up of 
patients with malignant cervical lymphadenopathy with an 
unknown primary. There is trial evidence for its use for sur -
veillance following non-surgical treatment of oropharyngeal 
SCC and it shows promise for assessment of patients being 
investigated for recurrence.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound has become an integral part of head and neck ser-
vices, particularly in association with one-stop clinics for the 
evaluation of undiagnosed neck lumps or presumed cervical 
metastasis. Used alongside fine-needle aspiration cytology 
(FNAC), ultrasound is capable of delineating and sampling 
cervical lymphadenopathy and both thyroid and salivary 
gland lesions/masses. The technique is operator dependent 
but benefits from exposing the patient to no ionising radia-
tion or detrimental side-effects.
Fine-needle aspiration cytology
FNAC is useful for the assessment and pathological diagno -
sis of enlarged cervical lymph no des. It involves the use of a 
fine-needle puncture into the mass and immediate aspiration 
for cytological examination. It has few complications and 
there is no evidence of tumour seeding along needle tracts. 
It requires no specialist equipment other than a 21G or 23G 
needle and a 10 mL syringe. Aspiration should be carried out 
only when the needle enters the swelling. If the specimen can 
be assessed immediately by an expert cytologist, then it can be 
sent without fixation. If there is delay in microscopic exam -
ination, then the specimen, smeared on a microscope slide, 
should be fixed before transfer to the laboratory. The positive 
yield from FNAC is dependent not only on the quality of the 
aspirate, but also on the skill of the cytologist.
Radionucleotide studies to assess 
bone invasion
A radioisotope bone scan of the facial skeleton adds little 
to the diagnosis and assessment of head and neck cancer, 
beyond that of clinical assessment, MRI and/or CT, and plain 
imaging. The scan is not specific and tends to show increased 
uptake wherever there is increased metabolic activity in bone. 
A false-positive diagnosis is common and ‘overstaging’ of the 
disease frequent.
Figure 48.10 Magnetic resonance imaging of a primary tumour of  
the left tongue base (blue arrow) and neck node metastasis (red arrow).
Computed tomography
CT is much more widely available than MRI but its utility 
may be restricted by artifact degredation of images by dental 
restorative materials. It is useful when bony invasion is sus -
pected. CT of the thorax is now indicated for all patients and 
not just those with proven cervical lymph node metastasis 
and large-volume disease.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   766 25/10/2017   09:05Lip cancer 767
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
TREATMENT
General principles
The management of head and neck cancer necessitates a mul-
tidisciplinary approach, integrating the combined skills and 
capabilities of surgeons, oncologists, radiologists, pathologists 
and allied health professionals to deliver an optimal treat -
ment strategy seeking to maximise oncologic outcomes while 
mitigating, or restoring, loss of form and function.
Surgery remains the primary treatment modality for oral 
cavity cancer. Where adverse pathological features are appar-
ent (based on resective pathology), postoperative radiother -
apy or chemoradiotherapy are advocated. Given the critical 
normal functional demands of the oral cavity and associated 
structures, reconstruction of the ablated surgical defect is fre-
quently necessary to restore (as best possible) form and func -
tion. Options for reconstruction will depend on the defect, 
relevant patient co-morbidities, the clinical environment/
facilities and, importantly, the skill set of the treating surgeon.
In the clinically node-positive neck, a therapeutic neck 
dissection is normally performed at the time of pirmary resec-
tion. Management of the clinically node-negative neck in 
oral cavity cancer is more contentious, particularly in early 
stage (T1/2) disease. Recent randomised control evidence has 
demonstrated improved outcomes for elective neck dissec -
tion over a watch and wait policy for such patients. Sentinel 
lymph node biopsy as an additional staging tool in early oral 
cavity cancer does offer a means to avoid unnecessary elective 
neck dissection; however, it lacks clinical trials level evidence 
despite being included in some clinical guidelines.
Patient factors
Modern anaesthesia and postoperative critical care facilities 
have allowed major head and neck surgery to be carried out on 
patients with significant medical comorbidity. Advancing age 
is not considered to be a contraindication to major head and 
neck cancer surgery but may certainly influence the extent of 
adjuvant treatment (inclusion of chemotherapy to postoper -
ative radiotherapy has little evidence of benefit to those over 
70 years of age). Conversely, young patients should not be 
denied radiotherapy for fear of inducing a second malignancy 
(e.g. sarcoma) in later life.
Management of premalignant 
conditions
Elimination of associated aetiological factors is the initial 
basis of the management of premalignant oral mucosal lesions. 
Cessation of smoking, elimination of the areca nut/pan habit 
and reduction in alcohol consumption should be encouraged 
in all patients with premalignant lesions. A photo  graphic 
record of the lesion is useful, particularly for long-term 
follow-up. All erythroplakia and speckled leucoplakia should 
undergo urgent incisional biopsy, as many will represent either 
in-situ or early oral cancer at presentation. Biopsy from more 
than one site provides a better representation of histological 
heterogeneity within a lesion.
Severe epithelial dysplasia and carcinoma in situ should be 
ablated by surgical excision where feasible. Laser vaporisation 
can be employed; however, it does not yeild a surgical speci-
men for histological examination, thus preventing assessment 
of resection margins and also detection of disease upstaging 
initially missed through sampling effects of incisional biop-
sies. Small lesions, particularly on the lateral border of the 
tongue or buccal mucosa, may be managed with surgical 
excision and primary closure by undermining the adjacent 
mucosa, or be left to granulate. Larger defects can be managed 
with laser excision and allowed to epithelialise spontaneously 
(Figure 48.11). Monitoring of less severe grades of dysplasia 
with elimination of causative agents is pragmatic but can be 
labour intensive. Use of primary care physcians/dentists can 
be helpful as part of a multidisciplinary follow-up regime.
Currently there are no successful chemoprevention agents; 
however, clinical trials are ongoing in the attractive area of clin-
ical research with the ambition of reducing the risk of malig-
nant transformation in high-risk oral premalignant lesions.
(a)
Figure 48.11 (a) Leucoplakia with severe dysplasia of the lateral 
border of the tongue. (b) Laser vaporisation.
LIP CANCER
Surgery and external beam radiotherapy are highly effective 
methods of treatment for lip cancer. The cure rate approaches 
90% for either modality.
(b)
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   767 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK768
Premalignant changes on the lower lip mucosa are fre-
quently extensive and are best managed by a lower lip shave, 
in which the vermilion defect is closed by advancement of 
the lower labial mucosa.
Small tumours
Small tumours (<2 cm) of the lip can be managed with either 
a V- or W-shaped excision under local or general anaesthesia. 
The defect, which should be no larger than one-third of the 
total lip size, is closed in three layers – mucosa, muscle and 
skin – with particular attention paid to the correct alignment 
of the vermilion border (Figure 48.12).
Intermediate tumours
Larger tumours, which produce defects of between one-third 
and two-thirds the size of the lower lip, require local flaps 
for reconstruction. V or W excision will result in microsto -
mia. Large central defects can be managed using local flaps 
such as the Johansen step technique (Figure 48.13). This 
allows closure of the defect by symmetrical advancement of 
soft-tissue flaps, utilising the excess skin in the labiomental 
Figure 48.12 (a) Skin markings for wedge excision of the lower lip. (b) Primary closure.
(a) (b)
Figure 48.13 (a) Skin markings for Johansen step reconstruction. (b) Closure of lip and labiomental steps.
(a)
(b)
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   768 25/10/2017   09:05Tongue cancer 769
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
grooves. Alternative techniques include the Bernard or the 
Karapandzic advancement flaps.
Total lip reconstruction
Extensive tumours of the lower lip, which invade adjacent 
tissues (T4), have a high incidence of neck node metastasis. 
Patients with such advanced disease require surgery , which 
may include unilateral or bilateral selective neck dissection 
and total excision of the lower lip and chin, with or without 
adjacent mandibular resection (rim or segmental mandibulec-
tomy). The lower lip soft-tissue defect can be reconstructed 
with a variety of free flaps including the radial forearm flap 
potentially suspended with palmaris longus tendon (Figure 
48.14) or perforator flaps such as the anterolateral thigh 
(ALT) flap or the medial sural artery perforator (MSAP) free 
flap. The benefits of each vary in terms of tissue bulk, donor 
site morbidity and vascular pedicle length. Where segmental 
bony resection has been required, composite (bone including) 
free flaps are necessary to restore adequate mandibular con -
tinuity and soft-tissue form/function. The choice of flap will 
depend on the defect and the surgeons repertoire; however, 
the scapula free flap provides exceptional flexibility and tissue 
variability. Alternatives include the composite radial forearm 
flap, fibula free flap and perforator based osseocutaneous iliac 
crest free flap (DCIA; deep circumflex iliac artery free flap)
TONGUE CANCER
Management of the neck in early stage oral cavity cancer, 
including the oral tongue, has been discussed above; however, 
consideration for elective management of the node-negative 
neck should be made in all instances. When performing sur -
gical excision of the primary tumour (Figure 48.15), a 1 cm 
margin in all planes should be attempted in seeking a com -
plete excision with pathologically clear (>5  mm) margins. 
Resection resulting in partial or hemiglossectomy can be per-
formed with either a cutting diathermy or laser if available. 
Advanced tumours (T3 and T4) often encroach upon the 
floor of the mouth and, occasionally, the mandible. In these 
circumstances a resection of the tongue and floor of the mouth 
and mandible is required. T4 tumours of the oral tongue may 
cross the midline, for which (sub)total glossectomy is the 
only option to achieve adequate tumour clearance. Decisions 
regarding elective neck dissections on the contralateral side 
will be dictated by radiological and clinical findings, in par -
ticular proximity of the tumour to the midline.
Access
Access for oral cancer is important to allow accurate assess -
ment and clear visualisation to enable tumour clearance to be 
achieved. Access techniques include:
Camille Bernard , surgeon, presented a novel approach to the subtotal lower lip defect to the Societé de Chirurgie de Paris in 1852. von Burrow subsequently published 
his account of the flap (1855), claiming to have been using it in practice for some time. The flap is therefore referred to by some as the Bernard–von Burrow flap.
Miodrag Karapandzic , 1930–2016, maxillofacial surgeon, Professor of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, University of Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
Figure 48.14 (a) Skin markings for total excision of the lower lip, 
chin and left selective neck dissection. (b) Postoperative view of the 
reconstructed lower lip using a radial artery forearm flap.
(a)
(b)
Figure 48.15 Ulcerative squamous cell carcinoma of the right lateral 
border of the tongue.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   769 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK770
 ● transoral – small –moderate sized anterior oral tumours;
 ● lip-split technique and paramedian or median mandibulo-
tomy (Figure 48.16);
 ● visor incision (Figure 48.17) with or without drop down.
Reconstruction
Imparment of function (e.g. speech, swallowing) is related 
primarily to tumour size, site and reconstruction but is also 
influenced by patient factors (age, comorbidity, prior treat -
ment). However, typically the more anterior the defect in the 
oral cavity, the greater the impact on speech, and the more 
posterior, the greater the detrimental impact will be on swal-
lowing. Reconstruction of the surgical defect restores oral 
integrity to the neck and provides a bulk of non-dynamic tis-
sue with an aim of restoring function benefit.
Small defects of the lateral tongue can be managed by 
primary closure or be allowed to heal by secondary intention 
Figure 48.16 (a) Skin markings for lip split and mandibulotomy in continuity with neck dissection. (b) Paramedian and midline mandibulo -
tomy. (c) Margins for primary tumour resection after mandibulotomy. (d) Tongue defect after right selective neck dissection, mandibulotomy 
and partial glossectomy.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 48.17 Visor approach to the anterior mandible/floor of the 
mouth and tongue.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   770 25/10/2017   09:05Floor of mouth 771
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
with little or no functional impariment. Larger defects (e.g. 
T2, T3 and T4 resections) require formal reconstruction to 
encourage good speech and swallowing. Free tissue transfer 
of suitable tissue (e.g. a radial forearm flap [Figure 48.18], or 
ALT), utilising microvascular anastomosis in most instances, 
gives a good functional result. Large-volume defects, includ -
ing total glossectomy, may require more bulky flaps such as the 
rectus abdominus free flap or ALT depending on patient body 
habitus. If feasible, the preservation of one or both hypoglos -
sal nerves is useful to encourage floor of mouth function to 
help relearn swallowing.
The ablative surgeon should consider adequate access for 
the resection and consider adjunctive procedures to facilitate 
this where compromised (e.g. the visor procedure with drop 
down [see Figure 48.17]).
bilateral nasolabial flaps tunnelled into the mouth and inter -
digitated provide an acceptable alternative (Figure 48.19). 
Three weeks later their pedicles are divided and inset into 
the lateral floor of mouth defects. Large defects that involve 
rim resection of the anterior mandible may also be managed 
with soft-tissue reconstruction only. Full-thickness resection 
of the anterior mandible, however, requires immediate recon-
struction to prevent severe functional defects or a cosmetic 
deformity. Vascularised bone with a soft-tissue component 
provides the most up-to-date method of reconstruction. A 
fibula flap or a vascularised iliac crest graft (DCIA) are two 
options in the management of anterior mandible defects with 
simultaneous floor of mouth defects.
Figure 48.18 Radial artery forearm flap raised befor e division of a 
vascular pedicle and cephalic vein (arrow).
FLOOR OF MOUTH
Carcinoma of the floor of the mouth can spread to the ven-
tral surface of the anterior tongue or encroach on the lower 
anterior alveolus. Surgical excision may include a partial 
anterior glossectomy and anterior mandibular resection. Only 
very small tumours of the floor of the mouth can be managed 
by simple excision. Management of the adjacent mandible/
mandibular rim may be necessary where the tumour abuts the 
mandible; this may be by way of a rim resection or segmental 
mandibulectomy.
Reconstruction
Reconstruction will depend on the defect size (and its constit-
uents) and ranges from healing by secondary intention to use 
of the thin, pilable radial forearm free flap for small defects, to 
ALT and composite flaps for larger resections.
Small tumours of the floor of the mouth excised with a 
laser frequently may avoid formal reconstruction. For larger 
defects, where the ventral tongue and labial mucosa are 
involved, reconstruction is needed to avoid severe difficul -
ties with speech, swallowing and mastication. Smaller, simple 
soft-tissue defects of the anterior floor of mouth are best recon-
structed with a radial artery forearm flap. If a patient is unfit 
for microvascular free-flap surgery or the facilities are limited, 
Figure 48.19  (a) Skin markings for bilateral nasolabial flaps.  
(b) Transposition of bilateral nasolabial flaps into the anterior floor of 
the mouth.
(a)
(b)
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   771 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK772
BUCCAL MUCOSA
SCC of the buccal mucosa (Figure 48.20) should be excised 
widely, including the underlying buccinator muscle. Larger 
tumours occasionally extend onto the maxillary tuberosity , 
tonsillar fossa or mandibular alveolus. Facial skin involve -
ment is rare but carries a poor prognosis. Management of the 
clinically negative neck should be no different for tumours 
of the buccal mucosa and as such, a simultaneous ipsilateral 
selective supraomohyoid neck dissection (levels I, II, III), or 
sentinel lymph node biopsy, is considered good practice.
Access for buccal carcinoma can be achieved either tran -
sorally for smaller lesions (T1, T2) or using the lip-splitting 
technique for larger lesions (T3, T4).
Reconstruction of the buccal mucosa prevents scarring 
and trismus. Options include the radial artery forearm flap or 
a temporalis muscle flap. Raw temporalis muscle inset into 
the buccal mucosal defect will epithelialise spontaneously 
over several weeks.
LOWER AL VEOLUS
Tumours that involve the mandibular alveolus are similarly 
treated with surgery including (Figure 48.21a) ipsilateral 
selective neck dissections for lateral tumours and bilateral 
selective neck dissection for anterior tumours. Bone invasion 
(Figure 48.21b) demands segmental resection of the mandi -
ble and this may be in continuity with the neck dissection(s). 
Figure 48.20 Exophytic squamous cell carcinoma of the right buc -
cal mucosa.
(a) (b)
(c ) (d)Interosseous
membrane
Flexor hallucis
longus m. (cut)
Soleus m.
(cut)
Peroneus
longus m.
Peroneal
vessels
Skin
/f_lap
Tibialis posterior
m. (cut)
T ibialis
posterior m.
Figure 48.21 (a) Extensive squamous cell carcinoma of the anterior mandible involving the floor of the mouth. (b) Plain radiography (orthop-
antomogram) revealing bony destruction of the anterior mandible. (c) Osseocutaneous fibula flap. (d) Postoperative radiograph of the recon -
structed mandible with fibula flap and reconstruction plate.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   772 25/10/2017   09:05Lower alveolus 773
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Primary or immediate reconstruction is preferred as the func-
tional and cosmetic outcomes are superior to those of delayed 
reconstruction. Options for bony reconstruction are shown in 
Table 48.2. They include the fibula flap for the edentulous 
mandible (Figures 48.21c, d) and the iliac crest (DCIA) 
for patients with a dentate mandible (Figure 48.22). The 
vascularised iliac crest can be wrapped with internal oblique 
abdominal wall muscle, which epithelialises spontaneously. 
This intraoral epithelialisation provides an excellent surface 
for prosthetic replacement with or without osseointegrated 
implants.
Although non-vascularised bone grafts have been utilised 
for mandibular reconstruction, the long-term success is low as 
many patients receive postoperative radiotherapy and loss of 
the bone and dehiscence of the titanium tray or reconstruc -
tion plate can be expected sequelae.
TABLE 48.2 Mandibular reconstruction (reconstructive 
ladder).
Method Technique
No reconstruction Primary closure
Soft tissue only Pectoralis major myocutaneous flap
Alloplastic material 2.4 mm reconstruction plate alone
Combination 
alloplastic/soft tissue
2.4 mm reconstruction plate and pectoralis 
major flap
Non-vascularised 
bone grafts
Titanium tray and cancellous chips (iliac 
crest)
Vascularised bone 
grafts
Fibula (edentulous and dentate); iliac crest 
(dentate); scapula (concomitant large soft-
tissue defect)
Figure 48.22 (a) Squamous cell carcinoma of the right mandibu -
lar alveolus. (b) Resection of the right mandible with reconstruction 
plate. (c) Vascularised (deep circumflex iliac artery) iliac crest (arrow) 
bone graft. (d) Right mandible with epithelialised abdominal muscle 
(arrow).
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   773 25/10/2017   09:05CHAPTER 48  Oral cavity malignancy
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK774
RETROMOLAR PAD
Tumours at this site frequently , but not always, invade the 
ascending ramus of the mandible. They also spread medially 
into the soft palate and the tonsillar fossa. Access for excision 
may necessitate additional access (e.g. a lip split and man -
dibulotomy [see Figure 48.16]). Small defects are managed 
ideally with a microvascular free flap, such as a radial artery 
forearm flap, or with a temporalis muscle flap where pedi -
cled options are prefered. Segmental mandibular resections 
require vascularised bone to achieve adequate reconstruction; 
in such circumstances the scapula free flap provides a good 
source for restoration of bone continuity and abundant soft 
tissue capable of modification and flexible at inset, to suit 
larger defects.
HARD PALATE AND MAXILLARY 
AL VEOLUS
The maxillary alveolus and hard palate are relatively uncom-
mon sites for SCC. A useful classification of the maxillectomy 
defect with suitable reconstructive options is provided by  
Brown et al. (see Further reading). A tumour arising in these 
areas may arise either from the oral mucosa per se or from the 
maxillary antrum penetrating the oral cavity. In the Indian 
subcontinent, carcinoma of the hard palate is more common 
and is particularly associated with reverse smoking. When 
they occur, malignant tumours of minor salivary glands typi-
cally present as swellings of the hard palate. Small tumours of 
the maxillary alveolus can be managed by transoral partial 
maxillectomy. More extensive tumours involving the floor of 
the maxillary sinus require wider access by a Weber–Fergusson 
incision (Figure 48.23). If the preoperative investigations 
demonstrate extension of the disease into the pterygoid space 
or the infratemporal fossa, the prognosis is poor as surgical 
clearance is difficult if not impossible. Tumour extending into 
the orbit requires simultaneous orbital exenteration or even a 
combined neurosurgical resection. The vascularised iliac crest 
graft is the method of choice for immediate maxillary recon -
struction, although the fibula provides adequate bony replace-
ment to maintain facial contour.
Microvascular free tissue transfer remains the method 
of choice for the management of defects in the oropharynx 
(Table 48.3). Free flaps are superior reconstructive options to 
pedicled or local flaps, which may be used for salvage pro -
cedures or recurrent disease. Each ‘free’ flap has a principal 
blood supply and a concomitant venous drainage. The flaps 
can be tailored to the defect to include skin, fascia, bone and 
muscle. The techniques of free tissue transfer demand special-
ist training and a microscope to connect blood vessels in the 
neck after neck dissection (e.g. facial artery to the prepared 
artery attached to the flap). The vascular anatomy of micro -
vascular free flaps is summarised in Table 48.4.
TABLE 48.3 Primary reconstructive options in oral cancer.
Anatomical site Primary reconstructive options Alternative reconstruction
Floor of mouth RFFF Free flap – ALT, MSAP , lateral arm
Pedicled/local flap – nasolabial flaps (bilateral), submental island flap
Lateral tongue RFFF/ALT Free flap – MSAP
Pedicled/local flap – pectoralis major, platysma skin flap
Total tongue/glossectomy ALT/rectus abdominus Pedicled flap – pectoralis major
Buccal mucosa RFFF Free flap – ALT/MSAP
Pedicled/local flap – pectoralis major
Mandible
Dentate Iliac crest (DCIA) Free flap – fibula, composite radial, scapula or tip of scapula (angular 
branch of thoracodorsal A)
Edentulous Fibula Free flap – composite radial, scapula or tip of scapula (angular 
branch of thoracodorsal A)
Pedicled/local flap – reconstruction plate and pectoralis major
Maxilla
Low-level/hard palate Obturation, RFFF/ALT Pedicled/local flap – temporalis muscle
Free flap – ‘ZIP flap’ - zygomatic implant retained prosthesis 
(perforating) RFFF/ALT
High Iliac crest/scapula Fibula
Soft palate/tonsil Forearm/MSAP Free flap – ALT for larger defects ± pharyngeal flap
Pedicled/local flap – temporalis muscle, galeal flap
Tongue base RFFF Free flap – ALT for larger defects
Pedicled/local flap – pectoralis major
ALT, anterolateral thigh; DCIA, deep circumflex iliac artery; MSAP , medial sural artery perforator; RFFF , radial forearm free flap.
Sir William Fergusson , 1808–1877, Scottish surgeon, described and published a modification of the original Weber incision to access the midface.
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   774 25/10/2017   09:05Further reading 775
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
POST-TREATMENT 
MANAGEMENT
As with the initial management of oral cavity cancer, the mul-
tidisciplinary team is essential for the ongoing  management 
of oral cancer patients. For most patients, in particular those 
who have received combined modality treatment (surgery 
and (chemo)radiotherapy) medium to long-term sequelae 
can have a significant impact on quality of life. Speech and 
swallowing alteration is frequently encountered, as is the 
complication of osteoradionecrosis, in up to 10% of patients 
receiving adjuvant radiotherapy. While allied health profes -
sionals such as speech and language therapists are essential in 
the management of the former, surgical intervention, with its 
increased risks, is frequently required in the latter.
Surveillance for recurrence and, to a lesser extent, sec -
ond primary tumours is necessary and development of local 
protocols for this can be helpful, although as a general rule 
recurrence reaches it peak within the first 12–24 months post 
treatment and therefore monitoring is most intensive in this 
period
FURTHER READING
Amin MB, Edge S, Greene F , Byrd DR, Brookland RK et al. (eds). AJCC 
cancer staging manual , 8th edn. New York: Springer International 
Publishing, 2017.
Brown JS, Shaw RJ. Reconstruction of the maxilla and midface: intro -
ducing a new classification. Lancet Oncol 2010; 11: 1001–8.
Urken ML, Cheney ML, Sullivan M, Biller HF . Atlas of regional and free 
flaps for head and neck reconstruction. New York: Raven Press, 1995.
Wolff K-D, Hölzle F . Raising of microvascular flaps: a systematic approach . 
New York: Springer, 2011.
TABLE 48.4 Common microvascular ‘free’ flaps in oral cavity reconstruction.
Flap Blood supply Common variants
Forearm (RFFF) Radial artery Skin only; fascia only
Composite forearm Radial artery Skin and bone (radius)
Anterolateral thigh Perforator vessels off descending (or transverse) 
branch of lateral circumflex femoral artery
Skin only; skin and muscle ± additional fascia 
(capacity for tubed reconstruction of pharynx)
Medial sural artery 
perforator (MSAP)
Medial sural artery Fasciocutaneous flap
Lateral arm Profunda brachii artery Fasciocutaneous
Rectus abdominus Deep inferior epigastric artery Skin and muscle; muscle only
Fibula Peroneal artery Bone and skin; bone only; bone and fascia/fat
Iliac crest Deep circumflex iliac artery Bone only; bone and muscle; bone, muscle and skin, bone 
and skin as perforator flap
Scapula Subscapular artery (+ optional angular branch of 
thoracodorsal artery)
Bone and skin; bone and multiple skin paddles, separate 
bone segments on circumflex scapula artery and angular 
branch of thoracodorsal artery
RFFF , radial forearm free flap.
Figure 48.23 Weber–Ferguson incision for maxillectomy (lower eye-
lid extension may be required in extended maxillectomy).
07_48-B&L27_Pt7_Ch48.indd   775 25/10/2017   09:05Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The surgical anatomy of the salivary glands
 • The presentation, pathology and investigation of 
salivary gland disease
 • The medical and surgical treatment of stones, infections 
and tumours that affect salivary glands
INTRODUCTION
There are three paired major salivary glands, two parotid 
glands, two submandibular glands and two sublingual glands. 
In addition, there are multiple minor salivary glands.
MINOR SALIVARY GLANDS
Anatomy
The mucosa of the oral cavity contains approximately 800 
minor salivary glands. They are distributed in the mucosa of 
the lips, cheeks, palate, floor of the mouth and retromolar 
area. These minor salivary glands also appear in other areas 
of the upper aerodigestive tract including the oropharynx, 
larynx and trachea as well as the sinuses. They have a his -
tological structure similar to that of mucus-secreting major 
salivary glands. Overall, they contribute to 10% of the total 
salivary volume.
and most cysts are of the extravasation rather than retension 
variety. They arise in the loose mucosa of the lower lip and 
the floor of mouth where saliva can easily collect. The swell -
ing is painless and usually, but not always, translucent (Figure 
49.1). Some resolve spontaneously, but most require formal 
surgical excision. Recurrence is rare.
Tumours
Few tumours show more diversity in histological appearance 
and anatomical site than those that arise from mucous glands 
of the upper aerodigestive tract. Tumours of minor salivary 
glands are histologically similar to those of major glands; how-
ever, more minor salivary gland tumours are malignant and 
as are almost all tumours in the sublingual glands. Tumours 
of minor salivary gland origin occur anywhere in the upper 
aerodigestive tract; however, common sites for tumour forma-
tion include the palate, upper lip and retromolar regions. Less 
Summary box 49.1
Anatomy of salivary glands
●● Two parotid glands
●● Two submandibular glands
●● Two sublingual glands
●● Approximately ~800 minor salivary glands
Common disorders of minor salivary 
glands
Cysts
Cysts are common and arise from trauma to the glandular 
parenchyma or drainage system. The minor salivary glands 
have the distinction that they can secrete against pressure 
Figure 49.1 Mucous r etention cyst. A translucent swelling on the 
lower lip is typical.
49Chapter
Disorders of the salivary glands
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   776 25/10/2017   09:07Minor salivary glands 777
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
common sites for minor salivary gland tumours include the 
nasal and pharyngeal cavities. These tumours arise in submu-
cosal seromucous glands that are found throughout the upper 
aerodigestive tract. A well-defined rubbery lump is a salivary 
gland tumour until proven otherwise. Benign minor salivary 
gland tumours present as painless, firm, slow-growing swell-
ings. Overlying ulceration is extremely rare. Minor salivary 
gland tumours are managed by excision to include the overly-
ing mucosa, with primary closure (Figure 49.2).
Figure 49.3  (a) Pleomorphic adenoma in the right palate in a 
12-year-old girl. (b) Tumour is marked out with adequate margins 
including the overlying mucosa. (c) The subsequent defect. (d) Heal-
ing by secondary intention 3 years after surgery.
Figure 49.2 (a) Pleomorphic adenoma of the upper lip. (b) Tumour 
is excised with overlying mucosa. (c) Primary closure of the defect.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Benign tumours of the palate, less than 1  cm in diam -
eter, can be managed by excisional biopsy , and the defect 
left to heal by secondary intention (Figure 49.3). Where 
the tumours are greater than 1 cm in diameter, a 3 mm punch 
biopsy (dermatological punch) is recommended to establish 
a diagnosis prior to formal excision and to avoid the embar -
rasment of inadvertently encountering a low-grade malignant 
lesion.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   777 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK778
Malignant neoplasms
Malignant minor salivary gland tumours are rare (2 per mil -
lion population). Most are low grade and present as appar -
ently benign lumps. They have a firm consistency, and the 
overlying mucosa may have a varied discolouration from pink 
to blue or black (Figure 49.4). High-grade lesions usually 
become necrotic with ulceration as a late presentation.
as a deep punched out ulcer with an indurated margin. It 
can not be distinguished from a neoplastic lesion except by 
biopsy. The diagnosis is sugested by rapid onset in a young 
person. The lesion resolves spontaniously with symptomatic 
treatment.
THE SUBLINGUAL GLANDS
Anatomy
The sublingual glands are a paired set of salivary glands lying 
in the anterior part of the floor of the mouth between the 
mucous membrane, the mylohyoid muscle and the body of 
the mandible close to the mental symphysis. The gland has a 
head portion that drains by numerous excretory ducts (Ducts 
Figure 49.5 (a) Postoperative appearance following left maxillec -
tomy and immediate reconstruction with a vascularised iliac cr est 
graft and abdominal wall musculature (epithelialised). (b) Postop-
erative radiographic appearance of a reconstructed left maxilla with 
internal fixation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 49.4 Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the left maxillary alveolus.
(d)
Figure 49.3 (Continued)
Malignant minor salivary gland tumours of the palate that 
are low grade and early stage can be managed by wide excision 
with burring down of the underlying bone and then left to 
heal by secondary intention. Those that have perforated the 
palate may require partial or total maxillectomy. The subse-
quent defect can be managed by either prosthetic obturation 
or immediate reconstruction. Various microvascular flaps have 
been designed to reconstruct maxillectomy defects including 
radial forearm flap, fibular flap, rectus abdominus, latissimus 
dorsi and vascularised iliac crest graft (Figure 49.5).
Necrotising sialometaplasia
This is a well established but rare entity. T ypically it occurs 
in the palate and mimics an aggressive cancer. It presents 
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   778 25/10/2017   09:07The sublingual gl ands 779
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Augustus Quirinus Rivinus , 1652–1723, German physician and botanist who studied the anatomy of salivary glands and also developed ways of classifying plants.
Figure 49.6 Large ranula affecting the floor of the mouth.
Summary box 49.2
Sublingual glands
●● Problems are rare
●● Minor mucous retention cysts may need surgery
●● Plunging ranula is a retention cyst that tunnels deep
●● Nearly all tumours are malignant
Common disorders of the sublingual 
glands
Cysts
The term ‘ranula’ is applied to a mucous extravasation cyst 
that arises from the sublingual gland. It produces a charac -
teristic translucent swelling that takes on the appearance of 
a ‘frog’s belly’ (ranula) (Figure 49.6). A ranula can resolve 
spontaneously, but many also require active treatment. The 
traditional and effective way is to remove the sublingual 
gland, but it is not an easy operation and the morbidity can 
be significant. New less invasive techniques are now quite 
effective (85% success) in resolving ranulas while preserving 
the gland. Incision and drainage, however tempting, usually 
results in recurrence.
Ranula is derived from ‘rana’, the Latin for frog.
of Rivinus) directly into the oral cavity and the tail that drains 
into the submandibular duct or directly into the mouth.
Figure 49.7 Plunging ranula in the left submandibular region.
Plunging ranula
Plunging ranula is a rare form of mucous retention cyst that 
arises from the sublingual salivary glands. Mucus collects 
below the gland and perforates through the mylohyoid muscle 
diaphragm to enter the neck. Patients present with a dumb-
bell-shaped swelling that is soft, fluctuant and painless in 
the submandibular or submental region of the neck (Figure 
49.7). Diagnosis is made on ultrasound or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) examination but clinched by aspirating thick 
yellow treacly fluid from the cyst. This distinguishes it from a 
lymphangioma. A cervical approach is now contraindicated. 
The cyst arises from the sublingual gland. All that is required 
is to remove the sublingual gland and aspirate the saliva out of 
the sac. The latter is formed of connective tissue not epithe -
lium so melts away once the leak of saliva is resolved.
Tumours
Tumours involving the sublingual gland are extremely rare 
and are usually (90%) malignant. They present as a rubbery 
painless swelling in the floor of the mouth. Pain or lingual 
nerve paresthesia indicate a high-grade tumour. All such 
lumps must have a formal punch biopsy prior to formulating 
a treatment plan. Treatment requires en block wide excision 
involving the overlying mucosa and the adjacent periosteum 
with simultaneous neck dissection depending on the stage of 
the disease. Immediate reconstruction of the intraoral defect 
is recommended, especially when communication with the 
neck has been established. Radial artery forearm free flap or 
anterolateral thigh flap is usually the reconstruction of choice 
for fit patients, otherwise a pedicled pectoralis major flap can 
be used. There is normally a low threshold for adjuvant radio-
therapy except for low-grade and stage lesions.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   779 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK780
THE SUBMANDIBULAR GLANDS
Anatomy
The submandibular glands are paired salivary glands that lie 
below the mandible on either side. They consist of a larger 
superficial and a smaller deep lobe that are continuous around 
the posterior border of the mylohyoid muscle. Important ana-
tomical relations include the anterior facial vein and artery 
running over the surface of the gland in close association 
with the ramus mandibularis (marginal mandibular) of the 
facial nerve. The deep part of the gland lies on the hyoglos -
sus muscle closely related to the lingual nerve and inferior 
to the hypoglossal nerve. The gland is surrounded by a well-  
defined capsule that is derived from the deep cervical fascia 
which splits to enclose it. The gland is drained by a single 
submandibular duct (Wharton’s duct) that emerges from its 
deep surface and runs in the space between the hyoglossus 
and mylohyoid muscles. It drains into the anterior floor of 
the mouth at the sublingual papilla. There are several lymph 
nodes immediately adjacent and sometimes within the super-
ficial part of the gland.
Ectopic/aberrant salivary gland 
tissue
The most common ectopic salivary tissue is a Stafne bone 
cyst, the origin of which is uncertain. It presents as an asymp-
tomatic, clearly demarcated radiolucency of the angle of the 
mandible, characteristically below the inferior dental neuro -
vascular bundle (Figure 49.8). The cavity in the lingual plate 
houses part of the submandibular gland or ectopic salivary 
tissue, but the origin of the cavity is unclear and has been 
attributed to the pulse pressure from the facial artery. No 
treatment is required.
Inflammatory disorders of the 
submandibular gland
Inflammation of the submandibular gland is termed sialadeni-
tis. Submandibular sialadenitis may be acute, chronic or acute 
on chronic.
Common causes are:
Summary box 49.3
Important anatomical relationships of the 
submandibular glands
●● Lingual nerve
●● Hypoglossal nerve
●● Anterior facial vein
●● Facial artery
●● Marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve
Figure 49.8 Plain radiographic appearance of a Stafne bone cyst.
Thomas Wharton , ?1616–1673, physician, St. Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK, described the submandibular duct in 1656.
Edward C Stafne , 1894–1981, dental surgeon, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA, described these cysts in 1942.
 ● Acute submandibular sialadenitis
 ● Viral. The paramyxovirus (mumps) is a viral illness of 
the salivary glands that usually produces parotitis. The 
submandibular glands are occasionally involved, caus-
ing painful tender swollen glands. Other viral infec -
tions of the submandibular gland are extremely rare.
 ● Bacterial. Bacterial sialadenitis is more common than 
viral sialadenitis and occurs secondary to obstruction 
by stone. These stones can be reliably removed by 
minimally invasive techniques that preserve the gland.
 ● Chronic submandibular sialadenitis.
Obstruction and trauma
The most common cause of obstruction within the subman-
dibular gland is stone formation (sialolithiasis) within the 
gland and its associated duct system. Eighty per cent of all 
salivary stones occur in the submandibular glands because 
their secretions are relatively viscous. Eighty per cent of sub-
mandibular stones are radio-opaque and can be identified on 
plain radiography (Figure 49.9). Stones are mainly composed 
of phosphate and oxalate salts.
The second most common cause of submandibular duct 
obstruction is stricture. The remaining 5–10% of cases are 
secondary to floor of mouth pathology or external pressure, 
particularly trauma to the floor of the mouth from an overex-
tended flange on a lower denture that impinges on the sublin-
gual papilla, causing inflammation and subsequent stricture.
Clinical symptoms
Patients usually present with acute painful swelling in the 
region of the submandibular gland, precipitated by eat -
ing (Figure 49.10). The swelling occurs rapidly and often 
resolves spontaneously over 1–2 hours after the meal is com -
pleted (meal-time syndrome). This classical picture occurs 
when the stone causes complete obstruction as it is washed 
forward and impacts in the lumen. The two most common 
sites of impaction are the hilum of the gland as the duct bends 
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   780 25/10/2017   09:07The submandibul ar glands 781
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Figure 49.9 Lower occlusal X-ray highlighting a radio-opaque sub -
mandibular duct stone (arrowhead). Note the lar ger stone posteriorly 
located in the hilum of the gland (arrow).
Figure 49.10 Acute left submandibular sialadenitis.
over the mylohyoid muscle and near the punctum. The symp-
toms are frequently intermittent as the stone can dislodge and 
allow the gush of saliva induced at meal times to pass. In such 
circumstances, symptoms are moderate with minimal discom-
fort and swelling. Clinical examination reveals an enlarged 
firm submandibular gland, tender on bimanual examination. 
Pus may be visible draining from the sublingual papilla or 
expressed by bimanual palpation of the gland (Figure 49.11).
Management
Small (less then 4 mm) mobile stones can be retrieved using 
a Dormia® basket. This minimally invasive procedure is usu -
ally performed under local anaestheisa either endoscopically 
(sialendoscopy) or under radiological control (ultrasonogra -
Figure 49.11 Acute suppurative submandibular sialadenitis. There 
is pus extruding from the left sublingual papilla.
phy). For larger stones, extracorporeal or intracorporeal litho-
tripsy can be employed to break the stone into smaller pieces 
using shock waves and the stone fragments can then removed 
with a basket. Recently, a pneumatic intraductal lithotripter 
(StoneBraker™) has been developed that can be advanced 
into the duct lumen under endoscopic control to fragment 
the stone. Results are promising, with 70% of stones being 
cleared in slected cases.
If the stone is lying within the submandibular duct in the 
floor of the mouth anterior to the point at which the duct 
crosses the lingual nerve (second molar region), the stone 
can be removed under local anaesthetic but not by incising 
directly on to the duct. The latter runs under the sublingual 
gland and trauma to the head of the sublingual gland induces 
ranulae. Therefore, the incision has to run along the medial 
margin of the gland and the latter is then rotated laterally to  
expose the duct on its deep surface. Once the stone has been 
delivered via a single longitudinal incission along its surface, 
the duct should be closed by a resorbable suture and the inci-
sion in the floor of mouth closed.
Where the stone is proximal to the lingual nerve (i.e. 
at the hilum of the gland), stone retrieval via an intraoral 
approach can be performed quite reliably under general 
anaesthesia. The key is to choose cases in which the stone is 
palpable. This approach can be difficult and attendance on a 
suitable salivary course is recommended. Stone retrieval rates 
are excellent (95%). The risk to the lingual nerve is great-
est with deep stones that are not palpable, as they lie outside 
the mouth below the mylohyoid. Traction injuries can occur 
in such circumstances. If stone retrieval fails, submandibular 
gland excision can be performed.
Submandibular gland excision
With the availability of more conservative techniques, sub -
mandibular gland excision is performed less frequently for 
benign disease as almost all benign conditions can be treated 
without gland removel. It is now the treatment of last rather 
than first resort. Submandibular gland incision is indicated for:
 ● sialadenitis, when minimally invasive methods have failed;
 ● salivary tumours.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   781 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK782
Excision of the submandibular gland involves four distinct 
phases.
INCISION AND EXPOSURE OF GLAND
Surgery is usually performed under endotracheal general 
anaesthesia with moderate neck extension and the chin 
rotated to the opposite side. The incision should be marked at 
least 3–4 cm below the lower border of the mandible to avoid 
damage to the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve 
(Figure 49.12a). The incision should be sited within the 
nearest skin crease and should be approximately 4  cm long. 
Infiltration with lidocaine with adrenaline is optional. Sharp 
dissection is performed down to the platysma muscle, which 
should be clearly identified to facilitate later closure (Figure 
49.12b). The muscle is incised and retracted. The underlying 
investing layer of deep cervical fascia is then divided, and the 
marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve that normally 
runs on the deep surface of the platysma muscle is preserved. 
Posteriorly, the incision approaches the angular tract where 
the deep cervical fascia splits to form the investing layer 
around the sternomastoid muscle. Superficial veins, including 
the anterior facial vein, require ligation.
GLAND MOBILISATION
Deepening the incision divides the submandibular gland cap-
sule. In inflammatory conditions, the submandibular gland is 
Figure 49.12 (a) Surface landmarks of submandibular gland exci -
sion. (b) Skin flaps elevated and platysma exposed.
Figure 49.13  Submandibular gland mobilisation and exposur e of 
the facial artery.
(a)
(b)
excised by intracapsular dissection, mobilising the gland by 
sharp dissection. For tumours of the submandibular gland it 
is imperative to know if the lesion is benign or malignant. 
This can be ascertained by Tru-Cut biopsy. This is important 
because if the wrong operation is undertaken on a malignant 
tumour, the survival rate of the patient is reduced by 20%. 
Malignant tumours require wide excission with neck dissec -
tion in selected cases. Benign tumours can be dealt with by 
extracapsular dissection and excision of the submandibular 
gland.
The superficial lobe of the submandibular gland is first 
mobilised. As dissection proceeds, the posterior belly and 
anterior belly of the digastric muscle are identified. Dissec -
tion posteriorly identifies the facial artery (Figure 49.13), 
which is divided to facilitate further mobilisation. The course 
of the facial artery is variable, sometimes penetrating the 
gland emerging on the upper border and sometimes lying in a 
groove on the deeper aspect of the gland. The gland is further 
mobilised by blunt and sharp dissection. A number of small 
arteries and veins are encountered, which require control 
with bipolar diathermy.
DISSECTION OF THE DEEP LOBE AND 
IDENTIFICATION OF THE LINGUAL NERVE
An important landmark in submandibular gland dissection is 
the posterior border of the mylohyoid muscle. Once identi -
fied, it can be retracted forwards to reveal the deep lobe of 
the gland. Several veins are usually encountered, which need 
to be controlled with diathermy. The gland is then retracted 
inferiorly, invariably attached to the lingual nerve through 
parasympathetic secretor motor fibres. In the presence of 
chronic infection and subsequent fibrosis, identification of the 
lingual nerve on the deep aspect of the gland is sometimes dif-
ficult. It is imperative that the lingual nerve is formally identi-
fied prior to division of the parasympathetic fibres. The gland 
is then pedicled entirely on the submandibular duct, which, 
once identified, is ligated. The gland is delivered and sent for 
histological examination. The hypoglossal nerves lie deep to 
the submandibular capsule and should not be damaged during 
intracapsular dissection (Figure 49.14).
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   782 25/10/2017   09:07The submandibul ar glands 783
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Figure 49.14  Bed of the submandibular triangle following sub -
mandibular gland removal, r evealing the posterior edge of the 
mylohyoid muscle and the tendon of the digastric muscle.
Three cranial nerves (CNs) are at risk during removal of 
the submandibular gland:
1 the marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve;
2 the lingual nerve;
3 the hypoglossal nerve.
An adequate incision coupled with meticulous haemosta-
sis allows the surgeon to identify these important structures 
during surgery.
WOUND CLOSURE
Haemostasis is confirmed and a vacuum suction drain inserted. 
The wound is closed using a continuous resorbable suture to 
the platysma muscle, as the platysma muscle has a direct con-
tribution to the depressor activity of the corner of the mouth. 
The skin may be closed with a subcuticular non-resorbable 
suture, removed 7 days after surgery. The drain remains for 
24 hours.
Complications of submandibular gland 
excision
Complications are:
 ● haematoma;
 ● wound infection;
 ● marginal mandibular nerve injury;
 ● lingual nerve injury;
 ● hypoglossal nerve injury;
 ● transection of the nerve to the mylohyoid muscle produc-
ing submental skin anaesthesia.
Tumours of the submandibular 
gland
Tumours of the submandibular gland are uncommon and 
usually present as a slow-growing, painless swelling within 
the submandibular triangle (Figure 49.15). About 60–70% 
of submandibular gland tumours are benign, in contrast to 
80–90% of parotid gland tumours (Table 49.1). In many cir-
cumstances, the swelling cannot, on clinical examination, 
Figure 49.15 Benign tumour of the right submandibular gland.
TABLE 49.1 Salivary gland tumours – frequency and 
distribution.
Type Location Frequency Malignant 
(%)
Major Parotid
Submandibular
Sublingual
Common
Uncommon
Very rare
10–20
50
85
Minor Upper aerodigestive tract Rare 90
be differentiated from submandibular lymphadenopathy. 
This can be resolved definitively by ultrasound examination. 
Most salivary neoplasms, even malignant tumours, are often 
slow-growing, painless swellings. The difficulty is to always 
distinguish between benign and malignant lesions prior to 
excision, as in up to 30% referrals of submandibular gland 
cancers to regional cancer centres, patients have already had 
surgical excison of the gland, which was subsequently found 
to be malignant on histological examination. Pain is not a 
reliable indication of malignancy; however, rapid growth, 
facial nerve palsy, lymph node enlargement and skin tether -
ing are signs of a high-grade malignant lesion. The most com-
mon malignant tumour is an adenocystic carcinoma (40%), 
which may masquerade as a benign lump.
Clinical features of high-grade malignant 
salivary tumours
These include:
 ● facial nerve weakness;
 ● rapid enlargement of the swelling;
 ● induration and/or ulceration of the overlying skin;
 ● cervical node enlargement.
Investigation
The initial investigation of choice is ultrasound with fine-  
needle aspiration cytology (FNAC)/True-Cut biopsy. Once it 
is established that a tumour is present, computed tomo graphy 
(CT) and MRI scanning are complimentary techniques for 
imaging tumours arising in the major salivary glands. The 
tumour is intrinsic to the gland. The scan will highlight the 
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   783 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK784
relationship of the tumour to other anatomical structures, 
which is helpful in planning surgery.
Open surgical biopsy is contraindicated as this may seed 
the tumour into surrounding tissues, making it impossible to 
eradicate microscopic deposits of tumour cells. Fine-needle 
aspiration or Tru-Cut biopsy is a safe alternative as the risk of 
seeding tumour is remote. The combination of careful history 
and examination in conjunction fine-needle aspitation cytol-
ogy can identify over 95% of malignant cases. The few malig-
nant cases that are indistinguishable from benign disease by 
these methods and are only identified by histology are usually 
indolent and act as benign tumours.
Figure 49.16 (a) Landmarks and incision for suprahyoid neck dis -
section to remove a large pleomorphic adenoma of the submandibular 
gland. (b) Skin flap raised at the subplatysmal level. (c) Mobilisation 
of the contents of the anterior triangle of the neck along the anterior 
border of the sternomastoid. (d) Suprahyoid neck dissection com-
pleted, revealing the digastric tendon (yellow arrow) and great vessels 
(black arrow). (e) Specimen revealing the tumour with a cuff of normal 
tissue with artery forceps attached to the submandibular duct.
(b)
(d)
(a)
(c)
(e)
Management of submandibular gland 
tumours
Benign tumours of the submandibular gland can be safely 
removed by meticulous dissection outside the submandibular 
capsule. No instrument should be applied to the gland as to 
do so may crush it. As long as the capsule of the gland is pre-
served intact, the risk of recurrence is 1–1.5% at 10 years. As 
with all salivary gland tumours, surgical excision with a cuff of 
normal tissue is the goal.
The management of malignant salivary gland tumours is 
governed by the stage and clinical grade of the lesion. The 
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   784 25/10/2017   09:07The parotid gland 785
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
larger and more aggressive the lesion, the more radical is the 
surgery required. Each case has to be judged on its own merits, 
but wide clearance of the submandibular triangle with some 
form of neck dissection is normally the treatment of choice 
(Figure 49.16). This may neccessitate sacrifice of the lingual 
and hypoglossal nerves if the tumour is adherent to the deep 
bed of the gland (Figure 49.17). Adjuvant radiotherapy is 
usually dictated by pathological findings such as close margins 
and high-grade cancers. The prognostic cut off point for sal -
ivary cancers is 4 cm and most tumours larger than this need 
adjuvant therapy as will patients with adenoid cystic carci -
noma if optimum results are to be achieved.
THE PAROTID GLAND
Anatomy
The parotid gland lies in a recess bounded by the ramus of 
the mandible, the base of the skull and the mastoid process. 
It lies on the carotid sheath and CNs XI and XII and extends 
forward over the masseter muscle. The gland is enclosed in a 
Figure 49.17 (a) Landmarks and incision for radical neck dissection 
for carcinoma of the left submandibular gland. (b) computed tomog-
raphy scan revealing a large tumour of the left submandibular gland 
with central necrosis (arrow). (c) Skin flap developed for radical neck 
dissection. (d) Completion of radical neck dissection revealing the 
great vessels of the neck (arrow).
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
sheath of dense deep cervical fascia. Its upper pole extends 
just below the zygoma and its lower pole (tail) into the neck.
Several important structures run through the parotid 
gland. These include:
 ● the facial nerve trunk that divides into its major five 
branches;
 ● the terminal branch of the external carotid artery that 
divides into the maxillary artery and the superficial tem-
poral artery;
 ● the retromandibular vein;
 ● intraparotid lymph nodes.
The gland is arbitrarily divided into deep and superficial 
lobes, separated by the facial nerve. Eighty per cent of the 
parotid gland lies superficial and 20% deep to the nerve. An 
accessory lobe is occasionally present lying anterior to the 
superficial lobe on the masseter muscle.
Developmental disorders
Developmental disorders such as agenesis, duct atresia and 
congenital fistula are extremely rare.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   785 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK786
Inflammatory disorders
Viral infections
Mumps is the most common cause of acute painful parotid 
swelling and predominantly affects children. It is spread via 
airborne droplets of infected saliva. The disease starts with 
a prodromal period of 1–2 days, during which the patient 
experiences fever, nausea and headache. This is followed by 
pain and swelling in one or both parotid glands. Parotid pain 
can be very severe and exacerbated by eating and drinking. 
Symptoms resolve within 5–10 days. The diagnosis is based 
on history and clinical examination; recent contact with 
an infected patient with a painful parotid swelling is often 
sufficient to lead to a diagnosis. Atypical viral parotitis does 
occur and may present with predominantly unilateral swell -
ing or even submandibular involvement. A single episode of 
infection confers lifelong immunity. Treatment of mumps is 
symptomatic with regular paracetamol and adequate oral fluid 
intake. Complications of orchitis, oophoritis, pancreatitis, 
sensorineural deafness and meningoencephalitis are rare, but 
are more likely to occur in adults.
Other viral agents that produce parotitis include Cox-
sackie A and B, parainfluenza 1 and 3, Echo and lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis.
Bacterial infections
Acute ascending bacterial sialadenitis is historically described 
in dehydrated elderly patients following major surgery. 
Reduced salivary flow secondary to dehydration results in 
ascending infection via the parotid duct into the parotid 
parenchyma. The more common picture today is an acute 
bacterial parotitis associated with a salivary calculus. The 
patient presents with a tender, painful parotid swelling that 
arises over several hours (Figure 49.18). There is generalised 
malaise, pyrexia and occasional cervical lymphadenopathy. 
The pain is exacerbated by eating or drinking. The parotid 
swelling may be diffuse, but often localises to the lower pole of 
the gland. Intraoral examination may reveal pus exuding from 
the parotid gland papilla. The infecting organism is usually 
Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus viridans, and treatment is 
with appropriate intravenous antibiotics. If the gland becomes 
fluctuant, ultrasound may identify abscess formation within 
the gland that may require aspiration with a large-bore needle 
or formal drainage under general anaesthesia. In the latter pro-
cedure, the skin incision should be made low to avoid damage 
to the lower branch of the facial nerve. Blunt dissection using 
sinus forceps is preferred, and the cavity is opened to facili -
tate drainage. A drain is inserted and left in situ for 24–72 
hours. Sialography is contraindicated during acute infection. 
Chronic bacterial sialadenitis is rare in the parotid gland.
Recurrent parotitis of childhood
Recurrent parotitis of childhood is a distinct clinical entity of 
unknown aetiology and variable prognosis. It is characterised 
by rapid swelling of one or both parotid glands, in which the 
symptoms are made worse by chewing and eating. Systemic 
upset with fever and malaise is variable. The symptoms usu -
ally last from 3 to 7 days, and are then followed by a quiescent 
period of weeks to several months. Children usually present 
between the ages of 3 and 6 years, although symptoms have 
been reported in infants as young as 4 months. The diagnosis 
is based on the characteristic history and can be confirmed 
by sialography. This shows a characteristic punctate sialec-
tasis likened to a ‘snowstorm’ (Figure 49.19). The condi-
tion is difficult to manage if it becomes established and so 
the initial treatment is important. The condition responds to 
regular endoscopic washouts and long courses of antibiotics. 
The suspicion is that in some cases the condition is caused by 
an incompetent punctum that leads to soiling of the parotid 
ducts with contaminated oral fluids.
Figure 49.18 Acute left bacterial parotitis.
Figure 49.19 Characteristic ‘snowstorm’ appearance of r ecurrent 
parotitis of childhood (circled).
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   786 25/10/2017   09:07The parotid gland 787
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Henrik Samuel Conrad Sjögren , 1899–1986, Professor of Ophthalmology, Göthenburg, Sweden, described this condition in 1933.
A Swiss cheese  is one with many holes in it.
Figure 49.20  Magnetic r esonance imaging scan. Giant bilateral 
parotid cysts in human immunodeficiency virus infection.
Human immunodeficiency virus-associated 
sialadenitis
Chronic parotitis in children may signify human immuno -
deficiency virus (HIV) infection. The presentation of HIV-  
associated sialadenitis is very similar to classical Sjögren’s 
syndrome in adulthood. Although HIV-associated sialade -
nitis and Sjögren’s syndrome are histologically similar, the 
former condition is usually associated with a negative auto -
antibody screen. Other presentations of salivary gland disease 
in HIV-positive patients include multiple parotid cysts, which 
cause gross parotid swelling and facial disfigurement. CT and 
MRI demonstrate the characteristic ‘Swiss cheese’ appearance 
of multiple large cystic lesions (Figure 49.20). The swollen 
glands are usually painless and may regress on the institution 
of antiviral therapy. Cysts can be aspirated.
Obstructive parotitis
There are several causes of obstructive parotitis, which pro -
duces intermittent painful swelling of the parotid gland, par -
ticularly at mealtimes.
Stone formation and strictures
Sialolithiasis is less common in the parotid gland (20%) than 
in the submandibular gland (80%). Parotid duct stones are 
usually radiolucent and rarely visible on plain radiography. 
They are frequently located at the confluence of the collect -
ing ducts, at the point the duct courses over the masseter mus-
cle or in the distal aspect of the parotid duct adjacent to the 
parotid papilla. The stones are easily demonstrated on ultra -
sound. The same rules for treatment apply to parotid stones as 
to submandibular duct stones. Small stones (~4  mm) can be 
retrieved by baskets, slightly larger stones up to 8  mm can be 
broken with lithotripsy and stones over 8 mm diameter should 
be removed by endoscopic assisted surgery while preserving 
the gland. Strictures are common in the parotid gland and are 
responsible for about 20% of obstructive cases. The symptom 
complex is a little different as the obstruction is due to mucus 
plugs. These form after periods of stagnation. Classically, the 
patient complains of a meal-time syndrome starting at break-
fast and the saliva cannot seep past the mucus plug so the 
swelling persists. Massage eventually releases the plug with 
a gush of salty saliva. Infection is uncommon unless there is 
stone formation. Strictures respond to dilatation and endo -
scopic washouts with steroid solutions.
Papillary obstruction
Obstructive parotitis, can be caused by trauma to the parotid 
papilla. The subsequent inflammation and oedema obstructs 
salivary flow, particularly at mealtimes. This is a rare but real 
entity. The partial obstruction over a protracted period leads 
to dilation of the duct and an entity called ‘mega-duct’. A 
large dilated duct is visible coursing over the patient’s cheek. 
Drainage has to be re-established. This can be done by pro -
gressive dilatation of the punctum and the insertion of a stent 
that is kept in position for many weeks. Surgical attempts to 
refashion the punctum are unlikely to be successful. Papillo -
tomy should not be performed as this often leads to stricture 
formation and a life time of problems. This is not the case 
with the submandibular gland.
Tumours of the parotid gland
The parotid gland is the most common site for salivary tumours. 
Most tumours arise in the superficial lobe and present as  
slow-growing, painless swellings below the ear (Figure 49.21a), 
in front of the ear (Figure 49.21b) or in the upper aspect of 
the neck. Less commonly, tumours may arise from the accessory 
lobe and present as persistent swellings within the cheek. Rarely, 
tumours may arise from the deep lobe of the gland and present as 
a parapharyngeal mass (Figures 49.21c, d). Symptoms include 
difficulty in swallowing and snoring. Clinical examination 
reveals a diffuse firm swelling in the soft palate and tonsil.
Some 80–90% of tumours of the parotid gland are benign, 
the most common being pleomorphic adenoma (Table 49.2).
Malignant salivary gland tumours are divided into two dis-
tinct sub-groups:
1 Low-grade malignant tumours  (e.g. acinic cell carci-
noma) are indistinguishable on clinical examination from 
benign neoplasms.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   787 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK788
2 High-grade malignant tumours usually present as rapidly 
growing, often painless swellings in and around the parotid 
gland. The tumour presents as either a discrete mass with 
infiltration into the overlying skin (Figure 49.22) or a 
diffuse but hard swelling of the gland with no discrete 
mass. Presentation with advanced disease is common, and 
cervical lymph node metastases may be present.
Figure 49.21 (a) Benign tumour of the left parotid gland producing characteristic deflection of the ear lobe. (b) Pleomorphic adenoma arising 
from the upper pole of the left parotid gland producing a preauricular swelling. (c) Deep lobe tumour of the right parotid presenting with a 
swelling of the right soft palate. (d) Magnetic resonance imaging scan revealing a large deep lobe tumour (arrow) of the right parotid gland, 
occupying the parapharyngeal space.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Among primary parotid malignant tumours, mucoepi-
dermoid carcinoma is the most common, followed by ade -
nocystic carcinoma. The latter is notorious for its proclivity 
for perineural invasion and metastatic potential so surgery is 
normally supported by adjuvant radiotherapy to gain local 
control of the disease.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   788 25/10/2017   09:07The parotid gland 789
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Investigations
The initial imaging modality of choice is ultrasound as it 
demonstrates if the lump is intrinsic to the parotid or not. 
It also facilitates accurate sampling of the lesion by FNAC 
or True-Cut biopsy. Subsequently, CT and MRI are the most 
useful imaging techniques (Figure 49.23). Open surgical 
biopsy is contraindicated unless evidence of gross malignancy 
is present, and preoperative histological diagnosis is required 
as a prelude to radical parotidectomy.
Parotidectomy
The aim of superficial parotidectomy is to remove the tumour 
with a cuff of normal surrounding tissue. The most import -
ant structure traversing the parotid gland in the facial nerve. 
Parotid tumour excision techniques are classified based on 
the approach onto the facial nerve. Essentially the traditional 
parotidectomy is in reality a dissection of the facial nerve. A 
parotidectomy is conservative when the nerve is spared and 
radical when the nerve is excised en bloc with the tumour. 
A superficial parotidectomy is when the part of the gland 
superficial to the facial nerve is removed. A deep lobe parot -
idectomy is when the part of the gland beneath the nerve is 
removed and total parotidectomy is when both are dissected 
and removed. Superficial parotidectomy can be partial in rela-
tively small tumours that are removed with a cuff of clinically 
normal parenchyma without removal of the entire superficial 
portion of the gland.
An alternative surgical approach is to focus on the tumour 
itself as the principal procedure and not facial nerve dissec-
tion. Extracapsular dissection is now an established alterna -
tive to parotidectomy. It does not require formal facial nerve 
dissection and is a less invasive technique with reduced mor -
bidity. Temporary facial nerve injury rates are 7% compared 
with 25% for superficial parotidectomy.
Superficial parotidectomy
Superficial parotidectomy is the most common procedure for 
parotid gland pathology. Surgery is performed under endotra-
cheal general anaesthesia, which may or may not be accom -
panied by hypotensive anaesthesia to facilitate dissection, 
improve the visual surgical field and reduce bloo d loss. The 
operation has several distinct phases.
INCISION AND DEVELOPMENT OF A SKIN FLAP
The most commonly used incision is the ‘lazy S’ pre-auricu -
lar–mastoid–cervical (Figure 49.24a). The incision is marked 
TABLE 49.2 Classification of salivary gland tumours (simplified).
Type Subgroup Common examples
I Adenoma Pleomorphic
Monomorphic
Pleomorphic adenoma
Adenolymphoma (Warthin’s tumour)
II Carcinoma Low grade Acinic cell carcinoma
Adenoid cystic carcinoma
Low-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma
High grade Adenocarcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
High-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma
III Non-epithelial tumours Haemangioma, lymphangioma
IV Lymphomas Primary lymphomas
Secondary lymphomas
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas
Lymphomas in Sjögren’s syndrome
V Secondary tumours Local
Distant
Tumours of the head and neck especially
Skin and bronchus
VI Unclassified tumours
VII Tumour-like lesions Solid lesions Benign lymphoepithelial lesion
Adenomatoid hyperplasia
Cystic lesions Salivary gland cysts
Figure 49.22 Malignant tumour of the left parotid gland with inva -
sion of the overlying skin.
Aldred Scott Warthin , 1866–1931, Professor of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, curator of the museum, and demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described lymphadenoma in 1832.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   789 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK790
out and three points identified along its length to facilitate 
closure. Infiltration with local anaesthetic and adrenaline is 
optional, but does aid in the development of the skin flap, 
improves visibility and reduces blood loss in the initial phase. 
The skin flap is developed in an anterior direction by either 
scalpel or scissors dissection. The plane of dissection is well 
below the hair follicles, just above the parotid fascia. The skin 
flap is developed forwards to the anterior border of the gland. 
Posterior undermining of the incision in the cervical region 
facilitates access to the anterior border of the sternomastoid 
muscle.
MOBILISATION OF THE GLAND
This phase of the dissection aims to free the posterior mar -
gin of the gland, allowing identification of the facial nerve. 
Clips are applied along the fascia overlying the sternomas-
toid muscle, with the assistant applying traction anteriorly. By 
sharp dissection along the anterior border of the sternomas-
toid, an avascular plane is developed (Figure 49.24b), which 
requires elective transection of the great auricular nerve. At 
the lower end of the dissection, the external jugular vein is 
often encountered and ligated. The gland is gradually mobil -
ised by sharp dissection up to and on to the anterior aspect 
of the mastoid process, identifying the posterior belly of the 
digastric muscle.
A second avascular plane is developed along the ante -
rior border of the cartilaginous and bony external auditory 
meatus immediately anterior to the tragus. The two avascu -
lar planes are then connected by blunt and sharp dissection. 
By developing two broad avascular planes, identification of 
the facial nerve trunk is facilitated (Figure 49.24c). It is best 
achieved by scissors dissection in the line of the facial nerve 
trunk. Interoperative use of a facial nerve stimulator is rec -
ommended.
LOCATION OF THE FACIAL NERVE TRUNK
The main methods of facial nerve trunk localisation can be 
divided into antegrade and retrograde. The former utilises 
anatomical landmarks to identify the nerve trunk after its exit 
from the stylomastoid foramen, which is then traced distally. 
Landmarks commonly used are:
1 the inferior portion of the cartilaginous canal. This is 
termed Conley’s pointer (tragal pointer) and indicates the 
position of the facial nerve, which lies 1 cm deep and infe-
rior to its tip;
2 the upper border of the posterior belly of the digas-
tric  muscle. Identification of this muscle not only helps 
to mobilise the parotid gland, but also exposes an area 
immediately superior, in which the facial nerve is usually 
located;
3 the squamotympanic fissure;
4 the styloid process (the nerve is superficial to it);
5 the mastoid process can be drilled and the nerve identified 
more proximally.
Retrograde techniques rely on the identification of one of 
the nerve main branches (buccal in relation to the parotid 
duct, marginal mandibular in relation to the facial vessels, 
temporal branch), which is then traced proximally until the 
main trunk is identified. These techniques can be useful in 
revision cases where the anatomy is altered or postradiother -
apy when significant fibrosis distorts the planes of dissection.
Figure 49.23  (a) Magnetic resonance imaging scan r evealing a 
space-occupying lesion (arrow) in the right parotid gland; histology 
revealed pleomorphic adenoma. (b) Computed tomography scan 
of the left parotid gland revealing a cystic lesion (arrow). Histology 
revealed acinic cell carcinoma.
John J Conley , 1912–1999, otolaryngologist, St. Vincent’s Hospital and Medical Center, USA, made important contributions in the treatment of head and neck 
cancer.
(a)
(b)
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   790 25/10/2017   09:07The parotid gland 791
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Once the facial nerve trunk has been identified, gentle 
traction anteriorly facilitates further mobilisation. Control 
of haemorrhage at this stage is vital as bleeding, no mat -
ter how minor, significantly impedes visibility for the sur -
geon. Haemostasis can be achieved with bipolar diathermy , 
although caution is necessary, particularly as the facial nerve 
is approached. Damage to the stylomastoid artery, which lies 
immediately lateral to the nerve, can result in troublesome 
bleeding immediately prior to identification. Pledget swabs 
soaked in adrenaline are sometimes helpful in reducing the 
ooze associated with this phase of the dissection.
DISSECTION OF THE GLAND OFF THE FACIAL NERVE
Once the facial nerve trunk is identified, further exposure of 
the branch of the facial nerve can be achieved by scissors dis-
section in the perineural plane immediately above the nerve. 
Figure 49.24 (a) Landmarks and cervical–mastoid preauricular incision for superficial parotidectomy. (b) Development of the avascular plane 
along the anterior border of the sternomastoid prior to sacrifice of the great auricular nerve. (c) Identification of the trunk of the facial nerve 
(arrow). (d) Diagram highlighting the anatomical landmarks of the parotid bed. (e) Branches of the facial nerve and retromandibular vein follow-
ing delivery of the tumour. (f) Wound closure with a vacuum drain.
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
(e) (f)
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   791 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK792
The tunnel thus created is then laid open, and divisions and 
branches of the facial nerve are followed to the periphery in a 
sequential manner, usually beginning with the upper division. 
The upper division divides into a temporal and a zygomatic 
branch, and the lower division into mandibular and cervical 
branches. In this way, the superficial lobe and its associated 
tumour are mobilised in a superior to inferior direction (Fig-
ures 49.24d, e). The upper division of the nerve is frequently 
tortuous in its course and it can be damaged unless great care 
is taken during perineural dissection. It is often not necessary 
to dissect all branches of the facial nerve completely, as ade -
quate tumour clearance can be achieved with a more conser -
vative resection of the superficial lobe. When a branch of the 
facial nerve is adherent to the tumour or running through the 
tumour, it may require elective division. With the exception 
of the buccal branch, the transected nerve should be repaired 
immediately with a cable graft, harvested from the great auric-
ular nerve.
CLOSURE
The patient is placed into a Trendelenburg position to iden-
tify any residual bleeding vessels. A suction drain is applied 
for a period of 24–48 hours and the wound closed in layers 
(Figure 49.24f).
Extracapsular dissection
Extracapsular dissection is an oncologically sound technique 
for benign parotid gland tumours. The recurrent rates of pleo-
morphic adenomas excision with extracapsular dissection 
compare favourably with traditional superficial parotidecto-
mies (extracapsular dissection 1.3–1.5% vs superficial paroti -
dectomy 2–2.4%) and complication rates are less (temporary 
facial nerve palsy 7% vs 25%: Frey’s syndrome 0 vs 60%)
A preauricular incision is made, the length and posi -
tion of which is adapted to the size and site of the tumour 
(Figure 49.25a). The dissection proceeds in the plane just 
immediately above the ‘shining’ parotid fascia (the SMAS or 
superficial muscular aponeurotic system layer) and continues 
in continuity with the platysma muscle. The skin flap should 
extend past the lump for at least 1 cm (Figure 49.25b).
The circumference of the tumour is marked with ink and 
a cruciate incision marked over the surface. The legs of the 
cruciate incision should extend 1 cm past the edge of the 
tumour. This is an essential part of the technique. Four small 
artery clips are then placed where the two lines bisect. The 
artery clips are used to tent up the parotid fascia, which is 
then divided along the cruciate lines (Figure 49.25c). Small 
rounded end scissors are then used to commence a dissection 
through the parotid gland. The dissection advances in a blunt 
fashion and only when the scissors blades are visible through 
the fascia may the tissue bridge be divided.
As the dissection proceeds around the tumour, the presence 
of a facial nerve is easy to discern (Figures 49.25d, e). It is pru-
dent to use continuous facial monitoring during the operation, 
which helps alert the surgeon to the presence of a facial nerve. 
It is not difficult to recognise a branch of the nerve as long as 
the basic principle is adhered to that no parotid parenchyma 
is diathermised or cut unless one can see through the tissues. 
The key to the extracapsular dissection technique is to place 
traction on the artery clips, which pulls the parotid tissue away 
from the lump and normally reveals a plane through which 
the surgeon can work 2–3 mm away from the tumour. When 
a branch of the facial nerve is observed, it is not necessarily 
dissected unless in close vicinity to the tumour capsule. Retrac-
tors can be used on the normal parotid gland to improve expo-
sure of the tumour, but direct pressure on the tumour should be 
avoided to minimise the risk of rupture. The tumour is removed 
(Figure 49.25f), leaving a parted but essentially intact parotid 
gland (Figure 49.25g). Depending on the depth of the tumour, 
a suction drain can be used at the surgeon’s discretion.
The cruciate incision is re-approximated (Figure 49.25h) 
and the skin incision closed. It is advised that a mastoid-type 
pressure dressing is always applied at the end of the procedure 
otherwise sialoceles can occur. The pressure dressing is kept 
for about 48 hours.
Radical parotidectomy
Radical parotidectomy is performed for patients in whom 
there is clear histological evidence of a high-grade malignant 
tumour (e.g. squamous cell carcinoma) with invasion of facial 
nerve. Low-grade and low stage malignant tumours can usu-
ally be managed by standard superficial parotidectomy. Radi -
cal parotidectomy involves removal of all parotid gland tissue 
and elective division of the facial nerve, usually through the 
main trunk (Figure 49.26). The surgery inevitably removes 
the ipsilateral masseter muscle and may also require simul -
taneous neck dissection, particularly where there is clinical, 
radiological and cytological evidence of lymph node metasta-
ses in the ipsilateral neck. When indicated, facial nerve can 
be repaired using cable grafts (interpositional greater auricu -
lar or sural nerve grafts).
COMPLICATIONS OF PAROTID 
GLAND SURGERY
Complications of parotid gland surgery include:
 ● haematoma formation;
 ● infection;
 ● deformity: unsightly scar and retromandibular hollowing;
 ● temporary facial nerve weakness;
 ● transection of the facial nerve and permanent facial weak-
ness;
 ● sialocele;
 ● facial numbness;
 ● permanent numbness of the ear lobe associated with great 
auricular nerve transection;
 ● Frey’s syndrome.
Friedrich Trendelenburg , 1844–1924, successively Professor of Surgery at Rostock (1875–1882), Bonn (1822–1895) and Leipzig, (1895–1911), Germany. The 
Trendelenburg Position was first described in 1885.
Lucie Frey , 1896–1944, physician, The Neurological Clinic, Warsaw, Poland.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   792 25/10/2017   09:07Complications of parotid gl and surgery 793
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
Figure 49.25 Extracapsular dissection. (a) Left parotid pleomorphic adenoma: skin marking above tumour. (b) Development of skin flap and 
exposure of parotid fascia. (c) Cruciate incision through parotid fascia. The leaves of parotid fascia (arrows) have been raised exposing the 
underlying glandular parenchyma that contains the tumour. (d) Exposure of tumour. The arrow depicts a branch of the facial nerve. (e) Gradual 
mobilisation of the tumour. (f) The tumour is mobilised with preservation of the facial nerve branch (arrows). (g) Excision of the tumour. The 
picture shows the remaining parotid bed with the facial nerve branch intact (arrows). (h) The parotid fascia leaves are replaced and sutured 
together in a watertight fashion. This restores the parotid capsure integrity and prevents development of Frey’s syndrome.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
(g) (h)
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   793 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK794
Frey’s syndrome
Frey’s syndrome (gustatory sweating) is now considered an 
inevitable consequence of parotidectomy unless preventive 
measures are taken (see below). It results from damage to the 
autonomic innervation of the salivary gland with inappropri-
ate regeneration of the postganglionic parasympathetic nerve 
fibres of the auriculotemporal nerve that aberrantly stimulate 
the sweat glands of the overlying skin. The clinical features 
include sweating and erythema (flushing) over the region 
of surgical excision of the parotid gland as a consequence of 
autonomic stimulation of salivation by the smellor taste of 
food. The symptoms are entirely variable and are clinically 
Figure 49.26 (a) High-grade malignant tumour in the left parotid gland. (b) Magnetic resonance imaging scan demonstrating a diffuse 
infiltrative malignant tumour of the left parotid gland (arrow). (c) Skin incision outlined for radical neck dissection and left radical parotidectomy 
including the removal of overlying skin. (d) Skin flap developed. (e) Appearance after left radical neck dissection and left radical parotidectomy. 
Posterior mandible (upper arrow) and great vessels of the neck (lower arrow) are visible. (f) Wound closure after left radical neck dissection.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   794 25/10/2017   09:07Complications of parotid gl and surgery 795
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
demonstrated by a starch iodine test. This involves painting 
the affected area with io dine, which is allowed to dry before 
applying dry starch, which turns blue on exposure to iodine 
in the presence of sweat. Sweating is stimulated by salivary 
stimulation. The management of Frey’s syndrome involves 
the prevention as well as the management of established 
symptoms.
PREVENTION
The incidence of Frey’s syndrome is minimal when extracap-
sular dissection is performed as the parotid fascia is primar -
ily repaired and communication between denuded parotid 
parenchyma and subcutis sealed off.
There are a number of quite invasive techniques described 
to prevent Frey’s syndrome following parotidectomy. These 
include:
 ● sternomastoid muscle flap;
 ● temporalis fascial flap;
 ● insertion of artificial membranes between the skin and the 
parotid bed.
All these methods replace the barrier between the skin 
and the parotid bed to minimise inappropriate regeneration 
of autonomic nerve fibres.
MANAGEMENT OF ESTABLISHED FREY’S 
SYNDROME
Methods of managing Frey’s syndrome include:
 ● antiperspirants, usually containing aluminium chloride;
 ● denervation by tympanic neurectomy;
 ● the injection of botulinum toxin into the affected skin.
The last is the most effective and can be performed as an 
out-patient.
Granulomatous sialadenitis
This is a group of rare conditions that affect the salivary 
glands producing a variety of signs and symptoms, particularly 
painless swellings of the parotid and/or submandibular glands. 
Systemic upset is variable. These include the following:
 ● Mycobacterial infection. Tuberculosis and non-tubercu -
lous sialadenitis typically present as a tumour-like swell -
ing of the salivary gland. There is little pain and no fever. 
Preoperative investigations may be of some help, and the 
diagnosis is only confirmed when the swelling has been 
excised by either submandibular gland excision or formal 
parotidectomy.
 ● Sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis can affect the salivary tissue and 
presents with persistent salivary gland swelling that may 
be associated with xerostomia. Occasionally, the patient 
will present with a localised tumour -like swelling in one 
salivary gland, more commonly the parotid – the so called 
sarcoid pseudotumour. In such circumstances, the diagno-
sis is only likely to be made following surgical excision for 
a presumed neoplasm. Heerfordt’s syndrome is sarcoidosis 
that involves parotid swelling, anterior uveitis, facial palsy 
and fever.
 ● Other. These include cat scratch disease, toxoplasmosis, 
syphilis, deep mycoses and granulomatosis with polyangii-
tis (previously Wegener’s granulomatosis), allergic sialad-
enitis and sialadenitis associated with radiotherapy of the 
head and neck.
Tumour-like lesions
There is a group of pathological conditions that affect the 
salivary glands and which do not fall into any particular 
classification or category and are often difficult to diagnose. 
These include such conditions as sialadenosis, adenomatoid 
hyperplasia and multifocal monomorphic adenomatosis.
SIALADENOSIS
Sialadenosis (sialosis) is used to describe non-inflammatory 
swelling particularly affecting the parotid gland. It usually 
occurs in association with a variety of conditions including 
diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, other endocrine diseases, preg-
nancy, drugs, bulimia and other eating disorders, and idio-
pathic diseases.
Most patients present between 40 and 70 years of age, and 
the salivary swellings are soft and often symmetrical (Figure 
49.27). When the parotid glands are affected, patients may 
complain of a hamster-like appearance. Drug-induced sialosis 
Christian Frederick Heerfordt , 1871–1953, Danish ophthalmologist, described this syndrome in 1909.
Friedrich Wegener , 1907–1990, Professor of Pathology, Lübeck, Germany, described this form of granulomatosis in 1939.
Figure 49.27 Sialosis of the parotid glands secondary to excess 
alcohol intake.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   795 25/10/2017   09:07CHAPTER 49  Disorders of the salivary gl ands
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK796
is particularly common with sympathomimetic drugs. In many 
patients, no underlying disorder can be identified. Severe 
and prolonged malnutrition, as seen in eating disorders, pro-
duces sialadenosis by a process of hypertrophy to compensate 
for swings in acid balance. The pathological mechanism of 
sialadenosis can be associated with a process of neuropathy, 
which interferes with salivary gland function and subsequent 
acinar cell atrophy. This may be the case in diabetes mellitus, 
where autonomic neuropathy is a recognised complication as 
well as drug-induced sialosis.
The treatment of sialosis is unsatisfactory, but treatment 
is aimed at correction of the underlying disorder. Drug- 
associated sialadenosis may regress when the drug responsible 
is withdrawn.
Degenerative conditions
Sjögren’s syndrome
Sjögren’s syndrome is an autoimmune condition causing 
progressive destruction of salivary and lacrimal glands. Pri-
mary Sjögren’ s syndrome differs from secondary Sjögren’s 
syndrome in that xerostomia and keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
occur without an associated connective tissue disorder or 
other autoimmune condition (rhematoid arthritis, systemic 
lupous erythematosus, scleroderma, polymyositis, thyroiditis). 
However, the symptoms are often more severe, and the inci -
dence of lymphomatous transformation (see below) in the 
primary group is higher than that in the secondary group 
(Table 49.3).
The incidence of Sjogren’s syndrome is 0.5–2% of the 
population. Females are affected more than males in the 
ratio 10:1. Occasionally, there is enlargement of the salivary 
glands, more commonly the parotid rather than the subman-
dibular glands. The glands are occasionally painful, and the 
patient rarely develops a bacterial sialadenitis due to ascend -
ing infection from the associated xerostomia.
The characteristic pathological feature of Sjögren’s syn -
drome is progressive lymphocytic infiltration, acinar cell 
destruction and proliferation of duct epithelium in all salivary 
and lacrimal gland tissue. The diagnosis is based on the his -
tory as no single laboratory investigation is pathognomonic 
of either primary or secondary Sjögren’s syndrome (Figure 
49.28).
MANAGEMENT
Management of Sjögren’s syndrome remains symptomatic. 
No known treatment modifies or improves the xerostomia or 
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. An ophthalmological assessment 
is important, and artificial tears are essential to preserve cor -
neal function. For dry mouth, various artificial salivary substi-
tutes are available, but patients often consume large volumes 
of water, carrying a bottle of water with them at all times. In 
the dentate patient, the use of salivary substitutes with flu-
oride is important to counter the risk of accelerating dental 
caries. Other oral complications include oral candidosis and 
accelerated periodontal disease.
COMPLICATIONS OF SJÖGREN’S SYNDROME
There is an increased incidence of developing lymphoma 
(most commonly non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphoma) in 
patients with Sjögren’s syndrome. The risk is highest within 
the primary group, and the onset of lymphoma is heralded by 
immunological change within the blood. The incidence of 
lymphoma in patients with Sjogren’s syndrome is 4.3% (18.9 
times higher than in the general population). Enlarged and 
painful parotid glands raise the prospect of MALT (mucosa 
associated lymphoid tissue) lymphoma.
Xerostomia
Xerostomia is a common symptom in many aspects of medi-
cal practice. Normal salivary flows decrease with age in both 
men and women, although many patients with xerostomia 
are postmenopausal women who also complain of a burning 
tongue or mouth. Common causes of xerostomia are:
1 chronic anxiety states and depression;
2 dehydration;
TABLE 49.3 Degenerative disorders.
Primary Sjögren’s 
syndrome
More severe xerostomia
Widespread exocrine gland dysfunction
No connective tissue disorder
Secondary Sjögren’s 
syndrome
M:F: 1:10
Middle age
Underlying connective tissue disorder
Benign 
lymphoepithelial lesion
20% develop lymphoma
Diffuse parotid swelling 20% bilateral
Figure 49.28 Clinical appearance of primary biliary cirrhosis associ-
ated with Sjögren’s syndrome.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   796 25/10/2017   09:07Further reading 797
PART 7 | HEAD AND NECK
3 anticholinergic drugs, especially antidepressants;
4 salivary gland disorders – Sjögren’s syndrome. Ascending 
parotitis is an occasional complication of xerostomia and 
is managed with antibiotics and increased fluid intake;
5 radiotherapy to the head and neck.
Sialorrhoea
Certain drugs and oral infection produce a transient increase 
in salivary flow rates. In healthy individuals, excess salivation 
is rarely symptomatic as excess saliva is swallowed sponta -
neously. Uncontrolled drooling is usually seen in the presence 
of normal salivary production in children with mental and 
physical handicap, most notably cerebral palsy.
MANAGEMENT
Sialorrhoea can be managed medically with antisialogogues 
or with intraparenchymal botulinum toxin injection.
Uncontrollable drooling is managed surgically, and many 
operations are available. Surgical options include:
 ● bilateral submandibular duct repositioning and simultane-
ous sublingual gland excision;
 ● bilateral submandibular gland excision;
 ● transposition of the parotid ducts and simultaneous sub -
mandibular gland excision.
Most resting salivary gland flow arises from the subman -
dibular glands, and surgery should be focused on this gland to 
control uncontrolled sialorrhoea.
FURTHER READING
McGurk M, Combes J. Controversies in the management of salivary gland 
disease, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
07_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   797 25/10/2017   09:0707_49-B&L27_Pt7_Ch49.indd   798 25/10/2017   09:07
PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
50 The thyroid gland ................................................................................................800
51 The parathyroid glands ....................................................................................823
52 The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders .......838
53 The breast ..............................................................................................................860
Breast and endocrine
8
08_50A-B&L27_Pt8.indd   799 25/10/2017   09:08Learning objectives
 • To understand the development and anatomy of the 
thyroid gland
 • To know the physiology and investigation of thyroid 
function
 • To be able to select appropriate investigations for 
thyroid swellings
 • To know when to operate on a thyroid swelling
 • To describe thyroidectomy
 • To know the risks and complications of thyroid surgery
EMBRYOLOGY
The embryology of the thyroid and parathyroid glands under-
lies the anatomical position, anatomical variations and con -
genital conditions of these structures and is therefore vital for 
surgery (Figure 50.1). The thyroglossal duct develops from 
the median bud of the pharynx. The foramen caecum at the 
junction of the anterior two-thirds and posterior one-third of 
the tongue is the vestigial remnant of the duct. This initially 
hollow structure migrates caudally and passes in close con -
tinuity with, and sometimes through, the developing hyoid 
cartilage. The parathyroid glands develop from the third and 
fourth pharyngeal pouches. The thymus also develops from 
the third pouch. As it descends, the thymus takes the asso-
ciated parathyroid gland with it, which explains why the 
inferior parathyroid, which arises from the third pharyngeal 
pouch, normally lies inferior to the superior gland. However, 
the inferior parathyroid may be found anywhere along this 
line of descent (see also Chapter 51). The developing thyroid 
lobes amalgamate with the structures that arise in the fourth 
pharyngeal pouch, i.e. the superior parathyroid gland and the 
ultimobranchial body. Parafollicular cells (C cells) from the 
neural crest reach the thyroid via the ultimobranchial body.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
The normal thyroid gland weighs 20–25  g. The functioning 
unit is the lobule supplied by a single arteriole and consists of 
24–40 follicles lined with cuboidal epithelium. The follicle 
contains colloid in which thyroglobulin is stored (Figure 50.2). 
The arterial supply is rich, and extensive anastomoses occur 
between the main thyroid arteries and branches of the tracheal 
and oesophageal arteries (Figure 50.3). There is an extensive 
lymphatic network within and around the gland. Although 
some lymph channels pass directly to the deep cervical nodes, 
the subcapsular plexus drains principally to the central com -
partment juxtathyroid – ‘Delphian’ and paratracheal nodes 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 51.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Buccal cavity
Path of
descent of
thyroid
Path of
descent of
IPG and
thymus
Tracheo-oesophageal
tube
UBB
SPG
IV
Thymus
IPG
III
II
Thyroid
Figure 50.1 Embryology of thyroid and parathyr oid. Diagram of an 
anterior view of the pharynx in a 4-week embryo showing the rela-
tionship of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches to final position 
of the thyroid and parathyroid glands. IPG, inferior parathyroid; SPG, 
superior parathyroid; UBB, ultimobranchial body.
Delphi , a sacred site near the Gulf of Corinth in Greece, is the place where Phythia, the snake-woman oracle, resided. She sat on a tripod clutching the ribbons of 
the monolithic ‘omphalos’ of the world and after inhaling sulphurous fumes, would utter meaningless jargon which was interpreted equivocally by the attendent 
priests for those who came to consult her. Formerly the purpose of these lymph nodes was uncertain, and they were therefore called ‘Delphic’.
50Chapter
The thyroid gland
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   800 25/10/2017   09:10Surgical anatomy 801
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
and nodes on the superior and inferior thyroid veins (level VI),  
and from there to the deep cervical (levels II, III, IV and V) 
and mediastinal groups of nodes (level VII) (Figure 50.4).
The relationship between the recurrent laryngeal nerve 
(RLN) and the thyroid is of supreme importance to the oper-
ating surgeon. A branch of the vagus, the nerve recurs round 
the arch of the aorta on the left and the subclavian artery 
on the right. The clinical significance of this is that on the 
left the nerve has more distance in which to reach the tra -
cheoesophageal groove and therefore runs in a medial plane. 
On the right, there is less distance and the nerve runs more 
obliquely to reach the tracheoesophageal groove. Approxi-
Figure 50.2 Histology of the normal thyroid.
Right recurrent
larygeal nerve
Left recurrent
larygeal nerve
Thyroid gland
(right lobe)
Superior
parathyroid gland
Inferior parathyroid
gland
Inferior thyroid artery
Inferior thyroid vein
Common
carotid
artery
Internal
jugular vein
Right vagus
nerve (X)
Left vagus
nerve (X)
Figure 50.3 The thyroid gland from behind.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 51.4Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Submandibular
gland Internal carotid
artery
I II
III
VI
VII
IV
V
Internal jugular
vein
Internal carotid
artery
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Trapezius 
muscle
Anterior scalene
muscle
Internal jugular
vein
Left common carotid
artery
Manubrium
Right common
carotid artery
Cricoid
cartilage
Omohyoid
muscle
Hyoid bone
Mylohyoid
muscle
Digastric
muscle
Figure 50.4 Cervical lymph node levels.
mately 2% of nerves on the right are non-recurrent and will 
enter the larynx from above.
The nerve runs posterior to the thyroid and enters 
the  larynx at the cricothyroid joint. This entry point is at 
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   801 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE802
the level of Berry’ s ligament, a condensation of pretracheal 
fascia that binds the thyroid to the trachea. This is the point 
at which the nerve is at most risk of injury during surgery. In 
terms of surgical anatomy, the nerve can be located in the 
 tracheosophageal groove where it forms one side of Beahrs’ 
triangle (the other two sides are the carotid artery and the 
inferior thyroid artery) or at the cricothyroid joint. The nerve 
will normally be found as the thyroid lobe is mobilised later -
ally, lying under the most posterolateral portion of the gland 
called the tubercle of Zuckerkandl.
PHYSIOLOGY
Thyroxine
The hormones tri-iodothyronine (T 3) and l-thyroxine (T 4) 
are bound to thyroglobulin within the colloid. Synthesis 
within the thyroglobulin complex is controlled by several 
enzymes, in distinct steps:
 ● trapping of inorganic iodide from the blood;
 ● oxidation of iodide to iodine;
 ● binding of iodine with tyrosine to form iodotyrosine;
 ● coupling of monoiodotyrosines and di-io dotyrosines to 
form T3 and T4.
When hormones are required, the complex is resorbed 
into the cell and thyroglobulin is broken down. T3 and T4 are 
liberated and enter the blood, where they are bound to serum 
proteins: albumin, thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) and 
thyroxine-binding prealbumin (TBPA). The small amount of 
hormone that remains free in the serum is biologically active.
The metabolic effects of the thyroid hormones are due to 
unbound free T 4 and T 3 (0.03% and 0.3% of the total cir -
culating hormones, respectively). T 3 is the more important 
physiological hormone and is also produced in the periph -
ery by conversion from T4. T3 is quick acting (within a few 
hours), whereas T4 acts more slowly (4–14 days).
Calcitonin
The parafollicular C cells of the thyroid are of neuroendo -
crine origin and arrive in the thyroid via the ultimobranchial 
body (Figure 50.1). They produce calcitonin.
The pituitary–thyroid axis
Synthesis and release of thyroid hormones from the thyroid is 
controlled by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) from the 
anterior pituitary. Secretion of TSH depends upon the level 
of circulating thyroid hormones and is modified in a negative 
feedback manner. In hyperthyroidism TSH production is sup-
pressed, whereas in hypothyroidism it is stimulated. Regulation 
of TSH secretion also results from the action of thyrotrophin- 
releasing hormone (TRH) produced in the hypothalamus.
Thyroid-stimulating antibodies
A family of IgG immunoglobulins bind with TSH receptor 
sites (TRAbs) and activate TSH receptors on the follicular 
cell membrane. They have a more protracted action than 
TSH (16–24 versus 1.5–3 hours) and are responsible for vir -
tually all cases of thyrotoxicosis not due to autonomous toxic 
nodules. Serum concentrations are very low but their mea -
surement is not essential to make the diagnosis.
Serum thyroid hormones
Serum TSH
TSH levels can be measured accurately down to very low 
serum concentrations with an immunochemiluminomet -
ric assay. Interpretation of deranged TSH levels depends on 
knowledge of the T 3 and T 4 values. In the euthyroid state, 
T3, T4 and TSH levels will all be within the normal range. 
Florid thyroid failure results in depressed T 3 and T 4 levels, 
with gross elevation of TSH. Incipient or developing thyroid 
failure is characterised by low normal values of T3 and T4 and 
elevation of TSH. In toxic states, the TSH level is suppressed 
and undetectable (Table 50.1). T3 toxicity (with a normal T4) 
is a distinct entity and may only be diagnosed by measuring 
T3, although a suppressed TSH in the presence of normal T 4 
suggests the diagnosis.
Thyroid autoantibodies
Serum levels of antibodies against thyroid peroxidase 
(TPO) and thyroglobulin are useful in determining the 
cause of  thyroid dysfunction and swellings. Autoimmune 
Sir James Berry , 1860–1946, surgeon, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
Oliver H Beahrs , 1914–2006, surgeon, Mayo Clinic, MN, USA.
Emil Zuckerkandl , 1849–1901, Austro-Hungarian anatomist, brother of urologist Otto Zuckerkandl.
Myxoedema  was first described in 1873 by Sir William Withey Gull, 1816–1890, physician, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
TABLE 50.1 Results of thyroid function tests in normal and pathological states.
Thyroid functional state TSH (0.3–3.3 mU/L) Free T4 (10–30 nmol/L) Free T3 (3.5–7.5 µmol/L)
Euthyroid Normal Normal Normal
Thyrotoxic Undetectable High High
Myxoedema High Low Low
Suppressive T4 therapy Undetectable High High (often normal)
T3 toxicity Low/undetectable Normal High
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   802 25/10/2017   09:10Physiology 803
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Thyroid imaging
The workhorse investigation in thyroid disease for the sur -
geon is ultrasound. This modality allows assessment of the 
gland and the regional lymphatics. Not only can the char -
acteristics of the gland substance be quantified, but critically 
the presence and features of thyroid nodules can be described. 
Number, size, shape, margins, vascularity and specific features 
such as the presence of microcalcifications can be used to pre-
dict the risk of malignancy within a specific nodule. Regional 
lymphatics, particularly in the lateral neck can be assessed 
accurately for the presence of metastatic deposits. During 
ultrasound, fine needle aspiration (FNA) can be performed 
more accurately than free-hand techniques allow.
Ultrasound has the advantages that it is not associated 
with ionising radiation and is non-invasive and cheap (Figure 
50.5). Visualisation of the central neck nodes, in particular 
those behind the sternum, is however limited. For this reason, 
when metastatic disease is detected cross-sectional imaging 
is required to fully stage the disease. Retrosternal extension, 
which can often be predicted on plain chest x-ray (Figure 
50.6), also requires more advanced techniques to determine 
the extent adequately prior to considering management. For 
most of these indications, the imaging modality of choice is 
computed tomography (CT). Rapid acquisition times mini -
mise the artifact secondary to breathing and the lung fields 
can be accurately assessed simultaneously.
In the setting of an invasive primary thyroid cancer, both 
CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may have a role. 
Contrast enhanced CT is useful for determining the extent of 
airway invasion (Figure 50.7) and MRI is superior at deter -
mining the presence of prevertebral fascia invasion.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans have limited 
application in thyroid disease. They may be considered in the 
setting of recurrent thyroid cancer. This is particularly use -
ful when the disease does not concentrate iodine, at which 
point fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake increases and lesions 
become positive on PET scans.
Figure 50.5  Ultrasound scanning. (a) Transverse scan of normal 
thyroid. R, right lobe; L, left lobe; T, trachea. (b) Longitudinal scan of 
normal jugular lymph nodes (white arrows).
(a)
(b)
Figure 50.6  Chest radiograph showing r etrosternal goitre with 
 tracheal displacement.
Summary box 50.1
Thyroid investigations
Essential
●● Serum: TSH (T3 and T4 if abnormal); thyroid autoantibodies
●● FNAC of palpable discrete swellings; ultrasound guidance 
may reduce the ‘Thy1’ rate
Optional
●● Corrected serum calcium
●● Serum calcitonin (carcinoembryonic antigen may be used as 
an alternative screening test for medullary cancer)
●● Imaging: chest radiograph and thoracic inlet if tracheal 
deviation/retrosternal goitre; ultrasound, CT and MRI scan 
for known cancer, some reoperations and some retrosternal 
goitres; isotope scan if discrete swelling and toxicity coexist
thyroiditis may be associated with thyroid toxicity, failure 
or euthyroid goitre. Levels above 25 units/mL for TPO anti -
body and titres of greater than 1:100 for antithyroglobulin 
are considered significant, although a proportion of patients 
with histological evidence of lymphocytic (autoimmune) 
thyroiditis are seronegative. The presence of antithyroglob-
ulin antibody interferes with assays of serum thyroglobulin, 
with implications for follow-up of thyroid cancers. TSH 
receptor antibodies (TSH-Rab or TRAB) are often present 
in Graves’ disease. They are largely produced within the 
thyroid itself.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   803 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE804
out-patient department and is readily repeated. This technique, 
developed in Scandinavia 40 years ago, is now routine through-
out the world. FNAC results should be reported using standard 
terminology (Table 50.2). As stated above there is a trend to 
Isotope scanning
The uptake by the thyroid of a low dose of either radiola -
belled iodine ( 123I) or the cheaper technetium ( 99mTc) will 
demonstrate the distribution of activity in the whole gland. 
Routine isotope scanning is unnecessary and inappropriate 
for distinguishing benign from malignant lesions because the 
majority (80%) of ‘cold’ swellings are benign and some (5%) 
functioning or ‘warm’ swellings will be malignant. Its princi -
pal value is in the toxic patient with a nodule or nodularity 
of the thyroid. Localisation of overactivity in the gland will 
differentiate between a toxic nodule with suppression of the 
remainder of the gland, and toxic multinodular goitre with 
several areas of increased uptake with important implications 
for therapy (Figure 50.8).
Whole-body scanning is used to demonstrate metastases. 
However, the patient must have all normally functioning thy-
roid tissue ablated either by surgery or radioiodine before the 
scan is performed, because metastatic thyroid cancer tissue can-
not compete with normal thyroid tissue in the uptake of iodine.
Fine-needle aspiration cytology
Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) is the investigation  
of choice in discrete thyroid swellings. FNAC has excellent  
patient compliance, is simple and quick to perform in the 
Figure 50.7  (a) Scout film showing retrosternal goitre. (b) Axial 
computed tomography (CT) section showing goitre extending to 
below the aortic arch with tracheal compression. (c) Coronal CT sec-
tion showing goitre extending to the tracheal bifurcation. (d) Sagittal 
CT section showing goitre filling the posterior mediastinum.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 50.8 Technetium thyroid scan showing appearance of a 1-cm 
‘toxic’ adenoma in the right thyroid lobe with suppression of uptake in 
the left lobe. The intense uptake gives a false impression of the size 
of the swelling.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   804 25/10/2017   09:10Thyroid enlargement 805
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Simple goitre
Aetiology
Simple goitre may develop as a result of stimulation of the 
thyroid gland by TSH, either as a result of inappropriate 
secretion from a microadenoma in the anterior pituitary 
(which is rare), or in response to a chronically low level of 
circulating thyroid hormones. The most important factor in 
endemic goitre is dietary deficiency of iodine (see below), 
but defective hormone synthesis probably accounts for many 
sporadic goitres (see below).
TSH is not the only stimulus to thyroid follicular cell pro-
liferation and other growth factors, including immunoglob -
ulins, exert an influence. The heterogeneous structural and 
functional response in the thyroid resulting in characteristic 
nodularity may be due to the presence of clones of cells par -
ticularly sensitive to growth stimulation.
IODINE DEFICIENCY
The daily requirement of iodine is about 0.1–0.15mg. In 
nearly all districts where simple goitre is endemic, there is a 
very low iodide content in the water and food. Endemic areas 
are in the mountainous ranges, such as the Rocky Mountains, 
the Alps, the Andes and the Himalayas and in the UK areas 
of Derbyshire and Yorkshire. Endemic goitre is also found in 
lowland areas where the soil lacks iodide or the water supply 
comes from far away mountain ranges, e.g. the Great Lakes 
of North America, the plains of Lombardy, the Struma val -
ley, the Nile valley and the Congo. Calcium is also goitro-
genic and goitre is common in low-iodine areas on chalk or 
limestone, for example Derbyshire and Southern Ireland. 
Although iodides in food and water may be adequate, failure 
of intestinal absorption may produce iodine deficiency.
DYSHORMONOGENESIS
Enzyme deficiencies of varying severity may be responsible 
for many sporadic goitres, i.e. in non-endemic areas (Figure 
50.9). There is often a family history, suggesting a genetic 
defect. Environmental factors may compensate in areas of 
high iodine intake; for example, goitre is almost unknown in 
Iceland where the fish diet is rich in iodine. Similarly, a low 
intake of iodine encourages goitre formation in those with a 
metabolic predisposition.
Summary box 50.2
Thyroid swellings
●● Know how to describe thyroid swellings
●● Use appropriate investigations
●● Know the indications for surgery
●● Select the appropriate procedure
●● Describe and manage postoperative complications
TABLE 50.3 Classification of thyroid swellings.
Simple goitre 
(euthyroid)
Diffuse 
hyperplastic
Physiological
Pubertal
Pregnancy
Multinodular 
goitre
Toxic Diffuse (Graves’ 
disease)
Multinodular
Toxic adenoma
Neoplastic Benign
Malignant
Inflammatory Autoimmune Chronic lymphocytic 
thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s disease
Granulomatous De Quervain’s thyroiditis
Fibrosing Riedel’s thyroiditis
Infective Acute (bacterial 
thyroiditis, viral thyroiditis, 
‘subacute thyroiditis’)
Chronic (tuberculous, 
syphilitic)
Other Amyloid
use ultrasound to guide the needle to achieve more accurate 
sampling and reduce the rate of unsatisfactory aspirates.
THYROID ENLARGEMENT
The normal thyroid gland is impalpable. The term goitre (from 
the Latin guttur = the throat) is used to describe generalised 
enlargement of the thyroid gland. A discrete swelling (nodule) 
in one lobe with no palpable abnormality elsewhere is termed an 
isolated (or solitary) swelling. Discrete swellings with evidence 
of abnormality elsewhere in the gland are termed dominant.
A scheme for classifying thyroid enlargement is given in 
Table 50.3.
Hakaru Hashimoto , 1881–1934, Director of The Hashimoto Hospital, Mie, Japan, described chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis in 1912. The link to an autoimmune 
basis was defined by Roitt and his co-workers.
Struma . The River Struma arises in the mountains of Bulgaria and flows into the Aegean Sea. Along its banks and those of its tributaries dwell peoples of several 
nationalities among whom endemic goitre has long been prevalent. Struma is a European continental term for goitre.
TABLE 50.2 Classification of fine-needle aspiration 
cytology reports.
Thy1 Non-diagnostic
Thy1c Non-diagnostic cystic
Thy2 Non-neoplastic
Thy3 Follicular
Thy4 Suspicious of malignancy
Thy5 Malignant
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   805 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE806
GOITROGENS
Well-known goitrogens are the vegetables of the brassica 
family (cabbage, kale and rape), which contain thiocyanate, 
drugs such as para-aminosalicylic acid (PAS) and the anti -
thyroid drugs. Thiocyanates and perchlorates interfere with 
iodide trapping; carbimazole and thiouracil compounds inter-
fere with the oxidation of iodide and the binding of iodine to 
tyrosine.
Surprisingly, iodides in large quantities are goitrogenic 
because they inhibit the organic binding of iodine and  produce 
an iodide goitre. Excessive io dine intake may be associated 
with an increased incidence of autoimmune thyroid disease.
The natural history of simple goitre
Stages in goitre formation are:
 ● Persistent growth stimulation causes diffuse hyperplasia; 
all lobules are composed of active follicles and iodine 
uptake is uniform. This is a diffuse hyperplastic goitre, 
which may persist for a long time but is reversible if stim -
ulation ceases.
 ● Later, as a result of fluctuating stimulation, a mixed pat -
tern develops with areas of active lobules and areas of 
inactive lobules.
 ● Active lobules become more vascular and hyperplastic 
until haemorrhage occurs, causing central necrosis and 
leaving only a surrounding rind of active follicles.
 ● Necrotic lobules coalesce to form nodules filled either with 
iodine-free colloid or a mass of new but inactive follicles.
 ● Continual repetition of this process results in a nodular 
goitre. Most no dules are inactive, and active follicles are 
present only in the internodular tissue.
DIFFUSE HYPERPLASTIC GOITRE
Diffuse hyperplasia corresponds to the first stages of the natu-
ral history. The goitre appears in childhood in endemic areas 
but, in sporadic cases, it usually occurs at puberty when meta-
bolic demands are high. If TSH stimulation ceases the goitre 
may regress, but tends to recur later at times of stress such as 
pregnancy. The goitre is soft, diffuse and may become large 
enough to cause discomfort. A colloid goitre is a late stage of 
diffuse hyperplasia, when TSH stimulation has fallen off and 
when many follicles are inactive and full of colloid (Figure 
50.10).
NODULAR GOITRE
Nodules are usually multiple, forming a multinodular goitre 
(Figure 50.11). Occasionally, only one macroscopic nodule 
is found, but microscopic changes will be present  throughout 
the gland; this is one form of a clinically solitary nodule. 
Nodules may be colloid or cellular, and cystic degeneration 
and haemorrhage are common, as is subsequent calcification. 
Nodules appear early in endemic goitre and later (between 20 
and 30 years) in sporadic goitre, although the patient may be 
unaware of the goitre until his or her late 40s or 50s. All types 
of simple goitre are more common in the female than in the 
male owing to the presence of oestrogen receptors in thyroid 
tissue.
Figure 50.9 Total thyroidectomy for dyshormonogenetic goitre in a 
14-year-old girl.
Figure 50.10 Colloid goitre.
Figure 50.11 Large multinodular goitre.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   806 25/10/2017   09:10Thyroid enlargement 807
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually straightforward. The patient is euthyroid, 
the nodules are palpable and often visible; they are smooth, 
usually firm and not hard and the goitre is painless and moves 
freely on swallowing. Hardness and irregularity , due to calci-
fication, may simulate carcinoma. A painful nodule, sudden 
appearance or rapid enlargement of a nodule raises suspicion 
of carcinoma but is usually due to haemorrhage into a simple 
nodule. Differential diagnosis from autoimmune thyroiditis 
may be difficult and the two conditions frequently coexist.
Investigations
Thyroid function should be assessed to exclude mild hyper -
thyroidism, and the presence of circulating thyroid antibodies 
tested to differentiate from autoimmune thyroiditis. Ultra -
sound is the gold standard assessment when undertaken by 
a suitably trained and experienced operator. FNAC is only 
required for a nodule within the goitre that demonstrates 
ultrasonic features of concern. This may or may not be the 
largest ‘dominant’ nodule. The biopsy should be performed 
under ultrasonic guidance to ensure the correct nodule is sam-
pled. If there are swallowing or breathing symptoms then a 
CT scan of the thoracic inlet is the best modality to assess 
tracheal or oesophageal compression.
Complications
Tracheal obstruction may be due to gross lateral displacement 
or compression in a lateral or anteroposterior plane by ret -
rosternal extension of the goitre (Figure 50.7). Acute respi-
ratory obstruction may follow haemorrhage into a nodule 
impacted in the thoracic inlet.
SECONDARY THYROTOXICOSIS
Transient episodes of mild hyperthyroidism are common, 
occurring in up to 30% of patients.
CARCINOMA
An increased incidence of cancer (usually follicular) has been 
reported from endemic areas. Dominant or rapidly growing 
nodules in longstanding goitres should always be subjected to 
aspiration cytology.
Prevention and treatment of simple goitre
In endemic areas the incidence of goitre has been strikingly 
reduced by the introduction of iodised salt.
In the early stages, a hyperplastic goitre may regress if thy-
roxine is given in a dose of 0.15–0.2 mg daily for a few months.
Although the nodular stage of simple goitre is irrevers -
ible, more than half of benign nodules will regress in size over 
10 years. Most patients with multinodular goitre are asymp -
tomatic and do not require operation. Surgery is indicated for 
nodular goitres with features of underlying malignancy, for 
swallowing symptoms if other causes have been excluded or 
for cosmetic reasons if the patient finds the goitre unsightly. If 
the goitre is causing tracheal compression then surgery should 
be considered. Many such patients are found incidentally 
and are asymptomatic and often very elderly. As these goitres 
often grow very slowly the risks and benefits of surgery should 
be considered carefully, particularly if a sternal split may be 
required for access.
There is a choice of surgical treatment in multinodular 
goitre: total thyroidectomy with immediate and lifelong 
replacement of thyroxine or some form of partial resection 
to conserve sufficient functioning thyroid tissue to subserve 
normal function while reducing the risk of hypoparathyroid -
ism that accompanies total thyroidectomy. Subtotal thyroid-
ectomy involves partial resection of each lobe removing the 
bulk of the gland, leaving up to 8 g of relatively normal tissue 
in each remnant. The technique is essentially the same as 
described for toxic goitre, as are the postoperative complica -
tions. More often, however, the multinodular change is asym-
metrical, with one lobe more significantly involved than the 
other. In these circumstances, particularly in older patients, 
total lobectomy on the more affected side is the appropriate 
management with either subtotal resection (Dunhill proce -
dure) or no intervention on the less affected side. In many 
cases, the causative factors persist and recurrence is likely.
Reoperation for recurrent nodular goitre is more difficult 
and hazardous and, for this reason, an increasing number 
of thyroid surgeons favour total thyroidectomy in younger 
patients. However, when the first operation comprised uni -
lateral lobectomy alone for asymmetric goitre, reoperation 
and completion total thyroidectomy is straightforward if 
required for progression of nodularity in the remaining lobe. 
Total lobectomy and total thyroidectomy have the additional 
advantage of being therapeutic for incidental carcinomas (see 
below).
After subtotal resection, it has been customary to give 
thyroxine to suppress TSH secretion, with the aim of prevent-
ing recurrence. Whether this is either necessary or effective is 
uncertain, although the evidence of benefit in endemic areas 
is better than elsewhere. There is some evidence that radio -
active iodine may reduce the size of recurrent nodular goitre 
after previous subtotal resection and, in some circumstances, 
this may be a safer alternative than reoperation, particularly 
if there has been more than one previous thyroid procedure.
Clinically discrete swellings
Discrete thyroid swellings (thyroid nodules) are common and 
are palpable in 3–4% of the adult population in the UK and 
USA. They are three to four times more frequent in women 
than men.
Diagnosis
A discrete swelling in an otherwise impalpable gland is 
termed isolated or solitary, whereas the preferred term is 
dominant for a similar swelling in a gland with clinical evi -
dence of generalised abnormality in the form of a palpable 
contralateral lobe or generalised mild nodularity. About 70% 
of discrete thyroid swellings are clinically isolated and about 
30% are dominant. The true incidence of isolated swellings is 
Sir Thomas Peel Dunhill , 1876–1957, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   807 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE808
 somewhat less than the clinical estimate. Clinical classifica -
tion is inevitably subjective and overestimates the frequency 
of truly isolated swellings. When such a gland is exposed 
at operation or examined by ultrasonography, CT or MRI, 
clinically impalpable no dules are often detected. The true 
frequency of thyroid nodularity compared with the clinical 
detection rate by palpation is shown in Figure 50.12.
UL TRASONOGRAPHY
This is gold standard investigation to determine the physi -
cal characteristics of thyroid swellings. There are a number 
of ultrasonic features in a thyroid swelling associated with 
thyroid neoplasia, including microcalcification and increased 
vascularity, but only macroscopic capsular breach and nodal 
involvement are diagnostic of malignancy. Ultrasound should 
be used as the primary investigation of any thyroid nodule as 
a reassuring appearance mitigates the need for an FNAC (see 
below).
FINE-NEEDLE ASPIRATION CYTOLOGY
FNAC should be used, ideally under ultrasound guidance, 
on all nodules that do not fulfil a fully benign (U2) clas -
sification on ultrasound. FNAC is reliable in identifying 
papillary thyroid cancer but cannot distinguish between a 
benign follicular adenoma (Figure 50.14) and follicular car-
cinoma, as this distinction is dependent not on cytology but 
on histological criteria, which include capsular and vascular 
invasion.
FNAC is both highly specific and sensitive. Using ultra-
sound improves this further, particularly in part cystic, part 
solid nodules in which ultrasound allows targeting of the solid 
element for biopsy.
Age (years)
10 20 30 40 50 60
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Prevalence
Figure 50.12 The prevalence of thyroid nodules detected on palpa-
tion (broken line) or by ultrasonography or postmortem examination 
(solid line) (after Mazzaferri).
Demonstrating the presence of impalpable nodules does 
not change the management of palpable discrete swellings and 
begs the question of the necessity of investigating incidentally 
found nodules. The importance of discrete swellings lies in 
the risk of neoplasia compared with other thyroid swellings. 
Some 15% of isolated swellings prove to be malignant and 
an additional 30–40% are follicular adenomas. The remain-
der are non-neoplastic, largely consisting of areas of colloid 
degeneration, thyroiditis or cysts. Although the incidence 
of malignancy or follicular adenoma in clinically dominant 
swellings is approximately half of that of truly isolated swell -
ings, it is substantial and cannot be ignored (Figure 50.13).
Investigation
THYROID FUNCTION
Serum TSH and thyroid hormone levels should be measured. 
If hyperthyroidism associated with a discrete swelling is con -
firmed biochemically, it indicates either a ‘toxic adenoma’ or a 
manifestation of toxic multinodular goitre. The combination 
of toxicity and nodularity is important and is an indication 
for isotope scanning to localise the area(s) of hyperfunction.
AUTOANTIBODY TITRES
The autoantibody status may determine whether a swelling 
is a manifestation of chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis. The 
presence of circulating antibodies increases the risk of thyroid 
failure after lobectomy.
ISOTOPE SCAN
Isotope scanning used to be the mainstay of investigation of 
discrete thyroid swellings but has been abandoned except 
when toxicity is associated with nodularity.
Isolated
thyroid swelling
Solid
24%
Solid
12%
Cystic
12%
Cystic
6%
Male
48%
Male
24%
Male
12%
Male
24%
Female
12%
Female
6%
Female
3%
Female
6%
Dominant
thyroid swelling
Generalised
thyroid swelling
3%
Figure 50.13 The risk of malignancy in thyr oid swellings (‘rule of 
twelve’). The risk of cancer in a thyroid swelling can be expressed as a 
factor of 12. The risk is greater in isolated versus dominant swellings, 
solid versus cystic swellings and in men versus women.
Ernest L Mazzaferri , 1936–2013, endocrinologist, Ohio State University School of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   808 25/10/2017   09:10Thyroid enlargement 809
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
RADIOLOGY
Plain films have previously been used to assess tracheal com -
pression and deviation, but the modality of choice now is CT 
scanning. CT scanning is also useful if ultrasound has iden-
tified metastatic disease in the neck as it can assist surgical 
planning and also assess the superior mediastinum and lungs.
LARYNGOSCOPY
Flexible laryngoscopy has rendered indirect laryngoscopy 
obsolete and is widely used preoperatively to determine the 
mobility of the vocal cords. The presence of a unilateral cord 
palsy coexisting with an ipsilateral thyroid nodule of concern 
is usually diagnostic of malignant disease.
CORE BIOPSY
Core biopsy is rarely indicated in thyroid masses due to the 
vascularity of the thyroid gland and the risk of postprocedure 
haemorrhage. It can be useful in the rapid diagnosis of widely 
invasive malignant disease, for example anaplastic carcinoma, 
or in the diagnosis of lymphadenopathy.
The main indication for operation is the risk of neoplasia, 
which includes follicular adenoma as well as malignant swell-
ings. The reason for advocating the removal of all follicular 
neoplasms is that it is seldom possible to distinguish between a 
follicular adenoma and carcinoma cytologically. On this basis, 
some 50% of isolated swellings and 25% of dominant swell -
ings should be removed on the grounds of neoplasia. Even 
when the cytology is negative, the age and sex of the patient 
and the size of the swelling may be relative indications for sur-
gery, especially when a large swelling is responsible for symp-
toms. Some patients are happier to have a swelling removed 
even when cytology is negative.
There are useful clinical criteria to assist in selection for 
operation according to the risk of neoplasia and malignancy. 
Hard texture alone is not reliable as tense cystic swellings may 
be suspiciously hard but a hard, irregular swelling with any 
apparent fixity, which is unusual, is highly suspicious. Evidence 
of RLN paralysis, suggested by hoarseness and a non- occlusive 
cough and confirmed by laryngoscopy, is almost pathogno -
monic. Deep cervical lymphadenopathy along the internal 
jugular vein in association with a clinically suspicious swelling 
is almost diagnostic of papillary carcinoma. In most patients, 
however, such features are absent but there are risk factors asso-
ciated with sex and age. The incidence of thyroid carcinoma in 
women is about three times that in men, but a discrete swelling 
in a male is much more likely to be malignant than in a female 
and it is seldom justifiable to avoid removing such a swelling 
in a man. The risk of carcinoma is increased at either end of 
the age range and a discrete swelling in a teenager of either 
sex must be provisionally diagnosed as carcinoma. The risk 
increases as age advances beyond 50 years, more so in males.
Thyroid cysts
Routine FNAC (or ultrasonography) shows that over 30% 
of clinically isolated swellings contain fluid and are cystic or 
partly cystic. Tense cysts may be hard and mimic carcinoma. 
Bleeding into a cyst often presents with a history of sudden 
painful swelling, which resolves to a variable extent over a 
period of weeks if untreated. Aspiration yields altered blood 
but reaccumulation is frequent. About 50% of cystic swellings 
are the result of colloid degeneration, or of uncertain aeti -
ology because of an absence of epithelial cells in the lining. 
Although most of the remainder are the result of involution 
in follicular adenomas (Figure 50.15), some 10–15% of cys -
tic follicular swellings are histologically malignant (30% in 
men and 10% in women). Papillary carcinoma is often associ-
ated with cyst formation (Figure 50.16).
Most patients with discrete swellings, however, are 
women, aged 20–40 years, in whom the risk of malignancy, 
although significant, is low and the indications for operation 
are not clear cut.
Ultrasound is the most useful tool for assessing cysts. If 
there is no discernable solid element then the cyst is almost 
certainly benign and does not need to be further investigated. 
If there is an associated solid element then  consideration 
Figure 50.14 Thy3 aspiration cytology. Follicular neoplasm showing 
increased cellularity with a follicular pattern.
Figure 50.15 Apparently simple cystic thyr oid swelling, the wall of 
which comprised follicular neoplastic tissue.
Figure 50.16 Cyst formation in a papillary carcinoma.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   809 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE810
should be given to targeting that area with an ultrasound-  
guided FNAC.
The indications for operation in isolated or dominant thy-
roid swellings are listed in Table 50.4.
Subtotal resections for colloid goitre run the risk of later 
growth of the remnant and, if a second operation is required 
years later, this greatly increases the risk to the RLN and para-
thyroid glands. In young patients, total thyroidectomy should 
be considered. It may be preferable to leave the least affected 
lobe untouched to permit a straightforward lobectomy in the 
future if required, rather than carry out subtotal resections.
In Graves’ disease, preserving large remnants increases 
the risk of recurrence of the toxicity and, in these cases, it is 
better to err on the side of removing too much thyroid tissue 
rather than too little (Table 50.5). Thyroid failure should not 
be regarded as a failure of treatment, but recurrent toxicity is.
The relative merits of routine total versus selective total 
thyroidectomy in differentiated thyroid cancer are discussed 
below.
TABLE 50.4 Indications for operation in thyroid swellings.
Neoplasia FNAC positive Thy3–5
Clinical suspicion Age
Male sex
Hard texture
Fixity
Recurrent laryngeal 
nerve palsy
Lymphadenopathy
Recurrent cyst
Toxic adenoma
Pressure 
symptoms
Cosmesis
Patient’s wishes
TABLE 50.5 Comparison of surgical options for Graves’ disease.
Total thyroidectomy Subtotal thyroidectomy
Control of toxicity Immediate Immediate
Return to euthyroid state Immediate Variable – up to 12 months
Risk of recurrence None Lifelong – up to 5%a
Risk of thyroid failure 100% Lifelong – up to 100% at 30 yearsa
Risk of permanent hypoparathyroidism 5% 1%
Need for follow-up Minimal Lifelong
aThe risk of recurrence and late failure are a function of the size of the remnant as a proportion of the total gland weight. Large remnants in small glands have a 
higher risk of recurrence and a low risk of failure, and small remnants in large glands have a higher risk of thyroid failure but a low risk of recurrence.
Summary box 50.3
Thyroid operations
All thyroid operations can be assembled from three basic 
elements:
1 Total lobectomy
2 Isthmusectomy
3 Subtotal lobectomy
Total thyroidectomy = 2 × total lobectomy + isthmusectomy
Subtotal thyroidectomy = 2 subtotal lobectomy + isthmusectomy
Near-total thyroidectomy = total lobectomy + isthmusectomy + 
subtotal lobectomy (Dunhill procedure)
Lobectomy = total lobectomy + isthmusectomy
Selection of thyroid procedure
The choice of thyroid operation depends on:
 ● diagnosis (if known preoperatively);
 ● risk of thyroid failure;
 ● risk of RLN injury;
 ● risk of recurrence;
 ● Graves’ disease;
 ● multinodular goitre;
 ● differentiated thyroid cancer;
 ● risk of hypoparathyroidism.
Total and near-total thyroidectomy do not conserve suffi-
cient thyroid tissue for normal thyroid function and thyroid 
replacement therapy is necessary. In most patients with neg -
ative antithyroid antibodies, one thyroid lobe will maintain 
normal function. In subtotal thyroidectomy, the volume of 
thyroid tissue preserved influences the risk of thyroid failure: 
larger remnants have a better chance of normal function but 
a higher risk of recurrence in Graves’ disease.
Retrosternal goitre
Retrosternal goitre tends to arise from the slow growth of 
a multino dular gland down in to the mediastinum. As the 
gland enlarges within the thoracic inlet, pressure may lead 
to dysphagia, tracheal compression and eventually air -
way symptoms. The vast majority of patients have minimal 
symptoms. Patient should be considered for surgery if there 
is significant airway compression, if symptoms are present or 
in young patients in whom symptoms are likely to develop. 
In elderly patients with incidentally discovered retroster -
nal goitres, most surgeons would observe rather than   treat 
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   810 25/10/2017   09:10Hyperthyroidism 811
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
 prop hylactically. Clearly a balance between risk and benefit 
must be made.
If a decision is made to proceed to surgery, assessment of 
the extent of disease is critical. The vast majority (>95%) 
of retrosternal goitres can be removed transcervically . Those 
at most risk of requiring conversion to an open sternotomy 
approach include malignant or revision cases, those which 
extend into the posterior mediastinum and those in which 
the diameter of the goitre exceeds that of the thoracic inlet. 
In such cases a joint case with thoracic surgery should be 
planned.
All cases should have cross-sectional imaging. Ideally this 
is performed in the surgical position and when interpreting 
CT chest scans, the surgeon should pay attention to the arm 
position. If the arms are up (as for standard CT chest) a great 
deal of thyroid movement will be achieved when the arms are 
down and the neck extended.
The approach to surgery is as described below. A longer 
incision is required. The surgeon may mobilise the sternomas-
toid muscle from the strap muscles to improve access. The 
ligamentous tissue between the sternal heads of the clavicles 
may be gently divided to increase the opening for gland deliv-
ery. Blunt dissection on the capsule of the gland allows mobil-
isation. Gentle traction is applied to deliver the gland into 
the neck. If the goitre has developed from a posteriorly posi -
tioned nodule there is a risk that the RLN may be displaced 
anteriorly, so great care must be taken in dividing apparent 
fascial bands that overlie the gland. The blood supply is from 
the neck, reducing the risk of catastrophic bleeding from the 
great vessels. Nonetheless, care should be taken in the region 
of the major blood vessels in the neck and chest.
If the gland is fixed and immobile or too large to deliver 
through a cervical approach, a midline sternotomy is per -
formed and the gland can be dissected from below to achieve 
a safe total thyroidectomy.
HYPERTHYROIDISM
Thyrotoxicosis
The term thyrotoxicosis is retained because hyperthyroidism, 
i.e. symptoms due to a raised level of circulating thyroid hor -
mones, is not responsible for all manifestations of the disease. 
Clinical types are:
 ● diffuse toxic goitre (Graves’ disease);
 ● toxic nodular goitre;
 ● toxic nodule;
 ● hyperthyroidism due to rarer causes.
Diffuse toxic goitre
Graves’ disease, a diffuse vascular goitre appearing at the same 
time as hyperthyroidism, usually occurs in younger women and 
is frequently associated with eye signs. The syndrome is that 
of primary thyrotoxicosis (Figure 50.17); 50% of patients 
have a family history of autoimmune endocrine diseases. The 
whole of the functioning thyroid tissue is involved, and the 
hypertrophy and hyperplasia are due to abnormal TSH-RAb 
that bind to TSH receptor sites and produce a disproportion-
ate and prolonged effect.
Toxic nodular goitre
A simple nodular goitre is present for a long time before the 
hyperthyroidism, usually in the middle-aged or elderly, and 
very infrequently is associated with eye signs. The syndrome 
is that of secondary thyrotoxicosis.
In many cases of toxic nodular goitre, the nodules are 
inactive, and it is the internodular thyroid tissue that is over-
active. However, in some toxic nodular goitres, one or more 
nodules are overactive and here the hyperthyroidism is due to 
autonomous thyroid tissue as in a toxic adenoma.
Toxic nodule
A toxic nodule is a solitary overactive no dule, which may be 
part of a generalised nodularity or a true toxic adenoma. It is 
autonomous and its hypertrophy and hyperplasia are not due 
to TSH-RAb. TSH secretion is suppressed by the high level 
of circulating thyroid hormones and the normal thyroid tissue 
surrounding the nodule is itself suppressed and inactive.
HISTOLOGY
The normal thyroid gland consists of acini lined with flat -
tened cuboidal epithelium and filled with homogeneous col-
loid (Figure 50.2). In hyperthyroidism (Figure 50.18), there 
is hyperplasia of acini, which are lined by high columnar epi-
thelium. Many of them are empty, and others contain vacuo-
lated colloid with a characteristic ‘scalloped’ pattern adjacent 
to the thyrocytes.
Robert James Graves , 1796–1853, physician, Meath Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, published an account of exopthalmic goitre in 1835. He was President of the Royal 
College of Physicians of Ireland and elected Fellow of The Royal Society of London in 1849. There is a statue of him in the Royal College of Physicians in Ireland.
Figure 50.17 Graves’ disease.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   811 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE812
Principles of treatment of thyrotoxicosis
Non-specific measures are rest and sedation and in established 
thyrotoxicosis should be used only in conjunction with spe-
cific measures, i.e. the use of antithyroid drugs, surgery and 
radioiodine.
ANTITHYROID DRUGS
Those in common use are carbimazole and propylthiouracil. 
Antithyroid drugs are used to restore the patient to a euthyroid 
state and to maintain this for a prolonged period in the hope 
that a permanent remission will occur, i.e. that production 
of thyroid-stimulating antibodies (TSH-RAb) will diminish 
or cease. Antithyroid drugs cannot cure a toxic nodule. The 
overactive thyroid tissue is autonomous and recurrence of the 
hyperthyroidism is certain when the drug is discontinued.
 ● Advantages. No surgery and no use of radioactive materials.
 ● Disadvantages. Treatment is prolonged and the failure 
rate is at least 50%. The duration of treatment may be 
tailored to the severity of the toxicity, with milder cases 
being treated for only 6 months and severe cases for 
2 years before stopping therapy.
SURGERY
In diffuse toxic goitre and toxic nodular goitre with over -
active internodular tissue, surgery cures by reducing the mass 
of overactive tissue by reducing the thyroid below a criti -
cal mass. After subtotal thyroidectomy the patient should 
return to a euthyroid state, albeit after a variable period of 
hypothyroidism. There are however, the long-term risks of 
recurrence and eventual thyroid failure. In contrast total/
near total thyroidectomy accepts immediate thyroid failure 
and lifelong thyroxine replacement to eliminate the risk of 
recurrence and simplify follow-up. Operation may result in 
a reduction in TSH-RAb. In the autonomous toxic nodule, 
and in toxic nodular goitre with overactive autonomous 
toxic nodules, surgery cures by removing all the overactive 
thyroid tissue; this allows the suppressed normal tissue to 
function again.
 ● Advantages. The goitre is removed, the cure is rapid and 
the cure rate is high if surgery has been adequate.
 ● Disadvantages. Recurrence of thyrotoxicosis occurs in at 
least 5% of cases when subtotal thyroidectomy is carried 
out. There is a risk of permanent hypoparathyroidism and 
nerve injury. Y oung women tend to have a poorer cos -
metic result from the scar.
Every operation carries a risk, but with suitable prepara -
tion and an experienced surgeon the mortality is negligible 
and the morbidity low.
RADIOIODINE
Radioiodine destroys thyroid cells and, as in thyroidectomy, 
reduces the mass of functioning thyroid tissue to below a crit-
ical level.
 ● Advantages. No surgery and no prolonged drug therapy.
 ● Disadvantages. Isotope facilities must be available. The 
patient must be quarantined while radiation levels are 
high and avoid pregnancy and close physical contact, par-
ticularly with children. Eye signs may be aggravated.
Choice of therapy
Each case must be considered individually. Below are listed 
guiding principles on the most satisfactory treatment for a 
particular toxic goitre at a particular age; these must, how -
ever, be modified according to the facilities available and the 
personality and wishes of the individual patient, business or 
family commitments and any other coexistent medical or sur-
gical condition. Access to post-treatment care and availabil -
ity of replacement thyroxine can be important considerations 
in resource-poor countries.
In advising treatment, compliance, influenced by social 
and intellectual factors, is important; many patients cannot 
be trusted to take drugs regularly if they feel well, and indefi -
nite follow-up, which is essential after radioiodine or subtotal 
thyroidectomy is a burden for all.
DIFFUSE TOXIC GOITRE
Most patients have an initial course of antithyroid drugs with 
radioiodine for relapse. Exceptions are those who refuse radi -
ation, have large goitres, progressive eye signs or are pregnant.
TOXIC NODULAR GOITRE
Toxic nodular goitre is often large and uncomfortable and 
enlarges still further with antithyroid drugs. A large goitre 
should be treated surgically because it does not respond as 
well or as rapidly to radioiodine or antithyroid drugs as does a 
diffuse toxic goitre.
TOXIC NODULE
Surgery or radioiodine treatment is appropriate. Resection is 
easy, certain and with a low risk of morbidity. Radioiodine is a 
good alternative for patients over the age of 45 years because 
the suppressed thyroid tissue does not take up iodine and thus 
there is minimal risk of delayed thyroid insufficiency.
FAILURE OF PREVIOUS TREATMENT WITH 
ANTITHYROID DRUGS OR RADIOIODINE
In this case, surgery or thyroid ablation with 123I is appropriate.
Figure 50.18 Histology of thyrotoxicosis.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   812 25/10/2017   09:10Hyperthyroidism 813
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Surgery for thyrotoxicosis
Preoperative preparation
Traditional preparation aims to make the patient biochemi -
cally euthyroid at operation. Preparation is as an out-patient 
and only rarely is admission to hospital necessary on account 
of severe symptoms at presentation, failure to control the 
hyperthyroidism or non-compliance with medication. Care 
should be coordinated with endocrinology input.
Carbimazole 30–40  mg per day is the drug of choice for 
preparation. When euthyroid (after 8–12 weeks), the dose 
may be reduced to 5  mg 8-hourly or a ‘block and replace’ 
regime used. In this case, the high dose of carbimazole is con-
tinued to inhibit T 3 and T 4 production and a maintenance 
dose of 0.1–0.15 mg of thyroxine is given daily. The last dose 
of carbimazole may be given on the evening before surgery. 
Iodides are not used alone because, if the patient needs pre -
operative treatment, a more effective drug should be given.
An alternative method of preparation is to abolish the 
clinical manifestations of the toxic state, using β-adrenergic 
blocking drugs. These act on the target organs and not on 
the gland itself. Propranolol also inhibits the peripheral con -
version of T4 to T3. The appropriate dosages are propranolol 
40 mg t.d.s. or the longer acting nadolol 160  mg once daily. 
Clinical response to β-blockade is rapid and the patient may 
be rendered clinically euthyroid and operation arranged in a 
few days rather than weeks. The dose of β-adrenergic block-
ing drug is increased to achieve the required clinical response 
and quite often larger doses (propranolol 80 mg t.d.s. or nado-
lolol 320 mg once daily) are necessary.
β-adrenergic blocking drugs do not interfere with syn -
thesis of thyroid hormones, and hormone levels remain high 
during treatment and for some days after thyroidectomy. It 
is, therefore, important to continue treatment for 7 days 
 postoperatively.
Iodine may be given with carbimazole or a β-adrenergic  
blocking drug for 10 days before operation. Iodide alone 
produces a transient remission and may reduce vascularity, 
thereby marginally improving safety. The use of iodine prepa-
rations is not universal because of more effective alternatives. 
Iodine gives an additional measure of safety in case the early 
morning dose of β-adrenergic blocking drug is mistakenly 
omitted on the day of operation.
The extent of the resection depends on the size of the 
gland, the age of the patient, the experience of the surgeon, 
the need to minimise the risk of recurrent toxicity and the 
wish to avoid postoperative thyroid replacement (Table 50.5).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE OF THYROIDECTOMY
Having made the decision to proceed to surgery, the first step is 
informed consent. Patients should understand the risk of scar, 
RLN damage, bleeding, hypocalcaemia and hypo thyroidism.
Endotracheal intubation is performed, and if a nerve mon-
itor is to be used its position should be confirmed once the 
patient is in the surgical position (see New technology in thy-
roidectomy, below).
The patient lies supine with the neck extended. Surgical 
preparation extends from the mandible on to the chest. A 
skin crease incision is placed around the level of the cricoid 
cartilage. Classically those patients with ‘pendulous’ breasts 
should have an incision placed more superiorly as it will tend 
to migrate inferiorly over years and a sternal wound is less 
attractive.
Subplatysmal flaps are raised to an extent that allows access 
to the goitre, often from thyroid notch to sternal notch. The 
midline is identified between the strap muscles. The plane 
is developed to dissect between the muscle layers, elevating 
sternohyoid laterally until ansa cervicalis is visualised. The 
sternothyroid muscle is then mobilised from the gland, taking 
great care with the delicate vasculature. If required, the strap 
muscles may be divided superiorly to afford greater exposure.
Attention is turned first to the superior pole. A plane 
between the larynx and superior pole is developed and the 
branching divisions of the superior vascular pedicle are dis -
sected. As these insert onto the gland they are dissected, 
controlled with ties or bipolar diathermy and divided individ-
ually. Not only does this mobilise the superior pole, but pre -
serves the blood supply to the superior parathyroid gland. In 
addition, this minimises risk to the superior laryngeal nerve, 
which can often be seen passing medially towards the crico -
thyroid muscle. Gradually the superior pole is mobilised tak -
ing care not to dissect below the cricoid cartilage, at which 
point the RLN is at risk.
By now, the fascia around the thyroid has been clearly 
identified. This plane is followed over the anterolateral aspect 
of the gland to the inferior pole. The tracheoesophageal 
groove should not be entered at this point as the RLN is yet 
to be identified. Inferiorly the trachea should be dissected in 
order to confirm the anatomical landmark.
At this point structures inferior and superior to the RLN 
have been identified and careful dissection toward the lateral 
aspect of the gland allows the gland to be rotated medially, 
displaying the tracheoesophageal groove. Careful dissection 
of this area proceeds being sure not to divide any structure 
that could be the nerve. The fascia from the thyroid is mobil-
ised, being vigilant throughout. The RLN is identified and 
confirmed by the anatomical location, direction of travel and 
the nerve monitor, if in use. The nerve is then traced towards 
the larynx, allowing mobilisation of the lateral aspect of the 
gland.
During this part of the dissection the surgeon must prior -
itise identification of the nerve, preservation of the inferior 
parathyroid and its blood supply, as well as control of branches 
of the inferior thyroid artery. Again, these should be divided 
in a controlled manner as close as possible to gland in order to 
preserve parathyroid blood supply.
At this stage the nerve should be traced towards the cri -
cothyroid joint as it enters the larynx. This point is the area 
where the nerve is most commonly damaged. The pretracheal 
fascia condenses into Berry’s ligament at this stage. Small ves-
sels within the ligament retract if not controlled with bipolar 
diathermy or ties, and the resulting bleeding can disorientate 
the surgeon placing the nerve at risk (Figure 50.19).
In order to avoid this, pre-emptive diathermy to the 
 ligament and careful layer by layer dissection allows final 
mobilisation of the thyroid lobe. Some surgeons prefer to iso-
late the ligament and apply a careful tie to achieve haemostasis. 
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   813 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE814
be detected when the nerve is stimulated. Such intermittent 
nerve monitoring is gaining in popularity. Advocates consider 
the monitor particularly useful in recurrent operations where 
scar tissue makes the nerve difficult to identify . In addition, 
some authors find operative time is reduced and that this is 
a valuable tool for training. There is also some support for 
the use of nerve monitoring during bilateral thyroid surgery, 
as the information provided can aid in the identification of 
a unilateral palsy to prevent bilateral palsy that can require 
tracheostomy. Those who do not support the use of the nerve 
monitor highlight the lack of evidence that any real differ -
ence in outcome associated with this practice. In addition, 
there is the expense of the base machine and the electrodes. 
In contrast to intermittent nerve monitoring that allows 
identification of a damaged nerve, continuous nerve moni -
toring has now been developed. In theory, this provides the 
opportunity to identify a nerve when function is threatened 
(by excessive traction for example). This technique, although 
theoretically advantageous, requires an electrode placed on 
the vagus nerve and has not gained widespread acceptance 
(Figure 50.20).
Figure 50.19 Identification of the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Note 
how rotating the gland medially anteriorly kinks the nerve that is 
 normally intimately related to the terminal branches of the inferior 
 thyroid artery.
Whichever method is preferred, great care must be taken at this 
point. The lobe is then mobilised medially and the nerve falls 
laterally.
If total thyroidectomy is indicated the procedure is 
repeated on the contralateral side. If, however, lobectomy 
alone is indicated, the isthmus should be divided between 
clamps and oversewn. The surgical bed is then inspected to 
confirm the integrity of the nerve and the state of the para -
thyroid glands. Consideration may be given to reimplantation 
of parathyroids to the sternomastoid muscle if they appear 
devascularised. Irrigation followed by meticulous haemostasis 
should follow and no bleeding is acceptable. Ideally this is 
performed with a Valsalva manouvre with the head down.
Following complete haemostasis the strap muscles are 
loosely reapproximated in order to avoid a water tight seal but 
to prevent adhesion between skin and trachea. The wound is 
then closed in layers with absorbable suture to platysma and 
skin closure. This may be with clips, non-absorbable sutures 
or subcuticular closure. It is important that those involved 
in postoperative care know how the wound was closed and 
how to perform a bedside reopening in the event of a life-  
threatening bleed.
The patient is then returned to the recovery room and 
the postoperative area for overnight monitoring. Not only 
is the wound regularly reviewed, but for total thyroidectomy 
patients postoperative calcium should be checked to identify 
hypocalcaemia.
NEW TECHNOLOGY IN THYROIDECTOMY
The major immediate risk following thyroidectomy is haem -
orrhage; conventionally, artery forceps, ligatures and sutures 
have been used to secure the meticulous haemostasis neces -
sary to minimise the risk of this potentially life-threatening 
complication. Ultrasonic shears, enhanced bipolar diathermy 
and harmonic vessel sealing devices are increasingly used 
in  thyroid surgery and may be advantageous in complex 
 procedures.
Monitoring of the RLN and vagus nerve has become 
available over the last few years. By placing electrodes on the 
endotracheal tube between the vocal cords, movements can 
Figure 50.20 Diagram of continuous monitoring of the vagus nerve 
(adapted from an image provided by Inomed UK Ltd).
AL TERNATIVE SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
Over the past two decades, increasing experience has been 
gained in alternative approaches to thyroid surgery. Mini -
mally invasive video assisted techniques have been developed, 
which allow surgeons to operate through an incision <2 cm in 
length. With appropriately mo dified dissectors, experienced 
operators and advanced haemostatic electrosurgical devices, 
such procedures offer reduced scar length. However, they are 
only appropriate for small volume disease and as such are not 
suitable for many thyroid cases.
Robots have found a role in many aspects of modern surgi-
cal practice. In the Far East, a neck scar is found to be socially 
unacceptable. Robotic techniques have been developed that 
allow access to the thyroid via an axillary incision. Such ‘max-
imally invasive’ techniques require extended dissection over 
the chest wall and again are most suitable for small volume 
disease. Experienced centres continue to expand the indica -
tions for these techniques. However, they are associated with 
great cost and significant time, which currently limits their 
application to thyroid surgical practice.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   814 25/10/2017   09:10Hyperthyroidism 815
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS
Haemorrhage Haemorrhage is the most frequent 
life-threatening complication of thyroidectomy. Around 1 in 
50 patients will develop a haematoma, and in almost all cases 
this will develop in the first 24 hours. If an arterial bleed 
occurs, the tension in the central compartment pressure can 
rise until it exceeds venous pressure. Venous oedema of the 
larynx can then develop and cause airway obstruction lead-
ing to death. Although improvements in understanding of 
the blood supply to the larynx and technical developments in 
terms of haemostatic technologies have been made, this com-
plication has not been eliminated. Although many surgeons 
worldwide practice day case thyroidectomy, bleeding is the 
reason that, in the UK, thyroidectomy remains an inpatient 
procedure.
Intraoperative attention to detail in terms of haemostasis 
is critical. When closing the wound, avoiding a watertight 
closure of the strap muscles may allow a haematoma to escape 
into the subcutaneous tissues. Wound drains have not been 
shown to have a protective effect. Close monitoring of the 
wound is advised postoperatively. If a haematoma develops, 
clinical staff should know to remove skin sutures in order to 
release some pressure and seek senior advice immediately. 
Endotracheal intubation should be used to secure the airway 
while the haematoma is evacuated and the bleeding point 
controlled.
Recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis and voice 
change RLN injury may be unilateral or bilateral, tran -
sient or permanent. Early routine postoperative laryngoscopy 
reveals a much higher incidence of transient cord paralysis 
than is detectable by simple assessment of the integrity of the 
voice and cough. Such temporary dysfunction is not clinically 
important however, but voice and cord function should be 
assessed at first follow-up 4 weeks postoperatively. The Brit -
ish Association of Endocrine Surgeons audit revealed a RLN 
palsy rate of 1.8% at 1 month, declining to 0.5% at 3 months 
for first time operations. Permanent paralysis is rare if the 
nerve has been identified at operation.
If a RLN is injured during surgery and the transected ends 
are identified, they should be reanastomosed. In the event that 
a length of nerve is excised (due to invasion by malignancy 
for example), anastomosis of the ansa cervicalis may be con -
sidered. This does not return mobility of the vocal cord but 
maintains neurological input to the muscles of the larynx. By 
avoiding denervation and related muscle atrophy, the vocal 
quality is improved. Permanent vocal cord paralysis should be 
treated conservatively with speech therapy. If voice quality 
is unacceptable, medialisation procedures can be performed. 
Nerve grafting has shown promise but experience is limited.
Injury to the external branch of the superior laryngeal 
nerve is more common because of its proximity to the supe -
rior thyroid artery. This leads to loss of tension in the vocal 
cord with diminished power and range in the voice. Patients, 
particularly those who use their voice professionally, must be 
advised that any thyroid operation will result in change to the 
voice even in the absence of nerve trauma. Fortunately, for 
most patients the changes are subtle and only demonstrable 
on formal voice assessment.
Thyroid insufficiency  Following total thyroidectomy, 
clearly thyroxine replacement will be required. Around one 
in three patients who has a lobectomy will require supplemen-
tation; rates are higher in those with thyroid autoantibodies. 
Subtotal thyroidectomy was at one time performed with the 
aim of leaving sufficient tissue to maintain thyroid function. 
However, this is difficult to judge and over years, the benign 
process that necessitated primary surgery may recur, requir -
ing difficult revision procedures. For this reason, the practice 
of subtotal thyroidectomy has been more or less abandoned 
outside of environments where exogenous thyroxine is not 
available.
Parathyroid insufficiency  This is due to removal of the 
parathyroid glands or infarction through damage to the para-
thyroid end arteries; often both factors occur together. V as-
cular injury is probably far more important than inadvertent 
removal. The incidence of permanent hypoparathyroidism 
should be less than 1% and most cases present dramatically 
2–5 days after operation but, very rarely, the onset is delayed 
for 2–3 weeks or a patient with marked hypocalcaemia may 
be asymptomatic. The complication is limited to total thy -
roidectomy, as when lobectomy is performed the contralateral 
parathyroid glands are sufficient to maintain calcium levels. 
In particular, total thyroidectomy with central neck dissection 
places the parathyroid glands and their vascular supply at great 
risk and should only be performed when there is evidence of 
metastatic disease or high risk of occult disease in the regional 
lymph nodes.
Thyrotoxic crisis (storm) This is an acute exacerbation of 
hyperthyroidism. It occurs if a thyrotoxic patient has been 
inadequately prepared for thyroidectomy and is now extremely 
rare. Very rarely, a thyrotoxic patient presents in a crisis and 
this may follow an unrelated operation. Symptomatic and 
supportive treatment is for dehydration, hyperpyrexia and 
restlessness. This requires the administration of intravenous 
fluids, cooling the patient with ice packs, administration of 
oxygen, diuretics for cardiac failure, digoxin for uncontrolled 
atrial fibrillation, sedation and intravenous hydrocortisone. 
Specific treatment is by carbimazole 10–20  mg 6-hourly, 
Lugol’s iodine 10 drops 8-hourly by mouth or sodium iodide 
1g i.v. Propranolol intravenously (1–2  mg) or orally (40  mg 
6-hourly) will block β-adrenergic effects.
Wound infection Cellulitis requiring prescription of antibi-
otics, often by the general practitioner, is more common than 
most surgeons appreciate. A significant subcutaneous or deep 
cervical abscess is exceptionally rare and should be drained.
Hypertrophic or keloid scar This is more likely to form if 
the incision overlies the sternum and in dark skinned indi -
viduals. Intradermal injections of corticosteroid should be 
given at once and repeated monthly if necessary. Scar revision 
rarely results in significant long-term improvement.
Stitch granuloma  This may occur with or without sinus 
formation and is seen after the use of non-absorbable, partic -
ularly silk, suture material. Absorbable ligatures and sutures 
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   815 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE816
should be used throughout thyroid surgery. Some surgeons use 
a subcuticular absorbable skin suture rather than the tradi -
tional skin clips or staples.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Following surgery, the patient should be returned to the 
recovery room and nursed overnight on the ward. Wound care 
should include vigilance for signs of a haematoma. Following 
total thyroidectomy, calcium levels should be checked post-
operatively. Not all patients develop immediate hypocalcae -
mia and they should be educated about the signs (parasthesia 
of the fingers and toes or round the mouth). Serial calcium 
monitoring should be recommended for those at highest risk. 
Those patients who had a total thyroidectomy require thyrox-
ine replacement, which should start day 1 postoperatively. On 
clinic review, in addition to checking the histology report, 
the wound should be inspected and the larynx examined for 
vocal cord function. Biochemical assessment of thyroid func-
tion and calcium, if required, should be arranged.
NEOPLASMS OF THE THYROID
Classification of thyroid neoplasms is presented in Table 50.6 
and the relative incidence of malignancies in Table 50.7. 
lesions. Diagnosis and treatment is therefore, by wide exci -
sion, i.e. total lobectomy. The remaining thyroid tissue is nor-
mal so that prolonged follow-up is unnecessary.
Malignant tumours
The vast majority of primary malignancies are carcinomas 
derived from the follicular cells (Table 50.6 ). Such tumors 
were thought of as differentiated (papillary, follicular and 
Hürthle cell) and undifferentiated (anaplastic). However, 
now an intermediate class of ‘poorly differentiated carcinoma’ 
is recognised, which is likely to represent a state of dediffer -
entiated, between classic differentiated and undifferentiated 
diseases. The parafollicular C cells can undergo malignant 
transformation into medullary carcinoma, and thyroid lym -
phoma is another primary thyroid malignancy. In addition, 
the thyroid can be involved by direct spread from surround -
ing structures (larynx and oesophagus) or metastases (most 
commonly from renal cell carcinoma). Lymph node and 
blood-borne metastases of thyroid cancer occur primarily to 
bone and lung and may be the mode of presentation (Figure 
50.22).
Aetiology of malignant thyroid tumours
The great majority of thyroid cancers have no known aeti -
ological factor. The most important identifiable aetiological 
factor in differentiated thyroid carcinoma (particularly papil-
lary) is irradiation of the thyroid under 5 years of age. In the 
town of Gomel, Ukraine, the incidence of childhood thyroid 
cancer rose from <1 per million to 96 per million following 
the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
Short latency aggressive papillary cancer is associated with 
the ret/PTC3 oncogene and later developing, possibly less 
aggressive, cancers with ret/PTC1. The incidence of follicular 
carcinoma is high in endemic goitrous areas, possibly due to 
TSH stimulation. Malignant lymphomas sometimes develop 
in autoimmune thyroiditis, and the lymphocytic infiltration 
in the autoimmune process may be an aetiological factor.
TABLE 50.6 Classification of thyroid neoplasms.
Benign Follicular 
adenoma
Malignant Primary Follicular epithelium – 
differentiated
Follicular
Papillary
Follicular epithelium – 
poorly differentiated
Anaplastic
Parafollicular cells Medullary
Lymphoid cells Lymphoma
Secondary Metastatic
Local infiltration
TABLE 50.7 Relative incidence of primary malignant 
tumours of the thyroid gland.
Malignancy Relative incidence
Papillary carcinoma 80%
Follicular carcinoma 10%
Poorly differentiated/anaplastic carcinoma 5%
Medullary carcinoma 2.5%
Lymphoma 2.5%
Benign tumours
Follicular adenomas present as clinically solitary nodules 
(Figure 50.21) and the distinction between a follicular car -
cinoma and an adenoma can only be made by histological 
examination; in the adenoma there is no invasion of the cap-
sule or of pericapsular blood vessels. For this reason, FNA, 
which provides cytologic detail but not tissue architecture, 
cannot differentiate between benign and malignant follicular 
Figure 50.21 Isolated swelling in the upper pole of the right thyroid 
lobe.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   816 25/10/2017   09:10Neoplasms of the thyr oid 817
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Clinical features of thyroid cancers
The annual incidence is about 0.6 per million of the popu -
lation and the sex ratio is three females to one male. How -
ever, the incidence of papillary thyroid cancer is increasing 
rapidly across the world. This is mostly due to increased rates 
of imaging detecting previously occult disease. For that rea -
son, although the incidence is increasing, the mortality rates 
remain static at over 80% 5-year survival for all groups. In 
particular, anaplastic carcinoma predicts poor outcome with 
differentiated carcinomas generally having excellent out -
comes. The most common presenting symptom is a thyroid 
swelling (Figures 50.21 and 50.23). Enlarged cervical lymph 
nodes may be the presentation of papillary carcinoma (PTC). 
RLN paralysis is very suggestive of locally advanced disease.
Anaplastic growths are usually hard, irregular and infil -
trating. A differentiated carcinoma may be suspiciously firm 
and irregular, but is often indistinguishable from a benign 
swelling. Small papillary tumours may be impalpable, even 
when lymphatic metastases are present. Pain, often referred 
to the ear, is suggestive of nerve involvement from infiltrating 
tumours.
Diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms
Clinical history and examination continue to be the cor -
nerstone of diagnosis of thyroid neoplasms. As previously 
mentioned, radiation exposure and family history should be 
discussed. Examination of the central neck and regional lym-
phatics should be combined with assessment of vocal cord 
function. Biochemical assessment of thyroid function should 
also be considered in this first encounter, if not already per -
formed.
Following initial assessment, the next step is ultrasound. 
This non-invasive investigation is most accurate at assessing 
thyroid swellings. Not only can a judgement be made on the 
presence, size and number of thyroid nodules present, but an 
estimate of risk of malignancy can be made depending on 
these findings.
Following ultrasound, lesions can be categorised as benign, 
indeterminate or malignant. Benign lesions require no further 
assessment unless surgery is considered for compressive symp-
toms. Indeterminate or malignant lesions should be investi-
gated with FNAC.
Occasionally, the surgeon will encounter a thyrotoxic 
patient. Such cases are one of the few indications for a radio-
iodine uptake scan. This allows assessment of the function of 
a nodule. Hot nodules are very rarely malignant. Cold nod-
ules will require assessment as for all other thyroid neoplasms.
Following clinical, ultrasound and cytological assess -
ment, the vast majority of lesions will be characterised as 
benign, malignant or indeterminate. Further treatment will 
be planned accordingly.
Certain situations require specific consideration. For 
patients with widespread nodal disease or suspicion of locally 
invasive disease affecting the airway, contrast enhanced 
imaging should be considered. This should cover the neck 
and chest. Not only does this allow accurate assessment of 
any visceral invasion, but is superior to ultrasound at defining 
disease in the mediastinum and thorax. Concerns over the 
impact of iodine-containing contrast on delays to radioactive 
iodine therapy have been overplayed, and it is more critical 
that the surgeon has an accurate assessment of disease extent 
prior to surgery.
Patients with a rapidly growing thyroid mass, particularly 
if solid and fixed, should be considered at risk of anaplastic 
carcinoma. However, this diagnosis can be difficult to dif -
ferentiate from thyroid lymphoma or occasionally thyroid-
itis. Despite the difficulty, an accurate diagnosis is critical as 
anaplastic carcinoma is rapidly fatal and palliative measure 
are general recommended, whereas confounding disease pro -
cesses may respond to therapy. In this setting, core or even 
open biopsy may be required to make a confident diagnosis.
Figure 50.23 Follicular neoplasm of the thyroid presenting as an iso-
lated swelling.
Figure 50.22  Metastasis in the humerus from thyr oid carcinoma 
 (courtesy of DS Devadatta, Vellore, India).
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   817 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE818
tumors or extrathyroid extension or distant metastases have 
worse outcomes. A system of risk stratification can be used 
to predict the risk on an individual basis. In a young patient 
with a low-risk tumour, the risk of death following appropriate 
treatment is almost zero. In an older patient with a high-risk 
tumour (extrathyroid extension or distant metastases), the 
risk is as high as 50% at 5 years. Older patients with low-
risk tumours and younger patients with high-risk tumours are 
an intermediate risk group. Nodal metastases deserve special 
mention. In younger patients they predict for recurrence but 
not for death. This is because recurrent neck disease in young 
Papillary carcinoma
Papillary carcinoma is the most common thyroid malignancy. 
Interestingly, up to 30% of patients who die of non-thyroid 
disease have deposits of PTC in autopsy studies, suggesting 
that many patients live with this disease undetected. None -
theless, when papillary cancer is diagnosed most patients will 
be offered treatment. The disease is known for its propen -
sity for lymph node metastases. These are more common in 
younger patients, in whom they do not affect the otherwise 
excellent survival. This finding is in contrast to most malig-
nances, where the finding of metastatic disease confers a poor 
outcome. One contentious finding in patients with PTC is 
a high rate of occult micrometastases (as high as 40% of N0 
patients in the central neck). Despite the presence of metas-
tases, few patients progress to have clinically meaningful 
disease and the role of elective nodal surgery is in question. 
Distant metastases are uncommon in PTC.
Recently, increasing interest has focused on ‘papillary 
microcarcinoma’. This term is used to describe PTC that is 
<10 mm in size. These lesions are common (detected in about 
10% of benign thyroid resections) and not associated with 
adverse outcomes, including recurrence or non-survival. As 
such, management and follow-up of patients with these lesions 
of doubtful clinical significance is controversial. In Korea, for 
example, national screening has led to a significant increase 
in these cases. In Japan groups are opting for an observational 
approach without surgery. These studies have shown that at 
least two-thirds never progress. In the USA some groups are 
attempting non-surgical management with ablation techniques 
using ethanol or radiofrequency. In most of the world however, 
groups try to avoid diagnosing these small, insignificant lesions 
by limiting biopsies to >10 mm lesions and being conservative 
in the management of lesions following their diagnosis.
Follicular carcinoma
Follicular carcinoma can normally only be differentiated from 
follicular adenoma by the architecture on histology. For this 
reason, follicular lesions on FNA are unable to be diagnosed 
as malignant in the absence of clinical features such as metas-
tases (Figure 50.24). Multiple foci of follicular carcinoma are 
seldom seen and lymph node involvement is much less com -
mon than in papillary carcinoma. Blood-borne metastases are 
more common and the eventual mortality rate, although still 
low, is twice that of papillary cancer (Figure 50.25).
Hürthle cell tumours are a rare variant of follicular neo -
plasm in which oxyphil (Hürthle, Askanazy) cells predomi -
nate histologically. Hürthle cell cancers are associated with a 
poorer prognosis.
Prognosis in differentiated thyroid 
carcinoma
The prognosis in differentiated thyroid cancers is generally 
excellent. In terms of survival, older patients, those with large 
Karl Hürthle , 1866–1945, German histopathologist, first drew attention to these cells.
Max Askanazy , 1865–1940, described these cells while working at the Pathological Anatomy Institute, Tübingen, Germany.
Figure 50.24 Histology of follicular thyroid carcinoma showing vas-
cular (red arrow) and capsular (black arrow) invasion (courtesy of Dr 
SWB Ewen, Aberdeen, UK).
Figure 50.25 Follicular carcinoma of thyroid with skull secondaries.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   818 25/10/2017   09:10Neoplasms of the thyr oid 819
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
patients can almost always be successfully salvaged. In con -
trast, for older patients neck metastases (particularly in the 
lateral neck) are a marker of distant metastases in some, and 
therefore carry a negative prognostic implication for both 
recurrence and death.
The AJCC staging system is in the process of modifica -
tion. However, the current edition stages all patients <45 
years as stage I unless they have distant metastases, when they 
are stage II. Older T1N0M0 patients are stage I and T2N0M0 
are stage II. The presence of nodal disease in the central neck 
nodes (N1a) upstages older patients to stage III, as does T3 
disease. All older patients with lateral neck disease (N1b), 
locally invasive primary disease (T4) or distant metastases are 
stage IV .
The AJCC 8th edition will raise the age cut-off to 55 years. 
It will also formally recognise that extrathyroid extension is 
less significant if identified microscopically but not evident 
during surgery. The extent of nodal involvement will also 
be included, with small numbers of low-volume nodes being 
considered less significant than multiple large-volume nodes.
Surgical treatment for differentiated 
thyroid cancer
This subject has many contentious aspects. For the vast 
majority of patients, outcome is excellent irrespective of the 
extent of surgery. The low number of recurrences and death 
has made prospective trials difficult and, as such, very few 
exist.
The aim of surgery is to rid the patient of macroscopic 
disease and minimise the chance of recurrence and death. An 
additional aim is to minimise surgical morbidity. Achieving 
a balance between these aims is critical. In addition, the sur -
geon must consider whether radioactive iodine is to be rec-
ommended. In low-risk cases this is rarely indicated, whereas 
in high-risk patients it is used almost universally. Risk stratifi-
cation is therefore critical.
In high-risk patients with nodal or distant metastases, 
total thyroidectomy will be performed to eradicate disease in 
the thyroid and prepare the patient for radioactive iodine. For 
low-risk patients with a single focus of disease limited to the 
thyroid, a thyroid lobectomy can be offered. This has the sig-
nificant advantage of protecting the contralateral RLN and 
parathyroid glands. This approach is now considered appro -
priate unless there are high-risk features of disease.
In terms of the neck, when metastatic disease is present, a 
therapeutic compartment-orientated neck dissection should 
be performed to remove disease from the central or lateral 
neck, depending on the site of involvement. The role of elec-
tive neck surgery, when no disease in the nodes is detected 
preoperatively, is far more controversial. Lateral neck dissec-
tion carries significant morbidity and despite high rates of 
occult metastases in papillary carcinoma, has been abandoned. 
The reason is that even in patients who are thought to have 
occult metastases, very few progress to clinically meaningful 
disease. In contrast, the morbidity of central neck dissection 
is lower, and the compartment has to be opened during a thy-
roidectomy. In addition, salvage surgery in the central neck 
carries a high risk to the RLN and parathyroid glands. For 
these reasons elective central neck dissection has been pop -
ular in the last few decades. However, increased recognition 
that performing such surgery in all patients with PTC leads 
to high rates of morbidity and the lack of evidence that out -
comes improve due to more aggressive surgery, has led to a 
move away from this practice. At this point, patients who are 
considered at highest risk of having occult metastases in the 
central neck (those with extrathyroid extension for example) 
are  considered most likely to see benefit from elective surgery 
and it is not recommended routinely in low-risk patients.
Many patients will only be diagnosed with their thyroid 
cancer following a diagnostic lobectomy. In this setting, risk 
assessment is again critical. If the patient is considered low 
risk, further surgery is unlikely to be beneficial. If, however, 
patient or tumour features are considered high risk, radioac -
tive iodine may be recommended, in which case completion 
thyroidectomy may be required.
Given the complexity of decision making in thyroid 
cancer and the different groups involved (surgeons, endocri -
nologists, radiologists, cytologists, pathologists and nuclear 
medicine physicians), all cases should be discussed in a multi-
disciplinary setting.
Thyroxine
Following surgery, thyroid cells (both normal and malignant) 
can be suppressed using high doses of thyroxine. This was once 
considered routine for all differentiated thyroid cancers during 
follow-up. Again, risk stratification has modified our approach 
to these patients. Following surgery, patients can be considered 
high or low risk. For those patients at high risk from disease, 
thyroxine will be prescribed at levels which suppress TSH 
without making the patient biochemically hyperthyroid. In 
contrast, low-risk patients may be considered for thyroxine 
replacement at physiological levels. In this patient group, a 
balance of benefit (remember these patients have extremely 
low rates of recurrence or death) versus risk must be made. In 
particular, long-term TSH suppression can result in cardiac 
arrhythmia and osteoporosis. As such the treating team should 
consider all risks during follow-up to strike this balance.
Low-risk patients who have had lobectomy alone may 
require no thyroxine at all. Patients who had a total thyroid -
ectomy will clearly require replacement and those considered 
high risk should be managed with suppression, in order to 
minimise the chance of disease recurrence.
Radioiodine
Thyroid tissue concentrates iodine. For this reason, 131I can 
be given in order to deliver tumoricidal doses of radioactivity 
directly to thyroid tissue, both benign and malignant. In the 
setting of thyroid cancer, all normal tissue should be removed 
(total thyroidectomy) along with any gross neck disease (neck 
dissection) in order for any residual microscopic disease or 
distant metastases to receive an optimal dose. Radioiodine 
treatment is not an alternative to surgical resection for gross 
resectable disease.
As with many aspects of differentiated thyroid cancer 
management, indications for radioiodine treatment are con -
troversial. Again, low-risk patients have little to gain and 
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   819 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE820
may be safely managed without adjuvant therapy. High- risk 
patients, however, remain candidates.
In order to effectively drive the radioiodine into cells, 
high levels of TSH are required. This can be achieved by 
rendering the patient hypothyroid (off thyroxine) or by using 
recombinant TSH, which is injected prior to radioiodine 
administration.
Following radioiodine administration, an uptake scan is 
performed. This demonstrates areas of iodine uptake in the 
whole body and can be used to identify any metastatic disease 
not recognised on initial imaging. This information is useful 
in the ongoing process of risk stratification of patients follow-
ing initial therapy.
Outside the setting of primary treatment, radioiodine 
treatment may be considered in cases of recurrence, particu -
larly if not used initially. Multiple doses can be used in order 
to treat unresectable disease, distant metastases or even a ris-
ing thyroglobulin in the absence of structural disease.
Most differentiated thyroid cancers will concentrate 
iodine. However, with advancing patient age and particu -
larly if disease is multiply recurrent the tumour will lose its 
iodine avidity. This is called radioiodine refractory disease. 
Such cases may be considered for external beam radiotherapy, 
although this is uncommon.
Thyroglobulin
Thyroglobulin is a tumour marker produced by normal thy -
roid cells and most differentiated thyroid cancer. As such, 
this offers an extremely accurate method of following patients 
postoperatively. If a lobectomy has been performed the level 
will not be undetectable, but trends can be used to monitor 
for recurrence. Following total thyroidectomy, the aim is to 
have an undetectable thyroglobulin. Patients who achieve 
this point are at extremely low risk of recurrence. Serial thy -
roglobulin measurement (6–12 monthly) combined with 
ultrasound assessment of the neck can then be used to moni -
tor patients during follow-up.
If an undetectable level is not achieved, the thyroglobulin 
can be followed. If it increases, imaging should be performed 
to look for gross recurrent disease. Resectable disease should 
be addressed surgically and normally further radioactive 
iodine (RAI) would be indicated. The role of RAI in a rising 
thyroglobulin without structural disease is controversial.
Undifferentiated (anaplastic) 
carcinoma
This is one of the most aggressive malignancies in humans. 
Thankfully it is rare. It may develop de novo, or present as 
dedifferentiation of a papillary or poorly differentiated carci -
noma. The disease is characterised by rapid growth, visceral 
invasion and distant metastases. The surgeon’s role in this 
disease is crucial. Thyroid lymphoma can be incorrectly diag-
nosed as anaplastic cancer and so biopsy is critical. This can 
be done using a core or open technique.
Management is controversial. Almost all patients will be 
dead within 6 months. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy have 
not been shown to improve survival. Occasional patients may 
present with disease limited to the neck, which appears resect-
able on imaging. Such patients seem to have a slightly better 
outcome if treated with aggressive surgery and postoperative 
adjuvant therapy (radiotherapy +/- chemotherapy). However, 
solid evidence is lacking and the majority of patients will not 
be considered for curative treatment.
Those patients who have a known diagnosis and develop 
airway symptoms are generally better managed without tra -
cheostomy, despite the potentially distressing mode of death. 
In patients who present with airway signs and without a diag-
nosis, a tracheostomy may be required to buy time to con -
firm the diagnosis and in order to allow a few more days for 
patients to ‘get their affairs in order’.
Medullary carcinoma
These are tumours of the parafollicular (C cells) derived from 
the neural crest. rather than the cells of the thyroid follicle 
as are other primary thyroid carcinomas. The cells are not 
unlike those of a carcinoid tumour and on histological anal -
ysis a characteristic amyloid stroma is seen (Figure 50.26). 
High levels of serum calcitonin and carcinoembryonic anti-
gen are produced by many medullary tumours, which should 
be tested for in suspected cases. Calcitonin levels fall after 
resection and rise again with recurrence, making it a valuable 
tumour marker in the follow-up of patients with this disease. 
Diarrhoea is a feature in 30% of cases and this may be due 
to 5-hydroxytryptamine or prostaglandins produced by the 
tumour cells.
Some tumours are familial and account for 10–20% of 
all cases. Medullary carcinoma may occur in combination 
with adrenal phaeochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism 
(HPT) (usually due to hyperplasia) in the syndrome known as 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN-2A). The famil-
ial form of the disease frequently affects children and young 
adults, whereas the sporadic cases occur at any age with no 
sex predominance. When the familial form is associated with 
prominent mucosal neuromas involving the lips, tongue and 
inner aspect of the eyelids, with a Marfanoid habitus, the syn-
drome is referred to as MEN type 2B (see Chapter 52).
Figure 50.26 Histology of medullary carcinoma showing character-
istic ‘cell balls’ and amyloid (courtesy of Dr SWB Ewen, Aberdeen, 
UK).
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   820 25/10/2017   09:10Thyroiditis 821
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Involvement of lymph nodes occurs in 50–60% of cases 
of medullary carcinoma and blood-borne metastases are com-
mon. As would be expected, tumours are not TSH dependent 
and do not take up radioactive iodine. The prognosis is variable 
and depends on the stage at diagnosis. Any nodal involvement 
virtually eliminates the prospect of cure and, unfortunately, 
even small tumours confined to the thyroid gland may have 
spread by the time of diagnosis, particularly in familial cancers. 
In common with many endocrine tumours the progression of 
disease may be very slow, with a characteristically indolent 
course and long survival, even in the absence of cure.
In familial cases of medullary thyroid cancer, genetic 
screening of relatives should be recommended. This is a com-
plex subject but individuals identified can be risk stratified 
dependent on the genetic abnormality. This information 
can be used to make recommendations concerning prophy-
lactic thyroidectomy. Some relatives may be monitored into 
adulthood with serial calcitonin monitoring. In contrast, the 
 highest-risk mutations are associated with early-onset disease 
and total thyroidectomy is recommended during infancy.
Treatment
When medullary carcinoma is diagnosed, staging of the neck 
and chest should be performed. For those patients with disease 
confined to the thyroid, total thyroidectomy is recommended 
to remove all C cells. In addition, elective dissection of the 
central neck nodes is also performed to optimise the chance of 
cure. If there is evidence of nodal metastases, cure is unlikely. 
In this setting, gross disease should be excised but the surgeon 
should be mindful of morbidity. Such patients are highly likely 
to recur and a pragmatic approach should be adopted.
Malignant lymphoma
In the past, many malignant lymphomas were diagnosed as 
small round-cell anaplastic carcinomas. Response to irradia -
tion is dramatic (Figure 50.27) and radical surgery is unnec-
essary once the diagnosis is established by biopsy. In patients 
with tracheal compression, isthmusectomy is the most appro-
priate form of biopsy although the response to therapy is so 
rapid that this should rarely be necessary unless there has 
been difficulty in making a histological diagnosis. The prog -
nosis is good, particularly if there is no involvement of cer -
vical lymph nodes. Rarely, the tumour is part of widespread 
malignant lymphoma disease and the prognosis in these cases 
is worse. Most lymphomas occur against a background of lym-
phocytic thyroiditis.
THYROIDITIS
Chronic lymphocytic 
(autoimmune) thyroiditis
This common condition is usually associated with raised titres 
of thyroid antibodies. It commonly presents as a goitre, which 
may be diffuse or nodular with a characteristic ‘bosselated’ feel 
or with established or subclinical thyroid failure. The diagno-
sis often follows investigation of a discrete swelling. Features 
of chronic lymphocytic (focal) thyroiditis are commonly 
present on histological examination in association with other 
thyroid disease, notably toxic goitre (Figure 50.28). Primary 
Figure 50.27  Magnetic r esonance imaging scans of extensive 
malignant lymphoma (a) before and (b) after 7 days of external beam 
radiotherapy (courtesy of Dr FW Smith, Aberdeen, UK).
(a)
(b)
Friedrich Joseph de Quervain , 1868–1940, Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland, described this form of thyroiditis in 1902.
Figure 50.28 Autoimmune thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s disease; struma 
lymphomatosa). Intense lymphocytic-plasma cell infiltration, acinar 
destruction and fibrosis.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   821 25/10/2017   09:10CHAPTER 50  The thyroid gland
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE822
myxoedema without detectable thyroid enlargement rep -
resents the end stage of the pathological process.
Granulomatous thyroiditis (subacute 
thyroiditis, de Quervain’s thyroiditis)
This may follow a viral infection. In a typical subacute pre-
sentation, there is pain in the neck, fever, malaise and a firm, 
irregular enlargement of one or both thyroid lobes. There are 
raised inflammatory markers, absent thyroid antibodies, the 
serum T4 is high normal or slightly raised, and the 123I uptake 
of the gland is low. The condition is self-limiting and, in a 
few months, the goitre subsides and there may be a perio d of 
months of hypothyroidism before eventual recovery. In 10% 
of cases the onset is acute, the goitre very painful and tender 
and there may be symptoms of hyperthyroidism. One-third of 
cases are asymptomatic but for the presence of the goitre. If 
diagnosis is in doubt, it may be confirmed by FNAC, radio -
active iodine uptake and by a rapid symptomatic response to 
prednisone. The specific treatment for the acute case with 
severe pain is to give prednisone l0–20  mg daily for 7 days 
and the dose is then gradually reduced over the next month. 
If thyroid failure is prominent, treatment with thyroxine may 
be required until function recovers.
Riedel’s thyroiditis
This is very rare, accounting for 0.5% of goitres. Thyroid 
tissue is replaced by cellular fibrous tissue, which infiltrates 
through the capsule into muscles and adjacent structures, 
including parathyroids, recurrent nerves and carotid sheath. 
It may occur in association with retroperitoneal and medi-
astinal fibrosis and is most probably a collagen disease. The 
goitre may be unilateral or bilateral and is very hard and fixed. 
The differential diagnosis from anaplastic carcinoma can be 
made with certainty only by biopsy, when a wedge of the isth-
mus should also be removed to free the trachea. If unilateral, 
the other lobe is usually involved later and subsequent hypo -
thyroidism is common. Treatment is with high-dose steroid, 
tamoxifen and thyroxine replacement. Reduction in the size 
of the goitre and long-term improvement in symptoms are to 
be expected if treatment is commenced early.
FURTHER READING
Chadwick D, Kinsman R, Walton P . The British Association of Endo-
crine and Thyroid Surgeons Fourth National Audit Report, Den -
drite Clinical Systems Ltd: Henley-on-Thames, 2012.
Chen A, Bernet V , Carty SE et al. American Thyroid Association state-
ment on optimal surgical management of goiter. Thyroid 2014; 24: 
181–9.
Gharib H, Papini E, Valcavi R et al. American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists and Associazione Medici Endocrinologi medical 
guidelines for clinical practice for the diagnosis and management of 
thyroid nodules. Endocr Pract 2006; 12: 63–102.
Haugen BRM, Alexander EK, Bible KC et al. American Thyroid Associ-
ation management guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules 
and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 2016; 26: 1–133.
Perros P , Boelaert K, Colley S et al. Guidelines for the management of 
thyroid cancer. Clin Endocrinol 2014; 81(Suppl 1): 1–122.
Smallridge RC, Ain KB, Asa SL et al. American Thyroid Association 
guidelines for management of patients with anaplastic thyroid can -
cer. Thyroid 2012; 22: 1104–39.
Wells SA, Jr, Asa SL, Dralle H et al. Revised American Thyroid Associa-
tion guidelines for the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma. 
Thyroid 2015; 25: 567–610.
Yeh MW , Bauer AJ, Bernet VA et al. American Thyroid Association 
statement on preoperative imaging for thyroid cancer surgery. Thy-
roid 2015; 25: 3–14.
Bernhard Moritz Carl Ludwig Riedel , 1846–1916, Professor of Surgery, Jena, Germany, described this form of thyroiditis in 1896.
08_50B-B&L27_Pt8_Ch50.indd   822 25/10/2017   09:10Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy of the parathyroid glands
 • The physiology of calcium regulation
 • The underlying causes of hypercalcaemia and 
appropriate emergency management
 • The aetiology, presentation, investigation and 
management of primary hyperparathyroidism and 
associated special cases
 • The aetiology, presentation, investigation 
and management of secondary and tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism
 • The aetiology and management of parathyroid 
carcinoma
Chapter
The parathyroid glands
51
INTRODUCTION
The parathyroid glands were first described by Sir Richard 
Owen in a neck dissection of an Indian rhinoceros at the Lon-
don Zoological Gardens in 1850. Credit for recognition of the 
‘glandulae parathyreoidae’ goes, however, to Sandstr Öm who 
published a monograph in 1887 on dissection of the para-
thyroid glands and their blood supply in animals and human 
cadavers. Unfortunately, Sandström committed suicide at the 
age of 37 and it was not until the 1890s that his work was 
rediscovered by Gley, who associated tetany following thy -
roid surgery with removal of the parathyroid glands. In 1905, 
MacCallum found that he could relieve postoperative tetany 
by the injection of parathyroid extract. While the associa-
tion between parathyroid enlargement and bone disease was 
reported in 1907, it was not until 1925 that the first para -
thyroidectomy was performed by Mandl in Vienna on Albert 
Gahne, a tram conductor with severe primary hyperparathy -
roidism (PHPT) and osteitis fibrosa cystica.
ANATOMY OF THE 
PARATHYROID GLANDS
The developmental embryology and surgical anatomy of the 
parathyroid glands are intimately linked, and knowledge of 
both is essential for successful surgical treatment of parathy -
roid disease.
The parathyroid glands, of which there are four, develop 
from the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches between 
the fifth and twelfth week of gestation. They are typically 
described as ‘Portland brick’ (yellow/brown) in colour and 
weigh approximately 30 mg. Approximately 13% of the pop-
ulation have abnormal parathyroid tissue, with 5% having a 
true supernumerary gland. The blood supply of both the supe-
rior and inferior parathyroid glands arises from the inferior 
thyroidal artery. While the location of the individual glands 
may vary significantly, there appears to be a degree of symme-
try between opposite sides that can be helpful during surgical 
dissection.
The inferior parathyroid gland and the thymus arise from 
the third pharyngeal pouch. As a result of the longer normal 
embryological descent, there is correspondingly more vari -
ation in their anatomical position. However, in more than 
50% of cases they are located at the inferior pole of the thy -
roid gland, on the anterior, lateral or posterior surface. The 
gland itself is freely mobile within a globule of fat adjacent to 
the lower pole (Figure 51.1a).
The superior parathyroid glands arise from the dorsal 
portion of the fourth pharyngeal pouch. As a result of their 
more limited embryological descent they are more constant in 
Sir Richard Owen , 1804–1892, English comparative anatomist and palaeontologist. First director of the Natural History Museum, London and Hunterian Pro-
fessor at Royal College of Surgeons of England.
Ivar Viktor Sandström ,1852–1889, medical student, Uppsala, Sweden.
Marcel Eugene Gley , 1857–1930, French pathologist.
William J MacCallum , 1874–1944, Professor of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, USA.
Felix Mandl , 1892–1957, Professor of Surgery, Vienna, Austria.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   823 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE824
 position. In more than 80% of patients, the superior parathy-
roid glands are located at the posterior aspect of the thyroid 
lobe in an area 2  cm in diameter, centred 1  cm around the 
junction of the inferior thyroid artery and the recurrent laryn-
geal nerve in strict proximity to the cricothyroid junction 
(Figure 51.1b). The parathyroid glands are closely associated 
with, but contained within, a halo of fat that is freely mobile 
over the thyroid capsule.
CALCIUM AND PARATHYROID 
HORMONE REGULATION
The parathyroid glands play a central role in the regulation 
of serum calcium levels through the production of the active 
84 amino-acid peptide, parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH 
is secreted in response to low serum calcium or high serum 
magnesium levels. It is initially cleaved in the liver yielding 
Undescended
(above ITA)
Intrathyroidal
2%
9%
2%
3%
56%
28%
Related to lower
pole of thyroid
In thyrothymic
tract 
Below intersection
ITA and RLN
Mediastrial
In carotid sheath
Paraoesophageal
and below ITA
11%
1%
1%
77%
10%
Related to upper
pole of thyroid
Around intersection
of ITA and RLN
Intrathyroidal
Figure 51.1 Potential locations of the inferior (a) and superior (b) parathyroid glands. IT A, inferior thyroid artery; RLN, recurrent laryngeal 
nerve.
(a)
(b)
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   824 25/10/2017   09:21Primary hyperparathyroidism 825
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
an inactive C-terminal that is cleared by the kidneys. The 
N-terminal fragment is responsible for the biological activity 
of PTH on peripheral tissues. The active circulating molecule 
has a half life of approximately 3–5 minutes in patients with 
normal renal function.
PTH acts directly on the kidneys, bone and the gastro -
intestinal tract to activate intracellular second messengers, 
including cyclic AMP and calcium. In the kidneys, PTH 
increases serum calcium levels by increasing resorption of cal-
cium from the renal tubules and increasing the hydroxylation 
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to the biologically active 1,25-dihy -
droxyvitamin D. Active vitamin D increases both the resorp-
tion of phosphorus in the kidneys and the absorption of 
calcium from the gastrointestinal tract. In the bone, PTH 
acts on osteoblasts and osteoclasts to increase bone turnover, 
thereby increasing the amount of calcium in the extracellular 
space (Figure 51.2).
Calcitonin, which is synthesised by the parafollicular C 
cells of the thyroid gland, acts as the physiological antagonist 
to PTH. Calcitonin decreases serum calcium by decreasing 
bone turnover.
PRIMARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
The early descriptions of patients with PHPT were domi-
nated by those with osteitis fibrosa cystica. Brown tumours 
of the long bones and associated subperiostal bone reabsorp -
tion, distal tapering of the clavicles and the classical ‘salt and 
pepper’ erosions of the skull were typical findings. Over 80% 
of patients had associated renal stones, significant neuromus-
cular dysfunction and muscle weakness. This led to the tra -
ditional mnemonic that patients with PHPT presented with 
‘bones, stones, abdominal groans and psychiatric overtones’. 
The introduction of the automated serum chemical autoanal-
yser in the 1970s as well as radioimmune assay to accurately 
measure circulating PTH levels radically improved early 
diagnosis of PHPT, such that the majority of patients are now 
identified incidentally on routine biochemical investigations 
and are asymptomatic. The current controversies therefore, 
centre on the indications for intervention, either surgically 
or medically.
Presentation
PHPT is defined as hypercalcaemia in the presence of an 
unsuppressed and therefore relatively, or absolutely, elevated 
PTH level. Prevalence of the disease is reported to be 0.2–
0.5% with approximately 100  000 new cases per year in the 
USA. The majority of PHPT is sporadic in nature. Familial 
disease can occur in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 
type 1 or type 2A or as a familial cluster. Patients usually pres-
ent in the 5th or 6th decades and there is a female predomi -
nance with a ratio of 3:1.
Patients are typically identified incidentally with an ele -
vated total calcium or following routine assessment of bone 
densitometry (DEXA scan). Most patients will, however, 
have some vague constitutional symptoms, such as fatigue, 
muscle weakness, depression or some mild memory impair -
ment on questioning. The presence of kidney stones remains 
the most common clinical manifestation of symptomatic 
PHPT. Between 15% and 20% of patients will have neph -
rolithiasis and over 40% of patients will have hypercalciuria. 
Increasingly, postmenopausal women present with significant 
osteopenia or osteoporosis in the distal one-third of the radius 
with a minimal reduction in the lumbar spine, which prompts 
further investigation. This distribution arises as PTH appears 
to be catabolic at cortical sites (distal one-third of the radius) 
and anabolic at cancellous sites (lumbar spine).
PHPT may present with pancreatitis, although it is rarely 
seen in patients with milder forms of the disease. Common 
epidemiologically linked disorders, such as hypertension and 
peptic ulcer disease, are often encountered. Clinical examina-
tion is usually normal. Band keratopathy, pathognomonic of 
the disease and due to deposition of calcium phosphate crys-
tals in the cornea, is now rarely identified.
The differential diagnosis of PHPT includes other causes 
of hypercalcaemia, which are usually readily distinguishable 
(Table 51.1). It is important to exclude the presence of a wide-
spread malignancy, in which patients will typically have other 
symptoms. The exception to this rule is multiple myeloma, 
in which hypercalcaemia can be the presenting complaint. 
Improvements in the immuno-radiometric and immuno-  
chemiluminometric assays for PTH can help to distinguish 
these conditions, as in malignancy PTH levels are typically 
suppressed.
Hypercalcaemic crisis: presentation 
and management
Hypercalcaemia is documented in 0.5% of the general pop -
ulation and in up to 5% of hospitalised patients. The vast 
majority are asymptomatic with a mild to moderate elevation 
of serum calcium (<3 mmol/L and 3–3.5  mmol/L, respec -
tively) and respond to treatment of the underlying aetiology 
with associated dietary mo dification. A small proportion of 
Plasma Ca2+ 
concentration
Parathyroid 
hormone
Parathyroid 
glands
+/–
Activation of 
vitamin D
Renal tubular 
absorption 
of Ca2+
Ca2+ mobilised 
from bones
Ca2+ absorption 
in intestine
Plasma Ca2+ 
concentration
Figure 51.2 Schematic diagram of actions of parathyroid hormone.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   825 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE826
patients will present symptomatically with a total calcium of 
>3.5 mmol/L. This is referred to as a hypercalcaemic crisis and 
requires aggressive medical management.
Although symptoms can be varied, the typical presenta -
tion is of acute confusion, abdominal pain, vomiting, dehy -
dration and anuria. Prolongation of the P–R interval with a 
shortened Q–T interval can be identified on an electrocardio-
gram (ECG) prior to potentially lethal cardiac arrhythmias. 
Where the calcium is >4.5  mmol/L, coma and cardiac arrest 
can occur.
Treatment revolves around increasing renal excretion of 
calcium, reducing skeletal release of calcium and treatment of 
the underlying cause. Aggressive rehydration plays a  pivotal 
role. Typically, 200–500  mL/h of normal saline is given to 
maintain a urine output >100 mL/h, with the caveat that this 
may be modified to account for associated patient comorbidi-
ties. Once intravascular volume has been adequately restored, 
loop diuretics, such as furosemide, can be used to enhanced 
the renal excretion of calcium. The majority of patients 
will have normalisation of their calcium with these simple 
 measures.
In patients with advanced malignancy and a serum cal -
cium level >3  mmol/L, agents that blunt the release of cal -
cium from skeletal stores may be required. First-line treatment 
includes administration of bisphosphonates. These are pyro -
phosphate analogues that inhibit osteoclast activity in areas 
of high bone turnover. In the acute setting, these are given 
intravenously due to poor absorption in the gastrointestinal 
tract. Calcitonin can be used to both decrease osteoclastic 
activity and increase renal excretion of calcium. It has a short 
duration of action and is usually used as a bridge to reduce 
calcium until the sustained action of the bisphosphonates is 
seen. Finally, glucocorticoids (prednisolone) can be used to 
enhance the action of calcitonin. They increase calciuresis 
and decrease intestinal absorption of calcium. As a result, 
they may also play a role in diseases associated with vitamin 
D excess.
Pathology
The underlying aetiology of PHPT is usually a solitary para -
thyroid adenoma; however, in a small number of patients 
(2–4%) there are double adenomas. It may occur in a sporadic 
fashion or it can be familial (MEN type 1 or type 2A, hyper -
parathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome (HPT-JT)) in nature. 
The only known risk factor for the development of PHPT is 
a history of prior neck irradiation. The underlying molecu -
lar basis of PHPT is heterogeneous; however, upregulation of 
cyclin D may lead to a clonal proliferation within the para -
thyroid glands. This does not alter the set point of calcium 
but the hyperplasic nature of the parathyroid cells themselves 
causes excessive secretion of PTH.
Multigland disease is less common, occurring in approx-
imately 15% of patients. No clinical features differentiate 
single from multigland disease, although multigland disease 
is more commonly associated with familial syndromes such 
as MEN types 1 and 2A, as well as the chronic ingestion of 
lithium.
Diagnosis
PHPT is a biochemical diagnosis. Only when the disease has 
been confirmed biochemically should localisation studies be 
undertaken. Positive imaging does not confirm the diagnosis 
and negative findings cannot rule it out.
PHPT is defined as an elevated total, or more specifically 
ionised, calcium, in the presence of an inappropriately elevated 
or unsuppressed PTH. It is associated with a low serum 
phosphate in the setting of normal creatinine and vitamin D 
levels; 24-hour urinary excretion of calcium may be normal or 
elevated. It is important to perform a 24-hour urinary collection 
to rule out the presence of the rare familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia. Alkaline phosphatase may be elevated in 
patients in whom there is concomitant bone disease. This is 
important to recognise preoperatively, as the surgeon should 
anticipate significant postoperative hypocalcaemia due to the 
development of hungry bone syndrome.
Localisation studies
“In my opinion, the only localising study requir ed in a 
patient with untreated primary hyperparathyroidism is to 
localise an experienced parathyroid surgeon.”
John Doppman, 1986
Historically, preoperative localisation studies for PHPT were 
considered less important than identifying an experienced 
surgeon. However, with a shift away from the traditional four-
John L Doppman , 1928–2000, radiologist, National Institutes of Health, USA, developed the technique of selective venous sampling for parathyroid localisation.
TABLE 51.1 Causes of hypercalcaemia.
Endocrine Primary hyperparathyroidism
Thyrotoxicosis
Phaeochromocytoma
Renal failure Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Malignant disease Skeletal metastatic disease
Multiple myeloma, lymphoma, leukaemia
Solid tumours (PTH-related peptide 
mediated): lung, renal, squamous 
cell carcinoma of the head and neck, 
oesophagus, genital tract
Nutritional Excessive vitamin D ingestion
Vitamin A intoxication
Milk-alkali syndrome
Aluminium intoxication
Granulomatous Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Inherited disease Hypercalciuric hypercalcaemia
Immobilisation
Paget’s disease
Drug related Lithium
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   826 25/10/2017   09:21Primary hyperparathyroidism 827
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
gland (cervical neck) exploration to more minimally invasive 
procedures, accurate preoperative identification is critically 
important to guide surgical strategy.
There are a variety of both non-invasive and invasive 
studies commonly is use. Non-invasive radiology includes 
nuclear medicine-based studies, ultrasonography and 4D 
computed tomography (CT) scanning. Invasive imaging is 
largely reserved for reoperative surgery and includes ultra -
sound or CT-guided fine-needle aspiration with concomitant 
PTH assays, parathyroid angiography or selective venous sam-
pling for the PTH gradient.
Nuclear medicine-based studies (sestamibi 
scanning)
The use of sestamibi (2-methoxy-2-methylpropylisonitrile 
(MIBI)) for parathyroid localisation was first described in 
1989 and is now regarded as the most accurate and reliable 
method for imaging the parathyroid glands. It is safe and 
reproducible and while it has a sensitivity and specificity 
simi lar to ultrasound, it may image glands in ectopic positions 
better (Figure 51.3a).
Sestamibi accumulates in mitochondria and therefore 
washes out at differential rates depending on the number of 
mitochondria within individual tissues. Parathyroid adenomas 
often have a high concentration of oxyphilic cells with high 
mitochondrial content. These retain tracer and adenomas 
are therefore associated with a slow washout when compared 
with the thyroid gland. There are three different protocols 
for sestamibi scanning: single-isotope dual-phase scan, dual 
isotope subtraction imaging and single-photon emission com-
puted tomography (SPECT). The sensitivity and specificity of 
sestamibi, regardless of the protocol used, are 79% and 90%, 
respectively. False positives are rare but may arise from some 
solid thyroid nodules, such as Hürthle cell nodules, that are 
associated with high oxyphilic content. These can be reduced 
by the addition of a thyroid-specific radioactive tracer, such as 
99Tc-pertechnetate and subsequent subtraction images.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is a non-invasive, inexpensive method of 
imaging the parathyroid glands (Figure 51.3b). Parathyroid 
adenomas are typically oval or elongated, bi- or multilobed 
Karl Hürthle , 1866–1945, histopathologist, Breslau, Germany.
Figure 51.3 Sestamibi scan (a) demonstrating right inferior ade-
noma, with concordant ultrasound (b).
(a)
(b)
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   827 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE828
hypoechoic structures. Rarely, adenomas may be cystic or 
heterogeneous in nature. Giant adenomas are described as 
those over 3  cm in size. Ultrasound is not associated with 
any radiation exposure and has the advantage of being able 
to identify and facilitate biopsy of any concomitant thyroid 
pathology. However, ultrasonography is operator, lesion size 
and location dependent. Critically, ultrasound may miss ade-
nomas located in retro-oesophageal, retrosternal or retrotra -
cheal areas. It can also be difficult to differentiate between 
a small parathyroid gland and a normal appearing lymph 
node. A recent meta-analysis of preoperative localisation 
techniques in PHPT demonstrated that ultrasound and 
sestamibi-SPECT have comparable accuracy, with pooled 
sensitivities of 76.1% and 78.9% respectively, and positive 
predictive values (PPVs) of 93.2% and 90.7% respectively 
(Krakauer et al., 2016).
4D Computed tomography scanning
Multiphase CT imaging (4D-CT) has become widely uti -
lised to localise disease (Figure 51.4). It gives both anatom-
ical as well as functional information about the parathyroid 
glands. Using precontrast, postcontrast and delayed images, 
it demonstrates not only detailed anatomic localisation but, 
combined with rapid uptake and wash-out, allows hyperfunc-
tioning glands to be differentiated from lymph nodes, which 
demonstrate a progressive enhancement pattern. The poten -
tial disadvantage of 4D-CT scanning is the higher radiation 
dose when compared with traditional imaging modalities. 
Modification of the protocol now allows fewer phases to be 
obtained without compromising outcomes. The initial study 
in 2006 reported a sensitivity of 88% for lateralisation and 
70% for localisation of parathyroid adenomas (Rodgers et al., 
2006). A more recent meta-analysis, although limited by the 
small number of studies, demonstrated a sensitivity and PPV 
of 89.4% and 93.5% respectively, when 4D-CT was used as 
the primary imaging modality. This was reduced to 71.8% and 
74.9% respectively in cases of negative or inconclusive prior 
imaging (Cheung et al., 2012).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not commonly used 
to image the parathyroid glands. However, on T2-weighted 
images, enlarged parathyroid glands demonstrate significantly 
increased intensity. In reoperative cases or where the ade -
noma is located in the mediastinum, MRI may be beneficial, 
with higher reported sensitivities (50–88%). While the sensi-
tivity of MRI is slightly better than CT (64–88%) in primary 
disease, it has significant limitations. It is expensive, patients 
can be poorly compliant due to claustrophobia and the reso -
lution for normal glands or adenomas <5  mm is poor. Simi -
larly, it can be difficult to localise superior glands due to their 
posterior location, which allows them to be obscured by the 
thyroid gland.
Parathyroid angiography and venous 
sampling for PTH
Parathyroid angiography is reserved for reoperative cases and 
is now rarely required due to improvements in non-invasive 
imaging modalities. It involves examination of both thyro-
cervical trunks, both internal mammary arteries and carotids, 
with occasional selective superior thyroid artery catheterisa -
tion. Vascular parathyroid adenomas appear as a persistent 
oval or round ‘stain’ on angiography. Serious complications 
such as contrast-induced renal failure, embolisation and neu-
rological damage have limited its utility.
Selective venous sampling for PTH can allow accurate 
localisation of adenomas but an experienced interventional 
radiologist is vital for success. The venous drainage of the 
lesion is established when there is a two-fold drop in the 
PTH between the sampled blood and the serum PTH. The 
sensitivity is reported to be 80% and is equally effective in 
localising cervical and mediastinal adenomas. However, the 
false-positive rate of between 6% and 18% limits its utility to 
reoperative cases.
Figure 51.4 (a, b) 4D Computed tomography scanning demonstrat-
ing a right inferior parathyroid adenoma (arrows).
(b)
(a)
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   828 25/10/2017   09:21Primary hyperparathyroidism 829
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Management strategies
Surgical management
The mainstay of treatment for PHPT is surgery, addressing 
the underlying aetiology and allowing not only resolution of 
biochemical abnormalities but also sustained improvements 
in end-organ damage. Traditionally a bilateral cervical explo-
ration was performed with reported cure rates of 95–98%. 
With improvements in preoperative radiological localisation, 
a more minimally invasive approach has been developed and 
widely adopted (Figure 51.5).
All symptomatic patients should be offered surgery. An 
expert panel recently published recommendations on which 
asymptomatic patients should be considered for surgical inter-
vention (Table 51.2) (Bilezikian et al., 2014). When criteria 
have been met and where a single adenoma has been confi -
dently identified by radiological means, a minimally invasive 
parathyroidectomy may be offered. Conversely, where there 
is discordant imaging or where imaging fails to identify any 
parathyroid abnormalities, then a bilateral neck exploration 
and three and a half-gland parathyroidectomy or a four-
gland parathyroidectomy and autotransplantation should be  
performed.
Consent for a parathyroidectomy must include the pos -
sibility of recurrent laryngeal nerve damage (risk <1%), per -
manent hypoparathyroidism (requiring lifelong calcium and 
vitamin D supplementation, risk 0.5%), and persistent (5%) 
or recurrent hyperparathyroidism. Persistent disease is defined 
as an elevated serum calcium within 6 weeks of surgical inter-
vention and recurrent disease is defined as an increase in cal-
cium levels after 6 months but with an intervening period of 
normocalcaemia. 
MINIMALL Y INVASIVE (FOCUSED) 
PARATHYROIDECTOMY
Minimally invasive approaches are based on the principle that 
over 80% of individuals with PHPT have a single adenoma. 
Although there is no strict definition of the procedure, it 
commonly refers to the removal of a localised abnormal para-
thyroid gland through an incision less than 3  cm in length 
(Figure 51.6). The term encompasses open approaches (cen-
tral and lateral incisions), video-assisted and radio-guided 
parathyroidectomies. A number of randomised studies have 
shown that the focused approach has similar cure rates to a 
cervical exploration but with reduced rates of postoperative 
hypocalcaemia, shorter operating times, potentially less pain 
and better cosmesis.
The need to convert from a focused to a cervical exploration 
may be guided by the use of intraoperative PTH measurements. 
Routine use is, however, controversial due to high false- positive 
and false-negative rates. The basic concept is that the half life 
of circulating PTH is 3–5 minutes and there should therefore 
be a significant drop detected in the plasma PTH following 
resection of a single adenoma. If no such drop is detected, then 
MIBI and USDiscordant 
imaging
Concordant 
imaging
Pre-op
marking
with US
4D CT
4 gland 
exploration
Pre-op 
marking with 
US and MIP
MIP
Figure 51.5 Localisation paradigm and management strategies. CT, 
computed tomography; MIP , minimally invasive parathyr oidectomy; 
US, ultrasound.
TABLE 51.2 Consensus guidelines for surgical 
intervention in asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. 
(Adapted from Bilezikian et al., 2014.)
Measurement of 
serum calcium
0.25 mmol/L (1.0 mg/dL) above the upper 
limit of normal
Skeletal BMD by DEXA; T score –2.5 at lumbar spine, 
total hip, femoral neck or distal 1/3 of radius
Vertebral fracture
Renal Creatinine clearance <60 mL/min
24-hour urinary calcium >10 mmol/dL  
(>400 mL/d) or increased risk of stone 
formation by risk analysis
Age <50 years
Figure 51.6 (a) Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy through a lat-
eral approach; (b) the excised parathyroid adenoma.
(a)
(b)
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   829 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE830
multigland disease may be suspected and conversion to a bilat-
eral neck exploration should be considered. The Miami criteria 
were developed to determine the extent of resection. A drop in 
the PTH into the normal range and to less than half the max-
imum preoperative PTH at 10 minutes appears to accurately 
predict single-gland disease (Figure 51.7).
BILATERAL NECK EXPLORATION
A traditional cervical neck exploration is required where 
imaging is negative or discordant, in MEN (type 1 or type 
2A) or in lithium-induced PHPT. A transverse collar (Koch-
er’s) incision is made and the subplatysmal plane developed. 
The deep cervical fascia is divided between the strap muscles 
and these are retracted. The thyroid lobes are mobilised and 
the middle thyroid vein may be divided when present.
Identification of the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the 
middle thyroid artery allows a starting point for a systematic 
exploration. All four glands are identified. Three and a half 
glands are resected, with half of a vascularised parathyroid left 
in situ. The other half of the gland should be sent for frozen 
section to confirm the presence of parathyroid tissue (Fig-
ure 51.8). Ideally the most normal appearing parathyroid is 
left in situ. With this caveat in mind, where possible an infe -
rior gland should be left. It is marked with a non-absorbable 
suture to aid identification in the presence of recurrent dis -
ease, where resection can be achieved without increasing the 
risk of damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Alternatively, 
all four glands can be resected and a forearm autotransplant 
created. Small pieces of parathyroid are sutured into pockets 
created in the brachioradialis muscle. Cure rates, persistent 
and recurrent disease appear to be similar, regardless of the 
type of procedure use. However, in recurrent disease it can be 
difficult to identify the location of the recurrent tissue when 
an autotransplant is performed.
THYMECTOMY AND RESECTION OF MEDIASTINAL 
ADENOMAS
The incidence of clinically significant supernumerary glands 
is increased in patients with multigland disease or those with 
hereditary syndromes. A thymectomy should be routinely 
undertaken for patients with MEN 1-associated PHPT or in 
secondary hyperparathyroidism. A cervical thymectomy is 
performed by dissecting close to the thymic capsule, explor -
ing the cervical part of the gland. The mediastinal part of 
the gland can be removed by gentle upwards traction, with 
ligation of the veins draining into the innominate vein. The 
end of the gland is tapered and rarely requires formal ligation. 
A median sternotomy is not required where a prophylactic 
thymectomy is being performed.
Mediastinal adenomas are rare, accounting for less than 
1% of all parathyroid adenoma. They will be typically iden -
tified on preoperative imaging. Resection can either be 
achieved by an open sternotomy or increasingly by a thora -
coscopic approach. A minimally invasive approach can be 
particularly effective where the abnormal gland lies immedi -
ately deep to the mediastinal pleura. It can confer significant 
advantages in length of hospital stay and complication rates.
Permanent hypoparathyroidism
Permanent hypoparathyroidism is defined as the continuing 
need for calcium and/or vitamin D replacement at 1 year 
Figure 51.8 Parathyroidectomy with exposur e of the left superior 
and inferior parathyroid glands (white arrows) in situ (a) and left supe-
rior gland mobilised on its vascular pedicle (b).
(a)
(b)
Time (min)
151050
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
% PTH remaining
Figure 51.7 Miami criteria for intraoperative parathyr oid hormone 
(PTH) measurement. Drop of PTH into the normal range and less than 
half the maximum value at 10 min postresection.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   830 25/10/2017   09:21Special cases 831
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
postoperatively. It is a rare complication when surgery is 
undertaken for PHPT (0.5%), but in secondary hyperpara -
thyroidism it can range from 4% to 12%. Symptoms and 
signs relate to serum calcium levels. Symptoms include mild 
circumoral or digital numbness and paraesthesia, carpopedal 
or laryngeal spasms and cardiac arrhythmias. Chvostek’ s and 
Trousseau’s signs may be elicited. Chvostek’s sign refers to 
contraction of the ipsilateral facial muscles on percussion of 
the facial nerve below the zygoma. Trousseau’s sign refers to 
the development of carpopedal spasm secondary to occlusion 
of the arm (usually with a blood pressure cuff).
Biochemical investigations include total and ionised 
calcium levels as well as serum magnesium levels. An ECG 
may demonstrate a prolonged QT interval or QRS complex 
changes. Mild hypocalcaemia can be treated with oral cal -
cium and vitamin D supplementation. Acute symptomatic 
hypocalcaemia is an emergency and should be corrected with 
intravenous as well as oral calcium and vitamin D replace -
ment. Traditionally, 10 mL of 10% calcium gluconate is 
administered slowly intravenously. Supplemental magnesium 
may also be required, due to the synergistic action of trans-
porters for calcium and magnesium.
Medical management
Medical management is warranted in patients who are 
deemed unfit or who have contraindications to surgical inter-
vention, in patients with failed surgical intervention or in the 
long-term management of parathyroid carcinoma. The aims 
are to prevent skeletal complications (improve bone mineral 
density and reduce fracture risk) and to stabilise biochemi -
cal parameters. There are only limited data on the long-term 
efficacy of such an approach as surgery is known to provide 
durable responses.
BISPHOSPHONATES
Bisphosphonates are pyrophosphate analogues that are 
concentrated in areas of high bone turnover. They inhibit 
osteoclast activity and apoptosis, thereby increasing bone 
mineralisation and reducing bone turnover. Studies looking 
at the management of PHTP utilising bisphosphonates are 
limited by small numbers and short follow-up. However, use 
does appear to stabilise bone mineral density without mark-
edly altering the underlying serum biochemistry.
HORMONE REPLACEMENT THERAPY AND 
SELECTIVE OESTROGEN RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has been shown to 
improve bone mineral density and reduce the associated frac-
ture risk in postmenopausal women by reducing bone turn-
over. T wo non-randomised controlled trials have shown a 
durable and similar response to surgery for PHTP at 4 years, 
with improvements in bone mineral density but without any 
improvement in the underlying serum biochemistry. The 
rational for the use of selective oestrogen receptor antagonists 
(SERMs) is that they should confer the benefits of HRT but 
without the potential adverse vascular and breast effects. The 
effect on the bone mineral, however, appears to be less signif-
icant than that of HRT.
CALCIMIMETICS
The extracellular calcium sensing receptor (CaR) on the 
parathyroid cell surface negatively regulates secretion of 
PTH. Activation of the receptor decreases secretion of PTH, 
thereby decreasing bone turnover. Calcimimetics, such as 
cinacalcet, amplify the sensitivity of the CaR to extracellular 
calcium, altering the set point and thereby decreasing PTH 
production. The use of calcimimetics has gained widespread 
acceptance in secondary hyperparathyroidism, but use in 
PHTP is largely limited to patients unfit for surgery. Despite 
this, a number of small studies have shown normalisation of 
PTH levels and a reduction in bone remodelling, with durable 
results at 2 years, with the use of cinacalcet. Drug tolerance, 
especially gastrointestinal side effects, can be problematic and 
may limit the duration of usage.
SPECIAL CASES
Lithium-induced 
hyperparathyroidism
Lithium-induced hyperparathyroidism occurs in 10–15% of 
patients treated with long-term lithium. It is generally associ-
ated with a mild elevation in calcium with failure to suppress 
PTH. The underlying aetiology can be either gland hyper -
plasia, with lithium originally thought to stimulate all para -
thyroid tissue, or a single adenoma which has been shown to 
occur in 33–49% of cases. It has recently been suggested that 
the hyperparathyroidism may be caused by interference with 
the parathyroid kinase C signal transduction system and the 
Wnt pathway. Biochemical abnormalities may resolve with 
discontinuation of lithium. Surgery is indicated where ongo -
ing treatment with lithium is required or where abnormalities 
persist following withdrawal of lithium. Minimally invasive 
surgery is relatively contraindicated in these patients due to 
the high incidence of multigland disease. Excision, however, 
should be limited to those glands that are obviously enlarged 
at exploration rather than a formal three and a half-gland 
excision.
Familial syndromes
Familial hyperparathyroidism can be part of a well-recognised 
endocrine disorder, but it may also occur in isolation in a 
non-syndromic form. PHPT occurs as a central facet in mul -
tiple MEN 1, MEN 2A, HPT -JT and familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia (FHH).
Familial isolated hyperparathyroidism
Isolated familial hyperparathyroidism occurs when patients 
have PHPT without any other associated endocrinopathies. 
Frantisek Chvostek , 1835–1884, physician, The Jasefsacademie, Vienna, Austria.
Armand Trousseau , 1801–1867, physician, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   831 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE832
The underlying genetic abnormality has yet to be fully elu -
cidated, but the syndrome has been linked to known muta -
tions in the MEN 1 gene, the HRPT2 gene as well as the 
calcium-sensing receptor gene. A significant proportion of 
patients will belong to the MEN 1 family , with documented 
recognised mutations but without expression of other endo -
crinopathies. Hyperparathyroidism should be treated with 
a formal bilateral neck exploration and management as per 
patients with MEN.
MEN 1-associated hyperparathyroidism
MEN 1 is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome consisting of 
tumours of the parathyroids, endocrine pancreas–duodenum 
and the pituitary (the three Ps). It occurs in approximately 
1 per 30 000 individuals. It can also be associated with adre -
nal adenomas or carcinoma, foregut carcinoids and lipomas. 
Mutations, of which there are over 1000 identified in differ -
ent families, occur in the MEN 1 gene, which encodes the 
protein menin. Menin acts as a tumour suppressor . Patients 
typically present with young onset (20–30 years of age) of 
symptomatic hyperparathyroidism and over 95% of patients 
will have PHPT before the age of 40 years.
Surgical intervention in MEN aims to obtain and main -
tain normocalcaemia for the longest time possible. In 
general, it is associated with the presence of multigland para-
thyroid disease and as such has mandated a bilateral cervical 
exploration with at least a subtotal parathyroidectomy and 
cervical thymectomy. A total parathyroidectomy and fore-
arm autotransplantation is an acceptable alternative. Half of 
the most normal appearing parathyroid should be left in situ 
with a marking stitch to facilitate reoperative intervention. 
Detailed intraoperative notes, including diagrams, should 
be kept. Despite meticulous and extensive surgery, the rates 
of both persistent and recurrent disease remain high in this 
group of patients (up to 62%) regardless of the type of sur -
gery performed. Unfortunately, the rates of postoperative 
 permanent hypocalcaemia are also high, with published rates 
up to 47%.
MEN 2A-associated hyperparathyroidism
MEN 2A consists of medullary thyroid carcinoma, unilateral 
or bilateral phaeochromocytomas and PHPT. PHPT occurs in 
approximately 20% of patients and is associated with muta-
tions in codon 634 in the RET proto-oncogene. The major-
ity of patients will be asymptomatic, with a mild elevation in 
calcium and asymmetrically enlarged parathyroid glands. It 
is extremely important that the presence of a phaeochromo -
cytoma is excluded prior to surgical intervention. Surgery is 
usually performed for medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), 
with the parathyroid enlargement often being a coincidental 
intraoperative finding. In this setting, with extensive surgery 
for MTC, the primary aim of treatment is to avoid hypopara-
thyroidism. A conservative stance is adopted with resection 
of grossly enlarged glands, but with preservation of parathy -
roid tissue where possible and identification with a marking 
stitch in the neck.
Max Wilms , 1867–1918, Professor of Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
Summary box 51.1
Primary hyperparathyroidism
●● Presentation is now typically asymptomatic rather than the 
classical ‘bones, stones, abdominal groans and psychiatric 
overtones’
●● The diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism is a 
biochemical one
●● Presence of an elevated ionised calcium with an 
inappropriately elevated/not suppressed PTH level confirms 
the diagnosis
●● Sestimibi and focused neck ultrasound are the first-line 
radiological investigations
●● 85% of cases are due to a single adenoma
●● Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy is a safe and 
acceptable alternative to a four-gland exploration in the 
presence of localised disease
●● Familial syndromes and disease that is not localised require 
a formal four gland exploration and three and a half gland 
parathyroidectomy
Hyperparathyroid-jaw tumour syndrome
HPT-JT is a rare cause of PHPT . It arises due to inactivat -
ing mutations in the HRPT2 gene on chromosome 1 q21-32, 
encoding parafibromin. It classically presents with early-onset 
PHPT (mean age of 32 years), the aetiology of which can be 
either single- or multiple-gland disease but is predominantly 
cystic in nature. It presents with severe hypercalcaemia and 
is associated with an increased risk of an underlying parathy -
roid carcinoma. Approximately 40% of patients will have the 
pathognomonic ossifying jaw fibromas of the maxilla or man-
dible. Other associated abnormalities include renal pathology 
(hamartomas, polycystic kidney disease and adult Wilms’ 
tumours) and female patients may have uterine malignancies. 
Surgical intervention involves removal of all enlarged para -
thyroid glands.
Where there is concern for a parathyroid carcinoma, great 
care must be taken to avoid tumour spillage. Whether or not 
an en bloc resection of the enlarged suspicious parathyroid and 
the adjacent thyroid lobectomy is required remains contro -
versial.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia
FHH is not a surgical disease and therefore preoperative diag-
nosis is imperative for the surgeon. FHH arises as a result of 
heterozygous mutations in the calcium receptor gene (CASR) 
on chromosome 3. Benign familial hypocalciuric hypercal-
caemia typically presents with mild hypercalcaemia in young 
(<10 years of age) asymptomatic patients. Patients with FHH 
have a normal or slightly elevated PTH level, increased serum 
magnesium levels and hypocalciuria. A low urinary calcium/
creatinine clearance ratio is used to discriminate between 
FHH and mild PHPT. Patients rarely require intervention 
and surgical intervention is not indicated.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   832 25/10/2017   09:21Secondary hyperparathyroidism 833
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
SECONDARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is defined as a derangement in 
calcium homeostasis, which leads to a compensatory increase 
in PTH secretion. It occurs primarily as a result of chronic 
kidney disease and is therefore sometimes referred to as renal 
hyperparathyroidism. Other underlying causes include gastro-
intestinal malabsorption, vitamin D deficiency, liver disease 
or chronic lithium usage.
The pathogenesis of secondary hyperparathyroidism is 
related to renal dysfunction. Abnormalities in the renal tubu-
lar absorption of phosphate lead to hyperphosphataemia. This
acts directly on the parathyroid cells and stimulates PTH 
secretion. More recent translational research has identified 
a novel phosphaturia hormone, fibroblast growth factor 23 
(FGF 23). This is progressively secreted from osteocytes to 
compensate for chronic phosphate retention that in turn 
leads to a reduction in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, which by 
reducing the intestinal absorption of calcium, also acts to 
increase secretion of PTH. Previous studies in patients with 
chronic renal disease have shown that there is a reduction in 
the expression of the vitamin D receptor and the CaR, with 
associated skeletal resistance to PTH. These factors interact 
to form the complex pattern leading to progressive secondary 
hyperparathyroidism in the setting of chronic renal disease.
The pathological characteristics associated with second-
ary hyperparathyroidism include hyperplasia, asymmetrical 
glandular enlargement or nodularity. This differentiation is 
important, as when the parathyroid gland becomes nodular 
it loses expression of the vitamin D and Ca receptors. It has 
been proposed that nodular parathyroid glands may be resis -
tant to calcimimetics and therefore be refractory to medical  
management.
Diagnosis
The classical symptoms associated with secondary hyper-
parathyroidism are seen less commonly now, with greater 
awareness of the disease and the resultant earlier medical 
intervention. However progressive bone disease, especially 
bone pain, can occur with associated soft tissue calcium 
deposits (Figure 51.9). 
The diagnosis of secondary hyperparathyroidism is char -
acterised by hypocalcaemia or normocalcaemia with an ele -
vated PTH. Patients have a high serum phosphate and a low 
vitamin D. Traditional plain x-rays now rarely demonstrate 
the pathognomonic osteitis fibrosa cystica. However, bone 
densitometry (DEXA scan) typically demonstrates osteope -
nia or osteoporosis.
The diagnosis of secondary hyperparathyroidism is a bio-
chemical one. In general, localisation studies are not under -
taken as minimally invasive surgery is not indicated. However, 
a neck ultrasound can be performed to identify patients with 
nodular hyperplasia who may be refractory to medical man -
agement. Localisation studies are helpful in patients with 
recurrent disease, in order to identify ectopic parathyroid tis -
sue, especially in the mediastinum. In cases of recurrent dis -
ease, when there is no evidence of active disease in the neck, 
and a previous allograft has been used to the forearm, then 
selective venous sampling for PTH in the neck and the bra -
chial vein on the side of the graft can be useful. This is known 
as the Casanova test and to prove that the recurrent disease 
is located in the grafted arm (graft hyperplasia) the ratio must 
be greater than 20:1.
Calciphylaxis
Calciphylaxis (calcific uraemic arteriolopathy) is a syndrome 
of disseminated calcification resulting in both vascular cal -
cification and skin necrosis. It accounts for approximately 
4% of patients undergoing surgical intervention for second -
ary hyperparathyroidism. It presents with expanding painful 
cutaneous purpuritic lesions, predominantly on the extrem -
ities, although it can also be seen on the lower abdomen. 
The underlying tissue calcification within the arteriolar and 
small vascular walls leads to ischaemic necrosis and the devel-
opment of gangrene, which in turn leads to overwhelming 
Daniel Casanova , contemporary, University of Cantabria, Santander, Spain.
Figure 51.9 Secondary hyperparathyroidism. X-ray showing ectopic 
calcification.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   833 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE834
sepsis and death. The majority of these patients will have an 
elevated calcium × phosphate product but it is not usually 
associated with an extremely high PTH level. The underlying 
aetiology remains unclear but a number of potential factors 
have been postulated. A reduction in the serum levels of a 
calcification inhibitory protein, α-2-Heremans–Schmid gly-
coprotein, and abnormalities in smooth muscle cell biology 
in uraemic patients may play a role in the development of 
the syndrome. Prognosis for these patients is extremely poor, 
with a mortality of up to 87%. An urgent parathyroidectomy 
has been shown to decrease pain, improve wound healing and 
reduce the risk of amputation in these patients. It has also 
been associated with an increase in median survival.
Management
Renal transplantation remains the only definite treatment for 
secondary hyperparathyroidism. Other therapies are a bridge 
to this or aim to provide symptom relief. Standard manage -
ment includes replacement of calcium and vitamin D and the 
reduction of phosphate levels by the use of phosphate binders. 
Treatment of this disease changed radically with the intro -
duction of calcimimetic drugs, such as cinacalcet. Calcimi-
metics alter the set point of the CaR, thereby reducing the 
constant stimulation of the parathyroid glands and lowering 
the PTH level. This obviously does not address the underly -
ing renal disease. It remains controversial as to which patients 
may benefit from the use of calcimimetics and which patients 
may benefit from earlier surgical intervention. Indications for 
pursing medical management include those patients who are 
deemed non-surgical candidates by reason of medical comor -
bidities. Similarly, where there is persistent or recurrent dis -
ease, the origin of which cannot be clearly elucidated, surgical 
management should be avoided. However, there are definite 
indications for surgical intervention in secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism (Table 51.3) although these have been modified 
to reflect the current use, where available, of calcimimetics 
(Table 51.4).
TABLE 51.3 Indications for surgical intervention in 
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Essential components
1. Persistently high serum level of intact PTH >500 pg/mL
2. Hyperphosphataemia (serum P >6 mg/dL) or hypercalcaemia 
(serum Ca >2.5 mmol/L or 10 mg/dL) which is refractory to 
medical management
3. Estimated volume of the largest gland >300–500 mm3 or long 
axis >1 cm
Clinical findings
If patients have one of these symptoms, parathyroidectomy should 
be recommended:
Severe osteitis fibrosa with associated high bone turnover
Subjective symptoms (bone and joint pain, arthralgia, muscle 
weakness, irritability, purititis, depression)
Progressive ectopic calcification
Calciphylaxis
Progressive reduction in bone mineral content
Anaemia resistant to erythropoietin stimulating agent (ESA)
Dilated cardiomyopathy/cardiac failure
TABLE 51.4 Proposed indications for surgical 
management of secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) in 
the era of calcimimetics.
When SHPT is refractory to vitamin D replacement or vitamin D 
analogues and prolonged survival is anticipated
Severely impaired quality of life due to either SHPT or intolerance 
to calcimimetics
When sufficient reduction in parathyroid hormone cannot be 
achieved with use of calcimimetics
Thyroid surgery is also required (thyroid carcinoma)
There are a wide variety of operations that can be utilised 
for the management of secondary hyperparathyroidism, none 
of which appears significantly superior in terms of clinical 
outcomes (persistent or recurrent disease). These include a 
subtotal parathyroidectomy, a total parathyroidectomy with 
autograft or a total parathyroidectomy without autograft. 
Cryopreservation of resected tissue, where available, should 
be performed in case of significant postoperative hypocalcae -
mia. The first two procedures are most widely accepted and 
the type of operation performed depends upon the surgeon.
A subtotal parathyroidectomy is where three and a half 
parathyroid glands are excised, with the remnant being 
marked with a non-absorbable stitch to facilitate identifica -
tion in the event of recurrent disease. A biopsy of the final 
gland that is to be left in situ is mandatory to confirm the pres-
ence of residual parathyroid tissue. Ideally an inferior gland 
is left in situ to facilitate reoperative surgery and minimise 
potential damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve in that set-
ting (Figure 51.10). A total parathyroidectomy with a fore -
arm autograft involves removal of all parathyroid tissue in the 
neck, with reimplantation of a small amount of morcellated 
tissue within a pocket formed in the brachoradialis muscle. 
Overall, regardless of the operative approach utilised the cure 
rate ranges between 90% and 96%, with similar complication 
rates. A randomised study looking at 40 patients who either 
underwent a subtotal or total parathyroidectomy with auto-
transplant demonstrated no significant difference between 
the two operations in terms of efficacy and recurrence rate 
(Rothmund et al., 1991).
Figure 51.10 Subtotal parathyroidectomy for parathyroid hyperpla-
sia. Right inferior gland biopsied and half left in situ.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   834 25/10/2017   09:21Parathyroid car cinoma 835
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
PARATHYROID CARCINOMA
Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare malignancy occurring in 
approximately 1% of cases of PHPT, with an estimated prev-
alence of 0.005% of all cancers. While the aetiology remains 
unclear, recent advances in molecular biology suggest that 
there may be an underlying genetic basis. Currently, a history 
of previous neck irradiation remains the only known environ-
mental risk factor. However, given that it can arise in patients 
with end-stage renal disease as well as in those with MEN 
type 1, malignant transformation in hyperplastic glands may 
also occur.
A significant proportion of patients (>10%) with a para -
thyroid carcinoma will have HPT-JT. The underlying muta -
tion is in the HRPT2 gene at 1q25-32, a tumour suppressor 
gene that encodes the protein parafibromin. Parafibromin is 
involved in the regulation of cellular transcription and his -
tone mo dification. HRPT2 mutations, leading to inactiva -
tion of parafibromin, are therefore an important contributor 
to the pathogenesis of parathyroid carcinoma.
Parathyroid carcinoma remains difficult to diagnose pre -
operatively as it biochemically resembles PHPT. There are, 
however, a number of suggestive features. Firstly, the diagno -
sis is typically made a decade earlier, with an equal gender 
preponderance (female:male 1:1) when compared to PHPT. 
Summary box 51.2
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
●● Primarily due to underlying chronic kidney disease
●● Associated with parathyroid hyperplasia
●● Diagnosis is made biochemically with a low or normal calcium 
and an elevated PTH. High phosphate levels and low vitamin 
D levels are seen
●● No localisation studies are required
●● Mainstay of treatment is renal transplantation. Medical 
management with calcium and vitamin D replacements and 
phosphate binders is a bridge to transplantation
●● Use of calcimimetics has reduced the requirement for surgical 
intervention
●● Subtotal parathyroidectomy remains the surgical intervention 
of choice when indicated
TERTIARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism is a persistent autonomous 
hypercalcaemic hyperparathyroidism occurring after kidney 
transplantation. A number of proposed factors may prevent 
involution of the hyperplastic parathyroid glands following 
resolution of the underlying renal impairment. These include 
impaired graft function, non-suppressible PTH secretion, 
slow involution of enlarged glands or insufficient calcitriol 
conversion by the transplanted kidney.
The biochemical diagnosis is confirmed by an elevated 
total or ionised calcium, with an associated elevated or 
unsuppressed PTH and a reduced phosphate occurring at least 
1-year post renal transplantation. Differentiation from PHPT 
can be difficult. Fewer than 1% of patients with tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism will require surgical intervention (Table 
51.5). The only new evidence for intervention is the presence 
of nodular hyperplasia of the glands themselves. Traditionally, 
localisation studies or imaging of the neck was not indicated in 
tertiary hyperparathyroidism. However, increasing knowledge 
Summary box 51.3
Tertiary hyperparathyroidism
●● Persistent autonomous hypercalcaemic hyperparathyroidism 
occurring after kidney transplantation
●● Diagnosis is made by demonstrating an elevated total or 
ionised calcium with an associated elevated or unsuppressed 
PTH and a reduced phosphate occurring at least 1-year post 
renal transplantation
●● Localisation studies are not required but a focused neck 
ultrasound may confirm the presence of nodular enlargement
●● Surgical intervention remains the mainstay of treatment and 
involves a subtotal parathyroidectomy
The response to surgical intervention is often dramatic. 
The biochemical parameters may resolve almost immediately 
and appear to be sustained for up to 3 years postoperatively. 
Patients subjectively report improvements in the symptoms of 
secondary hyperparathyroidism including bone pain, pruritus, 
fatigue and depression. Finally, bone metabolism is improved 
with an approximate 10% increase in trabecular bone, with 
almost immediate suppression of bone resorption and acceler-
ation of new bone formation.
of the clonal nature of gland hyperplasia suggests that where 
there is a nodule within the parathyroid with a volume of 
tissue greater than 500 mm3, then resolution of electrolyte 
abnormalities is unlikely.
The use of calcimimetics in tertiary hyperparathyroid-
ism remains controversial and has not been approved for 
this indication. However, isolated reports have documented 
control of hypercalcaemia with minimal side effects in indi-
vidual patients. Surgical intervention remains the definitive 
management strategy. Subtotal parathyroidectomy or total 
parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation are acceptable 
surgical options. The majority of endocrine surgeons will 
opt for a subtotal parathyroidectomy in this setting, leaving 
a gland approximately four times normal in volume to min-
imise postoperative complications. Total parathyroidectomy 
without an autograft is not a treatment option due to the 
postoperative and persistent difficulties in managing the asso-
ciated hypocalcaemia.
TABLE 51.5 Indications for surgical intervention in tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism.
Subacute severe hypercalcaemia (>3 mmol/L)
Impaired graft function
Nodular hyperplasia of the parathyroid gland(s)
Progressive symptoms (>2 years following transplantation)
Worsening bone disease (pain, fractures, bone loss)
Renal stones/nephrocalcinosis
Soft tissue or vascular calcifications
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   835 25/10/2017   09:21CHAPTER 51  The parathyroid glands
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE836
Secondly, a greater proportion of these patients will be symp-
tomatic at presentation. A palpable neck mass is found in 
36–52% of patients with parathyroid carcinomas but rarely 
(<5%) in cases of PHPT. Finally, the biochemical abnormal-
ities tend to be exaggerated with an average total calcium of 
between 3.75 and 3.97  mmol/L and a PTH level 5–10 times 
the normal range.
The leading cause of morbidity and mortality from para -
thyroid carcinoma is hypercalcaemia, due to inappropriate 
PTH secretion. Treatment is focused on controlling hyper -
calcaemia and removal of the carcinoma where possible. 
Surgery remains the mainstay of treatment for primary pre-
sentations and locally recurrent disease. Complete resection 
of the tumour avoiding spillage is vital in preventing seeding 
and thus recurrent disease. En bloc resection of the tumour, 
associated thyroid lobectomy and central neck dissection 
remains controversial. Traditionally, complete R0 resection 
was thought to provide the only means of a cure. However, 
a number of recent studies have failed to demonstrate an 
improvement in local recurrence rates with such comprehen-
sive resection. Adjuvant chemotherapy has not been shown 
to confer a disease-free or overall survival benefit. Use of 
external beam radiotherapy should be considered on an indi-
vidual basis. Traditionally, it has not been deemed effective, 
but more recent single institution case series appear to chal -
lenge this assumption. It may be considered where it is diffi -
cult to achieve a complete surgical resection or in patients 
with multifocal recurrent soft tissue deposits.
Histological confirmation of a parathyroid carcinoma 
remains difficult. The classical description included trabec -
ular architecture, mitotic figures, thick fibrous bands and 
capsular and vascular invasion. However, these findings can 
be non-significant and new molecular markers may aid the 
diagnosis and stratify patients for more intensive follow-up 
(Figure 51.11) . Immunohistochemical evidence of down-  
regulation of parafibromin has a sensitivity of 67% and a 
specificity of 100% for detecting parathyroid carcinoma and 
the protein gene product 9.5 (PGP 9.5). Parafibromin immu-
nohistochemistry may be used with immunohistochemistry 
for PGP 9.5. This is a protein enco ded by ubiquitin carboxyl- 
terminal esterase L1 . It is upregulated in parathyroid carci -
noma and has a sensitivity of 78% and a specificity of 100% 
PERSISTENT 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Persistent hyperparathyroidism is defined as an elevated 
calcium within 6 weeks of surgical intervention. For all 
parathyroid operations (minimally invasive parathyroidec -
tomy (MIP) and bilateral exploration) the rate of persistent 
hypercalcaemia is approximately 6% in sporadic disease and 
between 16% and 20% in hereditary disease. It usually arises 
as a result of a technical error during the first operation, either 
due to a missed adenoma or asymmetrical disease. When 
this occurs all preoperative biochemistry, radiological imag -
ing, intraoperative findings and pathology must be carefully 
reviewed. If reoperation is appropriate, repeat imaging of the 
neck and mediastinum is required (sestamibi, ultrasound and 
4D-CT scanning). Surgical intervention can be straightfor -
ward where there are intact tissue planes, such as following 
a minimally invasive parathyroidectomy. Complications, 
including recurrent laryngeal nerve damage and permanent 
hypocalcaemia, are increased when extensive previous dissec-
tion has occurred and the patient must be consented appro -
priately.
RECURRENT 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Recurrent hyperparathyroidism is defined as hypercalcaemia 
occurring 6 months after surgery but with an intervening 
period of normocalcaemia. Common causes include missed 
pathology at the first operation; hyperplasia in remaining or 
autotransplanted tissue; parathyromatosis or , very rarely, the 
development of a second parathyroid adenoma. Parathyroma-
tosis refers to disseminated parathyroid tissue within the soft 
Atypical parathyroid 
tumour
Parafibromin 
NEGATIVE
Parafibromin 
POSITIVE
PGP 9.5
NEGATIVE
PGP 9.5
POSITIVE
High risk of 
malignancyCarcinoma Low risk of 
malignancy
Figure 51.11  Proposed decision tr ee for atypical parathyr oid 
tumours using parafibromin and PGP 9.5 immunostaining.
Summary box 51.4
Parathyroid carcinoma
●● Accounts for approximately 1% of all cases of primary 
hyperparathyroidism
●● A history of previous neck irradiation remains the only known 
environmental risk factor
●● The tumours remain difficult to diagnose preoperatively as 
they biochemically resemble primary hyperparathyroidism
●● Treatment is focused on controlling hypercalcaemia and 
removal of the carcinoma where possible
●● Surgery remains the mainstay of treatment for primary 
presentations and locally recurrent disease. Complete 
resection of the tumour avoiding spillage is vital in preventing 
seeding and thus recurrent disease
 (Figure 51.11). All parafibromin-negative and PGP 9.5- 
positive tumours should be considered for genetic screening.
Parathyroid carcinoma is an indolent but progressive 
disease. Metastatic spread can occur to the lungs, liver and 
bones. Recurrence rates range from 33% to 80% and it typi-
cally occurs in the first 3 years. Overall survival is reported to 
be 85–90% at 5 years and 49–77% at 10 years.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   836 25/10/2017   09:21Further reading 837
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
tissues of the neck and superior mediastinum due to rupture of 
the parathyroid gland during the primary surgery. A definitive 
indication for surgical intervention must be present prior to 
embarking on localisation studies. Surgical intervention will 
be guided by the radiological imaging. Complication rates of 
recurrent laryngeal nerve damage and permanent hypocalcae-
mia are higher in reoperative surgery.
FURTHER READING
Agarwal A, Mishra AK, Lombardi CP , Raffaelli M. Applied embryo logy 
of the thyroid and parathyroid glands. In: G.W . Randolph surgery 
of the thyroid and parathyroid glands . Philadelphia: Saunders, 2013, 
15–24.
Barczyn ski M, BränstrÖm R, Dionigi G, Mihai R. Sporadic multiple  
parathyroid gland disease – a consensus report of the European  
Society of Endocrine Surgeons. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2015; 400(8): 
887–905.
Bilezikian JP , Brandi ML, Eastell R et al. Guidelines for the management 
of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism: summary statement 
from the Fourth International Workshop. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2014; 99: 3561–9.
Carneiro-Pla D, Pellitteri PK. Intraoperative PTH monitoring during 
parathyroid surgery. In: G.W . Randolph surgery of the thyroid and para-
thyroid glands. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2013, 605–12.
Certani F , Pardi E, Marcocci C. Update on parathyroid carcinoma.  
J Endocrinol Invest 2016; 39(6): 595–606.
Cheung K, Wang TS, Farrokhyar F , Roman SA, Sosa JA. A meta-  
analysis of preoperative localisation techniques for patients with 
primary hyperparathyroidism. Ann Surg Oncol 2012; 19(2): 577–83.
Howell VM, Gill A, Clarkson A et al. Accuracy of combined protein 
gene product 9.5 and parafibromin markers for immunohistochem-
ical diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab  
2009; 94(2): 434–41.
Iacobone M, Carnaille B, Palazzo FF , Vriens M. Hereditary hyperpara -
thyroidism – a consensus report of the European Society of Endo -
crine Surgeons. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2015; 400(8): 867–86.
Jeong HS, Dominguez AR. Calciphylaxis: controversies in pathogenesis, 
diagnosis and treatment. Am J Med Sci 2016; 351(1): 217–27.
Krakauer M, Wieslander B, Myschetzky PS et al. A prospective com-
parative study of parathyroid dual-phase scintigraphy, dual-isotope 
subtraction scintigraphy, 4D-CT, and ultrasonography in primary 
hyperparathyroidism. Clin Nucl Med 2016; 41(2): 93–100.
Mihai R, Simon D, Hellman P . Imaging for primary hyperparathyroidism 
– an evidence-based analysis. Langenbecks Arch Surg 2009; 394(5): 
765–84.
Pitt SC, Sipple RS, Chen H. Secondary and tertiary hyperparathyroid -
ism: state of the art surgical management. Surg Clin North Am 2009; 
89(5): 1227–39.
Rodgers SE, Hunter GJ, Hamberg LM et al . Improved pre-operative 
planning for directed parathyroidectomy with 4-dimensional com -
puted tomography. Surgery 2006; 140(6): 932–40.
Rothmund M, Wagner PK, Schark C. Subtotal parathyroidectomy ver -
sus total parathyroidectomy and autotransplantation in secondary 
hyperparathyroidism: a randomized trial. World J Surg 1991; 15(6): 
745–50.
Silverberg SJ, Clarke BL, Peacock M et al. 2014. Current issues in the 
presentation of asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Workshop 2014; 99: 3580–94.
08_51-B&L27_Pt8_Ch51.indd   837 25/10/2017   09:21Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy and function of the adrenal and other 
abdominal endocrine glands
 • The diagnosis and management of these endocrine 
disorders
 • The role of surgery in the management of these 
endocrine disorders
ADRENAL GLANDS
Anatomy
The weight of a normal adrenal gland is approximately 4 g. 
There are two distinct components to the gland: the inner 
adrenal medulla and the outer adrenal cortex (Figure 52.1). 
The adrenal glands are situated near the upper poles of the 
kidneys, in the retroperitoneum, within Gerota’s capsule. The 
right adrenal gland is located between the right liver lobe and 
the diaphragm, close to and partly behind the inferior vena 
cava (IVC). The left adrenal gland lies close to the upper 
pole of the left kidney and the renal pedicle. It is covered by 
the pancreatic tail and the spleen (Figure 52.2). The adrenal 
glands are well supplied by blood vessels. The arterial blood 
supply branches from the aorta and the diaphragmatic and 
renal arteries and varies considerably. A usually single large 
adrenal vein drains on the right side into the vena cava and 
on the left side into the renal vein.
Dumitru Gerota , 1867–1939, Professor of Surgery, Bucharest, Romania.
Figure 52.2 Position of the adrenal glands (hatched) in the retroper-
itoneum.
52Chapter
The adrenal glands and other abdominal 
endocrine disorders
Figure 52.1 Cross-section of a normal adrenal gland. The inner, very 
thin layer between the two dark lines (zona reticularis) is the adre-
nal medulla. (DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; DHEAS, dehydroepi-
androsterone sulphate.)
Zona glomerulosa secretes 
aldosterone
Adrenal medulla secretes adrenaline, 
noradrenaline and dopamine
Zona reticularis and 
fasciculata secrete DHEA, 
DHEAS and cortisol
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   838 25/10/2017   09:23Disorders of the adr enal cortex 839
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Embryology
The two functional parts, the cortex and the medulla, arise 
from different blastodermic layers: mesodermal cells form the 
adrenal cortex and neuroectodermal cells migrate to the cor -
tex from the neural crest during embryogenesis and form the 
adrenal medulla.
Histology
The adrenal cortex is arranged in a zonal configuration. The 
outer zona glomerulosa contains small, compact cells. The 
central zona fasciculata can be identified by larger, lipoid-rich 
cells, which are arranged in radial columns. Compact and pig-
mented cells characterise the inner zona reticularis. The adre-
nal medulla consists of a thin layer of large chromaffin cells, 
which synthesise, store and secrete catecholamine.
Function of the adrenal glands
The adrenal glands play a pivotal role in the response to 
stress. Catecholamines are secreted by the adrenal medulla 
and corticosteroids, aldosterone and cortisol are synthesised 
in the adrenal cortex (Figure 52.1). Cells of the adrenal 
medulla synthesise mainly adrenaline (epinephrine) but also 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and dopamine. These cate -
cholamines act as hormones as they are secreted directly into 
the circulation. Their effects, which are mediated through α 
and β receptors on target organs, include the cardiovascular 
system, resulting in an increase in blood pressure and heart 
rate; vasoconstriction of vessels in the splanchnic system and 
vasodilatation of vessels in the muscles; bronchodilatation; 
and increased glycogenolysis in liver and muscles, all neces-
sary for the flight/fight response. Cells of the zona glomeru -
losa produce aldosterone, which regulates sodium–potassium 
homeostasis. The target organs of aldosterone are the kid-
neys, the sweat and salivary glands and the intestinal mucosa. 
Aldosterone promotes sodium retention and potassium excre-
tion. The most important regulators of aldosterone secretion 
are the renin–angiotensin system and the serum potassium 
concentration. Renin produced by the juxtaglomerular cells in 
the kidneys acts on its substrate angiotensinogen to gen  erate 
angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is converted by angiotensin-  
converting enzyme (ACE) to the octapeptide angiotensin 
II, which is modified to angiotensin III. Both stimulate the 
secretion of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex. A decrease 
in renal blood flow (haemorrhage, dehydration, salt depletion, 
orthostasis, renal artery stenosis) or hyponatraemia increases 
renin secretion and leads to sodium retention, potassium 
excretion and an increase of plasma volume.
Cells of the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis synthe -
sise cortisol and the adrenal androgens dehydroepiandroste -
rone (DHEA) and its sulphate DHEAS. DHEA and DHEAS 
are precursors of androgens and are converted in peripheral 
tissues such as fat. Cortisol secretion is regulated by adreno -
corticotrophic hormone (ACTH), which is produced by the 
anterior pituitary gland. The hypothalamus controls ACTH 
secretion by secreting corticotrophin-releasing hormone 
(CRH). The serum cortisol level inhibits the release of CRH 
and ACTH via a closed-loop system (negative feedback 
loop).
Cortisol has numerous metabolic and immunological 
effects. It increases gluconeogenesis and lipolysis, decreases 
peripheral glucose utilisation, inhibits immunological 
response and, in time, reduces muscular mass. It affects fat 
distribution, wound healing and bone mineralisation; and 
alters mood (euphoria or, rarely, depression) and brain corti -
cal activity and alertness.
DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL 
CORTEX
Incidentaloma
Definition
An incidentaloma is an adrenal mass, detected incidentally 
by imaging studies conducted for other reasons, not known 
previously to have been present or causing symptoms.
Incidence
The prevalence of adrenal masses in autopsy studies ranges 
from 1.4% to 8.7% and increases with age. Incidentalomas 
may be detected on imaging studies in 1% of patients. More 
than 75% are non-functioning adenomas but Cushing’s 
adenomas, phaeochromocytomas, metastases, adrenocortical 
carcinomas and Conn’s tumours can all be found this way 
(Table 52.1).
Diagnosis
When an incidentaloma is identified, a complete history and 
clinical examination is required. Occasionally a previously 
occult endocrine disturbance will come to light. A biochem-
ical work-up for hormone excess and sometimes additional 
imaging studies are also needed. The main goal is to exclude a 
functioning or malignant adrenal tumour.
TABLE 52.1 Prevalence of non-functioning and 
functioning tumours in patients with incidentalomas.
Tumour Prevalence (%)
Non-functioning adenoma 78
Cushing’s adenoma 7
Adrenocortical carcinoma 4
Phaeochromocytoma 4
Myelolipoma 2
Cyst 2
Metastases 2
Conn’s adenoma 1
Harvey Williams Cushing , 1869–1939, Professor of Surgery, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   839 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE840
Hormonal evaluation includes:
 ● morning and midnight plasma cortisol measurements;
 ● a 1-mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test;
 ● 24-hour urinary cortisol excretion;
 ● 12- or 24-hour urinary excretion of metanephrines or 
plasma-free metanephrines;
 ● serum potassium, plasma aldosterone and plasma renin 
activity;
 ● serum DHEAS, testosterone or 17-hydroxyestradiol (viril-
ising or feminising tumour).
Cross-sectional imaging such as computed tomography 
(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be per -
formed in all patients with adrenal masses. The likelihood of 
an adrenal mass being an adrenocortical carcinoma increases 
with the size of the mass (25% >4 cm). Adrenal metastases 
are likely in patients with a history of cancer elsewhere and 
the sole indication for biopsy of an adrenal mass is to confirm 
a suspected metastasis from a distant primary site.
Pathology
The most frequent cause of PHA with hypokalaemia is a uni-
lateral adrenocortical adenoma (Figure 52.3). In 20–40% 
of cases, bilateral micronodular hyperplasia is present. Rare 
causes of PHA are bilateral macronodular hyperplasia, glu -
cocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism or adrenocorti -
cal carcinoma. In the subset of patients with normokalaemic 
PHA, 70% have hyperplasia and 30% unilateral adenoma. 
Somatic mutations at the KCNJ5 gene coding for the potas-
sium channel Kir3.4 are present in aldosterone-producing 
adenomas and a germline KCNJ5 mutation can cause a very 
rare autosomal dominant and early-onset form of PHA, char-
acterized by bilateral adrenal hyperplasia.
Clinical features
Most patients are between 30 and 50 years of age with a 
female predominance. Apart from hypertension, patients 
complain of non-specific symptoms: headache, muscle weak -
ness, cramps, neurological events, polyuria, polydypsia and 
nocturia.
Diagnosis
The key feature of the biochemical diagnosis is the assessment 
of the aldosterone to plasma renin activity ratio. Hypokalae-
mia may be present. Antihypertensive and diuretic therapy, 
which cause hypokalaemia and influence the renin–angio -
tensin–aldosterone system, have to be discontinued. Once 
the biochemical diagnosis is confirmed, MRI or CT should 
be performed to distinguish unilateral from bilateral disease. 
Conn’s adenomas usually measure between 1 and 2 cm and 
are detected by CT with a sensitivity of 80–90% (Figure 
52.4). Micronodular changes and small adenomas are often 
underdiagnosed. An apparent unilateral mass could be a 
non-functioning tumour in a patient with bilateral micronod-
ular hyperplasia. Selective adrenal vein catheterisation can 
help before a decision on non-surgical or surgical treatment is 
Treatment
The treatment of functional adrenal tumours is described 
below. Any non-functioning adrenal tumour greater than 
4 cm in diameter and smaller tumours that increase in size 
over time should undergo surgical resection. Non-functioning 
tumours smaller than 4 cm should be followed-up after 6, 12 
and 24 months by imaging (MRI) and hormonal evaluation. 
If the tumour remains non-functioning and stable in size, sur-
veillance can be discontinued. Repeated frequent imaging 
using ionising radiation can lead to dangerous exposure to 
radiation and should be avoided.
Primary hyperaldosteronism – 
Conn’s syndrome
Incidence
Primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA) is defined by hyperten -
sion, as a result of hypersecretion of aldosterone. In PHA, 
plasma renin activity is suppressed. Among patients with 
hypertension the incidence of PHA is approximately 2%. 
Recent studies have revealed that up to 12% of hypertensive 
patients have PHA with normal potassium levels, thus potas-
sium levels are an inconsistent diagnostic feature of this dis-
ease, and cannot be relied on to confirm or exclude it.
Summary box 52.1
Adrenal gland biopsy
●● Never biopsy an adrenal mass until phaeochromocytoma has 
been biochemically excluded
●● The indication for adrenal gland biopsy is to confirm a 
suspected adrenal gland metastasis
Jerome William Conn , 1907–1981, Professor of Internal Medicine, The University of Michigan, Michigan, MI, USA.
Figure 52.3 A Conn’s adenoma (arrow) of the left adrenal gland; note 
the V-shaped normal adrenal tissue.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   840 25/10/2017   09:23Disorders of the adr enal cortex 841
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
made. During selective adrenal vein catheterisation, samples 
are obtained from the vena cava and from both adrenal veins 
and the aldosterone to cortisol ratio (ACR) is determined in 
each sample. A significant difference in the ACR ratio on one 
side indicates unilateral disease. In patients under age 40 with 
a biochemical diagnosis of Conns syndrome, a unilateral adre-
nal mass almost invariably represents the cause and selective 
adrenal vein sampling can be avoided in such cases.
Treatment
The first-line therapy for PHA with bilateral hyperplasia is 
medical treatment with spironolactone. In most cases supple-
mental antihypertensive medication is necessary to achieve 
satisfactory control of blood pressure.
Unilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy is an effective 
therapy in patients with clear evidence of unilateral or asym-
metrical bilateral disease. A subtotal adrenal resection can be 
considered in the case of a typical single Conn’s adenoma. In 
10–30% of patients who undergo an adrenalectomy, hyper -
tension persists despite adequate diagnostic work-up and 
treatment, allbeit at a lower level and requiring fewer medi -
cations to control it.
Cushing’s syndrome
Definition
Hypersecretion of cortisol caused by endogenous production 
of corticosteroids is known as Cushing’s syndrome. It can be 
either ACTH-dependent or ACTH-independent in origin. 
The most common cause (85%) of ACTH-dependent Cush -
ing’s syndrome is Cushing’s disease resulting from a pituitary 
adenoma that secretes an excessive amount of ACTH. Ecto-
pic ACTH-producing tumours (small cell lung cancer, foregut 
carcinoid) and CRH-producing tumours (medullary thyroid 
carcinoma, neuroendocrine pancreatic tumour) are more 
infrequent causes of ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome. 
Excessive or prolonged administration of cortisol-like drugs 
will produce the same clinical picture.
In about 15% of patients, an ACTH-independent Cush-
ing’s syndrome (low ACTH levels) is caused by a unilateral 
adrenocortical adenoma. Adrenocortical carcinoma and 
bilateral macronodular or micronodular hyperplasia represent 
rare causes of hypercortisolism.
Clinical symptoms
The clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome are shown in 
Summary box 52.2 . The typical patient is characterised by a 
facial plethora, a buffalo hump and a moon face in combina -
tion with hypertension, diabetes and central obesity (Figures 
52.5 and 52.6). However, clinical signs can be minimal or 
absent in patients with subclinical Cushing’s syndrome.
Figure 52.4 Computed tomography scan of a Conn’s adenoma of 
the left adrenal gland (arrowheads).
Figure 52.5 A 34-year-old patient with Cushing’ s syndrome whose 
symptoms included thickening of the face, weight gain and acne. 
Today patients with Cushing’ s syndrome rarely have the full-blown 
appearance as shown in older textbooks.
Figure 52.6 Discrete central obesity, ecchymosis and fragile skin in 
a patient with Cushing’s syndrome.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   841 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE842
Preoperative management
Patients with Cushing’s syndrome are at an increased risk of 
hospital-acquired infection, thromboembolic and myocardial 
complications. Therefore, prophylactic anticoagulation and 
the use of prophylactic antibiotics are essential. Cushing-  
associated diseases (diabetes, hypertension) must be controlled 
by medical therapy preoperatively.
Postoperative management
After unilateral adrenalectomy supplemental cortisol should 
be given postoperatively because the contralateral gland will 
be suppressed. In total, 15  mg/h is required parenterally for 
the first 12 hours followed by a daily dose of 100  mg for 3 
days, which is gradually reduced thereafter. After unilateral 
adrenalectomy, the contralateral suppressed gland needs up to 
1 year to recover adequate function. A synacthen test to eval-
uate adrenal fuction prior to stopping cortisol supplements 
is advised. In 10% of patients with Cushing’s disease who 
undergo a bilateral adrenalectomy after failed pituitary sur -
gery, the pituitary adenoma causes Nelson’s syndrome due to 
continued ACTH secretion at high levels, causing hyperpig -
mentation as a result of chemical synergies between ACTH 
and melanocyte-stimulating hormone.
Adrenal metastases
Adrenal metastases are discovered at autopsy in one-third of 
patients with malignant disease (less frequently during life). 
In declining frequency, the most common primary tumours 
are breast, lung, renal, gastric, pancreatic, ovarian and col -
orectal cancer. In selected circumstances an adrenalectomy 
is appropriate, for example if it is the sole site of metastatic 
disease.
Diagnosis
 ● Morning and midnight plasma cortisol levels are elevated, 
usually with loss of diurnal rhythm.
 ● Dexamethasone fails to suppress 24-hour urinary cortisol 
excretion.
 ● Serum ACTH levels discriminate ACTH-dependent 
from ACTH-independent disease.
Elevated or normal ACTH levels provide evidence for an 
ACTH-producing pituitary tumour (85%) or ectopic ACTH 
production. Therefore, in patients with elevated ACTH, 
MRI of the pituitary gland must be performed. If MRI is 
negative and additional venous sampling from the inferior 
petrosal sinus has excluded a pituitary microadenoma, a CT 
scan of the chest and abdomen is warranted to detect an ecto-
pic ACTH-producing tumour. In patients with suppressed 
ACTH levels, a CT or MRI scan is performed to assess the 
adrenal glands.
Subclinical Cushing’s syndrome is diagnosed if clinical 
symptoms are absent in the face of abnormal cortisol secre -
tion.
Treatment
Medical therapy with metyrapone or ketoconazole reduces 
steroid synthesis and secretion and can be used to prepare 
patients with severe hypercortisolism preoperatively or if 
surgery is not possible. ACTH-producing pituitary tumours 
are treated by trans-sphenoidal resection or radiotherapy. If 
an ectopic ACTH source is localised, resection will correct 
hypercortisolism.
A unilateral adenoma is treated by adrenalectomy. In 
cases of bilateral ACTH-independent disease (Figure 52.7), 
bilateral adrenalectomy is the primary treatment. Patients 
with an ectopic ACTH-dependent Cushing’s syndrome and 
an irresectable or unlocalised primary tumour should be con -
sidered for bilateral adrenalectomy as this controls hormone 
excess. Subclinical Cushing’s syndrome caused by unilateral 
adenoma can be treated by unilateral adrenalectomy.
Summary box 52.2
Clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome
●● Weight gain/central obesity
●● Diabetes
●● Hirsutism
●● Hypertension
●● Skin changes (abdominal striae, facial plethora, ecchymosis, 
acne)
●● Muscle weakness
●● Menstrual irregularity/impotence
●● Depression/mania
●● Osteoporosis
●● Hypokalaemia
Figure 52.7 Bilateral asymmetrical hyperplasia of the adrenal glands 
(arrows) in a patient with Cushing’s syndrome.
Don H Nelson , 1925–2010, Professor of Medicine, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   842 25/10/2017   09:23Disorders of the adr enal cortex 843
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Adrenocortical carcinoma
Incidence
Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy with 
an incidence of 1–2 cases per 1  000 000 population per year 
and a variable but generally poor prognosis. A slight female 
predominance is observed (1.5:1). The age distribution is 
bimodal with a first peak in childhood and a second between 
the fourth and fifth decades.
Pathology
The differentiation between benign and malignant adrenal 
tumours is challenging, even in the hands of an experienced 
pathologist. Criteria for malignancy are tumour size, the pres-
ence of necrosis or haemorrhage and microscopic features such 
as capsular or vascular invasion. These should be assessed in 
terms of a microscopic diagnostic score. Additional informa -
tion is provided by immunohistochemistry. The macroscopic 
features are commonly multinodularity and heterogeneous 
structure (Figure 52.8) with haemorrhage and necrosis.
Clinical presentation
Approximately 60% of patients present with evidence of corti-
sol excess (Cushing’s syndrome). Patients with non-function-
ing tumours frequently complain of abdominal discomfort or 
back pain caused by large tumours. However, with increasing 
use of abdominal imaging, a growing number of adrenocor -
tical carcinomas are detected incidentally. Adrenal tumours 
secreting more than one hormone in excess, or feminising/
masculanising steroids are likely to be malignant.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic work-up should include measurements of 
DHEAS, cortisol and catecholamines to exclude a phaeo -
chromocytoma and a dexamethasone suppression test. MRI 
and CT are equally effective in imaging ACC (Figure 52.9). 
MRI angiography is useful to exclude tumour thrombus in 
the vena cava. As distant metastases are frequently present, 
a preoperative staging CT scan is recommended. The World 
Health Organization classification of 2004 is based on the 
McFarlane classification and defines four stages: tumours 
<5 cm (stage I) or >5 cm (stage II), locally invasive tumours 
(III) or tumours with distant metastases (IV). Functioning 
tumours tend to do worse than non-functioning, but have the 
advantage of a serum marker that can be used for follow-up 
and disease monitoring.
Treatment
Complete tumour resection (R0) is associated with favour -
able survival and should be attempted whenever possible. In 
order to prevent tumour spillage and implantation metasta -
ses, the capsule must not be damaged. En bloc resection with 
removal of locally involved organs is often required and in 
case of tumour thrombus in the vena cava, thrombectomy is 
needed. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy is associated with a high 
incidence of local recurrence and cannot be recommended. 
Tumour debulking plays a role in functioning tumours to con-
trol hormone excess.
Patients can be treated postoperatively with mitotane 
alone or in combination with etoposide, doxorubicin and 
cisplatin. Adjuvant radiotherapy may reduce the rate of 
local recurrence. After surgery, restaging every 3 months 
is required as the risk of tumour relapse is high. Prognosis 
depends on the stage of disease and complete removal of 
the tumour. Patients with stage I or II disease have a 5-year 
survival rate of 25%, whereas patients with stage III and 
stage IV disease have 5-year survival rates of 6% and 0% 
respectively. Recently, genetic sequencing of adrenocorti -
cal tumours has identified two distinct molecular subgroups 
that characterise aggressive and indolent ACCs and provide 
robust prognostic information in addition to pathological 
and MacFarlane staging.
Figure 52.8 Adrenocortical carcinoma that caused Cushing’s syn -
drome and virilisation in a female patient.
Figure 52.9 Magnetic resonance imaging of adr enocortical carci -
noma (arrow) in a patient with cortisol and testosterone excess.
en bloc  is French for ‘in a block’.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   843 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE844
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(adrenogenital syndrome)
Virilisation and adrenal insufficiency in children are pathog -
nomonic of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). This is 
an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a variety of enzy -
matic defects in the synthetic pathway of cortisol and other 
steroids from cholesterol. The most frequent defect (95%) is 
the 21-hydroxylase deficiency , which has an incidence of 1 
in 5000 live births. Excessive ACTH secretion is caused by 
the loss of cortisol and this leads to an increase in androgenic 
cortisol precursors and to CAH. CAH may present in girls 
at birth with ambiguous genitalia or as late-onset disease at 
puberty. Hypertension and short stature, caused by the pre-
mature epiphyseal plate closure, are common signs. Affected 
patients are treated by replacement of cortisol and with 
fludrocortisone. Large hyperplastic adrenals may need to be 
removed if symptomatic.
Adrenal insufficiency
Primary adrenal insufficiency is caused by the loss of function 
of the adrenal cortex. It was first described by Thomas Addi -
son in 1855. An early diagnosis is a clinical challenge, even 
today. Symptoms are only evident when about 90% of the 
adrenal cortex is destroyed. Secondary adrenal insufficiency is 
caused by a deficiency of pituitary ACTH secretion. Tertiary 
adrenal deficiency is provoked by a loss of hypothalamic CRH 
secretion and is caused by therapeutic glucocorticoid admin -
istration, brain tumour, trauma or irradiation.
unless immediately treated. Because of intestinal symptoms 
and fever, the so-called Addisonian crisis is often misdiag -
nosed as an acute abdominal condition.
Chronic adrenal insufficiency
When symptoms develop over time, patients present with 
anorexia, weakness and nausea. As a result of negative feed -
back, ACTH and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) levels 
increase and cause hyperpigmentation of the skin and oral 
mucosa. Hypotension, hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and 
hypoglycaemia are commonly observed. The diagnosis of 
adrenal insufficiency is made using the ACTH stimulation 
test. Basal ACTH levels are found to be high with cortisol 
levels decreased. There is no rise in cortisol levels following 
the exogenous administration of ACTH (synacthen test).
Treatment
If a patient displays features of adrenal insufficiency, treat -
ment must immediately be commenced, before awaiting the 
biochemical diagnosis. Initial blood samples can be used for 
later determinations of ACTH and cortisol levels. In addition 
to intravenous administration of hydrocortisone 100 mg every 
6 hours, 3 litres of saline is given in 6 hours under careful car-
diovascular monitoring. Concomitant infections, which are 
frequently present, require treatment.
Chronic adrenal insufficiency is treated by replacement 
therapy with daily oral hydrocortisone (10 mg/m2 body surface 
area) and fludrocortisone (0.1 mg). Patients must be advised 
about the need to take lifelong glucocorticoid and mineralo -
corticoid replacement therapy. To prevent an Addisonian cri-
sis, patients must be aware of the need to increase the dose in 
case of illness or stress. If patients with adrenal insufficiency 
are scheduled for surgery, appropriate steroid cover must be 
administrated.
DISORDERS OF THE ADRENAL 
MEDULLA AND NEURAL CREST-
DERIVED TISSUE
Phaeochromocytoma and 
paraganglioma
Definition
These are tumours of the adrenal medulla and sympathetic 
ganglia that are derived from chromaffin cells and most com-
monly produce supraphysiological levels of circulating cate-
cholamines.
Aetiology
The prevalence of phaeochromocytoma in patients with 
hypertension is 0.1–0.6% with an overall prevalence of 
0.05% in autopsy series. In total, 4% of incidentalomas are 
Thomas Addison , 1795–1860, physician, Guy’s Hospital, London, England, described the effects of disease of the suprarenal capsules in 1852.
Caesar Peter Moller Boeck , 1845–1917, Professor of Medicine, The University of Oslo, Norway.
Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson , 1878–1936, Professor of Neurology, King’s College Hospital, London, UK, described this condition in 1912.
Rupert Waterhouse , 1873–1958, physician, The Royal United Hospital, Bath, UK, described this syndrome in 1911.
Carl Friderichsen , 1886–1979, Medical Superintendent, Sundby Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, gave his account of the syndrome in 1918.
Summary box 52.3
Diseases associated with adrenal insufficiency
●● Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome
●● Tuberculosis
●● After bilateral adrenalectomy
●● Haemorrhage
●● Metastases
●● Systemic diseases (Boeck’s disease, amyloidosis, Wilson’s 
disease)
●● Hereditary diseases (e.g. adrenoleukodystrophia, 
adrenogenital syndrome)
●● Human immunodeficiency virus infection
Acute adrenal insufficiency
Acute adrenal insufficiency usually presents as shock in 
combination with fever, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
hypoglycaemia and electrolyte imbalance. W aterhouse–
Friderichsen syndrome is a bilateral adrenal infarction 
associated with meningococcal sepsis and is rapidly fatal 
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   844 25/10/2017   09:23Disorders of the adr enal medulla and neural crest-derived tissue 845
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
phaeochromocytomas. Sporadic phaeochromocytomas occur 
around the fourth decade, whereas patients with hereditary 
forms are diagnosed earlier. Phaeochromocytoma is known as 
the ‘10% tumour’ as 10% of tumours are inherited, 10% are 
extra-adrenal, 10% are malignant, 10% are bilateral and 10% 
occur in children. With the recent advent of detailed genetic 
predisposition tests, however, the incidence of hereditary 
phaeochromocytomas has been shown to be higher.
Hereditary phaeochromocytomas occur in several tumour 
syndromes:
 ● Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) : an auto-
somal dominant inherited disorder that is caused by acti -
vating germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene.
 ● Familial paraganglioma (PG) syndrome: glomus tumours 
of the carotid body and extra-adrenal paraganglioma are 
characteristic in this hereditary tumour syndrome, which 
is caused by germline mutations within the succinate 
dehydrogenase complex subunit B ( SDHB) SDHD and 
SDHC genes.
 ● von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) syndrome: those affected can 
develop early-onset bilateral kidney tumours, phaeochro-
mocytomas, cerebellar and spinal haemangioblastomas 
and pancreatic tumours. Patients have a germline muta -
tion in the VHL gene.
 ● Neurofibromatosis (NF) type 1: phaeochromocytomas 
in combination with fibromas on the skin and mucosae 
(‘café-au-lait’ skin spots) are indicative of a germline 
mutation in the NF1 gene.
Pathology
Phaeochromocytomas are greyish-pink on the cut surface 
and are usually highly vascularised. Areas of haemorrhage or 
necrosis are often observed (Figure 52.10). Microscopically, 
tumour cells are polygonal but the configuration varies con-
siderably. The differentiation between malignant and benign 
tumours is difficult, except when metastases are present. An 
increased PASS (phaeochromocytoma of the adrenal gland 
scale score), a high number of Ki-67-positive cells, vascular 
invasion or a breached capsule all lean more towards malig-
nant rather than benign.
Phaeochromocytomas may also produce calcitonin, 
ACTH, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) and para -
thyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP). In patients with 
MEN 2, the onset of phaeochromocytoma is preceded by 
adrenomedullary hyperplasia, sometimes bilateral. Phaeo -
chromocytoma is rarely malignant in MEN 2.
Clinical features
Symptoms and signs are caused by catecholamine excess 
and are typically intermittent (Table 52.2). In total, 90% of 
patients with the combination of headache, palpitations and 
sweating in the presence of an adrenal tumour have a phae -
ochromocytoma. Paroxysms may be precipitated by physi -
cal training, induction of general anaesthesia and numerous 
drugs and agents (contrast media, tricyclic antidepressive 
drugs, metoclopramide and opiates). Hypertension may occur 
continuously, be intermittent or absent. A subset of patients 
are asymptomatic. More than 25% of apparently sporadic 
phaeochromocytomas are caused by germline mutations in 
the RET, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD and NF1 genes; genetic test-
ing for these and other genes is therefore recommended, par -
ticularly in those patients aged under 50 years.
Diagnosis
The first step in the diagnosis of a phaeochromocytoma is the 
confirmation of excessive catecholamine levels in the patient 
either by the measurement of adrenaline and noradrenaline 
breakdown products, metanephrine and normetanephrine 
level, in a 12 or 24-hour urine collection, (levels that exceed 
the normal range by 2–40 times will be found in affected 
patients) or by determination of plasma-free metanephrine 
and normetanephrine levels. Biochemical tests should be 
performed at least twice. The biochemical diagnosis is then 
followed by localisation of the phaeochromocytoma. MRI 
is preferred because contrast media used for CT scans can 
provoke paroxysms. Classically, phaeochromocytomas show 
Eugen von Hippel , 1867–1939, Professor of Ophthalmology, Göttingen, Germany.
Arvid Lindau , 1892–1958, Professor of Pathology, Lund, Sweden.
Figure 52.10 Gross appearance of a phaeochromocytoma.
TABLE 52.2 Clinical signs of phaeochromocytoma.
Symptoms Prevalence (%)
Hypertension 80–90
Paroxysmal 50–60
Continuous 30
Headache 60–90
Sweating 50–70
Palpitation 50–70
Pallor 40–45
Weight loss 20–40
Hyperglycaemia 40
Nausea 20–40
Psychological effects 20–40
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   845 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE846
a ‘Swiss cheese’ configuration (Figure 52.11 ). 123I-MIBG 
(metaiodobenzylguanidine) single-photon emission com -
puted tomography (SPECT) will identify about 90% of pri -
mary tumours and is essential for the detection of multiple 
extra-adrenal tumours and metastases (Figure 52.12). Posi-
tron emission tomography (PET) scanning using fluorodeox -
yglucose (FDG) or dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) is yet 
more sensitive in detecting metastatic foci.
Treatment
Laparoscopic resection is now routine in the treatment of 
phaeochromocytoma. If the tumour is larger than 8–10  cm 
or radiological signs of malignancy are detected, an open 
approach should be considered.
PREOPERATIVE
Once a phaeochromocytoma has been diagnosed, an α- 
adrenoreceptor blocker (phenoxybenzamine) is used to block 
the effects of catecholamine excess and its consequences 
during surgery. With adequate medical pretreatment, the 
perioperative mortality rate has decreased from 20–45% to 
less than 3%. A dose of 20  mg of phenoxybenzamine ini -
tially should be increased daily by 10  mg until a daily dose of 
100–160 mg is achieved and the patient reports symptomatic 
postural hypotension. Additional β-blockade is required if 
tachycardia or arrhythmias develop; this should not be intro-
duced until the patient is α-blocked.
With adequate α-blockade preoperatively, anaesthe-
sia should not be more hazardous than in patients with a 
non-functioning adrenal tumour; however, in some patients, 
dramatic changes in heart rate and blood pressure may occur 
and require sudden administration of pressor or vasodilator 
agents. A central venous catheter and invasive arterial mon -
itoring are used. Special attention is required when the adre -
nal vein is ligated as a sudden drop in blood pressure may 
occur. The infusion of large volumes of fluid or administration 
of noradrenaline can be necessary to correct postoperative 
hypotension in the presence of unopposed α-blockade.
POSTOPERATIVE
Patients should be observed for 24 hours in the intensive care 
(ICU) or high dependancy unit as hypovolaemia and hypo-
glycaemia may occur. Lifelong yearly biochemical tests should 
be performed to identify recurrent, metastatic or metachro -
nous phaeochromocytoma.
Figure 52.11  Magnetic resonance imaging of a sporadic phaeo -
chromocytoma of the left adrenal gland (arrowheads).
Figure 52.12 Meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) single-photon emis-
sion computed tomography scan of a phaeochromocytoma of the left 
adrenal gland (arrow) in the same patient as in Figure 52.11.
Malignant phaeochromocytoma
Definition
Approximately 10% of phaeochromocytomas are malignant. 
This rate is higher in extra-adrenal tumours (paragangliomas). 
The diagnosis of malignancy implies metastases of chromaffin 
tissue, most commonly to lymph nodes, bone and liver.
Treatment
Surgical excision is the only chance for cure. Even in patients 
with metastatic disease, tumour debulking can be considered 
to reduce the tumour burden and to control the catechol-
amine excess. Symptomatic treatment can be obtained with 
α-blockers. Mitotane should be started as adjuvant or palli-
ative treatment. Treatment with 131I-MIBG or combination 
chemotherapy has resulted in a partial response in 30% and 
an improvement of symptoms in 80% of patients. The natural 
history is highly variable with a 5-year survival rate of less 
than 50%.
Phaeochromocytoma in pregnancy
Phaeochromocytomas in pregnancy may be silent and present 
as a hypertensive emergency, may mimic an amnion infection 
Summary box 52.4
Phaeochromocytoma
●● Obtain a secure biochemical diagnosis
●● Evaluate family history, refer to genetics if <50 years old
●● Diagnosis confirmed, treat with α-blockers
●● Plan surgical excision
●● Yearly lifelong follow-up
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   846 25/10/2017   09:23Surgery of the adr enal glands 847
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
resection in responding tumours and myeloablative stem cell 
rescue. Patients assigned to the low-risk, intermediate-risk 
and high-risk groups have overall 3-year survival rates of 90%, 
70–90% and 30%, respectively.
Ganglioneuroma
Definition
A ganglioneuroma is a benign neoplasm that arises from neu-
ral crest tissue. Ganglioneuromas can occur in the adrenal 
medulla and are characterised by mature sympathetic gan -
glion cells and Schwann cells in a fibrous stroma.
Clinical features
Ganglioneuroma is found in all age groups but is more com -
mon before the age of 60. Ganglioneuromas occur anywhere 
along the paravertebral sympathetic plexus and in the adrenal 
medulla (30%). Most often they are identified incidentally by 
CT or MRI performed for other indications.
Treatment
Treatment is by surgical excision, laparoscopic when adrenal-
ectomy is indicated.
SURGERY OF THE ADRENAL 
GLANDS
Since its introduction in the 1990s, laparoscopic or retroper -
itoneoscopic adrenalectomy has become the ‘gold standard’ 
in the resection of adrenal tumours, except for tumours with 
signs of malignancy. The more popular approach is the lapa -
roscopic transperitoneal approach, which offers a better view 
of the adrenal region than open surgery. The advantage of 
the retroperitoneoscopic approach is the minimal dissection 
required by this extra-abdominal procedure. In the case of 
small, bilateral tumours or in patients with hereditary tumour 
syndromes a subtotal resection is warranted, to avoid steroid 
dependence. The mortality rate ranges from 0% to 2% in spe-
cialised centres.
An open approach should be considered if radiological 
signs, distant metastases, large tumours (>8–10 cm) or a dis -
tinct hormonal pattern suggest malignancy.
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
Knowledge of the anatomy of the adrenal region is essential 
as anatomical landmarks guide the surgeon during operation. 
If these landmarks are respected, injury to the vena cava or 
renal vein, the pancreatic tail or the spleen can be avoided. 
Careful haemostasis is essential as small amounts of blood can 
impair the surgeon’s view. To prevent tumour spillage, direct 
grasping of the adrenal tissue/tumour has to be avoided.
syndrome or pre-eclampsia. Without adequate α-blockade, 
mother and unborn child are threatened by hypertensive 
crisis during delivery. In the first and second trimesters the 
patient should be scheduled for laparoscopic adrenalectomy 
after adequate α-blockade; the risk of a miscarriage during 
surgery is high. In the third trimester, elective caesarean with 
delayed consecutive adrenalectomy 6 weeks later should be 
performed. The maternal mortality rate is 50% when a phae-
ochromocytoma remains undiagnosed.
Neuroblastoma
Definition
A neuroblastoma is a malignant tumour that is derived from 
the sympathetic nervous system in the adrenal medulla (38%) 
or from any site along the sympathetic chain in the paraver -
tebral sites of the abdomen (30%), chest (20%) and, rarely, 
the neck or pelvis.
Pathology
Neuroblastomas have a pale and grey surface, are encap -
sulated and show areas with calcification. With increased 
tumour size, necrosis and haemorrhage may be detected. They 
are characterised by the presence of immature cells derived 
from the neuroectoderm of the sympathetic nervous system. 
Mature cells are found only in ganglioneuroblastomas.
Clinical features
Predominantly newborn infants and young children (<5 years 
of age) are affected. Symptoms are caused by tumour growth 
or by bone metastases. Patients present with a mass in the 
abdomen, neck or chest, proptosis, bone pain, painless bluish 
skin metastases, weakness or paralysis. Metastatic disease is 
present in 70% of patients at presentation.
Diagnosis
Biochemical evaluation should include urinary excretion 
(24-hour urine) of vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), homovan -
illic acid (HVA), dopamine and noradenaline, as increased 
levels are present in about 80% of patients. Accurate stag -
ing requires CT/MRI of the chest and abdomen, a bone scan, 
bone marrow aspiration and core biopsies as well as an MIBG 
scan. Staging is established according to the International 
Neuroblastoma Staging System (INSS).
Treatment
Prognosis can be predicted by the tumour stage and the age 
at diagnosis. Patients are classified as low, intermediate or 
high risk. Low-risk patients are treated by surgery alone (the 
addition of 6–12 weeks of chemotherapy is optional) whereas 
intermediate-risk patients are treated by surgery with adju -
vant multiagent chemotherapy (carboplatin, cyclophospha-
mide, etoposide, doxorubicin). High-risk patients receive 
high-dose multiagent chemotherapy followed by surgical 
Theodor Schwann , 1810–1882, Professor of Anatomy, Louvain (1839–1848), and later at Liège (1852–1880), described the neurilemma in 1839.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   847 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE848
Right adrenalectomy
The patient is positioned right side up, with table brake. 
Three ports are used to start. The dissection starts at the 
level of the periadrenal fat using careful coagulation and the 
peritoneum should be divided 2  cm below the edge of the 
liver from medial (IVC) to the lateral abdominal wall. This 
flap of peritoneum can then be used to retract the liver up 
and off the adrenal. A fourth port may be useful to hold the 
liver up. The gland is identified and mobilised gently, and 
the vein is secured with a clip or using one of the available 
energy devices; the gland is removed in a plastic catch bag 
(Figure 52.13).
Left adrenalectomy
With the patient positioned left side up, mobilisation of the 
spleen will displace it and the pancreatic tail medially. The 
incision of Gerota’s fascia is followed by identification of the 
adrenal vein, which runs into the renal vein in the space 
between the medial aspect of the kidney and the posterior 
aspect of the pancreatic tail. The resection is completed by 
mobilising the adrenal gland at the level of the periadrenal 
fat. Remove the gland in a bag and close the 3 port sites after 
infiltrating each with local anaesthesia.
Retroperitoneoscopic adrenalectomy
The first port is placed at the distal end of the 12th rib with 
the patient in the prone position. After a digital dissection 
into the retroperitoneum, Gerota’s fascia is displaced ven -
trally. The right adrenal vein is covered by the retrocaval 
posterior aspect of the adrenal gland. The left adrenal vein 
is usually located at the medial inferior pole of the adrenal 
gland. High inflation pressures allow bloodless dissection, 
effectively tamponading the veins. Being outside the abdom-
inal cavity affords an excellent view.
Open adrenalectomy
An open adrenalectomy is almost exclusively performed 
when a malignant adrenal tumour is suspected. On the right 
side the hepatic flexure of the colon is mobilised and the right 
liver lobe is cranially retracted to achieve an optimal expo -
sure of the IVC and the adrenal gland. On the left side the 
adrenal gland can be exposed after mobilisation of the splenic 
flexure of the colon, through the transverse mesocolon or 
through the gastrocolic ligament. The remaining dissection 
is the same as in laparoscopic adrenalectomy. A resection of 
regional lymph nodes is recommended in malignant adrenal 
tumours and should include resection of the tissue between 
the renal pedicle and the diaphragm.
PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE 
TUMOURS
Introduction
Pancreatic endocrine tumours (PETs) represent an important 
subset of pancreatic neoplasms. They account for 5% of all 
clinically detected pancreatic tumours. They consist of single 
or multiple, benign or malignant neoplasms and are associ-
ated in 10–20% of cases with multiple endocrine neoplasia 
type 1 (MEN 1). PETs present as either functional tumours, 
causing specific hormonal syndromes, or non-functional 
tumours, with symptoms similar to those in patients with 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. This section focuses on insulino-
mas, gastrinomas and non-functioning tumours because they 
represent 90% of all PETs (Table 52.3).
Function of the endocrine pancreas
The endocrine cells of the pancreas are grouped in the islets 
of Langerhans, which constitute approximately 1–2% of the 
mass of the pancreas (Figure 52.14). There are about one 
million islets in a healthy adult human pancreas and their 
combined weight is 1–1.5 g. There are four main types of cell 
in the islets of Langerhans, which can be classified according 
to their secretions:
 ● beta cells producing insulin (65–80% of the islet cells);
 ● alpha cells producing glucagon (15–20%);
 ● delta cells producing somatostatin (3–10%);
 ● pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells containing polypeptide 
(1%).
Insulinoma
Definition
This is an insulin-producing tumour of the pancreas causing 
the clinical scenario know as Whipple’s triad, i.e. symptoms of 
hypoglycaemia after fasting or exercise, plasma glucose levels 
<2.8 mmol/L and relief of symptoms on intravenous adminis-
tration of glucose.
AT
VC
Figure 52.13  Laparoscopic view during a right adr enalectomy. 
Arrow indicates the adrenal vein. AT, adrenal tumour; VC, vena cava.
Paul Langerhans , 1847–1888, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Freiberg, Germany.
George Hoyt Whipple , 1878–1976, Professor of Pathology, The University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA, described this disease in 1907. He shared the 1934 
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with George Richards Minot and William Parry Murphy ‘for their discoveries concerning liver therapy against anaemias’.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   848 25/10/2017   09:23Pancreatic endocrine tumours 849
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Incidence
Insulinomas are the most frequent of all the functioning PETs 
with a reported incidence of 2–4 cases per million population 
per year. Insulinomas have been diagnosed in all age groups, 
with the highest incidence found in the fourth to the sixth 
decades. Women seem to be slightly more frequently affected.
Pathology
The aetiology and pathogenesis of insulinomas are unknown. 
No risk factors have been associated with these tumours. Vir-
tually all insulinomas are located in the pancreas and tumours 
are equally distributed within the gland. Approximately 90% 
are solitary and about 10% are multiple and associated with 
MEN 1 syndrome.
Prognosis and predictive factors
No markers are available that reliably predict the biological 
behaviour of an insulinoma. Approximately 10% are malig-
nant. Insulinomas of <2 cm in diameter without signs of vas -
cular invasion or metastases are considered benign.
Clinical features
Insulinomas are characterised by fasting hypoglycaemia and 
neuroglycopenic symptoms. The episodic nature of the hypo-
glycaemic attacks is caused by intermittent insulin secretion 
by the tumour. This leads to central nervous system symp -
toms such as diplopia, blurred vision, confusion, abnormal 
behaviour and amnesia. Some patients develop loss of con -
sciousness and coma. The release of catecholamines produces 
symptoms such as sweating, weakness, hunger, tremor, nausea, 
anxiety and palpitations.
Biochemical diagnosis
A fasting test that may last for up to 72 hours is regarded 
as the most sensitive test. Usually, insulin, proinsulin, C-  
peptide and blood glucose are measured in 1- to 2-hour inter-
vals to demonstrate inappropriately high secretion of insulin 
in relation to blood glucose. About 80% of insulinomas are 
diagnosed by this test, most of them in the first 24 hours. Ele-
vated C-peptide levels demonstrate the endogenous secretion 
of insulin and exclude factitious hypoglycaemia caused by 
insulin injection.
Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of hypoglycaemia includes hor -
monal deficiencies, hepatic insufficiency, medication, drugs 
and enzyme defects. Occasionally, differentiating insulinoma 
from other causes of hypoglycaemia can be difficult. Nesidio -
blastosis is a rare disorder, mainly encountered in children, 
which is characterised by replacement of normal pancreatic 
islets by diffuse hyperplasia of islet cells.
Medical treatment of insulinoma
Medical management is reserved only for patients who are 
unable or unwilling to undergo surgical treatment or for 
unresectable metastatic disease. Diazoxide suppresses insulin 
secretion by direct action on the beta cells and offers reason-
ably good control of hypoglycaemia in approximately 50% 
TABLE 52.3 Neuroendocrine tumours of the pancreas.
Tumour (syndrome) Incidence (%) Presentation Malignancy (%)
Insulinoma 70–80 Weakness, sweating, tremor, tachycardia, anxiety, fatigue, dizziness, 
disorientation, seizures
<10
Gastrinoma 20–25 Intractable or recurrent peptic ulcer disease (haemorrhage, 
perforation), complications of peptic ulcer, diarrhoea
60–80
Non-functional tumours 30–50 Obstructive jaundice, pancreatitis, epigastric pain, duodenal 
obstruction, weight loss, fatigue
60–90
VIPoma 4 Profuse watery diarrhoea, hypotension, abdominal pain 80
Glucagonoma 4 Migratory necrolytic skin rash, glossitis, stomatitis, angular cheilitis, 
diabetes, severe weight loss, diarrhoea
80
Somatostatinoma <5 Cholelithiasis, diarrhoea, neurofibromatosis 50
Carcinoid <1 Flushing, sweating, diarrhoea, oedema 90
ACTHoma <1 Cushing’s syndrome >90
GRFoma <1 Acromegaly 30
ACTH, adrenocorticotrophic hormone; GRF , growth hormone-releasing factor; VIP , vasoactive intestinal polypeptide.
Figure 52.14  Immunofluorescent labelling of endocrine (insulin 
(green)) and exocrine (amylase (red)) pancreatic cells and the nuclear 
marker DAPI (blue) (courtesy of Dr Esni, Department of Surgery, Uni -
versity of Pittsburgh, USA).
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   849 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE850
of patients. When surgical options to treat malignant insuli -
nomas cannot be applied, chemotherapeutic options include 
doxorubicin and streptozotocin.
Surgical treatment of insulinoma
INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION
After a positive fasting test and exclusion of diffuse abdomi -
nal metastases by ultrasound or CT scan, all patients should 
be advised to undergo surgical excision of insulinoma.
PREOPERATIVE LOCALISATION STUDIES
Intraoperative exploration of the pancreas is the best method 
to use for localisation of insulinoma yet the operating surgeon 
will need preoperative localisation. Insulinomas are detected 
in about 65% of cases by endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), 33% 
of cases by CT scan and abdominal ultrasound and 15% of 
cases by magnetic resonance tomography. Intraoperative 
ultrasound (IOUS) of the pancreas is a vital tool after mobil-
isation of the gland. For preoperative localisation of an insu -
linoma, EUS has the highest sensitivity and should be used if 
laparoscopic resection is considered. If no lesion is identified 
and one can rely on the biochemical tests for diagnosis, lapa-
rotomy should follow, using IOUS.
BENIGN INSULINOMA
Surgical cure rates in patients with the biochemical diagno-
sis of insulinoma range from 90% to 100%. At open surgery 
an extended Kocher manoeuvre and mobilisation of the head 
and then the distal pancreas is performed to explore the whole 
gland. IOUS should then be used to confirm the presence of 
a tumour, to find non-palpable lesions and also to identify the 
relation of the tumour to the pancreatic duct (Figure 52.15a). 
Tumour enucleation is the technique of choice (Figure 
52.15b). For superficial tumours, laparoscopic enucleation 
is undertaken (Figure 52.16). Tumours located deep in the 
body or tail of the pancreas and those in close proximity to 
the pancreatic duct require distal pancreatectomy. Postopera-
tively, blood sugar levels begin to rise in most patients within 
the first few hours after removal of the tumour. To preserve 
pancreatic function and reduce the risk of iatrogenic diabetes 
mellitus, patients in whom tumour localisation is not success-
ful at operation should not undergo blind resection.
MALIGNANT INSULINOMA
Aggressive attempts at resection are recommended as these 
tumours are much less virulent than adenocarcinomas.
Gastrinoma (Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome)
Definition
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome (ZES) is a condition that includes: 
(1) fulminating ulcer diathesis in the stomach, duodenum 
or atypical sites; (2) recurrent ulceration despite ‘adequate’ 
therapy; and (3) non-beta islet cell tumours of the pancreas 
(gastrinoma).
Theodor Kocher , 1841–1917, Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland, awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1909, ‘for his work on the physiology, 
pathology, and surgery of the thyroid gland.’
Robert Milton Zollinger , 1903–1992, Professor of Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Edwin Homer Ellison , 1918–1970, Professor of Surgery, Marquette University, WI, USA. Zollinger and Ellison described this condition in a joint paper in 1955 
when they were both working at The Ohio State University.
Figure 52.16 Laparoscopic enucleation of an insulinoma.
Figure 52.15 (a) Intraoperative ultrasound showing a typical insuli-
noma (dashed circle). d wirsung, pancr eatic duct; v cava inf, inferior 
vena cava; v portae, portal vein. (b) Enucleated insulinoma.
(a)
(b)
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   850 25/10/2017   09:23Pancreatic endocrine tumours 851
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Incidence
Gastrinomas account for about 20% of PET. Approximately 
0.1% of patients with duodenal ulcers have evidence of ZES. 
The reported incidence is between 0.5 and 4 cases per million 
population per year. ZES is more common in males than in 
females. The mean age at the onset of symptoms is 38 years, 
and the range 7–83 years.
Pathology
The aetiology and pathogenesis of sporadic gastrinomas are 
unknown. At the time of diagnosis more than 60% of tumours 
are malignant. Pancreatic gastrinomas are mainly found in 
sporadic disease; most are found in the head of the pancreas. 
More than 70% of the gastrinomas in MEN 1 syndrome and 
most sporadic gastrinomas are located in the first and second 
part of the duodenum. Therefore, the anatomical area com -
prising the head of the pancreas, the superior and descending 
portion of the duodenum and the relevant lymph nodes has 
been called the ‘gastrinoma triangle’ because it harbours the 
vast majority of these tumours (Figure 52.17). All patients 
with gastrinomas should be tested for MEN 1 syndrome.
Prognosis and predictive factors
In general, the progression of gastrinomas is relatively slow 
with a 5-year survival rate of 65% and a 10-year survival rate 
of 51%. Patients with complete tumour resection have excel-
lent 5- and 10-year survival rates (90–100%). Patients with 
pancreatic tumours have a worse prognosis than those with 
primary tumours in the duodenum. There is no established 
marker to predict the biological behaviour of gastrinoma.
Clinical and biochemical features
Over 90% of patients with gastrinomas have peptic ulcer dis-
ease, often multiple or in unusual sites. Diarrhoea is another 
common symptom, caused by the large volume of gastric acid 
secretion. Abdominal pain from either peptic ulcer disease or 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) remains the most 
common symptom, occurring in more than 75% of patients.
Biochemical diagnosis
If the patient presents with a gastric pH below 2.5 and a 
serum gastrin concentration above 1000  pg/mL (normal  
<100 pg/mL) then the diagnosis of ZES is confirmed. Unfor -
tunately, the majority of patients have serum gastrin concen-
trations between 100 and 500  pg/mL and in these patients a 
secretin test should be performed. The secretin test is consid-
ered positive if an increase in serum gastrin of >200  pg/mL 
over the pretreatment value is obtained; this also rules out 
other causes of hypergastrinaemia (e.g. atrophic gastritis).
Differential diagnosis
The most common misdiagnoses are idiopathic peptic ulcer 
disease, chronic idiopathic diarrhoea and GORD. Other rea -
sons for hypergastrinaemia are chronic atrophic gastritis, gas-
tric outlet stenosis and retained antrum after gastric resection.
Medical treatment of gastrinoma
In most patients with ZES, gastric hypersecretion can 
be treated effectively with proton pump inhibitors. 
Octreotide can also help to control acid hypersecretion. 
Systemic chemo  therapy is utilised in patients with diffuse 
metastatic gastrinomas. Streptozotocin in combination with 
5-fluorouracil or doxorubicin is the first-line treatment.
Surgical treatment of gastrinoma
INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION
Surgical exploration should be performed in all patients with-
out diffuse metastases, to remove known malignant gastrino -
mas or benign ones.
PREOPERATIVE LOCALISATION STUDIES
Pancreatic gastrinomas are often larger than 1 cm in diame -
ter, whereas gastrinomas of the duodenum are usually smaller. 
Therefore, it is nearly impossible to identify duodenal gas -
trinomas by preoperative imaging. Pancreatic gastrinomas 
are detected by endoscopic ultrasound in about 80–90% of 
cases, by CT in 39% of cases and by MRI in 46% of cases. 
In approximately one-third of patients the results of conven -
tional imaging studies are negative. On the basis of recent 
studies, either endoscopic ultrasound or CT and somatostatin 
receptor scintigraphy (SRS) scan should be performed preop-
eratively for staging.
PANCREATIC GASTRINOMAS
Most pancreatic gastrinomas are solitary, located in the head 
of the gland or uncinate process, and can be identified at 
operation. Enucleation with peripancreatic lymph node dis -
section is the procedure of choice. Rarely, tumours are situ -
ated in the body or tail and should be treated by enucleation 
or distal resection. Even if a tumour is found in the pancreas, 
duodenotomy is recommended to detect additional tumours, 
if the patient has MEN 1.
DUODENAL GASTRINOMAS
The duodenum should be opened with a longitudinal inci -
sion and the posterior and anterior walls palpated separately 
(Figure 52.18) . Duo denal tumours smaller than 5  mm can Figure 52.17 The gastrinoma triangle.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   851 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE852
be enucleated with the overlying mucosa; larger tumours are 
excised with full-thickness excision of the duodenal wall.
Non-functional endocrine 
pancreatic tumours
Definition
PETs are clinically classified as non-functioning (NF-PET s) 
when they do not cause a clinical syndrome.
Incidence
NF-PETs account for 30–50% of all PET s. They are most 
often diagnosed in the fifth to sixth decades of life.
Pathology
NF-PETs cannot be differentiated from functional tumours 
by immunocytochemistry because they may also express hor -
mones such as gastrin, insulin, etc. They usually stain posi -
tively for chromogranin A and synaptophysin. The tumours 
are usually large (>5 cm) and unifocal except in MEN 1 syn-
drome. They are distributed throughout the pancreas with a 
head to body to tail ratio of 7:1:1.5.
Prognosis and predictive factors
About 70% of all NF-PETs are malignant. Overall 5- and 
10-year survival rates of 65% and 49% respectively have been 
described. When comparing NF-PETs with functioning PETs, 
the NF-PETs have a worse prognosis.
Clinical features
Patients usually present late because of the lack of a clinical/
hormonal marker of tumour activity. Therefore, in contrast to 
functioning PETs, patients with NF-PETs present with var -
ious non-specific symptoms, including jaundice, abdominal 
pain, weight loss and pancreatitis. In some cases liver metas -
tases are the first presentation.
Biochemical diagnosis
Increased levels of chromogranin A have been reported in 
50–80% of NF-PETs; the level of chromogranin A sometimes 
correlates with the tumour burden. The combination of 
elevated chromogranin A and PP measurements increases the 
sensitivity of diagnosis from 84% to 96% in NF-PETs.
Differential diagnosis
Differentiation from the more aggressive pancreatic adeno -
carcinoma is extremely important (Table 52.4 ). Recognition 
of NF-PETs is imperative because of their resectability and 
excellent long-term survival compared with their exocrine 
counterparts.
Medical treatment of non-functioning islet 
cell tumours
When surgical excision is not possible, chemotherapeutic 
options include streptozotocin, octreotide and interferon.
Surgical treatment of non-functioning islet 
cell tumours
INDICATIONS FOR OPERATION
An aggressive surgical approach should be considered in malig-
nant NF-PETs, even in the presence of distant metastases.
PREOPERATIVE LOCALISATION STUDIES
Preoperative ultrasound or CT scan are the procedures of 
choice as these tumours are relatively large. Also, SRS should 
be performed to differentiate endocrine from non-endocrine 
pancreatic tumours.
OPERATIVE PROCEDURES
The major goal is a potentially curative resection. This may 
require partial pancreaticoduodenectomy as well as the syn-
chronous or metachronous resection of liver metastases. Using 
an aggressive approach, curative resections are possible in up 
to 62% of cases and overall 5-year survival rates of around 
65% can be achieved. Repeated resections for resectable 
recurrences or metastases are justified to improve survival.
NEUROENDOCRINE TUMOURS 
OF THE STOMACH AND SMALL 
BOWEL
Definition and physiology
Neuroendocrine tumours (NET) of the gut and the pancreas 
arise from the diffuse neuroendocrine cell system, which can 
Figure 52.18 Palpation of a duodenal gastrinoma (arrow) after duo-
denotomy.
TABLE 52.4 Differences between pancreatic cancer and 
non-functioning endocrine pancreatic tumours (NF-PETs).
Pancreatic 
cancer
NF-PETs
Tumour size <5 cm >5 cm
CT scan Hypodensity Hyperdensity
No calcifications Calcifications 
possible
Chromogranin A in blood Negative Positive
Somatostatin receptor 
scintigraphy
Negative Positive
CT, computed tomography.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   852 25/10/2017   09:23Neuroendocrine tumours of the st omach and small bowel 853
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
be found as single or clustered cells in the mucosa of the bron-
chi, stomach, gut, biliary tree, urogenital system and in the 
pancreas (see Chapters 72 and 73 for NET of the appendix 
and rectum respectively). This cell system was first recognised 
as the ‘clear cell system’ by Feyrter in the 1930s and is iden -
tical to the APUD (amine precursor uptake and decarbox-
ylation) system described by Pearse in 1970. All cells of the 
system secrete different neuroendocrine markers, such as 
synaptophysin, chromogranin A and neurone-specific eno -
lase (NSE), and produce peptide hormones that are stored in 
granules, e.g. serotonin, somatostatin, PP or gastrin. In clin-
ical practice chromogranin A is utilised as a tumour marker. 
The main functional test for NET of the jejunum and ileum 
(the NET that are most often encountered) is the measure -
ment of the serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid 
(5-HIAA) in urine.
Pathology
Neuroendocrine cells can form hyperplasias or tumours. 
Oberndorfer coined the term ‘carcinoids’ for tumours aris -
ing from these cells in 1907. Although the term carcinoid 
continues to be used in clinical practice, these tumours do 
not always grow in a well-differentiated pattern reflecting the 
rather benign ‘carcinoma-like’, i.e. ‘carcinoid’ tumour. They 
can show different growth patterns, from benign tumours to 
high-grade undifferentiated carcinomas having a poor prog -
nosis (neuroendocrine carcinomas). Therefore, they should 
always be addressed as NET , including a description of their 
histological pattern (benign, low- or high-grade malignant) 
and their anatomical site (e.g. stomach, ileum) according to 
the World Health Organization (WHO) classification (2000). 
The relative distribution of NET in different organs is given 
in Table 52.5. Another classification based on embryological 
principles classifies NET as foregut (lung, stomach, pancreas), 
midgut (small bowel and appendix) and hindgut (colon and 
rectum) tumours.
Neuroendocrine tumours of the 
stomach
These tumours are rare. They comprise about 5% of all NET 
of the gastrointestinal tract and have an incidence of approx-
imately 0.2 cases per 100 000 population per year. There are 
four different types of gastric NET (Table 52.6). Types 1 and 2 
are small benign tumours that arise from the enterochromaf -
fin-like (ECL) cells in the gastric mucosa and grow in either 
a linear or a nodular pattern (Figure 52.19). Hypergastri-
naemia may cause symptoms and the treatment of choice is 
Anthony Guy Everson Pearse , 1916–2003, Professor of Histochemistry, The Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith, London, UK.
TABLE 52.5 Relative distribution of neuroendocrine 
tumours in different organs.
Site Distribution (%)
Lung 10
Stomach 5
Duodenum 2
Small bowel 25
Appendix 40
Colon 6
Rectum 15
Figure 52.19  Immunostaining of chromogranin in micr onodular 
hyperplasia of enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells of the stomach, asso-
ciated with chronic atrophic gastritis.
TABLE 52.6 Classification of gastric neuroendocrine tumours.
Type Histological pattern Size and location Causative factor and prognosis
1 Benign, non-functional, well  
differentiated
Gastric corpus; <1 cm; mucosa/
submucosa
ECLomas in chronic atrophic gastritis, 
hypergastrinaemia
2 Benign or low-grade malignant, 
differentiated
1–2 cm; angioinvasion; mucosa/
submucosa
ECLomas with hypergastrinaemia as a 
result of gastrinoma in MEN 1
3 Low-grade malignant, differentiated 2 cm; invasion beyond submucosa Sporadic ECLomas not related to 
hypergastrinaemia
4 Intermediate or small cell type, high-
grade malignant (neuroendocrine 
carcinoma)
Different sizes Causative factor unknown; prognosis 
poor
ECL, enterochromaffin-like; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   853 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE854
endoscopic resection. Types 3 and 4 are almost always malig-
nant and surgical resection should be undertaken if possible.
Pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment
Type 1 tumours (ECLomas) are the most frequent NET of 
the stomach (approximately 80%); they occur mostly in 
elderly women. Chronic hypergastrinaemia is the result of 
chronic atrophic gastritis and achlorhydria, the alkaline pH 
being the stimulus for hypersecretion of gastrin. They do not 
cause symptoms and are usually detected during gastroscopy 
for other reasons. Endoscopic resection is the treatment of 
choice. Antrectomy and resection of ECLomas should be 
undertaken only if there is recurrent disease and multiple 
(more than six) tumours, with at least one measuring >1 cm 
and infiltration of at least one into the submucosa.
The pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of type 2 
tumours is similar to that of type 1. The only difference is the 
cause of the hypergastrinaemia, which in type 2 tumours is 
the result of MEN 1 syndrome, with multiple gastrinomas in 
the duodenum or, rarely, in the pancreas.
Type 3 tumours are rare, sporadic and solitary tumours of 
unknown origin. Serum gastrin is normal; upper gastrointes-
tinal bleeding is the usual symptom that leads to endoscopy. 
Type 3 tumours are usually larger than 2 cm and often have 
lymph node and liver metastases at the time of diagnosis. Gas-
trectomy and lymph node dissection and resection of liver 
metastases is the treatment of choice. Liver metastases can 
also be treated by chemoembolisation.
Type 4 tumours present as large ulcerating malignancies 
similar to adenocarcinomas and should be treated accord -
ingly. The prognosis of types 3 and 4 is poor (Table 52.6).
Neuroendocrine tumours of the 
small bowel
Introduction
These are the tumours that are most commonly referred to as 
‘carcinoid’ tumours, as most NET of the gastrointestinal tract 
are found in the small bowel. They are also called ‘midgut’ 
tumours (together with NET of the appendix and the right 
colon). These tumours produce serotonin and cause the ‘car -
cinoid’ syndrome, but only in patients who have a large vol-
ume of liver metastases or if there is advanced local tumour 
growth draining into the IVC and thereby bypassing the liver. 
NET of the duodenum (gastrinomas in MEN 1 syndrome, 
somatostatinomas and others) are very rare and are not dis -
cussed further.
Pathology
NET of the jejunum and ileum arise from a subgroup of 
cells of the diffuse neuroendocrine system, the enterochro -
maffin (EC) cells, which secrete serotonin and substance P . 
They are either solitary or more often multiple, are almost 
always malignant and metastasise early to the regional lymph 
nodes and the liver depending on the location of the primary 
tumour(s) (Figure 52.20).
Clinical symptoms
Symptoms that lead to the diagnosis are caused by either 
the primary tumour or its lymph node metastases. Acute or 
chronic, recurrent or persistent abdominal pain, ileus or, rarely, 
lower gastrointestinal bleeding may occur. Symptoms may be 
due to liver metastases, such as sudden painful reddening of 
the face and chest (‘flushing’), diarrhoea or bronchospasm. 
These symptoms constitute ‘carcinoid’ syndrome. About 60% 
of patients eventually develop cardiac symptoms because of 
stenosis and insufficiency of the pulmonary and, more rarely, 
the tricuspid valve, with enlargement and thickening of the 
wall of the right atrium. The aetiology is unknown but local 
effects of serotonin and kinins may contribute.
Abdominal symptoms are caused either by obstruction of 
the appendix by an appendiceal NET (leading to appendec -
tomy) or by obstruction of the mesentery or the bowel lumen 
by growth of lymph node metastases in the mesentery near 
the bowel. Pain is caused by chronic ischaemia of the bowel 
(Figure 52.21), resulting not only from mesenteric lymph 
100
90
80
Frequency of lymph node
metastasis (%)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Small bowel
/H110211  1–2  /H110222
Meckel’s
diverticulum
/H110211  1–2  /H110222 
Appendix
 /H110211  1–2  /H110222
Diameter of primary tumour (cm)
Colon
 /H110211  1–2  /H110222
Rectum
 /H110211  1–2  /H110222
0
Figure 52.20  Relation of site and diameter of neuroendocrine 
tumours of the gut to frequency of lymph node metastasis.
Figure 52.21 Chronic ischaemia of the small bowel caused by des-
moplastic r eaction and narrowing of vessels in the mesentery in a 
neuroendocrine tumour of the ileum.
Johann Friedrich Meckel (The Younger) , 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   854 25/10/2017   09:23Multiple endocrine neoplasias 855
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
node metastases but also from constriction of mesenteric 
arteries and fibrosis of the mesentery by a so-called desmo -
plastic reaction.
Primary tumours in the jejunum and ileum rarely cause 
symptoms such as bleeding or intussusception as they usually 
only measure from a few millimetres up to 1 cm or at the most 
2 cm in diameter (Figure 52.22). A polypoid NET of the ter-
minal ileum may, however, cause ileocaecal intussusception.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of NET of the small bowel is made by history, 
physical examination of the abdomen, imaging and an assess-
ment of 5-HIAA in a 24-hour urine sample. It is positive in 
larger tumours only if metastases are present. Cross-sectional 
imaging, sonography, CT scan and MRI may show the pri -
mary tumour, mesenteric lymph node and liver metastases.
The best method for staging of NET is an octreotide 
(SRS) scan. This will show all tumour deposits provided that 
they are large enough and have a high somatostatin receptor 
density (Figure 52.23).
Surgical procedure
Surgery should be undertaken as soon as the diagnosis is 
made, even in the presence of liver metastases. The main goal 
is resection of the bowel primary tumour(s) and mesenteric 
lymph node metastases. This may entail resection of large 
amounts of bowel (100 cm or more), particularly if stage III 
or IV lymph node masses are found in the mesentery (Fig-
ure 52.24). In the presence of liver metastases, extrahepatic 
disease should be resected whenever possible. Metastatic dis -
ease in the mesenteric root will lead to long-term pain in the 
abdomen or back and to a poor quality of life, whereas liver 
metastases can be treated by chemotherapy or embolisation.
Somatostatin and its analogues provide symptomatic 
treatment of the ‘carcinoid’ syndrome caused by a large vol -
ume of liver metastases. These drugs may also have an anti -
proliferative effect. Surgery to remove liver metastases is 
possible in approximately 10% of patients. In others, emboli-
sation, chemoembolisation, SRS using radioactively labelled 
octreotide, chemotherapy, biotherapy and also liver trans-
plantation can be performed.
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE 
NEOPLASIAS
Introduction
Multiple endocrine neoplasias (MEN) are inherited syn-
dromes characterised by a combination of benign and malig -
nant tumours in different endocrine glands. There are two 
main types, type 1 (MEN 1) and type 2 (MEN 2). The mode 
of inheritance is autosomal dominant in both.
Figure 52.22 Multiple neuroendocrine tumours in the small bowel 
causing large lymph node metastases in the mesentery.
Figure 52.23  Octreotide scan of a patient with neur oendocrine 
tumour of the gut and diffuse metastases in different organs.
Stage IV
Stage III
Stage II
Stage I Jejunum
Superior
mesenteric
artery
Ileocolic
artery
Caecum
Ileum
Figure 52.24 Bulky lymph node metastases can occur at differ ent 
levels in the mesentery. To resect them completely, long segments of 
bowel must be resected, the closer to the mesenteric root the metas-
tases are situated (adapted from Akerström G, Hellman P , Öhrvall U. 
Midgut and hindgut carcinoid tumours. In: Doherty GM, Skogseid B 
(eds.). Surgical endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2001, by kind permission.).
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   855 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE856
MEN 1 is characterised by the triad of tumours in the 
anterior pituitary gland, mostly presenting as prolactinomas 
or non-functioning tumours, hyperplasia of the parathyroids 
causing primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) and pancreati-
coduodenal endocrine tumours (PETs). The syndrome was 
first described by Wermer in 1954 and is therefore also called 
Wermer’s syndrome. It is caused by germline mutations in the 
menin gene, located on chromosome 11.
MEN 2 is divided into three subtypes: familial medullary 
thyroid carcinoma (FMTC), MEN 2A and MEN 2B. Medul -
lary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) plays the key role in all sub -
types. MEN 2 is caused by germline mutations in the RET 
proto-oncogene, located on chromosome 10. MEN 2A is 
characterised by the combination of MTC, pHPT and mostly 
bilateral phaeochromocytomas. MTC combined with phae -
ochromocytoma alone is called Sipple’s syndrome. FMTC is 
characterised by distinct mutations in RET and MTC alone 
as the clinical manifestation. MEN 2B comprises MTC, phae-
ochromocytoma and characteristic facial and oral mucosal 
neurinomas (Figure 52.25) and intestinal ganglioneuroma-
tosis, accompanied by a Marfanoid habitus.
The most important difference between MEN 1 and MEN 
2, besides the different clinical pictures, is that MEN 2 is 
characterised by a well-understood genotype–phenotype cor -
relation. This means that depending on the particular muta-
tion in the RET proto-oncogene, the phenotypic appearance 
and the onset of endocrine tumours will be different and can 
be predicted from the type of mutation. This is not the case 
in MEN 1 syndrome.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
Epidemiology
The prevalence of the syndrome is estimated to be around 
0.04–0.2 cases per 1000 population per year. The penetrance 
is high with almost 100% of mutation carriers developing the 
syndrome. The disease is equally distributed between men 
and women.
Clinical presentation
The clinical presentation depends on the affected organs. 
Tumours can occur synchronously (Table 52.7). Most of the 
mutation carriers identified in screening programmes are 
asymptomatic.
Paul Wermer , 1898–1975, physician, The Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described this condition in 1954.
John H Sipple , b.1930, physician, The State University of New York, New York, NY, USA.
John V Verner , b.1927 and Ashton B Morrison, 1922–2008, at Duke University, USA, described the features of watery diarrhoea and hypokalaemia in 1958 and 
subsequently linked their observations with hyperplasia of non-beta islet cells of the pancreas in 1974.
Figure 52.25 Neurinomas of the tongue in a patient with multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 2B.
TABLE 52.7 Affected organs in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1.
Endocrine gland affected Frequency (%) Hormone Clinical syndrome
Parathyroids 90 PTH pHPT
Pancreas, duodenum (mostly multiple) 50–80
Gastrinoma Gastrin Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
Insulinoma Insulin Hypoglycaemia syndrome
Non-functioning tumours PP –
VIPoma VIP Verner–Morrison syndrome
Glucagonoma Glucagon Glucagonoma syndrome
Anterior pituitary gland 30–60
Prolactinoma Prolactin Galactorrhea
Non-functioning adenoma – Non-specific
Other manifestations
Adrenals 40–50 Cortisol? Mostly non-functioning
NET in lung, thymus, stomach 3–10 – –
Lipoma 5–10 – –
NET, neuroendocrine tumours; pHPT, primary hyperparathyroidism; PP , pancreatic polypeptide; PTH, parathyroid hormone; VIP , vasoactive intestinal 
polypeptide.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   856 25/10/2017   09:23Multiple endocrine neoplasias 857
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
PARATHYROIDS
In total, 90–100% of patients suffering from MEN 1 develop 
pHPT and it is usually the first manifestation of the disease. 
MEN 1 pHPT is characterised by multiglandular disease so 
that all four parathyroids become hyperplastic in the course 
of the disease. The clinical presentation of MEN 1 pHPT 
is similar to that of the sporadic disease. Few patients have 
asymptomatic disease; most common in symptomatic disease 
is nephrolithiasis. Diagnosis is established by determination of 
parathyroid hormone (PTH) and calcium in serum and urine.
ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
PETs occur in around 50–60% of MEN 1 patients. In such 
patients taking part in screening programmes, 70–90% are 
found to have non-functioning and functioning PETs. This 
high rate of detection of PETs is the result of the improve -
ment in diagnostic procedures in the last decade, including 
EUS. MEN 1 PETs are the most common syndrome-  
associated cause of death. They are mostly multiple and often 
recur after surgery. Although most patients have multiple 
tumours, one hormone syndrome is usually dominant. The 
most common functional tumour is gastrinoma followed by 
insulinoma. VIPomas, glucagonomas and somatostatinomas 
are extremely rare. Non-functioning tumours can be asympto-
matic for many years.
The diagnostic work-up is similar to that for sporadic PETs 
and includes hormone measurements, e.g. gastrin, insulin, PP , 
etc. and imaging.
ANTERIOR PITUITARY GLAND
Tumours of the anterior pituitary gland are found in 30–60% 
of patients with MEN 1. These are mostly microadenomas 
that present as prolactinomas or non-functioning tumours. 
Most prolactinomas can be treated with medication, thus 
avoiding operation.
ADRENAL TUMOURS AND OTHER ORGAN 
MANIFESTATIONS
Adrenal involvement is common in MEN 1 patients and 
affects nearly 40–50% of patients. Mostly non-functioning 
adenomas are found. Very rarely, adrenocortical carcinomas 
or phaeochromocytomas may develop.
Although very rare, manifestations of MEN 1 include 
NET of the lung, thymus, stomach, duodenum and small 
bowel. It is important to check for NETs of the thymus, as 
they are mostly malignant.
Genetic screening
Identification of the MEN 1 (menin) gene in 1997 formed the 
basis for direct mutational analysis of the gene and for fam -
ily screening. After genetic counselling of the index patient, 
family members can be screened. Mutation carriers can then 
be included in screening programmes that make early detec -
tion of endocrine tumours possible. Screening programmes 
should follow the consensus guidelines published by Brandi et 
al. in 2001. In cases of apparently sporadic endocrine tumours 
in patients younger than 40 years, genetic testing for MEN 1 
is advised.
Operative therapy
PARATHYROIDS
The indications for surgery in MEN 1 pHPT follow the same 
criteria as in sporadic disease but the choice of procedure is 
different. As multiglandular disease is present in all cases, 
resection follows the same rules as in secondary HPT. There-
fore, the most common procedures are total parathyroidec -
tomy, including cervical thymectomy or 31/2-gland resection, 
leaving approximately 50 mg of parathyroid tissue behind, 
and cervical thymectomy. Selective resection of enlarged 
glands is obsolete because of the high rates of recurrence (see 
Chapter 51).
ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
Indications for surgery and its extent are controversial. Most 
experts agree that MEN 1 gastrinoma and insulinoma have to 
be operated on to prevent liver metastases and to control hor-
monal excess, provided that diffuse liver metastases are not 
present. MEN 1 gastrinomas are more often located in the 
duodenum as multiple small tumours than in the pancreas. 
For gastrinomas located in the duodenum or pancreatic head 
(gastrinoma triangle, Figure 52.17), pylorus-preserving par -
tial pancreaticoduodenectomy is recommended. In rare cases 
the gastrinoma is located in the body or tail of the pancreas. 
In such cases distal pancreatectomy with excision of tumours 
in the pancreatic head is the procedure of choice. In MEN 1 
insulinoma the standard operative procedure is distal pancre-
atectomy with enucleation of tumours in the pancreatic head. 
Non-functioning PETs are operated on if they reach a size of 
1 cm. Careful palpation and IOUS are essential in every pan-
creatic procedure for MEN 1 PETs.
ANTERIOR PITUITARY GLAND
The indications for surgery in tumours of the anterior pitu -
itary gland are the presence of symptomatic non-functional 
tumours or if medical therapy of prolactinoma fails. Most 
procedures can be performed through a trans-sphenoidal 
approach.
ADRENAL TUMOURS
Functional adrenal tumours in MEN 1 are rare and have to 
be operated on. Non-functioning tumours should be resected 
if they reach a size of 4 cm. Pre- and perioperative manage -
ment follow the same rules as in sporadic adrenal tumours; 
therefore, phaeochromocytoma has to be ruled out in every 
patient. In most cases a laparoscopic or retroperitoneoscopic 
approach can be used. If there is evidence for a malignant 
tumour, open surgery is preferred.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
In most patients with MEN 2A, the disease is caused by 
mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in codon 634. MTC is 
almost always the first manifestation of the syndrome. If phae-
ochromocytoma and pHPT do not occur, one must suspect 
the presence of the FMTC subtype. Patients with MEN 2B do 
not develop pHPT and in 95% of cases mutations in codon 
918 of the RET proto-oncogene are causative (Table 52.8).
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   857 25/10/2017   09:23CHAPTER 52  The adrenal glands and other abdominal endocrine disorders
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE858
Medullary thyroid carcinoma
MTC is characterised by multicentricity and is often accompa-
nied by C-cell hyperplasia. These characteristics should lead 
to molecular diagnostic work-up (mutational analysis of the 
RET proto-oncogene) in patients with apparently ‘sporadic’ 
MTC. In contrast to sporadic MTC, the diagnosis in families 
with known mutation of the RET gene is mostly made much 
earlier, possibly as the result of mutational screening and cal-
citonin measurements. MTC is most aggressive in MEN 2B. 
It occurs in early childhood, much earlier than in MEN 2A, 
with lymph node metastases present in the early stages. Pre -
ventative surgery is advised around the age of 1 year.
Primary hyperparathyroidism
pHPT in MEN 2A is less common and has a milder clinical 
course than MEN 1 pHPT. It occurs in about 20–30% of 
patients with MEN 2A. Most patients are asymptomatic but 
all parathyroid glands can become hyperplastic, mostly meta-
chronously. The disease develops after the third decade of life 
typically.
Phaeochromocytoma
The frequency of phaeochromocytoma in MEN 2 is around 
10–50% and tumours can be bilateral. This can occur syn -
chronously or metachronously. The tumours are almost always 
benign. Diagnostic work-up includes measurement of urinary 
catecholamines, abdominal CT or MRI and 131I-MIBG scin-
tigraphy (see above).
Operative therapy
MEDULLARY THYROID CARCINOMA
Operative therapy for MEN 2 MTC in patients detected by 
genetic screening is a good example of efficient prophylac -
tic surgery, as the likelihood of developing MTC is 100% for 
most mutations. The mutation carriers can be operated on 
with no evidence of tumour in the thyroid, protecting them 
from MTC for the rest of their lives. Different RET muta-
tions are associated with early or late onset of the disease. 
Risk groups have been defined to determine the appropriate 
age for thyroidectomy (Table 52.9).
PHAEOCHROMOCYTOMA
The operative approach is laparoscopy or retroperitoneos -
copy. Unilateral or bilateral subtotal resection may be feasi -
ble, which retains the healthy part of the gland and prevents 
postoperative dependence on cortisol and mineralocorticoid 
supplementation (see above) (Figure 52.26). Further phaeo-
chromocytomas can develop in the remnants that are left, so 
continued surveillance is required.
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
The clinical situation in MEN 2 pHPT is even more difficult 
than in MEN 1 pHPT because of the association with MTC 
in MEN 2. During neck surgery for MTC in a eucalcaemic 
patient, enlarged parathyroid glands should be removed. In 
cases in which neck surgery has already been performed for 
MTC, the surgical approach to MEN 2A pHPT should be 
more tailored to the individual patient. For example, in an 
older patient after thyroidectomy for MTC with mild asymp-
tomatic hypercalcaemia, localisation procedures and a tar -
geted approach may be appropriate.
TABLE 52.8 Frequency of diseases in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 related to mutation in different codons.
Syndrome Frequently affected codons in RET MTC (%) pHPT (%) PCC (%)
FMTC 533, 630, 768, 844 90–100 – –
MEN 2A 609, 634, 790, 804 90–100 20–30 10–50
MEN 2B 883, 918 100 – 10–50
FMTC, familial medullary thyroid cancer; MEN 2A, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A; MEN 2B, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B; MTC, medullary thyroid 
cancer; PCC, phaeochromocytoma; pHPT, primary hyperparathyroidism; RET, RET proto-oncogene (RET = rearranged during transfection).
TABLE 52.9 Prophylactic thyroidectomy for medullary thyroid cancer depending on the site of mutation of the RET proto-
oncogene in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 patients with normal calcitonin levels.
Risk group
High Medium Low
Codon 883, 918, 922 609, 611, 618, 620, 634 768, 790, 791, 804, 891
Thyroidectomy at age (years) <1 6 <20
Right
Left
Figure 52.26 Bilateral multiple phaeochromocytomas in a patient 
with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. A, aorta; C, vena cava; 
white arrows, tumours; black arrow, normal adrenal.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   858 25/10/2017   09:23Further reading 859
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
FURTHER READING
Allolio B, Fassnacht M. Clinical review: adrenocortical carcinoma: clin-
ical update. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 91: 2027–37.
Assié G, Letouzé E, Fassnacht M  et al. Integrated genomic characteriza-
tion of adrenocortical carcinoma. Nat Genet 2014; 46(6): 607–12.
Bartsch DK, Fendrich V , Langer P et al. Outcome of duodenopancreatic 
resections in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1. Ann 
Surg 2005; 242: 757–64.
Brandi ML, Gagel RF , Angeli A et al. Guidelines for diagnosis and ther-
apy of MEN type 1 and type 2. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001; 86: 
5658–71.
Hardy R, Lennard TWJ. Subtotal adrenalectomy. Br J Surg 2008; 95: 
1075–6.
Fendrich V , Langer P , Celik I et al. An aggressive surgical approach leads 
to long-term survival in patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors. 
Ann Surg 2006; 244: 845–51.
Gaujoux S, Bonnet S, Leconte M et al. Risk factors for conversion and 
complications after unilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Br J Surg 
2011; 98: 1392–9.
Ilias I, Pacak K. Diagnosis and management of tumors of the adrenal 
medulla. Horm Metab Res 2005; 37: 717–21.
Madani R, Al-Hashmi M, Bliss R, Lennard TWJ. Ectopic phaeochromo-
cytoma: does the rule of 10 apply? World J Surg 2007; 31: 849–54.
Muth A, Hammarstedt L, Hellstrom M et al. Cohort study of patients 
with adrenal lesions discovered incidentally. Br J Surg 2011; 98: 
1383–91.
Norton JA, Fraker DL, Alexander HR et al. Surgery increases survival in 
patients with gastrinoma. Ann Surg 2006; 244: 410–19.
Walz MK, Alesina PF , Wenger FA et al. Posterior retroperitoneoscopic 
adrenalectomy: results of 560 proceedures in 520 patients. Surgery 
2006; 140: 943–8.
Young WF Jr. Clinical practice: the incidentally discovered adrenal 
mass. New Engl J Med 2007; 356: 601–10.
08_52-B&L27_Pt8_Ch52.indd   859 25/10/2017   09:23Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
53Chapter
The breast
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • Appropriate investigation of breast disease
 • Breast anomalies and the complexity of benign breast 
disease
 • The modern management of breast cancer
COMPARATIVE AND SURGICAL 
ANATOMY
The protuberant part of the human breast is generally described 
as overlying the second to the sixth ribs and extending from 
the lateral border of the sternum to the anterior axillary line. 
Actually, a thin layer of mammary tissue extends considerably 
further, from the clavicle above to the seventh or eighth ribs 
below, and from the midline to the edge of the latissimus dorsi 
posteriorly. This fact is important when performing a mastec-
tomy, the aim of which is to remove the whole breast. The 
anatomy of the breast is illustrated in Figure 53.1.
The axillary tail of the breast is of surgical importance. In 
some normal subjects it is palpable and, in a few, it can be seen 
premenstrually or during lactation. A well-developed axillary 
tail is sometimes mistaken for a mass of enlarged lymph nodes 
or a lipoma.
The lobule is the basic structural unit of the mammary 
gland. The number and size of the lobules vary enormously: 
they are most numerous in young women. From 10 to over 
100 lobules empty via ductules into a lactiferous duct, of 
which there are 15–20. Each lactiferous duct is lined with 
a spiral arrangement of contractile myoepithelial cells and 
is provided with a terminal ampulla, a reservoir for milk or 
abnormal discharges.
The ligaments of Cooper  are hollow conical projections 
of fibrous tissue filled with breast tissue; the apices of the 
cones are attached firmly to the superficial fascia and thereby 
to the skin overlying the breast. These ligaments account for 
the dimpling of the skin overlying a carcinoma.
The areola contains involuntary muscle arranged in con-
centric rings as well as radially in the subcutaneous tissue. The 
areolar epithelium contains numerous sweat glands and seba-
ceous glands, the latter of which enlarge during pregnancy 
and serve to lubricate the nipple during lactation (Montgom-
ery’s tubercles).
The nipple is covered by thick skin with corrugations. 
Near its apex lie the orifices of the lactiferous ducts. The nip-
ple contains smooth muscle fibres arranged concentrically 
and longitudinally; thus, it is an erectile structure, which 
points outwards.
The lymphatics of the breast drain predominantly into 
the axillary and internal mammary lymph nodes. The axil -
lary nodes receive approximately 85% of the drainage and are 
arranged in the following groups:
 ● lateral, along the axillary vein;
Breast lobule
Areola
Lactiferous duct 
and ampulla
Ductule
Clavicle
Rib
Pectoralis
minor
Pectoralis
major
Cooper’s
ligament
Figure 53.1 Cross-sectional anatomy of the breast.
Sir Astley Paston Cooper , 1768–1841, surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described these ligaments in 1845.
William Fetherston Montgomery , 1797–1859, obstetrician, Dublin, Ireland, described these tubercles in 1837.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   860 25/10/2017   09:24Investigation of br east symptoms 861
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
 ● anterior, along the lateral thoracic vessels;
 ● posterior, along the subscapular vessels;
 ● central, embedded in fat in the centre of the axilla;
 ● interpectoral, a few nodes lying between the pectoralis 
major and minor muscles;
 ● apical, which lie above the level of the pectoralis minor 
tendon in continuity with the lateral nodes and which 
receive the efferents of all the other groups.
The apical no des are also in continuity with the supra -
clavicular nodes and drain into the subclavian lymph trunk, 
which enters the great veins directly or via the thoracic duct 
or jugular trunk. The sentinel node is defined as the first 
lymph node draining the tumour-bearing area of the breast. 
The importance of the sentinel node is described later.
The internal mammary nodes are fewer in number. They 
lie along the internal mammary vessels deep to the plane of 
the costal cartilages, drain the posterior third of the breast 
and are not routinely dissected, although they were at one 
time biopsied for staging.
INVESTIGATION OF BREAST 
SYMPTOMS
Although an accurate history and clinical examination are 
important methods of detecting breast disease, there are 
a number of investigations that can assist in the diagnosis. 
Examination precedes palpation and requires careful observa-
tion of the patient both with the arms at rest and also elevated 
to lift the breast. Small lesions may betray their presence by 
dimpling or minor distortions when the patient moves.
Mammography
Soft tissue radiographs are taken by placing the breast in 
direct contact with ultrasensitive film and exposing it to 
low-voltage, high-amperage x-rays (Figure 53.2). The dose 
of radiation is approximately 0.1 cGy and, therefore, mam -
mography is a very safe investigation. The sensitivity of this 
investigation increases with age as the breast becomes less 
dense. In total, 5% of breast cancers are missed by popula -
tion-based mammographic screening programmes; even in 
retrospect, such carcinomas are not apparent. Thus, a normal 
mammogram does not exclude the presence of carcinoma. 
Digital mammography is being introduced, which allows 
manipulation of the images and computer-aided diagnosis. 
Tomo-mammography is also being assessed as a more sensitive 
diagnostic modality.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is particularly useful in young women with dense 
breasts in whom mammograms are difficult to interpret, and 
in distinguishing cysts from solid lesions (Figures 53.3 and 
53.4). It can also be used to localise impalpable areas of breast 
Figure 53.2 Mammogram showing a carcinoma.
Gy  is short for Gray, the SI unit for the absorbed dose of ionising radiation.
Louis Harold Gray , 1905–1965, Director, The British Empire Cancer Campaign Research Unit in Radiobiology, Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, Middlesex, 
UK.
Figure 53.3 Ultrasound of the breast showing a cyst (arrow).
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   861 25/10/2017   09:24CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE862
pathology. It is not useful as a screening tool and remains 
operator dependent. Increasingly , ultrasound of the axilla is 
performed when a cancer is diagnosed, with guided percuta-
neous biopsy of any suspicious glands.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Figure 53.5) of the 
breast is useful in a number of settings:
 ● to distinguish scar from recurrence in women who have 
had previous breast conservation therapy for cancer 
(although it is less accurate within 9 months of radiother-
apy because of abnormal enhancement);
 ● to assess multifocality and multicentricity in lobular can -
cer and to assess the extent of high-grade ductal carci -
noma in situ (DCIS). It is less useful in low-grade DCIS;
 ● it is the best imaging modality for the breasts of women 
with implants;
 ● as a screening tool in high-risk women (because of family 
history).
Although biopsies can be performed with MRI guidance, 
this is complicated by the configuration of the imaging sys -
tem. With improved ultrasound equipment, an MRI-detected 
lesion can often be found on a second-look ultrasound and 
biopsied using this modality.
Needle biopsy/cytology
Histology can be obtained under local anaesthesia using 
a springloaded core needle biopsy device (Figure 53.6). 
Cytology is obtained using a 21G or 23G needle and 10-mL 
syringe with multiple passes through the lump with negative 
pressure in the syringe. The aspirate is then smeared on to a 
slide, which is air dried or fixed (Figure 53.7). Fine-needle 
Figure 53.4 Ultrasound of the breast showing a carcinoma (arrow).
Figure 53.5 Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the breasts show-
ing carcinoma of the left br east (arrows). (a) Precontrast; (b) post-
gadolinium contrast; (c) subtraction image.
Figure 53.6 Corecut biopsy of breast.
Figure 53.7 Fine-needle aspiration cytology showing grade III ductal 
carcinoma cells.
(a)
(b)
(c)
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   862 25/10/2017   09:24The nipple 863
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
aspiration cytology (FNAC) is the least invasive technique 
of obtaining a cellular diagnosis and is rapid and very accu -
rate if both operator and cytologist are experienced. However, 
false negatives do occur, mainly through sampling error, and 
invasive cancer cannot be distinguished from in situ disease. 
A histological specimen taken by core biopsy allows a defini -
tive preoperative diagnosis, differentiates between DCIS and 
invasive disease and also allows the tumour to be stained for 
receptor status. This is important before commencing neoad-
juvant therapy.
Large-needle biopsy with vacuum 
systems
The sampling error decreases as the biopsy volume increases 
and using 8G or 11G needles allows more extensive biopsies 
to be taken. This is useful in the management of microcalcifi-
cations or in the complete excision of benign lesions such as 
fibroadenomas.
Triple assessment
In any patient who presents with a breast lump or other symp-
toms suspicious of carcinoma, the diagnosis should be made 
by a combination of clinical assessment, radiological imaging 
and a tissue sample taken for either cytological or histological 
analysis (Figure 53.8), the so-called triple assessment. The 
positive predictive value (PPV) of this combination should 
exceed 99.9%.
THE NIPPLE
Absence of the nipple is rare and is usually associated with 
amazia (congenital absence of the breast).
Supernumerary nipples are not uncommon and occur 
along a line extending from the anterior fold of the axilla to 
the fold of the groin (Figure 53.9). This constitutes the milk 
line of lower mammals. Rarely, there is duplication of the nip-
ple on a normal areola.
Nipple retraction
This may occur at puberty or later in life. Retraction occur -
ring at puberty, also known as simple nipple inversion, is of 
unknown aetiology (benign horizontal inversion). In about 
25% of cases it is bilateral. It may cause problems with 
breast-feeding and infection can occur because of retention 
of secretions, especially during lactation. Recent retraction 
of the nipple may be of considerable pathological signifi -
cance. A slit-like retraction of the nipple may be caused by 
duct ectasia and chronic periductal mastitis (Figure 53.10a), 
but circumferential retraction, with or without an underly -
ing lump, may well indicate an underlying carcinoma (Figure 
53.10b).
Treatment
Treatment is usually unnecessary and the condition may 
spontaneously resolve during pregnancy or lactation.
Simple cosmetic surgery can produce an adequate correc-
tion but has the drawback of dividing the underlying ducts. 
Mechanical suction devices have been used to evert the nip -
ple, with some effect.
Cracked nipple
This may occur during lactation and be the forerunner of 
acute infective mastitis. If the nipple becomes cracked during 
lactation, it should be rested for 24–48 hours and the breast 
should be emptied with a breast pump. Feeding should be 
resumed as soon as possible.
Papilloma of the nipple
Papilloma of the nipple has the same features as any cutane -
ous papilloma and should be excised with a tiny disc of skin. 
Alternatively, the base may be tied with a ligature and the 
papilloma will spontaneously fall off.
P
Triple assessment
Clinical Imaging athology
Age Examination USS Mammography FNAC Corecut
Con/f_ident diagnosis in 99.9% of cases
Figure 53.8  Triple assessment of br east symptoms. FNAC, fine-  
needle aspiration cytology; USS, ultrasound scan.
Figure 53.9 Accessory nipple with congenital retraction of the nor -
mal nipple.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   863 25/10/2017   09:24CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE864
Retention cyst of a gland of 
Montgomery
These glands, situated in the areola, secrete sebum and if they 
become blocked a sebaceous cyst forms.
Eczema
Eczema of the nipples is a rare condition and is often bilateral; 
it is usually associated with eczema elsewhere on the body. It 
is treated with 0.5% hydrocortisone (not a stronger steroid 
preparation).
Paget’s disease
Paget’s disease of the nipple must be distinguished from 
eczema. The former is caused by malignant cells in the sub -
dermal layer and is usually associated with a carcinoma within 
the breast. Eczema tends to occur in younger people who have 
signs of eczema elsewhere (look at the antecubital fossae).
Discharges from the nipple
Discharge can occur from one or more lactiferous ducts. Man-
agement depends on the presence of a lump (which should 
always be given priority in diagnosis and treatment) and the 
presence of bloo d in the discharge or discharge from a sin -
gle duct. Mammography is rarely useful except to exclude an 
underlying impalpable mass. Cytology may reveal malignant 
cells but a negative result does not exclude a carcinoma or in 
situ disease.
A clear, serous discharge  may be ‘physiological’ in a 
parous woman or may be associated with a duct papilloma 
or mammary dysplasia. Multiduct, multicoloured discharge is 
physiological and the patient may be reassured.
 ● A blood-stained discharge may be caused by duct ecta-
sia, a duct papilloma or carcinoma. A duct papilloma is 
usually single and situated in one of the larger lactifer -
ous ducts; it is sometimes associated with a cystic swelling 
beneath the areola.
 ● A black or green discharge  is usually the result of duct 
ectasia and its complications. 
Figure 53.10 Recent nipple retraction. (a) Slit-like retraction of duct 
ectasia with mammary duct fistula. (b) Circumferential retraction with 
underlying carcinoma.
(a)
(b)
Sir James Paget , 1814–1899, surgeon, St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described this disease of the nipple in 1874.
Summary box 53.1
Discharges from the nipple (the principal causes are in 
bold)
Discharge from the surface
●● Paget’s disease
●● Skin diseases (eczema, psoriasis)
●● Rare causes (e.g. chancre)
Discharge from a single duct
Blood-stained:
●● Intraduct papilloma
●● Intraduct carcinoma
●● Duct ectasia
Serous (any colour):
●● Fibrocystic disease
●● Duct ectasia
●● Carcinoma
Discharge from more than one duct
Blood-stained:
●● Carcinoma
●● Ectasia
●● Fibrocystic disease
Black or green:
●● Duct ectasia
Purulent:
●● Infection
Serous:
●● Fibrocystic disease
●● Duct ectasia
●● Carcinoma
Milk:
●● Lactation
●● Rare causes (hypothyroidism, pituitary tumour)
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   864 25/10/2017   09:24Benign breast disease 865
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Treatment
Treatment must firstly be to exclude a carcinoma by occult 
blood test and cytology. Simple reassurance may then be suffi-
cient but, if the discharge is proving intolerable, an operation 
to remove the affected duct or ducts can be performed (micro-
dochectomy).
MICRODOCHECTOMY
It is important not to express the blood before the operation 
as it may then be difficult to identify the duct in theatre. A 
lacrimal probe or length of stiff nylon suture is inserted into 
the duct from which the discharge is emerging. A tennis rac -
quet incision can be made to encompass the entire duct or a 
periareolar incision used and the nipple flap dissected to reach 
the duct. The duct is then excised. A papilloma is nearly 
always situated within 4–5 cm of the nipple orifice.
Ductoscopy (inspection of the internal structure of the 
duct system) using microendoscopes is technically feasible 
but generally disappointing. The affected duct may not be 
visualised and biopsy systems are currently rudimentary.
CONE EXCISION OF THE MAJOR DUCTS (AFTER 
HADFIELD) (SUBAREOLAR RESECTION)
When the duct of origin of nipple bleeding is uncertain or 
when there is bleeding or discharge from multiple ducts, 
the entire major duct system can be excised for histological 
examination without sacrifice of the breast form. A periare -
olar incision is made and a cone of tissue is removed with 
its apex just deep to the surface of the nipple and its base on 
the pectoral fascia. The resulting defect may be obliterated by 
a series of purse-string sutures, although a temporary suction 
drain will reduce the chance of long-term deformity. It is vital 
to warn the patient that she will be unable to breast-feed after 
this and may experience altered nipple sensation.
BENIGN BREAST DISEASE
This is the most common cause of breast problems; up to 30% 
of women will suffer from a benign breast disorder requiring 
treatment at some time in their lives. The most common 
symptoms are pain, lumpiness or a lump. The aim of treat -
ment is to exclude cancer and, once this has been done, to 
treat any remaining symptoms.
Congenital abnormalities
Amazia
Congenital absence of the breast may occur on one (Figure 
53.11) or both sides. It is sometimes associated with absence 
of the sternal portion of the pectoralis major (Poland’s syn-
drome). It is more common in males.
Polymazia
Accessory breasts (Figure 53.12) have been recorded in the 
axilla (the most frequent site), groin, buttock and thigh. They 
have been known to function during lactation.
Mastitis of infants
Mastitis of infants is at least as common in boys as in girls. 
On the third or fourth day of life, if the breast of an infant is 
pressed lightly, a drop of colourless fluid can be expressed; a 
few days later, there is often a slight milky secretion, which 
disappears during the third week. This is popularly known as 
‘witch’s milk’ and is seen only in full-term infants. It is caused 
by stimulation of the fetal breast by prolactin in response to 
the drop in maternal oestrogens and is essentially physiolog -
ical. True mastitis is uncommon and is predominately caused 
by Staphylococcus aureus.
Diffuse hypertrophy
Diffuse hypertrophy of the breasts occurs sporadically in 
otherwise healthy girls at puberty (benign virginal hyper -
trophy) and, much less often, during the first pregnancy. The 
condition is rarely unilateral. This tremendous overgrowth is 
apparently caused by an alteration in the normal sensitivity 
of the breast to oestrogenic hormones and some success in 
treating it with antioestrogens has been reported. Treatment 
is otherwise by reduction mammoplasty.
Geoffrey John Hadfield , 1923–2006, surgeon, Stoke Mandeville Hospital, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, UK.
Alfred Poland , 1822–1872, surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described this condition in 1841.
Figure 53.11 Congenital absence of the left breast.
Figure 53.12 Bilateral accessory breasts.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   865 25/10/2017   09:24CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE866
Injuries of the breast
Haematoma
Haematoma, particularly a resolving haematoma, gives rise to 
a lump, which, in the absence of overlying bruising, is difficult 
to diagnose correctly unless it is biopsied.
Traumatic fat necrosis
Traumatic fat necrosis may be acute or chronic and usually 
occurs in stout, middle-aged women. Following a blow , or 
even indirect violence (e.g. contraction of the pectoralis 
major), a lump, often painless, appears. This may mimic a 
carcinoma, even displaying skin tethering and nipple retrac -
tion, and biopsy is required for diagnosis. A history of trauma 
is not diagnostic as this may merely have drawn the patient’s 
attention to a pre-existing lump. A seatbelt may transect or 
avulse the breast with a sudden deceleration injury, as in a 
road traffic accident.
Acute and subacute inflammations 
of the breast
Bacterial mastitis
Bacterial mastitis is the most common variety of mastitis and 
is associated with lactation in the majority of cases.
AETIOLOGY
Lactational mastitis is seen far less frequently than in former 
years. Most are caused by S. aureus and, if hospital acquired, 
are likely to be penicillin resistant. The intermediary is usu -
ally the infant; after the second day of life, 50% of infants 
harbour staphylococci in the nasopharynx.
Although ascending infection from a sore and cracked 
nipple may initiate the mastitis, in many cases the lactiferous 
ducts will first become blocked by epithelial debris leading to 
stasis; this theory is supported by the relatively high incidence 
of mastitis in women with a retracted nipple. Once within the 
ampulla of the duct, staphylococci cause clotting of milk and, 
within this clot, organisms multiply.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The affected breast, or more usually a segment of it, presents 
the classical signs of acute inflammation. Early on this is a 
generalised cellulitis but later an abscess will form.
TREATMENT
During the cellulitic stage, the patient should be treated 
with an appropriate antibiotic, such as flucloxacillin or co-  
amoxiclav. Feeding from the affected side may continue if 
the patient can manage. Support of the breast, local heat and 
analgesia will help to relieve pain.
If an antibiotic is used in the presence of undrained pus, an 
‘antibioma’ may form. This is a large, sterile, brawny oedema-
tous swelling that takes many weeks to resolve.
It used to be recommended that the breast should be 
incised and drained if the infection did not resolve within 48 
hours or if after being emptied of milk there was an area of 
tense induration or other evidence of an underlying abscess. 
This advice has been replaced with the recommendation that 
repeated aspirations under antibiotic cover (if necessary using 
ultrasound for localisation) be performed. This often allows 
resolution without the need for an incision and will also allow 
the patient to continue breast-feeding.
The presence of pus can be confirmed with needle aspi -
ration, and the pus should be sent for bacteriological culture. 
In contrast to the majority of localised infections, fluctuation 
is a late sign. Usually, the area of induration is sector shaped 
and, in early cases, about one-quarter of the breast is involved 
(Figure 53.13); in many late cases the area is more exten -
sive (Figure 53.14). When in doubt, an ultrasound scan may 
clearly define an area suitable for drainage.
Figure 53.13 Intramammary breast abscess.
Figure 53.14 Large breast abscess.
Operative drainage of a breast abscess
This is less commonly needed as prompt commencement of 
antibiotics and repeated aspiration is usually successful. Inci-
sion of a lactational abscess is necessary if there is marked skin 
thinning and can usually be performed under local anaesthe -
sia if an analgesic cream such as EMLA (lidocaine) is applied 
30 minutes before surgery.
The usual incision is sited in a radial direction over the 
affected segment, although if a circumareolar incision will 
allow adequate access to the affected area this is preferred 
because it gives a better cosmetic result. The incision passes 
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   866 25/10/2017   09:24Benign breast disease 867
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
through the skin and the superficial fascia. A long artery for -
ceps is then inserted into the abscess cavity. Every part of the 
abscess is palpated against the point of the artery forceps and 
its jaws are opened. All loculi that can be felt are entered.
Finally, the artery forceps having been withdrawn, a fin -
ger is introduced and any remaining septa are disrupted. The 
wound may then be lightly packed with ribbon gauze or a 
drain inserted to allow dependent drainage.
Chronic intramammary abscess
A chronic intramammary abscess, which may follow inade -
quate drainage or injudicious antibiotic treatment, is often 
a very difficult condition to diagnose. When encapsulated 
within a thick wall of fibrous tissue the condition cannot be 
distinguished from a carcinoma without the histological evi -
dence from a biopsy.
Tuberculosis of the breast
Tuberculosis of the breast, which is comparatively rare, is usu-
ally associated with active pulmonary tuberculosis or tubercu-
lous cervical adenitis.
Tuberculosis of the breast occurs more often in parous 
women and usually presents with multiple chronic abscesses 
and sinuses and a typical bluish, attenuated appearance of the 
surrounding skin. The diagnosis rests on bacteriological and 
histological examination. Treatment is with antituberculous 
chemotherapy. Healing is usual, although often delayed, and 
mastectomy should be restricted to patients with persistent 
residual infection.
Actinomycosis
Actinomycosis of the breast is rarer still. The lesions present 
the essential characteristics of faciocervical actinomycosis.
Mondor’s disease
Mondor’s disease is thrombophlebitis of the superficial veins 
of the breast and anterior chest wall, although it may also 
occur in the arm.
In the absence of injury or infection, the cause of thrombo-
phlebitis (like that of spontaneous thrombophlebitis in other 
sites) is obscure. The pathognomonic feature is a thrombosed 
subcutaneous cord, usually attached to the skin. When the skin 
over the breast is stretched by raising the arm, a narrow, shal-
low, subcutaneous groove alongside the cord becomes appar -
ent (Figure 53.15). The differential diagnosis is lymphatic 
permeation from an occult carcinoma of the breast. The only 
treatment required is to restrict arm movements. The condi -
tion usually subsides within a few months without recurrence, 
complications or deformity. There are case reports of Mon -
dor’s disease being associated with subsequent development of 
malignancy, although coincidental malignancy is more likely.
Duct ectasia/periductal mastitis
PATHOLOGY
This is a dilatation of the breast ducts, which is often asso -
ciated with periductal inflammation. The pathogenesis is 
obscure and almost certainly not uniform in all cases, although 
the disease is much more common in smokers.
The classical description of the pathogenesis of duct ecta-
sia asserts that the first stage in the disorder is a dilatation in 
one or more of the larger lactiferous ducts, which fill with a 
stagnant brown or green secretion. This may discharge. These 
fluids then set up an irritant reaction in surrounding tissue, 
leading to periductal mastitis or even abscess and fistula for -
mation (Figures 53.16 and 53.17). In some cases, a chronic 
indurated mass forms beneath the areola, which mimics a car-
cinoma. Fibrosis eventually develops, which may cause slit-
like nipple retraction.
Figure 53.15 Mondor’s disease evident in the lateral aspect of the 
right breast.
Figure 53.16 Subareolar abscess in duct ectasia.
Henri Mondor , 1885–1962, Professor of Surgery, Paris, France.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   867 25/10/2017   09:24CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE868
An alternative theory suggests that periductal inflamma -
tion is the primary condition and, indeed, anaerobic bacte-
rial infection is found in some cases. A marked association 
between recurrent periductal inflammation and smoking 
has been demonstrated. This was thought by some to indi -
cate that arteriopathy is a contributing factor in its aetiology, 
although others believe that smoking increases the virulence 
of the commensal bacteria. It is certainly clear that cessation 
of smoking increases the chance of a long-term cure.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Nipple discharge (of any colour), a subareolar mass, abscess, 
mammary duct fistula and/or nipple retraction are the most 
common symptoms.
TREATMENT
In the case of a mass or nipple retraction, a carcinoma must be 
excluded by obtaining a mammogram and negative cytology or 
histology. If any suspicion remains the mass should be excised.
Antibiotic therapy may be tried, the most appropriate 
agents being co-amoxiclav or flucloxacillin and metronida -
zole. However, surgery is often the only option likely to bring 
about cure of this notoriously difficult condition; this consists 
of excision of all of the major ducts (Hadfield’s operation). It 
is particularly important to shave the back of the nipple to 
ensure that all terminal ducts are removed. Failure to do so 
will lead to recurrence.
Aberrations of normal development 
and involution
Nomenclature
The nomenclature of benign breast disease is confusing. This 
is because over the last century a variety of clinicians and  
pathologists have chosen to describe a mixture of physiological 
changes and disease processes according to a variety of clinical, 
pathological and aetiological terminology. As well as leading to 
confusion, patients were often unduly alarmed or overtreated 
by ascribing a pathological name to a variant of physiological 
development. To address this confusion, a concept (Aberrations 
of Normal Development and Involution (ANDI)) has been 
developed and described by the Cardiff Breast Clinic. 
Aetiology
The breast is a dynamic structure that undergoes changes 
throughout a woman’s repro ductive life and, superimposed 
upon this, cyclical changes throughout the menstrual cycle. 
(This is illustrated in Figure 53.18). The pathogenesis of 
ANDI involves disturbances in the breast physiology extend-
ing from a perturbation of normality to well-defined disease 
processes. There is often little correlation between the his -
tological appearance of the breast tissue and the symptoms.
Figure 53.17 Mammary fistula originating in a chronic subareolar 
abscess.
Figure 53.18 Normal breast changes throughout life. UK National 
Health Service Breast Screening Programme data.
9080 7060 50
Age (y)
Cancer
Simple
cyst
Nodu-
larity
Fibro-
adenoma
Frequency
40 3020 10 0
Pathology
The disease consists essentially of four features that may vary 
in extent and degree in any one breast.
 ● Cyst formation. Cysts are almost inevitable and very vari-
able in size.
 ● Fibrosis. Fat and elastic tissues disappear and are replaced 
with dense white fibrous trabeculae. The interstitial tissue 
is infiltrated with chronic inflammatory cells.
 ● Hyperplasia of epithelium in the lining of the ducts and 
acini may occur, with or without atypia.
 ● Papillomatosis. The epithelial hyperplasia may be so 
extensive that it results in papillomatous overgrowth 
within the ducts.
Clinical features
The symptoms of ANDI are many as the term is used to 
encompass a wide range of benign conditions, but often 
include an area of lumpiness (seldom discrete) and/or breast 
pain (mastalgia).
 ● A benign discrete lump in the breast is commonly a cyst or 
fibroadenoma. True lipomas occur rarely.
 ● Lumpiness may be bilateral, commonly in the upper outer 
quadrant or, less commonly, confined to one quadrant of 
one breast. The changes may be cyclical, with an increase 
in both lumpiness and often tenderness before a menstrual 
period.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   868 25/10/2017   09:24Benign breast disease 869
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
 ● Non-cyclical mastalgia is more common in perimeno -
pausal than postmenopausal women. It may be associated 
with ANDI or with periductal mastitis. It should be dis-
tinguished from referred pain, for example a musculoskel-
etal disorder. ‘Breast’ pain in postmenopausal women not 
taking hormonereplacement therapy (HRT) is usually 
derived from the chest wall, back or neck.
About 5% of breast cancers exhibit pain at presentation, 
but rarely as the sole presenting feature.
TREATMENT OF LUMPY BREASTS
If the clinician is confident that he or she is not dealing with 
a discrete abnormality (and clinical confidence is supported 
by mammography and/or ultrasound scanning if considered 
appropriate), the woman can initially be offered firm reassur -
ance. It is perhaps worthwhile reviewing the patient at a dif -
ferent point in the menstrual cycle, for example 6 weeks after 
the initial visit as often the clinical signs will have resolved by 
that time. There is a tendency for women with lumpy breasts 
to be rendered unnecessarily anxious and to be submitted 
to multiple random biopsies because the clinician lacks the 
courage of his or her convictions. Rapid referral into the sec -
ondary health care sytem often means patients are assessed 
without an intervening menstrual cycle and this may lead to 
additional concerns.
TREATMENT OF MASTALGIA
Pronounced cyclical mastalgia may become a significant clin-
ical problem if the pain and tenderness interfere with the 
woman’s life, disturb her sleep and impair sexual activity. Ini-
tially, firm reassurance that the symptoms are not associated 
with cancer will help the majority of women. Acknowledge -
ment that this is a real symptom, a non-dismissive attitude 
and an explanation of the aetiology are all helpful in manag-
ing this condition.
In the first instance, an appropriately fitting and support -
ive bra should be worn throughout the day and a soft bra 
(such as a sports bra) worn at night. Avoiding caffeine drinks 
is said to help, although the author remains unconvinced.
A patient symptom diary will help her to chart the pattern 
of pain throughout the month and thus determine whether 
this is cyclical mastalgia. This allows the majority of patients 
to adjust to the concept of a cyclical nature of their problem 
but, if reassurance is inadequate, then a planned escalation 
of treatment (Table 53.1) could be advised. Oil of evening 
primrose, in adequate doses given over 3 months, will help 
more than half of these women. It appears to achieve higher 
response rates in those over 40 years of age rather than 
younger women. For those with intractable symptoms, an 
antigonadotrophin, such as danazol, or a prolactin inhibitor, 
such as bromocriptine, may be tried. Very rarely it is neces-
sary to prescribe an antioestrogen, for example tamoxifen, or 
a luteinising hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist to 
deprive the breast epithelium of oestrogenic drive.
For non-cyclical mastalgia it is important to exclude extra-
mammary causes such as chest wall pain (Tietze  syndrome). 
This is common in postmenopausal women who are not 
 taking HRT, and the neck and shoulders are common sights 
of referred pain. It is seldom necessary these days to carry 
out a biopsy on a very localised tender area that might be 
harbouring a subclinical cancer as imaging is so much better. 
 Treatment may be with non-steroidal analgesics or by injec -
tion with local anaesthetic on a ‘trigger spot’.
Breast cysts
These occur most commonly in the last decade of repro duc-
tive life as a result of a non-integrated involution of stroma 
and epithelium. They are often multiple, may be bilateral and 
can mimic malignancy. Diagnosis can be confirmed by aspira-
tion and/or ultrasound. They typically present suddenly and 
cause great alarm; prompt diagnosis and drainage provides 
immediate relief.
Treatment
A solitary cyst or small collection of cysts can be aspirated. If 
they resolve completely, and if the fluid is not bloo d-stained, 
no further treatment is required. However, 30% will recur and 
require reaspiration. Cytological examination of cyst fluid is 
no longer practised routinely. If there is a residual lump or if 
the fluid is blood-stained, a core biopsy or local excision for 
histological diagnosis is advisable, which is also the case if 
the cyst reforms repeatedly. This will exclude cystadenocarci-
noma, which is more common in elderly women.
Galactocele
Galactocele is rare and usually presents as a solitary, subareo-
lar cyst and always dates from lactation. It contains milk and 
in long-standing cases its walls tend to calcify.
TABLE 53.1 Treatment of breast pain.
Exclude cancer
Reassure Use pain chart if unsure if cyclical or non-cyclical. Also allows time for reassurance to become 
active!
Adequate support Firm bra during the day and a softer bra at night
Exclude caffeine Works for some although not very efficacious in author’s practice
Consider medication
 Evening primrose oil (GLA) Better effect in women over 40 years old than in younger women
 Danazol, 100 mg three times a day Start at 100 mg per day and increase (seldom used these days)
 Tamoxifen Not licensed for this indication but occasionally very helpful
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   869 25/10/2017   09:24CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE870
Fibroadenoma
These usually arise in the fully developed breast between the 
ages of 15 and 25 years, although occasionally they occur in 
much older women. They arise from hyperplasia of a single 
lobule and usually grow up to 2–3 cm in size. They are sur -
rounded by a well-marked capsule and can thus be enucleated 
through a cosmetically appropriate incision. A fibroadenoma 
does not require excision unless associated with suspicious 
cytology, it becomes very large or the patient expressly desires 
the lump to be removed. Alternatives to surgery include 
cryoablation, heating with high-frequency ultrasound (echo-
therapy) or removal with a large core vacuum biopsy system. 
Even if clinically obvious, a biopsy should be obtained if the 
patient is over 25 or there are any atypical features on ultra -
sound. 
Giant fibroadenomas occasionally occur during puberty. 
They are over 5 cm in diameter and are often rapidly growing 
but, in other respects, are similar to smaller fibroadenomas 
and can be enucleated through a submammary incision. They 
are more common in the Afro-Caribbean population.
Phyllodes tumour
These benign tumours, previously sometimes known as sero-
cystic disease of Brodie or cystosarcoma phyllodes, usually 
occur in women over the age of 40 years but can appear in 
younger women. They present as a large, sometimes massive, 
tumour with an unevenly bosselated surface (Figure 53.19). 
Occasionally, ulceration of overlying skin occurs because of 
pressure necrosis. Despite their size, phyllodes tumours remain 
mobile on the chest wall. Histologically, there is a wide 
variation in their appearance, with some of low malignant 
potential resembling a fibroadenoma and others having a 
higher mitotic index, which are histologically worrying. The 
latter may recur locally but, despite the name of cystosarcoma 
phyllodes, they are rarely cystic and only very rarely develop 
features of a sarcomatous tumour. These may metastasise via 
the bloodstream.
Treatment
Treatment for the benign type is enucleation in young women 
or wide local excision. Massive tumours, recurrent tumours 
and those of the malignant type will require mastectomy.
Sir Benjamin Collins Brodie , 1783–1862, surgeon, St. George’s Hospital, London, UK, described serocystic disease of the breast in 1840.
Alexander Tietze , 1864–1927, Professor of Surgery, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland), described this condition in 1921.
Figure 53.19 Phyllodes tumour (courtesy of Professor Mike Dixon). 
Summary box 53.2
Benign breast disorder classification
Congenital disorders
●● Inverted nipple
●● Supernumerary breasts/nipples
●● Non-breast disorders including Tietze’s disease 
(costochondritis)
●● Sebaceous cysts and other skin conditions
Injury
Inflammation/infection
●● ANDI (aberations of normal differentiation and involution):
Cyclical nodularity and mastalgia
Cysts
Fibroadenoma
Duct ectasia/periductal mastitis
●● Pregnancy-related:
Galactocele
Lactational abscess
When the diagnosis of carcinoma is 
in doubt
There will always be situations in which the clinician cannot 
be sure whether a particular lump in the breast is an area of 
mammary dysplasia, a benign tumour or an early carcinoma.
If there is doubt on clinical, cytological or radiological 
examination, it is essential to obtain a tissue diagnosis. This 
is often possible by needle biopsy. In the event of a negative 
result, open biopsy of the mass or large guage vacuum biopsy 
is necessary. Because of the possibility of reporting errors and 
because the histology is likely to be more difficult (if a diag -
nosis has not already been made), the author suggests that 
frozen-section reporting should be used rarely and certainly 
should not form the basis for a decision to undertake a mas-
tectomy. Table 53.2 gives an algorithm for investigating any 
breast lump.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   870 25/10/2017   09:24Carcinoma of the br east 871
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Risk of malignancy developing 
in association with benign breast 
pathology
The relative risks of malignancy developing according to dif-
ferent histological features found at biopsy are illustrated in 
Table 53.3.
These were elucidated 30 years ago but remain pertinent 
and a recent single-centre review reinforces the conclusion 
that the histological classification of the benign lesion in 
combination with a family history of breast cancer are import-
ant predictors of risk.
CARCINOMA OF THE BREAST
Breast cancer is the most common cause of death in 
middle-aged women in western countries. In England and 
Wales, 1 in 12 women will develop the disease during their 
lifetime. The incidence is expected to continue rising as 
the population ages, although more slowly than previously 
thought as the use of HRT has reduced in the USA and UK.
Aetiological factors
Geographical
Carcinoma of the breast occurs commonly in the west-
ern world, accounting for 3–5% of all deaths in women. In 
resource-poor countries it accounts for 1–3% of deaths.
Age
Carcinoma of the breast is extremely rare before the age of 
20 years but, thereafter, the incidence steadily rises so that by 
the age of 90 years nearly 20% of women are affected.
Gender
Less than 0.5% of patients with breast cancer are male.
Genetic
Breast cancer occurs more commonly in women with a family 
history of breast cancer than in the general population. Breast 
cancer related to a specific mutation accounts for about 5% of 
breast cancers, yet has far-reaching repercussions in terms of 
counselling and tumour prevention in these women. This will 
be discussed more fully in a subsequent section.
Diet
Because breast cancer so commonly affects women in the 
‘developed’ world, dietary factors may play a part in its 
causation. There is some evidence that there is a link with 
diets low in phytoestrogens. Alcohol consumption is associ-
ated with an increased risk.
Endocrine
Breast cancer is more common in nulliparous women and 
breast-feeding in particular appears to be protective. Also 
protective is having a first child at an early age, especially 
if associated with late menarche and early menopause. It is 
known that in postmenopausal women, breast cancer is more 
common in the obese. This is thought to be because of an 
increased conversion of steroid hormones to oestradiol in 
the body fat. Recent studies have clarified the role of exoge-
nous hormones, in particular the oral contraceptive pill and 
HRT, in the development of breast cancer. For most women 
the benefits of these treatments will far outweigh the small 
putative risk; however, long-term exposure to the combined 
preparation of HRT does significantly increase the risk of 
developing breast cancer. The recent fall in use of HRT in 
USA and UK has seen a reduction in the incidence of breast 
cancer in the 50–60-year-old cohort.
Previous radiation
This was considered to be of historical interest, as the major -
ity of women exposed to the atomic bombs at Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki have now died. It was, however , also a problem in 
women who had been treated with mantle radiotherapy as 
TABLE 53.2 Investigation of a breast lump (after imaging 
performed) using fine-needle aspiration cytology.
Cystic Lump disappears; clear 
fluid (many colours)
Discharge patient
Residual thickening; blood-
stained fluid
Investigate – ?core biopsy
Solid Benign Offer excision or observe
Atypical Investigate – ?core biopsy
Malignant Treat for cancer
TABLE 53.3 Relative risk of invasive breast carcinoma 
based on pathological examination of benign breast tissue 
(American College of Pathologists Consensus Statement).a
No increased risk Adenosis, sclerosing or florid
Apocrine metaplasia
Cysts, macro and/or micro
Duct ectasia
Fibroadenoma
Fibrosis
Hyperplasia
Mastitis (inflammation)
Periductal mastitis
Squamous metaplasia
Slightly increased risk 
(1.5–2 times)
Hyperplasia, moderate or florid, 
solid or papillary
Papilloma with a fibrovascular core
Moderately increased risk 
(5 times)
Atypical hyperplasia (ductal or 
lobular)
Insufficient data to assign 
a risk
Solitary papilloma of lactiferous 
sinus
Radial scar lesion
After Page and Dupont (1978) by kind permission of the Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, USA.
a A combination with positive family history significantly increases the risks 
shown above.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   871 25/10/2017   09:24CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE872
part of the management of Hodgkin’ s disease, in which sig -
nificant doses of radiation to the breast were received. The 
risk appeared about a decade after treatment and was higher 
if radiotherapy occurred during breast development. A sur -
veillance programme was organised in the UK with MRI and 
mammographic screening. This type of radiotherapy is now 
no longer used and the cohort of patients at risk is now small.
Pathology
Breast cancer may arise from the epithelium of the duct sys -
tem anywhere from the nipple end of the major lactiferous 
ducts to the terminal duct unit, which is in the breast lobule. 
The disease may be entirely in situ, an increasingly common 
finding with the advent of breast cancer screening, or may be 
invasive cancer. The degree of differentiation of the tumour is 
usually described using three grades: well differentiated, mod-
erately differentiated or poorly differentiated. Commonly, a 
numerical grading system based on the scoring of three indi -
vidual factors (nuclear pleomorphism, tubule formation and 
mitotic rate) is used, with grade III cancers roughly equating 
to the poorly differentiated group.
Previously, descriptive terms were used to classify breast  
cancer (‘scirrhous’, meaning woody, or ‘medullary’, meaning 
brain-like). More recently, histological descriptions have been 
used. These have been shown to have clinical correlations in 
the way that the tumour behaves. However, with the increas-
ing application of molecular markers, there is a change in the 
way that breast cancers are classified and it is likely that much 
more information about an individual tumour will be routinely 
reported, such as its likelihood of metastasis and to which thera-
peutic agents it will be susceptible. Gene array analysis of breast 
cancers has identified five major subtypes (luminal A and lumi-
nal B, triple negative, Her-2 receptor positive and a miscella -
neous group.) Some of these correlate with known markers such 
as oestrogen receptor status. There are specific gene signatures 
that correlate with response to chemotherapy or poor prog-
nosis. A commercial test is now available to patients with 
oestrogen-positive tumours to assess their risk of recurrence. 
This is based on analysis of 21 genes and may allow selection of 
patients in whom more aggressive therapy is indicated. 
Current nomenclature
Ductal carcinoma is the most common variant with  lobular 
carcinoma occurring in up to 15% of cases. There are sub -
types of lobular cancer, including the classical type, that carry 
a better prognosis than the pleomorphic type. Occasionally, 
the picture may be mixed with both ductal and lobular fea -
tures. There are different patterns of spread depending on 
histological type. If there is doubt whether a tumour is pre -
dominantly lobular in type, immunohistochemical analysis 
using the e-cadherin antibody, which reacts positively in lob-
ular cancer, will help in diagnosis.
Rarer histological variants, usually carrying a better pro -
gnosis, include colloid or mucinous carcinoma, whose cells 
produce abundant mucin, medullary carcinoma, with solid 
sheets of large cells often associated with a marked lymphocytic 
reaction and tubular carcinoma. Invasive lobular carcinoma is 
commonly multifocal and/or bilateral, hence the increasing use 
of MRI for assessment. Cases detected via the screening pro -
gramme are often smaller and better differentiated than those 
presenting to the symptomatic service and are of a special type.
Inflammatory carcinoma is a fortunately rare, highly 
aggressive cancer that presents as a painful, swollen breast, 
which is warm with cutaneous oedema. This is the result of 
blockage of the subdermal lymphatics with carcinoma cells. 
Inflammatory cancer usually involves at least one-third of the 
breast and may mimic a breast abscess. A biopsy will con -
firm the diagnosis and show undifferentiated carcinoma cells. 
It used to be rapidly fatal but with aggressive chemotherapy 
and radiotherapy and with salvage surgery the prognosis has 
improved considerably.
In situ carcinoma is preinvasive cancer that has not brea-
ched the epithelial basement membrane. This was previously 
a rare, usually asymptomatic, finding in breast biopsy speci-
mens but is becoming increasingly common because of the 
advent of mammographic screening; it now accounts for over 
20% of cancers detected by screening in the UK. In situ car -
cinoma may be ductal (DCIS) or lobular (LCIS), the latter 
often being multifocal and bilateral. Both are markers for the 
later development of invasive cancer, which will develop in 
at least 20% of patients. Although mastectomy is curative, 
this constitutes overtreatment in many cases. The best tre -
atment for in situ carcinoma is the subject of a number of 
on-going clinical trials. DCIS may be classified using the Van 
Nuys system, which combines the patient’s age, type of DCIS 
and presence of microcalcification, extent of resection margin 
and size of disease. Patients with a high score benefit from 
radiotherapy after excision, whereas those of low grade, whose 
tumour is completely excised, need no further treatment.
Staining for oestrogen and progesterone receptors is now 
routine, as their presence will indicate the use of adjuvant 
hormonal therapy with tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor 
(AI) (Figure 53.20). Tumours are also stained for Her-2 or 
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, Curator of the Museum, and Demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 53.20 Immunohistochemical staining for oestrogen receptors.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   872 25/10/2017   09:24Carcinoma of the br east 873
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
c-erbB2 (a growth factor receptor) as patients who are posi -
tive can be treated with the monoclonal antibody trastuzu -
mab (Herceptin®), either in the adjuvant or relapse setting.
The pathologist is an important member of the breast can-
cer team and will increasingly help decide which adjuvant 
therapies will be appropriate.
Paget’s disease of the nipple
Paget’s disease of the nipple (Figure 53.21) is a superficial 
manifestation of an underlying breast carcinoma. It presents 
as an eczema-like condition of the nipple and areola, which 
persists despite local treatment. The nipple is eroded slowly 
and eventually disappears. If left, the underlying carcinoma 
will sooner or later become clinically evident. Nipple eczema 
should be biopsied if there is any doubt about its cause. Micro-
scopically, Paget’s disease is characterised by the presence of 
large, ovoid cells with abundant, clear, pale-staining cyto-
plasm in the Malpighian layer of the epidermis.
The spread of breast cancer
Local spread
The tumour increases in size and invades other portions of 
the breast. It tends to involve the skin and to penetrate the 
pectoral muscles and even the chest wall if diagnosed late.
Lymphatic metastasis
Lymphatic metastasis occurs primarily to the axillary and the 
internal mammary lymph no des. Tumours in the posterior 
one-third of the breast are more likely to drain to the internal 
mammary nodes. The involvement of lymph nodes has both 
biological and chronological significance. It represents not 
only an evolutional event in the spread of the carcinoma but 
is also a marker for the metastatic potential of that tumour. 
Involvement of supraclavicular nodes and of any contralat -
eral lymph nodes represents advanced disease.
Spread by the bloodstream
It is by this route that skeletal metastases occur, although the 
initial spread may be via the lymphatic system. In order of 
frequency the lumbar vertebrae, femur, thoracic vertebrae, rib 
and skull are affected and these deposits are generally osteo -
lytic. Metastases may also commonly occur in the liver, lungs 
and brain and, occasionally, the adrenal glands and ovaries; 
they have, in fact, been described in most body sites. Analysis 
of peripheral blood samples for circulating tumour deoxyribo-
nucleic acid (DNA) has shown prognostic significance and 
can be used to monitor response.
Clinical presentation
Although any portion of the breast, including the axillary 
tail, may be involved, breast cancer is found most frequently 
in the upper outer quadrant (Figures 53.22  and 53.23). 
Most breast cancers will present as a hard lump, which may be 
associated with indrawing of the nipple or overlying skin. As 
the disease advances locally there may be skin involvement 
with peau d’orange (Figure 53.24) or frank ulceration and 
fixation to the chest wall (Figure 53.25). This is described 
as cancer-en-cuirasse when the disease progresses around the 
Figure 53.21  (a) Paget’s disease of the nipple. (b) Histological 
appearance of Paget’s disease.
(a)
(b)
Marcello Malpighi , 1628–1694, Professor of Physic successively at Bologna, Pisa and Messina, and in 1691 Physician to the Papal Court in Rome, Italy.
peau d’orange  is French for ‘orange skin’.
Figure 53.22 Invasive carcinoma of the right breast. Note the shrink-
ing and elevation of the breast with nipple retraction.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   873 25/10/2017   09:25CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE874
chest wall. About 5% of breast cancers in the UK will present 
with either locally advanced disease or symptoms of metastatic 
disease. This figure is much higher in resource-poor countries. 
These patients must then undergo a staging evaluation so 
that the full extent of their disease can be ascertained. This 
will include a careful clinical examination, chest radiograph, 
computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen and 
a bone scan (either using isotopes or MRI) (Figure 53.26). 
This is important for both prognosis and treatment; a patient 
with widespread visceral metastases may obtain an increased 
length and quality of survival from systemic hormone therapy 
or chemotherapy, but is unlikely to benefit from surgery as she 
will die from her metastases before local disease becomes a 
problem. In contrast, patients with relatively small tumours 
(<2 cm in diameter) confined to the breast with negative ipsi-
lateral lymph nodes rarely need staging beyond a good clinical 
examination as the pick-up rate for distant metastases is so 
low. Currently, there are no tests recommended for screening 
of patients with early-stage breast cancer.
12% 60%
6% 10%
12%
Figure 53.23  The relationship of car cinoma of the breast to the 
quadrants of the breast.
Figure 53.24 Peau d’orange of the breast.
Figure 53.25 Ulcerated carcinoma of the right breast.
Figure 53.26 Skeletal isotope bone scan showing multiple ‘hotspots’ 
due to metastases.
Staging of breast cancer
Classical staging of breast cancer by means of the TNM 
(tumour–node–metastasis) or UICC (Union Internationale 
Contre le Cancer) criteria is used less often with increased 
knowledge of the biological variables that affect prognosis. It 
is becoming clear that these factors (discussed in more detail 
below) rather than anatomical mapping that influence out -
come and treatment. Perhaps a more pragmatic approach 
would be to classify patients according to the treatment that 
they require (Table 53.4). Treatment recommendations are 
summarised in consensus statements such as those from the 
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and the St 
Gallen Conference.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   874 25/10/2017   09:25Carcinoma of the br east 875
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Prognosis of breast cancer
The best indicators of likely prognosis in breast cancer remain 
tumour size, grade and lymph node status; however, it is real-
ised that some large tumours will remain confined to the breast 
for decades, whereas some very small tumours are incurable 
at diagnosis. Hence, the prognosis of a cancer depends not 
on its chronological age but on its invasive and metastatic 
potential. In an attempt to define which tumours will behave 
aggressively, and thus require early systemic treatment, a host 
of prognostic factors have been described. These include 
the histological grade of the tumour, hormone receptor sta -
tus, measures of tumour proliferation such as Ki-67, growth 
factor analysis and oncogene or oncogene product measure -
ments. Many others are under investigation but have proved 
of little practical value in patient management. Prognostic 
indices (such as the Nottingham prognostic index) have 
combined these factors to allow subdivision of patients into 
discrete prognostic groups. More recently, computer-aided 
programs (adjuvant online; www.adjuvantonline.com or in 
the UK Predict; www.predict.nhs.uk ) have been developed, 
which incorporate the putative benefits of treatment allowing 
oncologist and patient to visualise the benefits of therapy. 
Treatment of cancer of the breast
The two basic principles of treatment are to reduce the 
chance of local recurrence and the risk of metastatic spread. 
Treatment of early breast cancer will usually involve surgery 
with or without radiotherapy. Systemic therapy such as che-
motherapy or hormone therapy is added if there are adverse 
prognostic factors such as lymph node involvement, indicat-
ing a high likelihood of metastatic relapse. At the other end 
of the spectrum, locally advanced or metastatic disease is usu-
ally treated by systemic therapy to palliate symptoms, with 
surgery playing a much smaller role. An algorithm for the 
management of breast cancer is shown in Summary box 53.3.
treat the patient within the protocol of a controlled clinical 
trial. As part of the preoperative and postoperative manage-
ment of the patient it is often useful to employ the skills of a 
trained breast counsellor and also to have available advice on 
breast prostheses, psychological support and physiotherapy, 
when appropriate.
In many specialist centres the care of breast cancer patients 
is undertaken as a joint venture between the surgeon, medi -
cal oncologist, radiotherapist and allied health professionals 
such as the clinical nurse specialist. This has been shown to 
be good for the patient, to lead to higher trial entry and to 
improve the mental health of the professionals in the breast 
team. There are published guidelines for the optimal manage-
ment of patients with breast cancer such as SIGN 84 (Scot-
tish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, (www.sign.ac.uk/
guidelines/fulltext/84/).
Local treatment of early breast cancer
Local control is achieved through surgery and/or radio therapy.
TABLE 53.4 A pragmatic classification of breast cancer.
Group Approximate 
5-year survival 
rate (%)
Example Treatment
‘Very low-risk’ primary breast cancer >90 Screen-detected DCIS, tubular or special types Local
‘Low-risk’ primary breast cancer 70–90 Node negative with favourable histology Locoregional with/without systemic
‘High-risk’ primary breast cancer <70 Node positive or unfavourable histology Locoregional with systemic
Locally advanced <30 Large primary or inflammatory Primary systemic
Metastatic – – Primary systemic
DCIS, duct carcinoma in situ.
Summary box 53.3
Algorithm for management of operable breast cancer
●● Achieve local control
●● Appropriate surgery
Wide local excision (clear margins) and radiotherapy, or
Mastectomy ± radiotherapy (offer reconstruction – 
immediate or delayed)
Combined with axillary procedure (see text)
Await final pathology and receptor measurements
Use risk assessment tool; stage if appropriate
●● Treat risk of systemic disease
Offer chemotherapy if prognostic factors poor; include 
Herceptin if Her-2 positive
Radiotherapy as decided above
Hormone therapy if oestrogen receptor or progesterone 
receptor positive
The multidisciplinary team approach
As in all branches of medicine, good doctor–patient com -
munication plays a vital role in helping to alleviate patient 
anxiety. Participation of the patient in treatment decisions is 
of particular importance in breast cancer when there may be 
uncertainty as to the best therapeutic option and the desire to 
SURGERY
Surgery still has a central role to play in the management of 
breast cancer but there has been a gradual shift towards more 
conservative techniques, backed up by clinical trials that have 
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   875 25/10/2017   09:25CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE876
shown equal efficacy between mastectomy and local excision 
followed by radiotherapy.
It was initially hoped that avoiding mastectomy would  
help to alleviate the considerable psychological morbidity 
associated with breast cancer, but recent studies have shown 
that over 30% of women develop significant anxiety and 
depression following both radical and conservative surgery. 
After mastectomy women tend to worry about the effect of the 
operation on their appearance and relationships, whereas after 
conservative surgery they may remain fearful of a recurrence.
Mastectomy is indicated for large tumours (in relation to 
the size of the breast), central tumours beneath or involving 
the nipple, multifocal disease, local recurrence or patient 
preference. The radical Halsted mastectomy, which included 
excision of the breast, axillary lymph nodes and pectoralis 
major and minor muscles, is no longer indicated as it causes 
excessive morbidity with no survival benefit. The modified 
radical (Patey) mastectomy is more commonly performed and 
is thus described below. Simple mastectomy involves removal 
of only the breast with no dissection of the axilla, except for 
the region of the axillary tail of the breast, which usually has 
attached to it a few nodes low in the anterior group.
Patey mastectomy  The breast and associated structures are 
dissected en bloc (Figure 53.27) and the excised mass is com-
posed of:
 ● the whole breast;
 ● a large portion of skin, the centre of which overlies the 
tumour but which always includes the nipple;
 ● all of the fat, fascia and lymph nodes of the axilla.
The pectoralis minor muscle is either divided or retracted 
to gain access to the upper two-thirds of the axilla. The axil -
lary vein and nerves to the serratus anterior and latissimus 
dorsi (the thoracodorsal trunk) should be preserved. The 
intercostal brachial nerves are usually divided in this oper -
ation and the patient should be warned about sensation 
changes postoperatively.
The wound is drained using a wide-bore suction tube. 
Early mobilisation of the arm is encouraged and physio-
therapy helps normal function to return very quickly; most 
patients are able to resume light work within a few weeks.
Conservative breast cancer surgery   This is aimed at 
removing the tumour plus a margin of normal breast tissue. 
This is commonly referred to as a wide local excision. The term 
lumpectomy should be reserved for an operation in which a 
benign tumour is excised and in which a large amount of nor-
mal breast tissue is not resected. A quadrantectomy involves 
removing the entire segment of the breast that contains the 
tumour. Both of these operations are usually combined with 
axillary surgery, usually via a separate incision in the axilla. 
There are various options that can be used to deal with the 
axilla, including sentinel node biopsy, sampling, removal of 
the nodes behind and lateral to the pectoralis minor (level 
II) or a full axillary dissection (level III). The width of the 
Summary box 53.4
Treatment of early breast cancer
The aims of treatment are:
●● ‘Cure’: likely in some patients but late recurrence is possible
●● Control of local disease in the breast and axilla
●● Conservation of local form and function
●● Prevention or delay of the occurrence of distant metastases
William Stewart Halsted , 1852–1922, Professor of Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD, USA.
David Howard Patey , 1899–1976, surgeon, The Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.
Pectoralis
major
Biceps and 
coracobrachalis muscles
Pectoralis
minor
Axillary
artery
Long thoracic
nerve
Subscapular
nerves
Thoracodorsal
nerve
Subscapularis
muscle
Latissimus
dorsi muscle
Axillary
vein
Figure 53.27 Radical mastectomy with 
pectoralis removed; the modified radical 
approach leaves the pectoralis major 
muscle intact.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   876 25/10/2017   09:25Carcinoma of the br east 877
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
margin has attracted much controversy, with some units 
adopting a 1-cm margin and others 1 mm. A recent consensus 
meeting has suggested that no tumour at the inked margin is 
sufficient, although the trials upon which this is based have 
been challenged and many still regard 1 mm as a safer margin. 
There is no need for wider margins than this.
There is a somewhat higher rate of local recurrence follow-
ing conservative surgery, even if combined with radiotherapy, 
but the long-term outlook in terms of survival is unaffected. 
Local recurrence is more common in younger women and in 
those with high-grade tumours and involved resection margins. 
Patients whose margins are involved should have a further 
local excision (or a mastectomy) before going on to radiother-
apy. Local excision of a breast cancer without radiotherapy is 
associated with an unacceptably high local recurrence rate.
The role of axillary surgery is to stage the patient and to 
treat the axilla. The presence of metastatic disease within the 
axillary lymph nodes remains the best single marker for progno-
sis; however, treatment of the axilla does not affect long-term 
survival, suggesting that the axillary nodes act not as a ‘reser-
voir’ for disease but as a marker for metastatic potential. It used 
to be accepted that only premenopausal women should have 
their axilla staged by operation as there was a good case for giv-
ing chemotherapy to lymph node-positive patients; however, 
it is now clear that postmenopausal women also benefit from 
chemotherapy and so all patients require axillary staging. In 
postmenopausal patients, tamoxifen was once given regardless 
of axillary lymph node status, but it is now known that only 
hormone receptor-positive patients, irrespective of age, benefit 
from this. Axillary surgery should not be combined with radio-
therapy to the axilla because of excess morbidity. Removal of 
the internal mammary lymph nodes is unnecessary.
Sentinel node biopsy   This technique has become the 
standard of care in the management of the axilla in patients 
with clinically node-negative disease. An axillary ultrasound 
is now routinely performed along with the ultrasound of the 
breast cancer. Any suspicious nodes can be biopsied by either 
cytology or core biopsy The sentinel node is localised perop -
eratively by the injection of patent blue dye (Figure 53.28)  
and radioisotope-labelled albumin in the breast. The recom-
mended site of injection is in the subdermal plexus around 
the nipple, although some still inject on the axillary side of 
the cancer. The marker passes to the primary node draining 
the area and is detected visually and with a hand-held gamma 
camera. Peropererative diagnosis allows completion axillary 
clearance if nodal disease is detected. This may be achieved 
with frozen-section analysis, touch imprint cytology (TIC) or 
by molecular methods. These involve homogenising the node 
and detection of a gene such as cytokeratin 19 or mammoglo-
bin. In some cases there are only subcapsular micrometastases 
that are missed at frozen section. In patients in whom there 
is no tumour involvement of the sentinel node, further axil -
lary dissection can be avoided. The utility of intraoperative 
diagnosis is increasingly questioned. It is time-consuming and 
with increasing use and experience of axillary ultrasound the 
rate of unexpectedly positive nodes is low. Moreover, there is 
increasing adoption of no further surgery even if a positive sen-
tinel node is encountered. A nomogram outlining the chances 
of further axillary node positivity has been developed by the 
group at Memorial Sloan Kettering Hospital, New York, and is 
available on their website (www.mskcc.org/mskcc/html/15938.
cfm). Recent trial results have called into question the utility 
of completion axillary clearance after a positive sentinel node 
has been detected but at present this remains controversial. 
RADIOTHERAPY
Radiotherapy to the chest wall after mastectomy is indicated 
in selected patients in whom the risks of local recurrence are 
high. This includes patients with large tumours and those 
with large numbers of positive nodes or extensive lympho-
vascular invasion. There is some evidence that postoperative 
chest wall radiotherapy improves survival in women with 
node-positive breast cancer.
It is conventional to combine conservative surgery with 
radiotherapy to the remaining breast tissue. Recurrence rates 
are too high for treatment by local excision alone except in 
special cases (small node-negative tumours of a special type). 
Trials are under way to investigate whether radiotherapy 
can be given intraoperatively at one sitting or as an accel-
erated postoperative course. This would have considerable 
advantages in making conservative surgery available in areas 
where radiotherapy is not currently used. It would also relieve 
the burden of the current demand for radiotherapy, which 
accounts for up to 40% of activity in some departments.
Extrapolation from the Oxford overviews of systemic 
therapy (carried out every 5 years) suggests that for every four 
local recurrences avoided, one additional life will be spared at 
15 years. This figure has recently been challenged but it does 
highlight the importance of getting the initial treatment right 
and avoiding local recurrence.
Adjuvant systemic therapy
Over the last 25 years there has been a revolution in under -
standing of the biological nature of carcinoma of the breast. 
It is now widely accepted that the outcomes of treatment are 
predetermined by the extent of micrometastatic disease at 
the time of diagnosis. Variations in the radical extent of local 
therapy might influence local relapse but probably do not 
alter long-term mortality from the disease. However, systemic 
therapy targeted at these putative micrometastases might be 
expected to delay relapse and prolong survival. As a result of 
Figure 53.28 Sentinel node biopsy.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   877 25/10/2017   09:25CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE878
many international clinical trials and recent world overview 
analyses it can be stated with statistical confidence that the 
appropriate use of adjuvant chemotherapy or hormone ther -
apy will improve relapse-free survival by approximately 30%, 
which ultimately translates into an absolute improvement in 
survival of the order of 10% at 15 years. Bearing in mind how 
common breast cancer is in Northern Europe and the USA, 
these figures are of major public health importance.
Who to treat and with what are still questions for which 
absolute answers have yet to found, but the data from over -
views of recent trials show that lymph node-positive and many 
higher-risk node-negative women should be advised to have 
adjuvant combined chemotherapy. Women with hormone 
receptor-positive tumours will obtain a worthwhile benefit 
from at least 5 years of endocrine therapy, either 20 mg daily of 
tamoxifen if premenopausal or the AIs (anastrozole, letrozole 
and exemestane) if postmenopausal. It is no longer appropriate 
to give hormone therapy to women who do not have oestrogen 
or progesterone receptor-positive disease. Recent trials have 
shown that longer durations of endocrine therapy provide a 
small extra benefit but with increased toxicity.
HORMONE THERAPY
Tamoxifen has been the most widely used ‘hormonal’ treat -
ment in breast cancer. Its efficacy as an adjuvant therapy was 
first reported in 1983 and it has now been shown to reduce 
the annual rate of recurrence by 25%, with a 17% reduction 
in the annual rate of death. Beneficial effects of tamoxifen in 
reducing the risk of tumours in the contralateral breast have 
also been observed, as has its role as a preventative agent 
(IBIS-I and NSABP-P1 trials). Trials studying the optimal 
duration of treatment suggest that 5 years of treatment is pref-
erable to 2 years.
Other hormonal agents that are also beneficial as adju -
vant therapy have been developed. These include the LHRH 
agonists, which induce reversible ovarian suppression and 
thus have the same beneficial effects as surgical or radiation-  
induced ovarian ablation in premenopausal receptor-positive 
women, and the oral AIs for postmenopausal women. AIs are 
now licensed for treatment of all stages of disease and have 
been shown to be superior to tamoxifen. A large trial com -
paring anastrazole to tamoxifen in the adjuvant setting has 
shown beneficial effect for the AI in terms of relapse-free 
survival, although no benefit for overall survival. There is an 
additional reduction in contralateral disease, which makes 
this drug suitable for a study of prevention, and the side-effect 
profile is different from that of tamoxifen. AIs are more expen-
sive than tamoxifen but are coming off patent protection and 
generic copies may allow more widespread use. There is an 
increase in bone density loss with patients taking an AI and 
a bone density scan is advised prior to commencement with 
treatment of underlying osptepaenia or osteporosis.
CHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapy using a first-generation regime such as a 
6-monthly cycle of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 
5-fluorouracil (CMF) will achieve a 25% reduction in the risk 
of relapse over a 10–15-year period. It is important to under -
stand that this 25% reduction refers to the likelihood of an 
event happening. For example, a woman with a 96% chance 
of survival at, for example, 5 years only has a 4% chance of 
death over this time and the absolute benefit from chemo -
therapy would be an increase in survival rate of 1%, to 97%. 
This would not be a sufficient gain to offset the side effects of 
this potentially toxic therapy. However, for a woman with a 
60% chance of dying (40% survival rate) a 25% reduction in 
risk would increase her likelihood of survival to 55% and thus 
treatment would be worthwhile. CMF is no longer considered 
adequate adjuvant chemotherapy and modern second- and 
third-generation regimes include an anthracycline (doxoru -
bicin or epirubicin) and the newer agents such as the taxanes.
Chemotherapy used to be prescribed only to premeno -
pausal women with a poor prognosis (in whom its effects 
are likely to be the result, in part, of a chemical castration 
effect) but it is now also offered to postmenopausal women 
with poor prognosis disease. Chemotherapy may be conside -
red in node-negative patients if other prognostic factors, such 
as tumour grade, imply a high risk of recurrence. The effect of 
combining hormone and chemotherapy is additive, although 
hormone therapy is started after completion of chemotherapy 
to reduce side effects.
High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue for patients 
with heavy lymph node involvement has now been shown in 
controlled trials to offer no advantage and has been abandoned.
Primary chemotherapy (neoadjuvant) is being used in 
many centres for large but operable tumours that would tradi-
tionally require a mastectomy (and almost certainly postope -
rative adjuvant chemotherapy). The aim of this treatment is 
to reduce tumour volume to enable breast-conserving surgery 
to be performed. This approach is successful in up to 80% 
of cases, but is not associated with improvements in survival 
compared with conventionally timed chemotherapy. Patients 
who achieve a complete pathological response have increa -
sed survival rates. Patients with Her-2-positive disease will 
receive Herceptin as part of their management and have high 
complete response rates. It is important that tumours have 
a metallic clip placed into them at the onset of therapy as 
otherwise there will be uncertainty about which area to resect 
once chemotherapy has been completed. There is debate 
about the safety and utility of sentinel node biopsy prein -
duction of chemotherapy; however, it can be safely perfor -
med after completion of chemotherapy. Neoadjuvant therapy 
is also used in the triple negative cohort of patients (Er, PR 
and Her-2 negative). In patients with breast cancer strongly 
positive for hormone receptors, a similar effect can be seen 
following 3 months of endocrine treatment.
Newer ‘biological’ agents will be used more frequently as 
molecular targets are identified – the first of these, trastuzamab 
(Herceptin®), is active against tumours containing the growth 
factor receptor c-erbB2. Other agents currently available are  
lapitinab, an oral combined tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI). 
Other TKIs are in development such as, pertuzumab. T-DM1 
is a drug used in Her- 2-positive disease where a chemotherapy 
agent, emestane, is bound to an anti-Her-2 agent to allow tar-
geted delivery of the chemotherapy to Her-2-positive cells. The 
antivascular growth factor bevacizumab initially showed pro-
mise but is now no longer routinely used for adjuvant therapy. 
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   878 25/10/2017   09:25Carcinoma of the br east 879
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
It is unclear how and when these agents will be used, whether 
in combination or instead of standard chemotherapy agents.  
They are very expensive and unaffordable in many countries. 
Other agents likely to be used in the next few years include 
CK4/CDK6 inhibitors for metastatic ER-positive cancer. 
Follow-up of breast cancer
Patients with breast cancer used to be followed for life to 
detect recurrence and dissemination. This led to large clinics 
with little value for either patient or doctor. It is current prac-
tice to arrange yearly or 2-yearly mammography of the treated 
and contralateral breast. There is a move to return the patient 
early to the care of the general practitioner with fast-track 
access back to the breast clinic if suspicious symptoms appear. 
There is currently no routine role for repeated measurements 
of tumour markers or imaging other than mammography.
Phenomena resulting from 
lymphatic obstruction in advanced 
breast cancer
Peau d’orange
Peau d’orange is caused by cutaneous lymphatic oedema 
(Figure 53.24). Where the infiltrated skin is tethered by the 
sweat ducts it cannot swell, leading to an appearance like 
orange skin. Occasionally, the same phenomenon is seen over 
a chronic abscess.
Lymphoedema
Lymphoedema of the arm is a troublesome complication of 
breast cancer treatment, fortunately seen less often now that 
radical axillary dissection and radiotherapy are rarely com -
bined. However, it does still occur occasionally after either 
mode of treatment alone and appears at any time from 
months to years after treatment. There is usually no precipi -
tating cause but recurrent tumour should be excluded because 
neoplastic infiltration of the axilla can cause arm swelling as a 
result of both lymphatic and venous blockage. This neoplastic 
infiltration is often painful because of brachial plexus nerve 
involvement.
An oedematous limb is susceptible to bacterial infection 
following quite minor trauma and this requires vigorous anti-
biotic treatment. Antibiotics may need to be given for much 
longer than is normal and patients at risk of infection should 
have antibiotics readily available to enable treatment to be 
started promptly. Treatment of late oedema is difficult but 
limb elevation, elastic arm stockings and pneumatic compres-
sion devices can be useful.
Cancer-en-cuirasse
The skin of the chest is infiltrated with carcinoma and has 
been likened to a coat. It may be associated with a grossly 
swollen arm. This usually occurs in cases with local recur -
rence after mastectomy and is occasionally seen to follow the 
distribution of irradiation to the chest wall. The condition 
may respond to palliative systemic treatment but prognosis in 
terms of survival is poor.
Lymphangiosarcoma
Lymphangiosarcoma is a rare complication of lymphoedema 
with an onset many years after the original treatment. It takes 
the form of multiple subcutaneous no dules in the upper limb 
and must be distinguished from recurrent carcinoma of the 
breast. The prognosis is poor but some cases respond to cyto -
toxic therapy or irradiation. Interscapulothoracic (forequar -
ter) amputation is rarely indicated.
Breast reconstruction
Despite an increasing trend towards conservative surgery, up 
to 40% of women still require, or want, a mastectomy. These 
women can now be offered immediate or delayed reconstruc-
tion of the breast. Few contraindications to breast reconstruc-
tion exist. Even those with a limited life expectancy may 
benefit from the improved quality of life; however, patients do 
require counselling before this procedure so that their expec-
tations of cosmetic outcome are not unrealistic.
The increasing use of oncoplastic techniques such as vol -
ume displacement and volume replacement have opened up 
the options for increasing conservation rates. Specialist train-
ing is required and close cooperation with established plastic 
surgeons allows optimal selection of patients.
The easiest type of reconstruction is using a silicone gel 
implant under the pectoralis major muscle. The lateral por -
tion of the implant, which was traditionally left in the sub -
cutaneous plane, is now increasingly covered by an acellular 
dermal matrix (ADM). This gives a superior cosmetic result. 
Prior tissue expansion using an expandable saline prosthesis 
first (or a combined device), creates some ptosis of the new 
breast. If the skin at the mastectomy site is poor (e.g. follow -
ing radiotherapy) or if a larger volume of tissue is required, 
a musculocutaneous flap can be constructed either from the 
latissimus dorsi muscle (an LD flap) (Figure 53.29) or using 
the transversus abdominis muscle (a TRAM flap as shown in 
Figure 53.30). The latter gives an excellent cosmetic result 
in experienced hands but is a lengthy procedure and requires 
careful patient selection. It is now usually performed as a free 
transfer using microvascular anastomosis, although the pedi-
cled TRAM from the contralateral side is still used. Variations 
on the TRAM flap requiring less muscle harvesting, such as 
the DIEP flap (based on deep inferior epigastric vessels), are 
increasingly being used.
The timing of reconstruction may be difficult. Impedi -
ments to immediate reconstruction include insufficient 
theatre time and a lack of experienced reconstructive surgeons. 
In addition, if a patient is likely to need postoperative radio -
therapy then a delayed reconstruction using a flap often gives 
a better result. Radiotherapy onto a prosthesis often leads to 
a high incidence of capsular contracture and unacceptable 
results.
Nipple reconstruction is a relatively simple procedure that 
can be performed under a local anaesthetic. Many different 
types of nipple reconstruction are described but the majority 
lose height with time. Tattooing of the reconstructed nip -
ple is often required. Alternatively, the patient can be fitted 
with a prosthetic nipple. To achieve symmetry the opposite 
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   879 25/10/2017   09:25CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE880
breast may require a cosmetic procedure such as reduction or 
augmentation mammoplasty, or mastopexy. A breast recon -
structive service can be offered by a suitably trained breast 
surgeon, a plastic surgeon or, ideally, using a combined onco-
plastic approach. The patient needs to be warned that breast 
reconstruction is seldom, if ever, one operation.
External breast prostheses that fit within the bra are the 
most common method of restoring volume fill and should be 
available for all women who do not have an immediate recon-
struction.
Screening for breast cancer
Because the prognosis of breast cancer is closely related to 
stage at diagnosis it would seem reasonable to hope that a 
population screening programme that could detect tumours 
before they come to the patient’ s notice might reduce mor -
tality from breast cancer. Indeed, a number of studies have 
shown that breast screening by mammography in women 
over the age of 50 years will reduce cause-specific mortality by 
up to 30%. Following the publication in 1987 of the Forrest 
report, the National Health Service in the UK launched a 
programme of 3-yearly mammographic screening for women 
between the ages of 50 and 64 years (now increased to 70 
years). The introduction of this programme has undoubtedly 
improved the quality of breast cancer services but a num -
ber of questions remain unanswered, including the value 
of screening women under 50 years and the ideal interval 
between screenings. The psychological consequences of false 
alarms or false reassurances still need to be addressed and self- 
examination programmes that have failed to show any benefit 
for the  population in terms of earlier detection of or decreased 
mortality from breast cancer remain controversial. The 
 opponents of screening rightly point out that some women 
will have disease detected and treated that might never harm 
them in their lifetime. However, this group of women  cannot 
as yet be reliably seperated from those in whom prompt 
 diagnosis and treatment will be benficial. 
MRI is used to screen those at very high risk or where radi-
ation might be hazardous (Li-Fraumeni syndrome). There is no 
place for thermography as a secreening (or diagnostic) tool.
Familial breast cancer
Recent developments in molecular genetics and the iden -
tification of a number of breast cancer predisposition genes 
(BRCA1, BRCA2 and p53) have done much to stimulate 
interest in this area. Yet women whose breast cancer is due to 
an inherited genetic change actually account for less than 5% 
of all cases of breast cancer, that is about 1250 cases per year 
in the UK and 9000 cases in the USA. A much larger num -
ber of women will have a risk that is elevated above normal 
because of an as yet unspecified familial inheritance. These 
women have a risk of developing breast cancer that is 2–10 
times above baseline. The risks associated with family history 
are summarised in Table 53.5. There are computer programs 
available to assist the clinician in assessing family history risk.
The BRCA1 gene has been associated with an increased 
incidence of breast (and ovarian) cancer and is located on 
the long arm of chromosome 17 (17q). The gene frequency 
in the population is approximately 0.0006. It does, however, 
occur with greater frequency in certain populations such as 
Ashkenazi Jews, in whom there is often a common (founder) 
mutation. BRCA2 is located on chromosome 13q and there is 
an association with male breast cancer. 
Figure 53.29 Reconstruction with latissimus dorsi flap.
Figure 53.30 Transversus abdominus muscle flap.
Frederick Pei Li , 1940 – 2015, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA USA and Joseph F Fraumeni, Jr. (b.1933), National Institutes of Health, Washington 
DC, USA, in 1969 identified four families with increased susceptibility to cancer. This led to the discovery of mutation in the tumour suppressor gene p53.
Sir Andrew Patrick McEwen Forrest , Regius Professor of Clinical Surgery, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
Ashkenazi Jews  are Jews of Eastern or Central European descent.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   880 25/10/2017   09:25Carcinoma of the br east 881
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE
Women who are thought to be gene carriers may be 
offered breast screening (and ovarian screening in the case 
of BRCA1, which is known to impart a 50% lifetime risk of 
ovarian cancer), usually as part of a research programme, or 
genetic counselling and mutation analysis. Those who prove 
to be ‘gene positive’ have a 50–80% risk of developing breast 
cancer, predominantly while premenopausal. Many will opt 
for prophylactic mastectomy. Although this does not com -
pletely eliminate the risk, it does reduce it considerably. This 
work should be carried out in specialist centres.
For the great majority of women with a positive family 
history, who are unlikely to be carriers of a breast cancer 
gene, there are no currently proven breast cancer screening 
manoeuvres, although this is under investigation. Tamoxifen 
given for 5 years appears to reduce the risk of breast cancer by 
30–50% as does the AI, anastrozole. Thus, these women are 
best served by being assessed and followed-up, preferably in a 
properly organised family history clinic.
Pregnancy
The effects of pregnancy on breast cancer are increasingly 
understood and it is thought that breast cancer presenting 
during pregnancy or lactation tends to be at a later stage, pre-
sumably because the symptoms are masked by the pregnancy; 
however, in other respects it behaves in a similar way to breast 
cancer in a non-pregnant young woman and should be treated 
accordingly. Thus, treatment is similar with some provisos: 
radiotherapy should be avoided during pregnancy, making 
mastectomy a more frequent option than breast conservation 
surgery; chemotherapy should be avoided during the first tri-
mester but appears safe subsequently; most tumours are hor -
mone receptor negative and so hormone treatment, which is 
potentially teratogenic, is not required. Becoming pregnant 
subsequent to a diagnosis of breast cancer appears not to alter 
the likely outcome, but women are usually advised to wait 
at least 2 years as it is within this time that recurrence most 
often occurs. The risk of developing breast cancer with oral 
contraceptive use is only slight, and disappears 10 years after 
stopping the oral contraceptive pill.
Hormone replacement therapy
HRT increases the risk of developing breast cancer if taken 
for prolonged perio ds and in certain high-risk groups. HRT 
may also prolong symptoms of benign breast disorders such 
as cysts and mastalgia and make mammographic appearances 
more difficult to interpret.
Patients who develop breast cancer while on HRT appear 
to have a more favourable prognosis. The consequences in 
terms of recurrence in women using HRT following breast 
cancer are unknown.
Treatment of advanced breast 
cancer
Breast cancer may occasionally present as metastatic dis -
ease without evidence of a primary tumour (that is with an 
occult primary). The diagnosis is made partly by exclusion of 
another site for the primary tumour and may be confirmed by 
histology with special immunohistological stains of the meta-
static lesions. Management should be aimed at palliation of 
the symptoms and treatment of the breast cancer, usually by 
endocrine manipulation with or without radiotherapy.
Locally advanced inoperable breast 
cancer
Locally advanced inoperable breast cancer, including inflam-
matory breast cancer, is usually treated with systemic therapy, 
either chemotherapy or hormone therapy.
Occasionally, ‘toilet mastectomy’ or radiotherapy is 
required to control a fungating tumour but often incision 
through microscopically permeated tissues results in a worse 
outcome.
Metastatic carcinoma of the breast
Metastatic carcinoma of the breast will also require 
palliative systemic therapy to alleviate symptoms. Hormone 
manipulation is often the first-line treatment because of 
its minimal side effects. It is particularly useful for bony 
metastases. However, only about 30% of these tumours will 
be hormone responsive and, unfortunately, in time even these 
will become resistant to treatment. First-line hormone therapy 
for postmenopausal women is now anastrazole or one of the 
other third-  generation AIs. Tamoxifen, ovarian suppression 
by surgery (for premenopausal women), radiotherapy and 
medical treatment are all in common use. When resistance 
to these has developed, other hormonal agents can prove 
useful, with about one-half of the response rate seen in the 
first-line therapy. The newer agents such as antiprogestins, 
pure antioestrogens and growth factor TKIs are all candidates 
for this role.
Cytotoxic therapy is used particularly in younger women 
or those with visceral metastases and rapidly growing 
tumours. A variety of regimes is available and, although 
none prolongs survival, contrary to expectations, quality of 
life and symptom control is often better with more aggres-
sive treatments, with responses being seen in up to 70% of 
patients.
Local treatment may also prove useful for some metastatic 
disease, such as radiotherapy for painful bony deposits and 
internal fixation of pathological fractures.
TABLE 53.5 Likelihood of genetic mutation with family 
 history.
No. of family cases <50 years old BRCA1 (%)a BRCA2 (%)b
2 4 3
3 17 13
4 41 33
5 55 44
a BRCA1 is also associated with ovarian and, to a lesser extent, colorectal 
and prostate cancer.
b BRCA2 is associated with familial male breast cancer.
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   881 25/10/2017   09:25CHAPTER 53  The breast
PART 8 | BREAST AND ENDOCRINE882
THE MALE BREAST
Gynaecomastia
Idiopathic
Hypertrophy of the male breast may be unilateral or bilateral. 
The breasts enlarge at puberty and sometimes present the 
characteristics of female breasts.
Hormonal
Enlargement of the breasts often accompanied stilbestrol 
therapy for prostate cancer, now rarely used. It may also occur 
as a result of a teratoma of the testis, in anorchism and after 
castration. Rarely, it may be a feature of ectopic hormonal 
production in bronchial carcinoma and in adrenal and pitu -
itary disease. Body builders may use steroids to improve their 
physique, which may cause gynaecomastia. Some even go so 
far as to take tamoxifen to mask this symptom.
Associated with leprosy
Gynaecomastia is very common in men suffering from leprosy. 
This is possibly because of bilateral testicular atrophy, which 
is a frequent accompaniment of leprosy.
Associated with liver failure
Gynaecomastia sometimes occurs in patients with cirrhosis 
as a result of failure of the liver to metabolise oestrogens. It is 
associated with drugs that interfere with the hepatic metab -
olism of oestrogens. It is also seen with certain drugs such as 
cimetidine, digitalis and spironolactone.
Associated with Klinefelter’s syndrome
Gynaecomastia may occur in patients with Klinefelter’s syn -
drome, a sex chromosome anomaly having 47XXY trisomy.
TREATMENT
Provided that the patient is healthy and comparatively young, 
reassurance may be sufficient. If not, mastectomy with preser-
vation of the areola and nipple can be performed. The patient 
must be warned about the side effects of this procedure, which 
are common and a cause of many medico-legal complaints in 
the UK.
Carcinoma of the male breast
Carcinoma of the male breast (Figure 53.31) accounts for less 
than 0.5% of all cases of breast cancer. The known predispos-
ing causes include gynaecomastia and excess endogenous or 
exogenous oestrogen. As in the female it tends to present as a 
lump and is most commonly an infiltrating ductal carcinoma.
Treatment
Stage for stage the treatment is the same as for carcinoma in 
the female breast and prognosis depends upon stage at presen-
tation. Adequate local excision, because of the small size of 
the breast, should always be with a ‘mastectomy’.
Harry Fitch Klinefelter Jr. , 1912–1990, physician of Baltimore, MD, USA, described this syndrome in 1942.
OTHER TUMOURS OF THE 
BREAST
Lipoma
A true lipoma is very rare.
Sarcoma of the breast
Sarcoma of the breast is usually of the spindle-cell variety and 
accounts for 0.5% of malignant tumours of the breast. Some 
of these growths arise in an intracanalicular fibroadenoma 
or may follow previous radiotherapy, e.g. for Hodgkin’s lym -
phoma, many years previously. It may be impossible to dis-
tinguish clinically a sarcoma of the breast from a medullary 
carcinoma, but areas of cystic degeneration suggest a sarcoma 
and on incising the neoplasm it is pale and friable. Sarcoma 
tends to occur in younger women between the ages of 30 and 
40 years. Treatment is by simple mastectomy followed by 
radiotherapy. The prognosis depends on the stage and histo-
logical type.
Metastases
On rare occasions cancer elsewhere may present with a metas-
tasis in the breast. The breast is also occasionally infiltrated by 
Hodgkin’s disease and other lymphomas.
FURTHER READING
Harris JR, Lippman M, Morrow M. Hellman S. Diseases of the breast . 
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, 2014.
Hughes LE, Mansel RE, Webster DJT. Benign disorders and diseases of the 
breast, 3rd edn. Edinburgh: Saunders, 2009.
Sainsbury R. Breast operations. In: Kirk R (ed). General surgical opera -
tions, 5th edn. Churchill Livingstone, 2006.
SIGN 84 Management of breast cancer in women. A national clinical 
guideline. Available online at: www.sign.ac.uk
Figure 53.31  Carcinoma of the male left br east (courtesy of 
Professor Mike Dixon). 
08_53-B&L27_Pt8_Ch53.indd   882 25/10/2017   09:25PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
54 Cardiac surgery .......................................................................................... 884
55 The thorax .................................................................................................... 914
Cardiothoracic
9
09_54A-B&L27_Pt9.indd   883 25/10/2017   09:26Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
54Chapter
Cardiac surgery
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The important role of surgery in cardiac disease
 • The role of investigation in planning surgery
 • The management of coronary heart disease
 • The role of surgery in valvular heart disease
 • The special role of surgery in congenital heart disease
 • The management of aortic vascular and pericardial 
disease
INTRODUCTION
In 1925 Sir Henry Souttar reported the first mitral commis -
surotomy in the British Medical Journal. He wrote that the 
heart should be as amenable to surgery as any other organ. He 
saw the main problem as being maintenance of blood flow , 
particularly to the brain, while surgery was being performed.
The first real advances occurred in the late 1940s and early 
1950s, driven by surgeons who had gained confidence and 
experience under the pressures and opportunities provided by 
war, followed by the development of cardiopulmonary bypass 
in the mid-1950s. Recently, the well-being and lifespan of 
patients with congenital, valvular and degenerative heart 
disease has improved drastically due to the advances in the 
range, complexity and technical expertise in cardiac surgery.
CARDIOPULMONARY BYPASS
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was first used successfully 
in 1953 by Gibbon and has since revolutionised cardiac sur -
gery. It can be employed in any procedure in which the heart 
and lungs need to be stopped temporarily and their function 
replaced artificially . Before Gibbon’s work, valve surgery 
under direct vision would not have been possible, nor would 
the precise reconstructions needed to treat extensive coronary 
artery disease (CAD). Much of the success of modern CPB 
is attributable to the development of new biomaterials and 
sophisticated oxygenating devices, as well as a greater under -
standing of the pathophysiological consequences of CPB.
Surgical approach to the heart
The heart is approached mainly by a median sternotomy. An 
incision is made from the suprasternal notch to the lower end 
of the xiphisternum. The sternum is divided and retracted to 
expose the thymus superiorly and the pericardium inferiorly . 
The thymus, although atrophic in adults, often remains rela -
tively vascular. The thymus and pleurae are dissected from the 
pericardium and the pericardium is opened. Before cannula -
tion for CPB, the patient is fully heparinised. Other incisions 
that can be used include left or right anterolateral thoracot -
omy for minimally invasive operations or for specific opera -
tions on the descending aorta.
Initiating cardiopulmonary bypass
Arterial cannulation
Conventionally, the great vessels are exposed and an aortic 
perfusion cannula is inserted into the ascending aorta, held in 
place by the purse-string suture. Air is excluded and the can -
nula connected to the bypass circuit. Alternatively , when it 
is inadvisable (aortic dissection), impractical (aortic root sur-
gery) or impossible (severe adhesions) to cannulate the aorta, 
alternative arterial cannulation sites can be used, such as the 
Summary box 54.1
Alternative uses of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB)
●● Rewarming from profound hypothermia
●● Resuscitation in severe respiratory failure
●● As an adjunct in pulmonary embolectomy
●● In single- and double-lung transplantation
●● In cardiopulmonary trauma
●● In certain non-cardiac surgical procedures (e.g. resection of 
highly vascular tumours and tumours invading large blood 
vessels)
Sir Henry Sessions Souttar , 1875–1964, surgeon, The London Hospital, London, UK.
John Heysham Gibbon , 1903–1973, worked at Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   884 25/10/2017   09:27Cardiopulmonary bypass 885
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
femoral artery or the axillary artery. The latter has recently 
been gaining more popularity , as it provides antegrade flow 
and can be utilised to provide selective cerebral perfusion 
in complex aortic operations; axillary cannulation has the 
 theoretical advantage of reducing thromboembolic events 
when compared to femoral cannulation.
Venous cannulation
A purse-string suture is placed around the right atrial append-
age and a single ‘two-stage’ venous cannula is placed to estab-
lish venous drainage. The venous pipe has end holes that sit 
in the inferior vena cava and side holes that sit in the right  
atrium (to take drainage from the superior vena cava). Alter-
natively, the superior and inferior vena cavae may be cannu -
lated separately to gain better control over the venous return 
and to facilitate surgery within the right atrium. Venous drain-
age from the femoral vein can offer an alternative, particularly 
during thoracic aortic or minimally invasive procedures.
Cardio pulmonary bypass circuit
Once the circuit is connected (Figure 54.1 ) the CPB 
machine (the ‘pump’) gradually takes over the processes of 
circulation and ventilation. Once full flow is established (the 
required cardiac output depends on the body surface area of 
the patient), the ventilator is stopped and the heart can be 
isolated from the rest of the circulation. Blood is drained from 
the heart to the venous reservoir using the siphon effect by 
gravity, as it is usually placed 50–70 cm below the level of the 
heart and oxygenated using an oxygenator that allows gas 
exchange across its membrane. Blood is then pumped to the 
body by the bypass machine via the aortic cannula.
The core systemic temperature can be lowered by passing 
the returning blood through a heat exchanger that can reduce 
the metabolic demands of the tissues. The degree of cooling 
is managed according to the severity and complexity of the 
surgical procedure, as well as the surgeon’s preference.
The blood is also filtered to remove particulate emboli and 
returned to the systemic arterial circulation via a pump. Suc-
tion pumps can be employed to keep the area around the heart 
clear of blood and to decompress the heart when used as vents.
Myocardial protection
Once CPB has been established the ascending aorta is usu -
ally cross-clamped to obtain a bloodless operative field. The 
heart ceases to eject and becomes anoxic due to inhibition 
of coronary bloo d flow. Permanent myocardial damage can 
develop within 15–20 minutes, therefore most cardiac opera-
tions require some form of myocardial protection. Techniques 
of myocardial protection and the operative management of 
the myocardium have had a significant impact on the com -
plexity of cardiac surgery. The methods of myocardial protec-
tion include intracoronary infusion of a cardioplegic solution 
(antegrade), infusion via the coronary sinus (retrograde), 
intermittent cross-clamp fibrillation and total circulatory 
arrest.
Cardioplegic solutions vary in terms of temperature, pH, 
arresting agent, osmolality and the presence of red cells and 
other factors. Most solutions contain potassium as the arrest -
ing agent. Potassium arrests the heart in diastole by depolar -
isation of the myocyte cellular membrane. Cold (4–10ºC) 
isotonic crystalloid or blood solutions aid myocardial protec -
tion by reducing metabolic requirements through local hypo-
thermia. Warm cardioplegic solutions, on the other hand, 
may facilitate better myocardial repair recovery postopera -
tively by aiding activation of intramyocardial enzymes.
Intermittent cross-clamp fibrillation is a technique in 
which intermittent ventricular fibrillation is induced by a 
small electrical charge. The heart does not eject and is rel-
atively still but not bloodless. The aorta is cross-clamped to 
render the heart ischaemic. The heart can tolerate short peri-
ods (10–20 min) of ischaemia, provided the heart is reperfused 
when the cross-clamp is released and allowed to beat follow -
ing cardioversion for short periods during the operation.
Total circulatory arrest becomes necessary when visibility 
and clarity of the operative area is crucial, as in paediatric sur-
gery or in surgery of the ascending aorta and arch of the aorta. 
CPB is instituted and the core body temperature reduced to 
15–18ºC (profound hypothermia). The metabolic rate of all 
organs of the body is reduced by 50% with every 7ºC drop in 
temperature. Using this technique, circulatory arrest can be 
tolerated for up to 20–30 min. Additional cerebral protection 
can be provided with ice packs placed around the head, phar-
macological agents and cerebral perfusion techniques.
Discontinuing cardiopulmonary bypass
At the end of the procedure, air must be meticulously excluded 
from the cardiac chambers. Once perfusion is restored to the 
coronary arteries (by removing the cross-clamp) the heart 
Cardiotomy suction
blood
Venous blood
from patient
Arterial blood
to patient
Arterial filter
Blood outlet line
Recirculation line
Oxygenator/heat exchanger
Blood inlet line
Flow probe
Blood pump
Filtered
hardshell
venous
reservoir
Figure 54.1  Components of the cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) 
circuit. (Repr oduced from Abraham JK. Cardiopulmonary bypass. 
Surgery 2000; 18: 11, with permission from The Medical Publishing 
Company.)
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   885 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC886
may beat spontaneously. If ventricular fibrillation is present, 
cardioversion may be required. Epicardial pacing wires may be 
placed to treat postoperative bradycardia or heart block. The 
patient is rewarmed, acidosis and hypokalaemia are corrected 
and ventilation is restarted. The heart gradually takes over 
the circulation while the arterial flow from the CPB machine 
is reduced. When the blood pressure is acceptable and the 
surgeon is confident that the heart function is adequate, CPB 
is discontinued. The cannulae are removed and the anticoag-
ulation is reversed by administering protamine.
Complications of CPB
CPB is a complex technique and requires careful interac-
tion and communication between surgeon, anaesthetist and 
perfusionist to ensure that the patient remains safe. Difficul-
ties can occur during cannulation (aortic dissection or atrial 
injury), at the start of CPB (oxygenator failure) and at the 
end of CPB (coagulopathy). Many complications can occur 
following blood exposure to the non-physiological surface of 
the CPB circuit. This leads to the activation of inflammatory 
cascades giving rise to a post-CPB systematic inflammatory 
response syndrome (SIRS) that can ultimately lead to multi -
organ failure.
Recent understanding of the impact of CPB on the coag-
ulation cascade and the patient’s inflammatory response 
(SIRS) has resulted in the development of smaller ‘mini’ 
CPB, which has demonstrated some advantages in terms 
of post-CPB inflammatory responses and blood transfusion 
requirement. Alternative methods include surgery on beat-
ing heart ‘off-pump’, although despite some advantages, use 
remains restricted to coronory artery bypass grafting (CABG) 
and long-term outcomes are still a matter of debate.
CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS 
SURGERY
Introduction
Before the 1950s, surgical attempts to treat CAD through 
augmentation of non-coronary flow to the myocardium was 
via the creation of pericardial or omental adhesions, which 
had limited success. From the 1960s onwards, the importance 
of aortocoronary saphenous vein grafts and the value of the 
internal mammary (internal thoracic artery) were increas-
ingly recognised. The outcomes of CABG surgery were care -
fully monitored from the beginning and by the 1970s, multiple 
large, prospectively randomised, multicentre trials were con -
ducted. All these trials showed that a subset of patients had 
improved survival after surgery, compared with other treat-
ments. With the advent of percutaneous coronary interven -
tion (PCI) in the 1980s, the patient population undergoing 
CABG has changed, becoming progressively sicker but often 
with the most to gain. Over the last decade there have been 
major advances in PCI including the use of bare metal stents 
and the development of different generations of drug-eluting 
stents, as well as biodegradable stents, in an effort to reduce 
restenosis. Although the role of CABG in the treatment of 
ischaemic heart disease has been questioned, a recent large 
multicentre randomised trial carried out comparing CABG to 
PCI with drug-eluting stents has clearly shown that CABG is 
still the gold standard operation in certain groups of patients. 
Other more recent trials have confirmed these findings mainly 
in diabetic and high-risk patients.
Coronary artery anatomy
The coronary arteries are branches of the ascending aorta, 
arising from ostia in the aortic sinuses above the aortic valve, 
the right from the anterior sinus and the left from the left 
posterior sinus (Figure 54.2).
Summary box 54.2
Potential complications of CPB
●● Bleeding disorders
●● Infection
●● Air embolism
●● Intestinal ischaemia/infarction
●● Microembolisation
●● Myocardial depression
●● Neurological dysfunction
●● Pancreatitis
●● Postcardiotomy syndrome
●● Pulmonary injury
●● Systemic organ dysfunction
●● Vascular injury
Summary box 54.3
Coronary artery surgery
●● Randomised controlled trials have confirmed improvement in 
survival following CABG for certain groups of patients
Left coronary artery
The left main coronary artery, which arises from the aortic 
root, can be the site of significant stenosis (‘left main stem 
disease’) and carries the worst prognosis in terms of survival 
without surgery. The artery is inaccessible at its origin and 
therefore grafts are anastomosed to its branches, the left ante-
rior descending artery (LAD) or anterior interventricular 
artery and obtuse/marginal (OM) branches of the circumflex 
artery. The LAD is the most frequently diseased coronary 
artery and most often bypassed during CABG surgery.
Right coronary artery
The right coronary artery (RCA) passes from its origin ante -
riorly between the right atrial appendage and the pulmonary 
trunk and courses in the atrioventricular groove around the 
margin of the right ventricle. It usually forms an anastomosis 
with the circumflex artery at the junction of the right and left 
atria and the interventricular septum (the crux). It continues 
as the posterior descending artery or interventricular artery. 
Common sites of stenosis of the RCA are in its  proximal 
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   886 25/10/2017   09:27Coronary artery bypass surgery 887
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
 portion or at the bifurcation or crux. In the presence of dis -
ease at the bifurcation, a graft can be placed distally to the 
posterior descending artery.
The question of anatomical dominance is determined by 
the artery that supplies the posterior descending artery . In 
approximately 90% of cases the posterior descending artery 
arises from the RCA, a pattern referred to as right dominance. 
The posterior descending artery can also arise from the cir -
cumflex artery, a pattern referred to as left dominance, which 
occurs in approximately 10% of cases. A balanced pattern is 
one in which two posterior descending arteries, one arising 
from the right coronary artery and one from the circumflex 
artery, can exist (Figure 54.2).
Ischaemic heart disease
Ischaemic heart disease (IHD) is a major cause of morbid -
ity and mortality in resource-rich countries. The underlying 
pathology is mainly atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries.
Pathophysiology
Atherosclerosis is the process underlying the formation of 
focal obstructions or plaques in large- and medium-sized 
arteries. It is accepted that atherosclerosis is a chronic inflam-
matory process resulting from interactions between plasma 
lipoproteins, leukocytes (monocyte/macrophages, T lympho -
cytes), vascular endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells. 
Atherosclerotic lesions can histologically be found at differ -
ent stages in blood vessels including:
 ● The fatty streak. The first evidence of atherosclerosis can 
be found in children 10–14 years of age. This appears as a 
yellow streak running along the major arteries. The streak 
consists of smooth muscle cells, which are filled with 
 cholesterol, and foam cells.
 ● Fibrous plaque. A fibrous plaque consists of large num -
bers of smooth muscle cells, foam cells, and leukocytes. As 
the fibrous plaque grows, it projects into vessels leading to 
lumen narrowing that, in turn, can lead to ischaemia or 
infarction.
 ● Complicated lesion. This occurs when the fibrous plaque 
ruptures provoking activation of the coagulation cascade 
and the formation of thrombus
Clinical manifestations
The principal symptoms of IHD are chest pain or angina, 
breathlessness, fatigue, swelling, palpitations and syncope. 
Severity of symptoms and the extent to which the symptoms 
interfere with everyday activities form a significant part of 
the clinical history. An assessment of risk factors should be 
included. Clinical examination follows and, although often 
normal, any evidence of myocardial ischaemia or stigmata of 
associated disease, such as diabetes or peripheral vascular dis-
ease, should be noted.
Summary box 54.4
Risk factors for ischaemic heart disease (IHD)
●● Advancing age
●● Male gender
●● Hyperlipidaemia
●● Diabetes mellitus
●● Hypertension
●● Smoking
●● Family history of IHD
●● Obesity
●● Reduced physical activity
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.2bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Sur gery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Pulmonary
veins
Inferior
vena cava
Right coronary
artery
Atrioventricular
node artery
Posterior
descending
artery (PDA)
(b)
Posterior
ventricular
branches
Cir cum/f_lex branch
of left coronary
artery
Left atrium
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54,2aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Sur gery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Ascending aorta
Pulmonary trunk
Left atrium
Left coronary artery
Left atrial
branch
Cir cum/f_lex
Left
marginal
branch
Diagonal
branches
Left
ventricleApex
Left anterior
descending
artery (LAD)
Right
mar ginal
branch
Right
coronary
artery
Right
atrium
Right atrial
branch
Branch to
sinoatrial
node
Superior
vena cava
Figure 54.2 The heart, showing the distribution the of the left and right coronary arteries. (a) Anterior surface of the heart; (b) base and dia-
phragmatic surface of the heart.
(b)(a)
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   887 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC888
Investigations
Non-invasive methods of diagnosis
RESTING ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
As a baseline test, a 12-lead resting electrocardiogram (ECG) 
often provides the first indication of ischaemic cardiac disease 
and is essential in the acute clinical setting. However, it is not 
necessarily abnormal even in the presence of severe multives-
sel coronary disease. Evidence of previous myocardial infarc -
tion (MI) is seen commonly, as Q waves and/or non-specific 
ST and T-wave changes.
TROPONIN AND CARDIAC ISOENZYMES
These are useful in assessing patients with an acute coronary 
syndrome (ACS) when the diagnosis is in doubt. Standard 
enzyme measurement such as troponin, creatine kinase MB 
(CKMB) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) can aid diagnosis, 
as well as having prognostic implications.
EXERCISE TOLERANCE TESTING
Exercise tolerance testing (ETT) is a valuable technique for 
assessing myocardial ischaemia, both for diagnostic purposes 
and as a prognostic tool. However, an abnormal exercise test 
must be interpreted in the light of the probability of CAD 
and the physiological response to exercise as measured by the 
percentage of the maximum predicted heart rate achieved. 
A positive test with evidence of ischaemia on the ECG (ST 
depression of ≤2 mm) does not always indicate IHD, and a 
negative test does not always exclude its presence.
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Performed either through a transthoracic or transoesophageal 
approach, echocardiography is valuable for the evaluation of 
ventricular function and regional wall motion abnormalities, 
as well as valvular lesions.
Stress echocardiography can detect regional wall motion 
abnormalities brought on by exercise or the use of dobutamine 
or dipyridamole. It is a reliable method of identifying viable 
myocardium. Impaired but recoverable myocardium possesses 
a functional reserve that allows it to be temporarily recruited 
into action, whereas scar tissue does not. The development of 
real time 3-dimensional echocardiography (RT3DE) with the 
ability to carry out valve reconstruction from different aspects 
has recently revolutionised preoperative surgical planning in 
patients with complex valvular lesions.
RADIONUCLIDE STUDIES AND CARDIAC MAGNETIC 
RESONANCE IMAGING
The main type of radionuclide study used is myocardial perfu-
sion scanning using specific radioiosotopes (such as thallium 
201) to assess the significance of coronary disease and viabil -
ity of the myocardium.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be per -
formed to evaluate the ischaemic burden of coronary disease 
(using pharmacological agents to stress the heart) and to 
provide details of tissue viability when using gadolinium as a 
contrast agent.
MRI is also very useful in assessing cardiac tumours, peri -
carditis and other structural heart diseases.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Positron emission tomography (PET) provides information on 
myocardial perfusion, metabolism and cell membrane func -
tion. Positron-emitting isotopes are used to label physiolog -
ical substances, which can measure the regional distribution 
of these substances. PET is valuable in the diagnosis of CAD, 
particularly when the more widely available imaging modal -
ities are inconclusive. It can identify injured but viable myo -
cardium that is potentially salvageable by  revascularisation.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
With the development of the latest computed tomography 
(CT) scanners, which have the ability to correct for respira-
tory and cardiac movements, multislice high-resolution CT 
scanning may become an alternative to coronary angiography. 
It allows assessment of coronary disease, particularly proximal 
CAD, and gives some information about the degree of coro -
nary artery calcification (calcium score) that is very helpful 
when stratifying patients to determine which ones will benefit 
from the more invasive coronary angiography.
Invasive methods of diagnosis
CORONARY ANGIOGRAPHY
Selective coronary angiography provides the means of accu -
rately diagnosing the presence and extent of CAD and 
remains the ‘gold standard’ diagnostic technique (Figure 
54.3). In spite of the availability of newer imaging tech-
niques such as cardiac MRI, selective coronary angiogra -
phy provides high image quality, demonstrating the extent, 
severity and location of coronary artery stenoses and the 
quality and size of the distal coronary arteries. Any steno -
sis in an artery of >70% of the diameter (90% reduction 
Figure 54.3 Coronary angiogram demonstrating severe stenosis in 
the left main stem prior to bifur cation of the left anterior descending 
and circumflex arteries.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   888 25/10/2017   09:27Coronary artery bypass surgery 889
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
of cross-sectional area) is considered ‘severe’. In addition, 
angiography can assess ventricular function and provide 
the cardiac surgeon with information to determine opera -
bility, operative risk and probability of the operative result. 
Coronary angiography only outlines the coronary anatomy, 
does not demonstrate ischaemia and carries an overall com -
plication rate of less than 1%. However, flow measurement 
across a stenotic area, using techniques such as fractional 
flow reserve (FFR), has been effective in predicting patients 
who are likely to benefit from revascularisation. Moreover, 
intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) can provide more detailed 
information regarding the degree of stenosis, especially in 
left main stem disease.
Summary box 54.6
Indication for surgery
●● >50% stenosis of the left main stem (‘critical left main stem 
disease’)
●● >50% stenosis of the proximal left anterior interventricular 
artery
●● Two or three main coronary arteries diseased (‘triple-vessel 
disease’)
●● Poor ventricular function associated with multivessel disease
Chronic stable angina
Although PCI is increasingly being used for the treatment of 
stable angina, CABG is still indicated in the presence of cer-
tain angiographic features. Angina can be relieved by surgical 
revascularisation in most patients and symptomatic improve-
ment can be expected for over 10 years.
Acute coronary syndromes
A recently published meta-analysis showed substantial 
benefit with an early invasive strategy mainly in high-risk 
patients. An invasive strategy always starts with angiography. 
After defining the anatomy and its associated risk features, 
a decision about the type and extent of intervention can be  
made. The angiography in combination with ECG changes 
often identifies the culprit lesion and PCI, if desirable, can be 
recommended to treat it. Angiography should be performed 
urgently for diagnostic purposes in patients at high risk and in 
whom the differential diagnosis of other acute clinical situa-
tions is unclear. In patients stabilised after an episode of ACS, 
the indications for CABG are similar to those for patients 
with stable chronic disease.
The optimal timing of revascularisation is different for 
PCI and for CABG. While the benefit from PCI in patients 
with non-ST segment elevation acute coronary syndrome 
(NSTE-ACS) is related to its early performance, the benefit 
from CABG is greatest when patients can undergo surgery 
after several days of medical stabilisation.
Surgery for the complications of myocardial 
infarction
Myocardial infarction (MI) leads to myocyte necrosis, which 
may heal to form scar tissue or rupture if the ventricular wall 
gives way. Free rupture of the ventricle is usually fatal despite 
treatment. Ventricular septal rupture typically presents 
3–7 days after infarction with pulmonary oedema, a pansys -
tolic murmur and haemodynamic instability. The diagnosis 
is usually confirmed with echocardiography. Repair is with a 
pericardial or artificial Dacron patch. Mitral valve papillary 
muscle necrosis causes acute mitral regurgitation, a pansys -
tolic murmur and pulmonary oedema. Diagnosis is made by 
echocardiography and right heart catheterisation (showing 
large V waves). Mitral valve replacement is usually necessary, 
but the mortality rate is higher than in valve replacement for 
non-ischaemic valvular diseases. Ventricular aneurysm occurs 
following partial-thickness necrosis of the ventricular wall if 
the free wall is replaced with noncontractile fibrous tissue. 
Left ventricular function is affected because the fibrous wall 
balloons out during systole and reduces the actual stroke vol-
ume. Repair is undertaken using CPB, and CABG is under -
taken at the same time if necessary combined with valve 
replacement if needed.
Acute failure of percutaneous coronary 
angioplasty
Since the advent of intracoronary stents, the need for emer -
gency CABG following complications of PCI is low at <1%. 
The mortality rate in this group is significantly higher than 
for elective CABG.
Indications for surgery
The decision to offer CABG is based on the balance 
between the expected benefit and the potential risks to the 
patient. The two issues to be addressed when deciding if a 
patient is suitable to have surgery are the appropriateness 
of revascularisation and the relative merits of CABG ver -
sus PCI. Current best evidence shows that revascularisation 
can be readily justified on symptomatic grounds in patients 
with persistent limiting symptoms (angina or angina equiv -
alent) despite optimal medical therapy and/or on prognostic 
grounds in certain anatomical patterns of disease.
Recent guidelines concerning myocardial revascular -
isation released by the Task Force on Myocardial Revas -
cularization of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 
and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery 
(EACTS), are useful in identifying patients with certain 
angiographic features who can benefit from surgery.
Summary box 54.5
Coronary angiography
●● ‘Gold standard’ for imaging of anatomy
●● Demonstrates extent, severity and location of stenoses
●● Reduction in diameter of >70% is considered severe (90% 
reduction in cross-sectional area)
●● Demonstrates quality and size of distal arterial tree
●● Aids diagnosis of ischaemia
●● Evaluates suitability for surgery
●● Aids in prognostic assessment
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   889 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC890
Preparation for surgery
Clinical assessment
Before CABG, the severity and stability of the patient’s IHD, 
the presence of significant valvular disease and the status of 
left ventricular function should be properly evaluated. Any 
comorbid risk factors for IHD should be documented and, in 
particular, the state of coexisting diseases assessed. Attention 
is paid to the presence of carotid artery disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, respiratory status, preoperative diabetic 
control and presence of associated diabetic complications, 
significant renal dysfunction or coagulopathy. All medica -
tions taken by the patient are noted. Ideally, some should 
be stopped before surgery, in particular antiplatelet agents, 
including aspirin, anticoagulants and oral hypoglycaemics. 
Other drugs, such as diuretics and angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, are stopped at the discretion of the 
surgeon. However, apart from the exceptions noted, as a gen-
eral rule all cardiac and antihypertensive medications should 
be taken  preoperatively.
Risk assessment
Myocardial revascularisation is appropriate when the expected 
benefits, in terms of survival or health outcomes, exceed the 
expected negative consequences of the procedure. Therefore, 
risk assessment is an important aspect of contemporary clin -
ical practice, being of value to clinicians and patients. Over 
the long term, it allows quality control and the assessment 
of health economics. Numerous different models have been 
developed for risk stratification in cardiac surgery including 
the EuroSCORE II and STS score.
EuroSCORE II is the system commonly used to predict 
risk for patients in the UK and can be an independent pre -
dictor of major adverse cardiac events (MACEs). There-
fore, it can be used to determine the risk of revascularisation 
irrespective of, and even before, the selection of treatment 
strategy. However, it is important to acknowledge that no risk 
score can accurately predict events in an individual patient. 
Moreover, limitations exist with all databases used to build 
risk models, and differences in definitions and variable con -
tent can affect the performance of risk scores when they are 
applied across different populations. Ultimately risk stratifica-
tion should be used as a guide, while clinical judgement and 
multidisciplinary discussion (Heart Team) remain essential.
Selection of conduit
Venous grafts
The long saphenous vein is the most common vein used as 
a conduit as it is straightforward to harvest, provides good 
length and is easy to handle. Historical studies showed lim -
ited long-term patency rate for long saphenous vein grafts 
(50–60% at 10 years). However, recent studies suggest that 
the early use of lipid-lowering agents and antiplatelet agents 
such as low-dose aspirin can improve vein graft long-term 
patency. In assessing the patient preoperatively, the legs 
should be checked for varicose veins. Alternative vein con -
duits include the short saphenous vein or upper limb veins 
such as the cephalic vein; however, these grafts are associated 
with poorer long-term patency rates.
Arterial grafts
The left internal mammary artery (LIMA), or internal thor -
acic artery, has become the conduit of choice for the LAD. 
Since the mid-1980s, long-term patency rates of >98% have 
been reported, with improved long-term survival and fewer 
reoperations. As LIMA–LAD anastomosis avoids the late 
complication of vein graft atherosclerosis, particular interest 
has focused on the use of bilateral internal mammary artery 
(BIMA) grafts. However, there is ongoing debate regarding 
the appropriateness in certain subgroups of patients, such as 
the obese diabetic, in whom sternal wound complications 
appear higher.
The use of the radial artery as a second or alternative arte-
rial bypass graft has enjoyed a revival in recent times. This 
has been driven to some extent by the developing concept 
of total arterial revascularisation and the belief that this will 
help improve long-term results of coronary surgery. Different 
randomised controlled studies have demonstrated excellent 
patency rates at 1 and 5 years. In assessing a patient in whom 
a radial artery harvest is planned, an Allen’s test should be 
performed. Alternative arterial bypass grafts include the gas -
troepiploic artery and the inferior epigastric artery.
Summary box 54.7
Allen’s test
●● The patient makes a tight fist while the surgeon compresses 
both distal and ulnar arteries digitally; this squeezes blood 
from the hand
●● The hand is then relaxed and compression of the ulnar artery 
is released; the speed of returning colour to the hand is 
assessed
●● If colour returns in 5–7 s, patency and collateral flow from the 
ulnar artery is confirmed
The operation
Intraoperative monitoring includes monitoring of continuous 
central venous pressure and blood pressure (via a central line 
in the internal jugular or subclavian vein and radial artery 
line, respectively), urine output via a urinary catheter , tem-
perature using a nasopharyngeal probe and continuous ECG 
monitoring.
The operation commences with harvesting of the con -
duits (long saphenous vein from the leg (Figure 54.4), and/or 
radial artery) while the chest is opened via a median sternot-
omy and the LIMA is dissected from the chest wall (Figure 
54.5). The patient is typically placed on CPB after heparini-
sation, the aorta is cross-clamped and the heart arrested with 
Edgar van Nuys Allen , 1900–1961, Professor of Medicine, The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   890 25/10/2017   09:27Coronary artery bypass surgery 891
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
to the ascending aorta and the proximal anastomoses are 
completed. Occasionally, the surgeon may opt to carry out the 
whole operation while the cross-clamp is applied, to reduce 
the risks associated with aortic manipulation. The patient is 
warmed and weaned from CPB. The heparin is reversed and 
the patient is returned to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Postoperative recovery
The majority of patients are extubated a few hours after 
returning from surgery and remain in the ICU for 24 hours or 
so. In some centres, ‘fast tracking’ appropriate patients allows 
earlier transfer to a recovery area or high-dependency unit 
(HDU). Discharge is routinely 4–8 days after surgery.
Postoperative complications
Bleeding
Significant bleeding occurs in approximately 2–3% of 
patients. Rarely, acute cardiac tamponade or profound hypo -
tension may occur in the early postoperative perio d and 
requires emergency resternotomy.
Arrhythmias
The most common postoperative arrhythmia is sinus tachy -
cardia, closely followed by atrial fibrillation (AF). It occurs in 
around 30% of patients undergoing CABG and often spon -
taneously reverts to sinus rhythm. Treatment includes cor -
rection of potassium (>4.5 mmol/L), the use of β-blockers, 
amiodarone or digoxin and, if necessary, cardioversion. Bra -
dycardia is seldom seen, but temporary pacing via epicardial 
pacing wires inserted intraoperatively may be required in the 
postoperative period.
Figure 54.4 The long saphenous vein is exposed at the ankle, ante-
rior to the medial malleolus, as far as the saphenofemoral junction (if 
required). The side branches are tied carefully and divided and the 
vein is excised. Gentle distension of the vein through a cannula at its 
distal end allows inspection for leaks.
Figure 54.5 A pedicled left internal mammary artery is dissected off 
the chest wall and divided distally after systemic heparinisation. It is 
left attached to the subclavian artery proximally.
Vein
grafts
Left
subclavian
artery
Left
internal
mammary
artery
Figure 54.6 Completed coronary artery bypass grafts.
cardioplegia. The grafts are anastomosed to coronary arteries 
distal to the stenosis (Figure 54.6).
The aortic cross-clamp is removed and the heart is reper -
fused with oxygenated blood. A side-biting clamp is applied 
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   891 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC892
Poor cardiac output state
Myocardial function typically declines in the first few hours 
following cardiac surgery, presumably in response to an isch -
aemia/reperfusion-type injury. Inotropic agents are often 
required at this time to support the heart function and main-
tain the circulation. Occasionally, the patient develops a per-
sistent low cardiac output state. The clinical manifestations 
include poor peripheral perfusion, low urine output, a devel-
oping metabolic acidosis and low blood pressure.
There are several mechanisms that account for this 
complication in the early postoperative period, including 
depressed myocardial contractility, reduced preload, increased 
afterload and a disturbance in heart rate or rhythm.
Treatment is aimed at the underlying cause but generally 
includes oxygenation, optimising preload, reducing afterload, 
managing any rhythm disturbances and improving contrac -
tility. If the low cardiac output state persists, the heart may 
require pharmacological or mechanical support.
PHARMACOLOGICAL SUPPORT
Inotropic drugs act in a variety of ways to alter the systemic 
vascular resistance, increase the heart rate and increase the 
force of myocardial contractility. Commonly used inotropes 
include dopamine, dobutamine, adrenaline (epinephrine) 
and noradrenaline (norepinephrine). These compounds 
are often used in conjunction with vasodilating agents that 
decrease the afterload.
MECHANICAL SUPPORT
If low cardiac output persists despite inotropic support, 
the heart may require mechanical support while it recov-
ers its function. Mechanical support can be achieved using 
intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), ventricular assist device 
(VAD) or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
IABP is a device that is inserted, either percutaneously 
or under direct vision, into the common femoral artery. It is 
threaded into the aorta until its tip lies just distal to the arch 
vessels (Figure 54.7). The balloon is triggered by the ECG, 
deflating during ventricular systole (thus reducing afterload) 
and inflating in diastole (displacing blood that perfuses the 
coronary arteries retrogradely). When the heart has recovered 
sufficiently, the balloon is removed.
VAD is a mechanical circulatory supporting device used to 
replace the function of a failing heart partially or completely. 
It can be used as a short-term measure typically for patients 
recovering from heart attacks or heart surgery (bridge), or as a 
long-term support for patients suffering from congestive heart 
failure (destination). Current VAD devices are all continuous 
flow, based on a large trial that proved the superiority of con-
tinuous flow compared to pulsatile. Blood is exposed in these 
devices to a non-biological surface that can activate proin -
flammatory and coagulation cascades, leading to strokes and 
bleeding. Another important complication associated with 
VAD is infection.
ECMO is another circulatory support device that is simi -
lar to CPB; however ECMO can be established using venous 
access only (called VV-ECMO) or venous and arterial access 
(VA-ECMO). This mechanical support is mainly used for 
neonates and adults with potentially reversible respiratory 
failure, postcardiac surgery or as a temporary stabilisation 
method for patient who may need VAD (bridge therapy) as it 
can be easy to establish in unstable patients.
Neurological dysfunction
Stroke leading to a focal neurological deficit occurs in approx-
imately 2% of patients following CABG. Embolisation, prob-
ably originating from the aortic arch or heart chambers, is 
the most common mechanism for territorial infarcts, with 
hypoperfusion leading to watershed infarcts. Diffuse neuro -
logical injury may occur leading to subtle cognitive abnormal-
ities in memory, concentration and attention.
Wound infection
Significant deep wound infection resulting in sternal dehis -
cence and mediastinitis occurs in around 0.5–2% of patients. 
This can be associated with significant morbidity, with a pro-
longed hospital stay and further surgical interventions for 
debridement and/or rewiring of the sternum. It still has a sig -
nificant mortality rate as high as 40%. Wound infections are 
more common in diabetics, dialysis patients and the obese.
Mortality
In the UK, the overall mortality rate for patients undergoing 
CABG is 1–3%. Multiple factors have been demonstrated to 
affect mortality after CABG, including age, gender , left ven-
tricular function, use of LIMA and complete  revascularisation.
Balloon
Systole Diastole
(a)
Aortic pressure
Balloon
in/f_lation
ECG
T P
R
T P
R
Diastole Systole Diastole
(b)
Figure 54.7 Intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation. (a) The bal-
loon deflates during systole and thereby lowers systemic resistance. It 
inflates during diastole and increases coronary perfusion in addition to 
augmenting the systemic blood pressure. (b) The pressure changes 
and phases of the electrocardiogram (ECG) are shown.
(b)
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   892 25/10/2017   09:27Valvular heart disease 893
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Surgical outcome
Relief of symptoms
If revascularisation is complete, CABG alleviates or improves 
anginal symptoms in more than 90% of patients at 1 year; this 
falls to 80% at 5 years and 60% at 10 years. This symptomatic 
deterioration usually reflects progression of atherosclerotic 
disease in vein grafts and native coronary arteries.
Survival
Early surgical versus medical studies have reported survival 
rates to be >95% at 1 year, 90% at 5 years, 75% at 10 years and 
60% at 15 years. Through changes in surgical practice, such 
as an increased use of arterial conduits and the widespread 
use of dual antiplatelet therapy, β-blockers and lipid-lowering 
agents, post-CABG survival may well improve in the future.
unphysiological surface area. This reduces proinflammatory 
activation but at the same time allows the surgeon to operate 
on a still, bloodless heart. However, there is still no evidence 
to support the superiority of any of the above mentioned tech-
niques and the final decision is usually based on the surgeon’s 
skills and the required operation.
Minimal access surgery
Minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB) 
grafting is performed through a strategically placed minimal 
access incision and so avoids all invasive aspects of conven -
tional CABG. Through an anterior submammary incision the 
LIMA can be dissected down with the aid of a thoracoscope 
and grafted to the LAD. More lateral MIDCAB incisions 
allow access to other coronary vessels, including branches of 
the circumflex artery. Patient selection remains, at least at 
present, a restriction to the ever-increasing minimally inva -
sive methods being developed. Although not yet critically 
evaluated, one particular approach is to combine MIDCAB 
(typically LIMA to LAD) with PCI to other less accessible 
coronary arteries (‘hybrid’ coronary revascularisation).
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Introduction
Early surgical management of valvular heart disease concen -
trated on valvular repair. The heroic early procedures for 
valve stenosis were closed and therefore ‘blind’ commissur -
otomies. They were replaced by open procedures with full 
visualisation, allowing precise repair and replacement. The 
first prosthetic valve replacement was performed by Harken 
in 1960 replacing the aortic valve, followed by a mitral valve 
replacement by Starr a year later. Continued improvements in 
perioperative care, myocardial protection and, in  particular, 
Summary box 54.8
Coronary artery bypass surgery outcome
Mortality
●● 1–3%
Peroperative infarct
●● 2–3%
Angina
●● Better in >90% at 1 year
●● 80% at 5 years
●● 60% at 10 years
Survival
●● >95% at 1 year
●● 90% at 5 years
●● 75% at 10 years
●● 60% at 15 years
Off-pump coronary artery surgery
CABG without the use of CPB is a well-established and 
increasingly popular method that may be combined with a 
minimally invasive approach or carried out through a con -
ventional sternotomy. It offers the advantages that it avoids 
the physiological stress associated with CPB and, to some 
extent, the aortic manipulation that can lead to neurological 
injury through atherosclerotic embolisation. Since the intro -
duction of cardiac stabilising devices such as the Octopus ® 
(Figure 54.8), off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) 
grafting has become widespread. One of the concerns, how -
ever, is related to the quality of anastomosis carried out on 
a beating heart and bloo dy field that can limit the surgeon’s 
vision. The advantages of off-pump surgery over on-pump has 
recently been questioned, especially with the development of 
mini-bypass pumps, which offer a closed circuit and minimal 
Dwight Emary Harken , 1910–1993, formerly Chief of Thoracic Surgery, The Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Innovator in heart surgery, he intro-
duced the concept of intensive care unit and opened the first intensive care unit in 1951. Served as Chief of Thoracic Surgery at Harvard University for 22 years.
Albert Starr , b.1926, formerly Professor of Surgery, The University of Oregon, Portland, OR, USA. Medical Director, Providence Heart and Vascular Institute, 
Portland. Inventor of the world’s first durable artificial mitral valve; winner of Lasker award in 2007 – an award given by the Lasker Foundation in the United States 
to a person (or persons) who has made major contributions to medical science or who has performed public service on behalf of medicine.
Figure 54.8 Off-pump cor onary artery bypass using an Octopus ® 
stabiliser to perform the distal anastomosis.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   893 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC894
the development of prosthetic heart valves have improved 
long-term haemodynamic results, provided symptom relief 
and prolonged survival. The majority of valvular operations 
involve surgery on the aortic or mitral valve; tricuspid and 
pulmonary valve surgery is rarely undertaken in isolation.
Surgical anatomy
Heart valves function to maintain pressure gradients between 
cardiac chambers and so ensure unidirectional flow of blood 
without reflux through the heart. The aortic valve is tricus -
pid, with semilunar leaflets attached to the aortic wall at the 
annulus with the aortic sinuses being above the base of each 
leaflet, two of which form the origin or ostium of the coron -
ary arteries. The intrinsic shape of the aortic semilunar valve 
allows blood to leave the ventricle during systole and prevents 
regurgitation during diastole. If disease leads to disruption of 
the leaflets or the annulus, valve function will be affected.
The mitral valve is bicuspid; the more anterior cusp is 
larger in area and lies between the orifices of the mitral and 
aortic valves. The leaflets, like those of the aortic valve, are 
attached to an annulus. The leaflets join at two commissures 
and are supported by a subvalvular apparatus, consisting of 
chordae tendinae and papillary muscles. The papillary mus -
cles contract in ventricular systole, pulling the cusps towards 
the atrioventricular orifice and holding blood within the ven-
tricle. The proper functioning of the mitral valve depends on 
the integrity of the annulus, leaflets, chordae and papillary 
muscles. If surgical correction is required, emphasis is on the 
preservation of these structures when possible (Figure 54.9).
Surgical options for heart valve 
disease
The decision of whether to repair or replace the diseased valve 
depends on the underlying pathology, the severity of disease 
and quality and/or involvement of the surrounding support -
ing structures. Generally, repair is increasingly favoured when 
possible in mitral valve disease, particularly in degenerative 
mitral regurgitation, in which it has been shown to have 
good long-term outcomes. Repair is the operation of choice 
in tricuspid valve disease, but aortic valve surgery generally 
involves replacing the diseased valve (Table 54.1).
Important factors in selecting the type of procedure and 
prosthesis include the patient’s choice, age, existing comor -
bidities and the need for anticoagulation. Because of uncer -
tainties about its lifespan, there is debate about when a 
bioprosthetic valve should be used, with most accepting its 
use in those over 60 years. The need for anticoagulation may 
have an impact on choice of valve, particularly in women of 
childbearing age, the elderly, the presence of congenital or 
TABLE 54.1 Comparing options for heart valve surgery.
Advantages Disadvantages
Valve repair Preservation of integral structures
Improved haemodynamics
Avoids long-term anticoagulation
Technical difficulties
Variable failure rate
Valve replacement
Mechanical Readily available
Extensive experience of use
Needs lifelong anticoagulation
Susceptibility to infection
Used in any age group
Durability, lifelong
Biological
Stented Readily available Limited lifespan
Short period of anticoagulation
Stentless Readily available Limited lifespan
Probably better haemodynamics with less outflow tract 
obstruction
More difficult to insert
Short period of anticoagulation
Homograft No anticoagulation
Improved haemodynamics
Long-term outcome uncertain
Not readily available
Technical difficulties
(Adapted from Sharpe DAC, Das SR. Heart valve surgery. Surgery 2000; 18: 265–9.)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.9Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  3      ISBN: 9781444121278
Tricuspid
valve
Mitral
valve
Pulmonary
valve
Aortic
valve
Figure 54.9 Four valves of the heart.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   894 25/10/2017   09:27Valvular heart disease 895
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
acquired bleeding diathesis and when there is the need for 
further major surgery.
Types of prosthetic valves
Mechanical valves
Mechanical valves can be used in any age group to replace 
any valve (Figure 54.10). They are extremely durable but 
the components of the valve are thrombogenic and, there-
fore, the patient requires systemic anticoagulation, usually 
with warfarin. This subjects the patient to a lifetime of blood 
tests, medication and the constant threat of haemorrhagic 
(intracerebral, epistaxis, gastrointestinal bleed) or thrombotic 
(cerebral infarction) complications.
Biological valves
Biological valves include homograft (or allograft) valves, 
removed from cadavers; autografts, a patient’s own valve; and, 
most commonly, heterografts (or xenografts) prepared from 
animal tissues. All share the basic design of three semilunar 
leaflets with central flow, so decreasing pressure gradients and 
minimising turbulence (Figure 54.11). Heterograft ‘tissue’ 
valves are the most commonly used valves and can be stented 
with a limited durability of 10–15 years, whereas stentless (or 
frameless) valves are expected to have less late calcific degen-
eration but are more technically difficult to insert.
Prosthetic valve dysfunction and 
complications
Structural valve failure
Bioprosthetic valves are vulnerable to degenerative changes. 
Structural failure rates for biological valves, although rare 
in those over 70 years of age, can reach 60% after 15 years. 
However, newer biological valves have a reoperative rate of 
<10% at 20 years. Structural failure of a mechanical valve is 
generally uncommon.
Paravalvular leak
Early-onset paravalvular leaks usually result from technical 
difficulties at insertion. Late-onset leaks can occur and may 
be related to an episo de of endocarditis or, in the presence 
of bioprostheses, leaflet degeneration. The leak can cause 
haemolytic anaemia or haemodynamic compromise and the 
valve may need replacement.
Thrombosis and thromboembolism
Thrombus formation on a prosthetic valve remains the most 
common complication of mechanical and biological valves 
(Figure 54.12). The risk of thromboembolism is greater with 
a valve in the mitral position (mechanical or biological) than 
with one in the aortic position. Improved haemodynamic 
function lowers the probability of thromboembolism. The 
incidence of thromboembolism in current mechanical valves 
is 0.5–3% per patient-year.
Prosthetic valve endocarditis
The incidence of prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) is 
2–4%. The risk is lifelong and is at its greatest in the 3 months 
after surgery. The incidence of PVE is higher with mechanical 
and bioprosthetic valves and lowest with homograft and auto-
graft valves. The diagnosis is suspected following symptoms of 
Figure 54.11 Porcine heterograft stented valve.
Figure 54.10 Bileaflet mechanical valve.
Figure 54.12 Thrombus (marked T and illustrated with the arr ows) 
on the moving components of a ball-and-cage valve.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   895 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC896
septicaemia, appearance of a new murmur or a septic embolus. 
It is confirmed with echocardiography, which may show vege-
tations and even abscess formation. A high index of suspi -
cion is required and early multiple blood cultures are needed 
to confirm the diagnosis, identify the infective organism and 
choose appropriate antibiotic therapy . The most common 
organisms that can lead to PVE are the Staphylococcus species, 
particularly S. epidermidis in early PVE and S. aureus (at least 
50% of cases); the Streptococcus species, usually S. viridans 
but also S. pneumoniae ; and, less commonly, gram-negative 
bacilli, as well as fungal organisms.
The treatment of choice is early aggressive intravenous 
antibiotic therapy. Serial echocardiography to assess extent of 
infection into surrounding myocardial tissue, as well as func-
tional assessment of the infected valve may help in optimising 
decisions on timing of surgical intervention. The prognosis of 
PVE remains poor, with an overall mortality rate of over 20%.
Postoperative management
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Currently; the National Institute for Health and Care Excel-
lence (NICE) recommends that prophylactic antibiotics 
are not required for patients with prothetic valves undergo-
ing dental procedures. Other leading European bodies have 
recently supported the above recommendation as the is no 
strong evidence to the contrary.
Antithrombotic therapy
All patients with mechanical valves require warfarin, usually 
started on the first or second postoperative day. The use of 
anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy with biological valves 
is variable and depends on the patient’s underlying rhythm 
postoperatively and surgeons’ preference.
Mitral valve disease
Mitral regurgitation
Any pathological process affecting the mitral valve appara -
tus may lead to mitral regurgitation. As such, there are many 
causes of regurgitation and they can be broadly classified into 
four headings.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
There is an important distinction between acute and chronic 
mitral regurgitation. The former is usually the result of isch -
aemic papillary muscle rupture or following infective endo-
carditis, whereas the latter is the result of myxomatous 
degeneration or fibroelastic changes in the leaflets.
In acute mitral regurgitation, the left ventricle ejects blood 
back into a small, poorly compliant left atrium, imposing a 
sudden volume load on the left atrium during ventricular sys-
tole. This leads to an abrupt rise in left atrial pressure followed 
by a rise in pulmonary venous pressure and pulmonary oedema.
In chronic mitral regurgitation, the process is sufficiently 
slow to allow compensatory left ventricular dilatation and 
hypertrophy, and dilatation of the left atrium without any sig-
nificant increase in pressure, so protecting the pulmonary cir-
culation. As the disease advances and left atrial dilatation can 
no longer accomodate, left atrial pressure begins to rise, lead-
ing to a rise in pulmonary venous pressure and progressive pul-
monary congestion, with eventual congestive cardiac failure.
CLINICAL FEATURES
In acute mitral regurgitation, the patient is usually unwell, 
presenting with clinical and radiological evidence of acute 
pulmonary oedema and a loud apical pansystolic murmur. 
Patients with mild chronic mitral regurgitation are usually 
asymptomatic. With progressive pulmonary congestion and 
left ventricular failure, the patient develops fatigue, dys-
pnoea on exertion and orthopnoea. The development of 
AF with left atrial dilatation is common. The enlarged left 
ventricle leads to a heaving apical impulse and a pansystolic 
murmur.
INVESTIGATIONS
 ● ECG may show left atrial hypertrophy (bifid P waves), left 
ventricular hypertrophy and atrial fibrillation.
 ● Chest radiography. There may be cardiomegaly with 
prominent pulmonary vasculature.
 ● Echocardiography. This is often combined with colour 
flow Doppler imaging, which shows the severity of the 
regurgitant jet of mitral regurgitation.
Summary box 54.9
Causes of mitral regurgitation and likely pathology
Degenerative
●● Myxomatous degeneration of the valve and subvalvular 
apparatus (Barlow’s disease)
●● Fibroelastic deficiency (in elderly patients)
●● Senile calcification: calcified annulus
●● Connective tissue disorders (e.g. Marfan syndrome, Ehlers–
Danlos syndrome): disruption of mitral valve apparatus
Ischaemic
●● Papillary muscle rupture: following myocardial infarction
●● Dynamic mitral regurgitation: as a result of transient ischaemia
●● Poor left ventricular function: most common ‘functional’ cause 
secondary to myocardial ischaemia
Rheumatic
●● Previous acute rheumatic fever: stiffened leaflets unable to 
coapt
Infective
●● Endocarditis: leaflet destruction and perforation
(Adapted from Hall R. Mitral valve disease. Medicine 1997; 
25: 27.)
John Brereton Barlow , 1924–2008, South African cardiologist.
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   896 25/10/2017   09:27Valvular heart disease 897
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
 ● Coronary angiography. In patients >40 years of age to 
investigate the coronary arteries.
 ● Cardiac MRI. Increasingly popular as it can give detailed 
information on structure and function
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
Indications for surgery for patients with primary mitral regur-
gitation include severe mitral regurgitation in symptomatic 
patients or severe regurgitation associated with changes in 
left ventricular function or dimension (such as left ventricular 
end-systolic diameter), as evidence suggests that any changes 
in ventricular function in the setting of primary mitral regur-
gitation is usually associated with significant mortality if not 
corrected (Figure 54.13). It is also recommended to address 
severe mitral disease in the same setting if a patient is under -
going cardiac surgery for a different reason.
The treatment of mitral regurgitation secondary to 
ischaemic heart disease remains controversial and current 
evidence suggests that patients with severe ischaemic regur -
gitation may benefit from mitral valve replacement, while 
patients with moderate regurgitation should usually undergo 
repair along with CABG if indicated.
Mitral stenosis
The most common cause of mitral stenosis worldwide remains 
rheumatic fever, despite the fact that the incidence of overt 
rheumatic fever in resource-rich countries has decreased. 
During the healing phase of acute rheumatic fever, the valve 
leaflets become adherent to each other at their free border so 
that the commissures become obliterated and the valve orifice 
narrows. Symptoms of mitral stenosis usually develop more 
than 10 years after the acute attack.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Mitral stenosis slows ventricular filling during diastole and 
the pressure in the left atrium rises to maintain cardiac out -
put. This leads to atrial hypertrophy and dilatation. Pulmo-
nary congestion results from the rise in left atrial pressure 
but, with time, the lungs are protected against pulmonary 
oedema by constriction of the pulmonary vessels. However, 
this  adaptive response, along with the passive ‘back pressure’ 
generated by the rise in left atrial pressure, leads to pulmonary 
hypertension. This leads to an increased demand on the right 
ventricle with eventual right heart failure and tricuspid regur-
gitation. The development of AF is common and can lead to 
a significant reduction in cardiac output. AF predisposes to 
thrombi forming in the left atrium, which may embolise to 
the systemic circulation.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients may remain asymptomatic for years and then pres-
ent with symptoms when the heart is stressed by an event 
such as pregnancy, fever, chest infection or with the onset 
of AF . The common symptoms are fatigue and dyspnoea on 
exertion, which result from the combination of reduced for -
ward flow and increased back pressure. The resulting pulmo -
nary congestion adds to breathlessness and may produce a 
cough or haemoptysis. If mitral stenosis is advanced, there 
may also be a right ventricular heave due to right ventric -
ular hypertrophy in response to pulmonary hypertension. 
Auscultation reveals an opening snap soon after the sec -
ond heart sound, as the diseased valve is opened forcibly by 
the high pressure in the left atrium. The reverse happens 
when the valve closes and there is a loud ‘tapping’ first heart 
sound. In addition, a rumbling mid-diastolic murmur can be 
heard. The duration of the murmur is related to the severity 
of the mitral stenosis, increasing in length as the stenosis 
becomes more severe.
INVESTIGATIONS
 ● ECG may show left atrial enlargement (P-mitrale) or AF . 
Right axis deviation and other ECG signs of right ventric-
ular hypertrophy (tall QRS complexes in the right ven -
tricular leads V1–3) may also be present.
 ● Chest radiography. There is a small aortic outline and a 
prominent pulmonary artery. The left atrium is enlarged 
(sometimes to an enormous degree) along with upper lobe 
diversion as a result of the raised pulmonary venous pres -
sure. The right ventricle also appears enlarged (Figure 
54.14).
Summary box 54.10
Causes of mitral valve disease
Stenosis
●● Rheumatic heart disease (common)
●● Calcification of valve or chordae
●● Congenital (rare)
Regurgitation
●● Rheumatic heart disease
●● Valve prolapse
●● Left ventricular dilatation or hypertrophy
●● Ischaemia
●● Bacterial endocarditis
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.13Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
120/80
mmHg
+ +
+
+120/↑
mmHg
Figure 54.13 Features and pathophysiology of mitral r egurgitation. 
There is a loud parasystolic murmur and the left atrium enlar ges. The 
left ventricle enlarges as a consequence of volume overload.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   897 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC898
 ● Echocardiography, in combination with colour flow 
Doppler imaging, allows assessment of the flow across the 
valve and, therefore, the degree of stenosis. Transoesoph-
ageal echocardiography (TOE) may be better at assessing 
valve morphology in detail and excluding the presence of 
an atrial thrombus.
 ● Coronary angiography. To investigate the coronary 
 arteries.
 ● Cardiac MRI.
 ● Right heart catheterisation.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
Medical management includes use of anticoagulation in 
patients with AF or left atrial enlargement. Tachyarrhyth -
mias, including fast AF , that may lead to decompensation 
and cardiac failure, should be treated. Rate-controlling 
agents are the mainstay of treatment. Diuretics may provide 
some benefit. The principal invasive intervention is percuta -
nous mitral balloon valvuloplasty (PMBV); surgery is indi-
cated for severely symptomatic patients who have failed or 
who are unsuitable for PMBV . The prognosis is determined 
by the severity of the stenosis, the size of the atrium, the 
onset of AF , rising pulmonary artery pressure and the unpre-
dictable risk of embolism from a large, fibrillating atrium 
(Figure 54.15). Surgical options include mitral valve repair 
or mitral valve replacement. Formerly common surgical pro -
cedures such as closed or open commissurotomy are now 
rarely performed.
Mitral valve operations
Depending on the type of procedure and approach to the 
mitral valve, a median sternotomy or, occasionally, a right tho-
racotomy is performed. The mitral valve can be approached 
directly through the left atrium in the interatrial groove, 
through the right atrium and then the interatrial septum, or 
through the left atrial appendage.
MITRAL VAL VE REPAIR
The restoration of normal valve function and preserva-
tion of the mitral apparatus is preferable to replacement 
in specific groups of pathology, as it can be associated with 
improved long-term ventricular remodelling and function. 
This approach reduces the bleeding complications associ-
ated with anticoagulants. The functional classification sys -
tem developed by Carpentier serves as a guideline in valve 
reconstruction. It allows classification of any mitral insuffi -
ciency into one of three groups according to the amplitude 
of the leaflet motion and provides a useful framework for the 
mechanisms of failure of the mitral valve. As a rule, several 
valvular lesions or abnormalities are involved in a functional 
abnormality, with specific techniques developed to correct 
each lesion.
At surgery, the anatomy of the valvular apparatus and 
subvalvular structures have to be carefully inspected. In par -
ticular, the extent of annular dilatation, leaflet prolapse and 
chordal dysfunction are assessed. The mitral valve recon -
struction is completed using various techniques, including 
insertion of a prosthetic ring annuloplasty (Figure 54.16); 
triangular or quadrangular resection of the leaflet; use of a 
sliding plasty; chordal shortening; chordal transposition and 
neochordea implantation.
There are many different techniques, which indicates 
that no one technique addresses all the issues that can occur 
with mitral regurgitation. Valve repair, however, offers better 
preservation of ventricular function and avoids the need for 
prolonged anticoagulation, as well as valve-related complica-
tions such as PVE or structural dysfunction. Recent advances 
in surgical techniques and the development of different types 
of rings has led to increased use of mitral valve repair with 
excellent results, making it the standard operation. The oper-
ative mortality is 1–3%. One of the major issues related to 
mitral repair is the incidence of regurgitation recurrence, 
which varies between series but can be up to 30% at 5 years. 
It seems that this is related to which leaflet is repaired and the 
amount of foreign material used in the repair (patch).
Figure 54.14  Chest radiograph of long-standing mitral stenosis, 
showing a massive left atrium.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Figo: 54.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Enlarged
left atrium
Thrombus
120/0–5
mmHg
20+
mmHg
Figure 54.15 Features and pathophysiology of mitral stenosis. The 
aorta and left ventricle are r elatively small because of chronically 
reduced cardiac output. The atrium is enlarged and may fibrillate, 
become stagnant and contain a thrombus. The ventricle fills with a 
turbulent jet that may be detected as a diastolic murmur or a thrill at 
the apex.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   898 25/10/2017   09:27Valvular heart disease 899
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
MITRAL VAL VE REPLACEMENT
When valve repair is not feasible, mitral valve replacement 
is necessary. This usually involves a median sternotomy 
and access to the left atrium on CPB. The diseased valve is 
exposed, excised and a suitably sized mechanical or biopros -
thetic valve is implanted. The atriotomy is closed following 
de-airing of the left heart. Intraoperative TOE can be used to 
assess adequate valve function.
The operative mortality rate for elective mitral valve 
replacement is approximately 5–6%. This depends largely 
on the state of the myocardium and the general condition 
(including age) of the patient. Common serious in-hospital 
complications include stroke (<4%) and renal failure (3%), 
although any complication of heart surgery is possible. The 
longer-term prognosis for patients following mitral valve 
replacement is generally good in comparison with the natural 
history of mitral valve disease. Indeed, more recent evidence 
suggests the patients with ischaemic severe mitral regurgita-
tion can benefit more from valve replacement when com-
pared to repair.
PERCUTANEOUS MITRAL VAL VE REPAIR 
(MITRACLIP®)
The MitraClip® is a device used to reduce mitral valve regur-
gitation. The method involves suturing of the leaflets of the 
mitral valve together so that regurgitation into the left atrium 
is prevented. The valve continues to open through the sides 
of the suture and therefore bloo d continues to flow into the 
left ventricle. Although this method is less invasive, associ -
ated with rapid recovery and reduced in-hospital stay, it is 
however technically demanding and long-term durability of 
the results of the device is unknown.
Recent data suggest that Mitraclip ® may be suitable for 
a small subset of high-risk patients or patients with chronic 
heart failure, but not for the vast majority, who are better 
served by surgery that leaves them with substantially less 
mitral regurgitation.
Aortic valve disease
Approximately two-thirds of all valve surgery performed in 
the UK is for aortic valve disease, which remains common 
despite a reduction in the incidence of rheumatic fever in 
resource-rich countries.
Aortic stenosis
Aortic stenosis, as opposed to aortic sclerosis, occurs when a 
pressure gradient can be demonstrated across the aortic valve. 
The difference is not absolute, as sclerosis can progress to ste-
nosis. The common cause of aortic stenosis in adults is an 
acquired, degenerative, calcific process that results in immo-
bile aortic valve cusps. Progressive fibrosis and calcification 
of a congenitally abnormal valve can mimic this degenera -
tive process. The usual congenital abnormality is commissu-
ral fusion leading to a bicuspid aortic valve, which occurs in 
approximately 1% of the population (Figure 54.17).
Figure 54.16  Operative view of the completed repair of a mitral 
valve using a Carpentier–Edwards annuloplasty ring (courtesy of 
A Murday, FRCS).
Alain Carpentier , cardiothoracic surgeon, Hôpital European Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.
Senile calci/f_ied
Posterior Posterior
Posterior
Anterior Anterior
Anterior
BicuspidRheumatic
Figure 54.17 (a) Formaldehyde-treated aortic valve (normal tricus -
pid configuration). (b) Aortic stenosis, different pathologies.
(a)
(b)
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   899 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC900
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
A pressure gradient develops between the left ventricle and 
the aorta, with the left ventricle adapting to this systolic 
pressure overload by an increase in left ventricular wall thick-
ness or hypertrophy. This adaptive response is an attempt to 
normalise left ventricular wall stress in the face of increased 
left ventricular systolic pressure and may maintain a normal 
cardiac output, prevent left ventricular dilatation and avoid 
significant symptoms for a number of years. Eventually, myo-
cardial function is affected and, together with insufficient left 
ventricular hypertrophy to normalise wall stress (load mis -
match), ventricular contractility is reduced.
When aortic stenosis is severe and cardiac output is nor -
mal, a >50 mmHg gradient between peak systolic left ven-
tricular and aortic pressure exists. As aortic stenosis worsens, 
cardiac output cannot increase with exertion and eventually 
becomes insufficient at rest. The reduction in ventricular 
contractility leads to an irreversible decline in left ventricular 
function, with dilatation and a rise in left ventricular end-  
diastolic pressure, to the point of overt left heart failure.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients are often asymptomatic until decompensation occurs, 
typically presenting with dyspnoea and angina, which is due 
to increased oxygen needs of the hypertrophied left ventricle, 
reduced coronary filling and inadequate cardiac output during 
exertion. Patients often describe a feeling of light-headed -
ness or ‘near’ syncope on effort. Cardiac arrhythmias can also 
occur. Auscultation of the heart demonstrates a murmur that 
is typically harsh, ejection in nature and best heard over the 
aortic area with radiation to the carotids. With critical aortic 
stenosis and a fall in cardiac output, the murmur may become 
quieter. The apex beat may be displaced in late disease along 
with signs of cardiac congestion (Figure 54.18).
INVESTIGATIONS
 ● ECG. There is left ventricular hypertrophy with tall R 
waves in the lateral leads and sometimes a ‘strain pattern’ 
(S–T depression with inverted T waves in the lateral 
leads).
 ● Chest radiography. May be normal. Cardiomegaly and 
pulmonary congestion can be seen in the presence of left 
ventricular failure. Poststenotic dilatation of the aorta is 
occasionally seen (Figure 54.19).
 ● Echocardiography confirms the diagnosis and, together 
with colour flow Doppler imaging, allows assessment 
of the aortic valve gradient, calculation of valve area 
and  evaluation of left ventricular dimensions and wall 
 thickness.
 ● Coronary angiography. To investigate the coronary arter-
ies in patients >40 years of age.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
Medical management focuses on the avoidance of sys -
temic hypotension and arterial vasodilatation, which may 
reduce myocardial perfusion pressure and therefore provoke  
ischaemia.
The natural history of symptomatic patients with aortic 
stenosis is dismal, with a 10-year mortality rate of 80–90%. 
The patient is at risk of sudden death related to the severity 
of the stenosis. Severe symptomatic aortic stenosis (mean gra-
dient >40 mmHg, velocity >4 m/s and effective orifice area 
<1 cm2 are indications for surgery.
Surgery is indicated in asymptomatic patients with severe 
stenosis, impaired left ventricular function or when the 
patient is undergoing surgery for a different reason such as 
CABG. An abnormal bloo d pressure response to exercise 
(low blood pressure) is also a sign that there is limited reserve 
in asymptomatic patients.
Aortic regurgitation
The causes of aortic regurgitation can be classified according 
to the speed of development of the regurgitant jet (acute or 
chronic) or according to the anatomical location of pathol -
ogy (valve leaflet or aortic wall). The causes of acute aortic 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.18Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
180/0–↑
mmHg
120/80 mmHg
10–15
mmHg
Hypertrophied
with raised systolic
pressure
++
+
+
+
+
Figure 54.18  Features and pathophysiology of aortic stenosis. 
 Haemodynamic changes in aortic stenosis. Aorta with poststenotic 
dilatation.
Figure 54.19 Chest radiograph in aortic stenosis.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   900 25/10/2017   09:27Valvular heart disease 901
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Acute aortic regurgitation imposes a volume load on the left 
ventricle because of backflow. It causes a sharp rise in left 
ventricular end-diastolic pressure, premature closure of the 
mitral valve and inadequate forward left ventricular filling. 
The result is sudden haemodynamic deterioration and acute 
respiratory compromise.
In chronic aortic regurgitation, volume load and left 
ventricular end-diastolic pressure increase gradually, leading 
to compensatory left ventricular dilatation and eccentric 
hypertrophy to maintain adequate cardiac output. Systolic 
and diastolic function is abnormal, and sudden deterioration 
can occur.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Longstanding aortic regurgitation is usually asymptomatic 
until the left ventricle begins to fail, when exertional dys -
pnoea may be the only symptom. Angina can also develop. 
A wide pulse pressure due to a reduction in diastolic pres-
sure and collapsing pulse (waterhammer pulse) are commonly 
seen. Other manifestations of the wide pulse pressure include 
visible capillary pulsation of the nail bed (Quincke’s sign), 
pulsatile head bobbing (de Musset’s sign), visible arterial pul-
sation in the neck (Corrigan’s sign), a ‘pistolshot’ sound on 
auscultating over the femoral artery (Traube’s sign) and uvular 
pulsation (Müller’s sign). The apex is displaced laterally, often 
visible and hyperdynamic or ‘thrusting’ in nature because of 
the left ventricular hypertrophy. Auscultation reveals a high-
pitched early diastolic murmur best heard at the left sternal 
edge (Figure 54.20).
INVESTIGATIONS
 ● ECG. There is left ventricular hypertrophy and some -
times a ‘strain pattern’.
 ● Chest radiography. Cardiomegaly can be seen if the left 
ventricle is dilating; sometimes, the aortic shadow may 
also indicate dilatation.
 ● Echocardiography. This allows assessment of the underly-
ing cause and severity of aortic regurgitation and enables 
the diameter of the aortic root as well as left ventricular 
dimensions to be determined. Colour flow Doppler imag -
ing quantifies the size of the regurgitant jet.
 ● Coronary angiography. To investigate the coronary arter-
ies in patients >40 years of age.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
Medical therapy with vasodilator drugs for relief of dyspnoea 
or angina is designed to improve forward stroke volume and 
reduce regurgitant volume. However, symptomatic relief does 
not alter the need for valve surgery.
The indications for surgery include severe regurgitation 
in symptomatic patients. Asymptomatic patients with severe 
aortic regurgitation and left ventricular dysfunction should be 
offered surgery. Valve replacement should also be considered 
in asymptomatic patients with severe regurgitation if they 
are undergoing cardiac surgery for any other reason, or when 
there is evidence of progressive left ventricular dilatation 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.20Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
120/40 mmHg
120/0–/uni2191
mmHg
LAP/uni2191
++
+
+
+
+
Figure 54.20 Haemodynamic consequences of aortic regurgitation. 
The left ventricle dilates and hypertrophies and ther e is a diastolic 
murmur. LAP , left atrial pressure.
Summary box 54.11
Causes of aortic regurgitation according to 
predominant anatomical location of pathology
Valve leaflet disease
●● Congenital, e.g. bicuspid valve leading to degenerative 
changes, occasionally with ventricular septal defect
●● Rheumatic heart disease
●● Infective endocarditis
Aortic wall pathology
●● Inflammatory, e.g. connective tissue disorders such as 
ankylosing spondylitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
rheumatoid arthritis
●● Systemic disease, e.g. tertiary syphilis
●● Degenerative, e.g. Marfan syndrome, aortic root dissection, 
senile aortopathy, leading to aortic root/annular dilatation
(Adapted from Petch M. Aortic valve disease. Medicine 1997; 
25: 31.
Bernard Jean Antonin Marfan , 1858–1942, physician L’Hôpital des Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, described this syndrome in 1896.
Heinrich Irenaeus Quincke , 1842–1922, Professor of Medicine, Kiel, Germany.
Louis Charles Alfred de Musset , 1810–1857, French poet and playwright in whom the sign, traditionally, was first noticed.
Sir Dominic John Corrigan , 1802–1880, physician, Jervis Street Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
Ludwig Traube , 1818–1876, physician, The Charité, Berlin, Germany.
Friedrich von Müller , 1858–1941, physician, Munich, Germany.
 regurgitation include infective endocarditis, aortic dissection 
and trauma. The common causes of chronic aortic regurgi -
tation include degeneration leading to aortic root and/or 
annular dilatation, congenital bicuspid valve and previous 
rheumatic fever or endocarditis.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   901 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC902
(left ventricular end-systolic diameter >50 mm). Aortic valve 
replacement is recommended if there is a decrease in systolic 
function.
Aortic valve surgery
Unlike mitral valve surgery, there are few occasions when the 
aortic valve can be repaired and usually the valve requires 
replacement. However, in neonates and children, aortic valve 
repair or valvotomy is well established. Percutaneous aortic 
balloon valvotomy has a role in children, but appears to only 
result in temporary benefit in adult aortic valve disease.
AORTIC VAL VE REPLACEMENT
Aortic valve replacement (A VR) is performed through a 
median sternotomy on CPB. The aorta is cross-clamped and 
opened proximally to reveal the diseased valve. Cardiople-
gic solution is infused into the coronary arteries to arrest the 
heart in diastole. The valve is then excised leaving the annu-
lus in situ but removing as much calcific debris as possible. 
The annulus is sized and the mechanical or biological valve is 
then sutured into position at the level of the native annulus 
and the aortotomy is closed.
The operative mortality rate for elective aortic valve sur -
gery is 2–3%, but is higher in emergency surgery, in surgery for 
endocarditis and in older patients.
Major complications include stroke (2%), perioperative 
MI (2%) and heart block requiring a permanent pacemaker 
(<1%). The major determinant of late survival after aortic 
valve surgery is preoperative left ventricular function. The 
5-year survival rate is approximately 75–85%, with the major-
ity of late deaths related to myocardial factors.
TRANSCATHETER AORTIC VAL VE IMPLANTATION
Although A VR is still the gold standard treatment, a signif -
icant number of patients affected by severe aortic  stenosis 
requiring A VR do not undergo surgery because they are 
considered too old or too frail for such an invasive proce -
dure, or because they are affected by concomitant comor -
bidities that noticeably increase the operative risk. In such 
patients transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TA VI) is 
an attractive alternative to standard A VR. Other indica -
tions include: heavily calcified ascending aorta (‘porcelain’ 
aorta) and the presence of a severe congenital thoracic 
 distortion.
There are different approaches for valve implantation; the 
most commonly used are transapical (antegrade), and translu-
minal (retrograde).
 ● Transapical approach. The main advantage of performing 
transapical procedures is that the feasibility does not rely 
on the absence of a concomitant peripheral vascular dis-
ease or previous aortic surgery. This approach reduces the 
risk of calcium dislodgment due to the passage of a stiff 
transluminal device into a diseased aortic arch. In tran -
sapical TA VI, the cardiac apex is prepared through a small 
left anterolateral mini-thoracotomy using a purse-string 
or a crossing suture reinforced by pledgets and, after the 
procedure, a chest tube is routinely inserted into the left 
pleura.
 ● Transluminal approach. This can be carried out via the 
femoral or subclavian artery. This is a useful technique for 
patient with previous cardiac surgery; however, the pres -
ence of peripheral vascular disease, small vessel diameters, 
tortuous vessels, aortic disease or previous aortic surgery 
contraindicates this approach.
Whichever approach is used, a balloon catheter is 
advanced into the left ventricle over a guidewire and posi -
tioned at the opening of the aortic valve. The existing aor -
tic valve is dilated in order to make room for the prosthetic 
valve. Rapid right ventricular pacing is used to interrupt car -
diac output through the existing aortic valve and to reduce 
movement during implantation. The new valve, mounted 
on a metal stent, is manipulated into position and is either 
self-expanding or deployed using balloon inflation. Deploy -
ment leads to obliteration of the existing aortic valve.
Complications associated with TA VI include, mortality 
(5–18% at 30 days), mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation 
(30–50%), stroke (3–9%), perioperative open conversion 
(9–12%), vascular complications (10–15%) and atrioventric-
ular block (4–8%). A recent MI (<3 months), severe pulmo -
nary dysfunction and the presence of an apical thrombus are 
contraindications for transapical TA VI. Interestingly, most 
recent multicentre trials have demonstrated that the role of 
TA VI can be expanded to include intermediate-risk patients, 
with satisfactory 2-year outcomes.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
Introduction
Congenital heart diseases are abnormalities of cardiac struc -
ture that are present from birth. Such abnormalities in the 
development of the heart typically arise in the third to eighth 
week of gestation. The first operation for congenital heart 
Summary box 54.12
Causes of aortic valve disease
Stenosis
●● Congenital
●● Rheumatic heart disease
●● Acquired calcification and fibrosis of valve or chordae 
tendineae with age
Regurgitation
●● Rheumatic heart disease
●● Infective endocarditis
●● Congenital
●● Inflammatory:
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatic ankylosing spondylitis
●● Dilatation of aortic root:
Marfan syndrome
Dissection
●● Systemic disease:
Syphilis
Ulcerative colitis
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   902 25/10/2017   09:27Congenital heart disease 903
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
disease was the ligation of a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) 
by Gross in 1938. With the development of neonatal CPB, 
improved methods of myocardial protection and microsurgi-
cal techniques, an increasing number of corrective and palli -
ative operations are possible.
Development of the heart and fetal 
circulation and circulatory changes 
at birth
By 12 weeks of fetal life the primitive vascular tube is fully 
developed. The fetal circulation differs from that of the adult 
in that the right and left ventricles pump blood in parallel 
rather than in series. Such an arrangement allows the heart 
and head to receive more highly oxygenated blood. In the 
fetus this is possible because of the presence of three structural 
shunts: the ductus venosus, the foramen ovale and the ductus 
arteriosus (Figure 54.21).
Soon after birth, pulmonary vascular resistance falls 
because of the action of breathing and the resulting pul -
monary vasodilatation. In addition, within 30 minutes of 
delivery, the ductus arteriosus constricts in response to an 
increase in blood oxygen levels. The result is a reversal of the  
pulmonary–systemic pressure gradient and termination of 
blood flow from the pulmonary artery into the aorta.
After birth, the act of cutting and tying the umbilical 
cord stops venous blood flow from the placenta. This low -
ers the pressure in the inferior vena cava and, with the fall 
in pulmonary vascular resistance, right atrial pressure falls. 
The result is closure of the foramen ovale. The abolition of 
venous return from the placenta also causes the ductus veno-
sus to close.
The closure of the fetal circulatory shunts in the few hours 
following birth is functional, with complete structural closure 
typically taking several months. In 20% of adults the struc -
tural closure of the foramen ovale remains incomplete, but is 
of no cardiovascular significance.
Abnormalities of cardiac structure may arise from the 
persistence of normal fetal channels (PDA, patent fora -
men ovale), failure of septation (atrial septal defect (ASD), 
ventricular septal defect (VSD), tetralogy of Fallot), steno -
sis (intracardiac–supravalvular, valvular, infravalvular or 
extracardiac coarctation of the aorta), atresia or abnormal 
connections (transposition of the great vessels (TGV), total 
anomalous venous drainage). Fetal echocardiography is now 
sufficiently sensitive to detect intracardiac lesions in the sec -
ond trimester.
Incidence
Congenital heart disease is the most common congenital 
abnormality in the UK; the incidence of significant cardiac 
abnormalities is 8 cases per 1000 live births. Many sponta-
neous abortions or stillbirths have cardiac malformations or 
chromosomal abnormalities associated with structural heart 
defects. In neonates and children with congenital heart dis -
ease, 15% will have more than one cardiac abnormality and 
15% will have another extracardiac abnormality.
Aetiology
There is often no obvious aetiology; most abnormalities 
appear to be multifactorial with both genetic and environ -
mental influences. There are well-recognised associations.
Diagnosis
Occasionally an antenatal diagnosis is possible, with severe 
congenital heart disease detected in utero at 16–18 weeks. If 
an infant is suspected of having a congenital heart disease, a 
diagnostic evaluation begins with an accurate history from the 
parents and specific questions about maternal health and drug 
intake during pregnancy. A detailed family history is important 
because some defects are familial. Clinical examination may 
reveal a murmur, evidence of heart failure, failure to thrive and 
cyanosis. In addition, congenital heart disease can present with 
hypertension, an arrhythmia, evidence of polycythaemia or a 
thromboembolic event. Investigation is much the same as for 
the adult patient and, with fetal echocardiography available, 
cardiac catheterisation is now avoided whenever possible.
Summary box 54.13
Recognised associations with congenital heart disease
Maternal (environmental) factors
●● Infection: rubella
●● Disease: systemic lupus erythematosus, diabetes mellitus
●● Drugs/medications: alcohol abuse, warfarin, phenytoin, lithium
Genetic factors
●● Single gene defects: Marfan, Noonan and Holt–Oram 
syndromes
●● Chromosomal defects: trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 
18 (Edwards syndrome), trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), Turner 
syndrome
●● Deletions: DiGeorge and Williams syndromes
Robert E Gross , 1905–1988, Surgeon-in-chief, Cardiovascular Surgery, Children’s Hospital, Boston, USA.
Etienne Arthur Louis Fallot , 1850–1911, Professor of Medicine, Marseilles, France.
Jacqueline Anne Noonan , b.1921, pediatric cardiologist, The University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA, described this condition in 1963.
Mary Clayton Holt , 1924–1993, cardiologist, The London Hospital for Women and Children, London, UK.
Samuel Oram , 1913–1991, cardiologist, King’s College Hospital, London, UK. Holt and Oram described this syndrome in a joint paper in 1960.
John Hilton Edwards , 1928–2007, Professor of Genetics, The University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Klaus Patau , 1908–1975, German-born American geneticist, University of Wisconsin–Madison, USA.
Angelo M. DiGeorge , 1921–2009, Professor of Pediatrics, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
John CP Williams , b.1922, New Zealand born cardiologist, described the condition in 1961.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   903 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC904
Classification
Congenital heart disease can be broadly classified according 
to the presence or absence of cyanosis, although the distinc -
tion is not always clear-cut. The presence of central cyanosis, 
blueness of the trunk and mucous membranes, results from 
levels of deoxygenated haemoglobin of >3–5 g/dL in the arte-
rial circulation.
Cyanotic congenital heart diseases  make up one-third 
of cases and are usually more complex, although they do 
include simple defects. Cyanotic congenital cardiac lesions 
can involve:
 ● A right-to-left shunt resulting in decreased pulmonary 
blood flow. Many of these lesions consist of a septal defect 
in conjunction with a right-sided obstructive lesion, pro -
ducing an obligatory right-to-left shunt. The most com -
mon cause of this is tetralogy of Fallot.
 ● Parallel systemic and pulmonary blood flow rather than in 
series. If there is no mixing this is incompatible with life, 
so typically neonates have a patent foramen ovale or VSD 
that allows some mixing of the two circulations at this 
level. The most common example of this is TGV.
 ● Defects in the connections of the heart in which there is 
mixing of the systemic and pulmonary flows. An example 
of such a complex lesion is total anomalous pulmonary 
venous drainage.
Acyanotic congenital heart diseases represent the other 
two-thirds of cases and are usually less complex. Such defects 
result in an increase in the work imposed on the heart because 
of either:
 ● A left-to-right shunt with increased pulmonary bloo d 
flow, which causes an increase in volume work of the 
heart. Examples include PDA, ASD and VSD.
 ● Obstruction of the blood flow across a heart valve on the 
left side of the heart, such as aortic stenosis, or in the aorta 
itself, as occurs with coarctation of the aorta, leading to an 
increase in pressure and work of the heart.
Typically, acyanotic congenital heart disease presents as 
heart failure in infancy because of pulmonary congestion 
caused by increased pulmonary blood flow, or increased pul-
monary venous blood pressure resulting from an obstructive 
lesion. The common acyanotic cardiac defects can also pres-
ent as a murmur in infancy or later.
Cyanotic congenital heart disease
Tetralogy of Fallot
This is the most common cyanotic congenital heart disease 
found in children surviving to 1 year and accounts for about 
4–6% of all congenital heart diseases. The four intracardiac 
lesions originally described (Figure 54.22) were:
 ● VSD;
 ● overriding aorta;
 ● pulmonary (typically infundibular or subpulmonary) ste-
nosis;
 ● right ventricular hypertrophy.
Clinically, there may be no signs initially but, as pulmo -
nary stenosis progresses, cyanosis typically develops within 
the first year of life. Squatting is an adaptation by the child 
to hypoxic spells. This increases systemic vascular resistance 
and the venous return to the heart, and consequently blood is 
diverted into the pulmonary circulation with increased oxy -
genation. Lethargy and tiredness are also common. Classically 
Ductus
arteriosus
Foramen
ovale
Ductus
venosus
Figure 54.21 Fetal circulation.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:54.22Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
1 Narr owing of the
 pulmonary valve
2 Thickening of wall
 of right ventricle
3 Displacement
 of aorta over 
 ventricular
 septal defect
4 V entricular septal defect
 opening between the left
 and right ventricles
Figure 54.22  Fallot’s tetralogy . Four abnormalities that r esult in 
insufficienctly oxygentated blood being pumped to the body.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   904 25/10/2017   09:27Congenital heart disease 905
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
the chest radiograph demonstrates a ‘boot-shaped’ heart with 
poorly developed lung vasculature. The diagnosis is confirmed 
with echocardiography . Surgery to correct the tetralogy is 
the mainstay of treatment and is usually carried out at 4–6 
months of age, when possible. The repair is achieved using 
a patch to close the VSD and resection of the obstructing 
section of the infundibular septum. The results of surgery are 
good, with a late survival rate of 95% at 5–10 years following 
correction of tetralogy, an operative mortality rate for a repair 
of between 5% and 10%, and an incidence of reoperation fol-
lowing tetralogy repair of 5–10%.
Transposition of the great vessels
The condition, first described by Morgagni, is the second 
most common cyanotic congenital heart disease and is the 
most common cause of cyanosis from a congenital cardiac 
defect discovered in the newborn period. TGV results from 
abnormal development, and typically occurs when the aorta 
arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery from 
the left ventricle (Figure 54.23). The resulting transposi-
tion causes the pulmonary and systemic circulations to run in 
parallel rather than in series, so that oxygenated pulmonary 
venous blood returns to the lungs and desaturated systemic 
venous blood is pumped around the body. The situation is 
incompatible with life and mixing of the blood must occur 
through associated shunts, such as a patent foramen ovale or 
associated VSD.
The most obvious presentation is severe central cyano -
sis occurring in the first 48 hours of life. However, if there 
is a large ASD or VSD there may be minimal cyanosis ini -
tially. Typically, progress is poor and, as pulmonary vascular 
resistance declines in the neonatal period, high pulmonary 
flow develops, with cardiac enlargement and left ventricular  
failure.
The chest radiograph shows pulmonary plethora, with 
the heart having an ‘egg on its side’ appearance, with a small 
pedicle (aorta in front of pulmonary artery). Cardiac echocar-
diography is sufficient to confirm the diagnosis and delineate 
the anatomy.
Many infants will die without treatment within 1 month 
of birth. Initial stabilisation can be achieved by performing 
percutanous balloon septostomy to increase the systemic 
arterial oxygen saturation. Alternatively, intravenous pros-
taglandins can be administered to keep the PDA open and 
increase systemic–pulmonary shunting. Arterial switch repair 
is currently the standard operation and is typically carried out 
within the first few weeks of birth. Long-term outcomes of 
the operation are excellent and many patients achieve good 
exercise tolerance; however, some patients will require reop -
eration for neopulmonary stenosis.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous 
drainage
Total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage (TAPVD) 
accounts for only l–2% of congenital heart disease. In this 
condition, the pulmonary venous drainage has become dis -
connected from the left atrium and drains into the systemic 
venous circulation at some other point (inferior vena cava, 
superior vena cava, coronary sinus or right atrium). Typically, 
TAPVD presents after the first week of life with cyanosis that 
is mild to moderate depending on pulmonary flow. Infants 
with high pulmonary flow develop cardiac failure, recurrent 
chest infections, failure to thrive and feeding difficulties. If 
high pulmonary flow is associated with a large ASD, cyano -
sis is often minimal and the lesion is tolerated well. If there 
is additional venous obstruction, cyanosis presents at birth 
with dyspnoea and pulmonary oedema. Echocardiography 
and cardiac (pulmonary) angiography are necessary to con -
firm the diagnosis and establish the location of the anomalous  
drainage.
The surgical principle is to re-establish the pulmonary 
venous drainage into the left atrium. The exact operative 
technique depends on the anatomy and type of TAPVD. The 
long-term results for survivors of the operation are generally 
good. Late death following repair is uncommon but, when it 
occurs, it is often caused by intimal fibroplasia of the pulmo-
nary veins away from the anastomosis.
Eisenmenger syndrome
Eisenmenger syndrome is becoming less common as cor -
rective surgery is undertaken increasingly early and fewer 
patients develop a fixed increase in their pulmonary vascular 
resistance. It occurs following the reversal of a left-to-right 
shunt across a previous left-to-right shunt, such as with an 
ASD or VSD. These congenital anomalies cause an increase 
in flow and higher right-sided pressures, which lead to com -
pensatory right ventricular hypertrophy and a subsequent rise 
in pulmonary artery pressure. Increasing pulmonary hyper -
tension leads to equalisation of pressures either side of the 
shunt but, at some point, the right-sided pressures will exceed 
those on the left side, resulting in shunt reversal and desatu -
rated blood entering the left side of the circulation. Cyanosis 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.23Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Right
atrium
Aorta
Pulmonary
artery
Left
ventricle
Right ventricle
Figure 54.23 Transposition of the great vessels.
Giovanni Battista Morgagni , 1682–1771, anatomist, Padua, Italy.
Victor Eisenmenger , 1864–1932, Austrian physician who described this condition in 1897, but the term ‘Eisenmenger syndrome’ was introduced in 1958 by an 
Australian cardiologist, Paul Hamilton Wood (1907–1962).
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   905 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC906
and dyspnoea are the most common clinical features. Closure 
of the shunt is contraindicated if pulmonary hypertension 
is irreversible because the right-to-left shunt now serves to 
decompress the pulmonary circulation.
Acyanotic congenital heart disease
Patent ductus arteriosus
The ductus arteriosus, a normal fetal communication, facil-
itates the transfer of oxygenated blood from the pulmonary 
artery to the aorta, shunting bloo d away from the lungs. 
Normally, functional closure of the ductus occurs within 
a few hours of birth; it is abnormal if it persists beyond the 
neonatal period. The ductus closes in response to an increase 
in peripheral oxygen saturation and a drop in the resistance 
of the pulmonary circulation as the lungs expand; this causes 
the ductal tissue to contract through a prostaglandin inhi -
bition mechanism. A cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor (e.g. indo -
methacin) may be used therapeutically to close the ductus 
in the first few weeks of life. In premature babies the ductus 
is more likely to remain patent for longer or permanently. 
In the isolated case of PDA, there is a left-to-right shunt 
of blood, resulting in a high pulmonary blood flow. Small 
shunts usually cause few symptoms and signs apart from the 
continuous machinery murmur in the left second intercos-
tal space. Larger ducts cause cardiac failure and can uncom -
monly lead to shunt reversal with cyanosis and clubbing. 
The diagnosis is best confirmed by echocardiography with 
colour flow Doppler imaging.
After 6 months of age, spontaneous closure of a PDA is 
rare. Most should be closed by preschool age, regardless of 
the absence of symptoms, if the risks of infective endocardi -
tis, developing left ventricular failure or, rarely, Eisenmenger 
syndrome are to be avoided. In the adult, surgical treatment 
is indicated if there is a persistent left-to-right shunt, even 
in the presence of reversible pulmonary hypertension. In the 
premature infant, if medical treatment to close the ductus is 
unsuccessful, the PDA may be treated by interventional cardi-
ology using an umbrella or coil duct occlusion device inserted 
percutaneously. If the PDA is very large or the patient very 
small, surgical closure via a left thoracotomy is preferred. 
This can be accomplished by either ligation or division of the 
PDA. The operative mortality rate is low and outcome gen -
erally very good.
Coarctation of the aorta
This accounts for 6–7% of congenital heart disease and is 
defined as a haemodynamically significant narrowing of the 
aorta, usually in the descending aorta just distal to the left 
subclavian artery, around the area of the ductus arteriosus 
(Figure 54.24). The coarctation typically puts a pressure load 
on the left ventricle, which can ultimately fail. The upper 
body is well perfused but the lower body, including the kid-
neys, is poorly perfused, leading to fluid overload, excess renin 
secretion and acidosis. Coarctation usually affects boys and, if 
it occurs in girls, is suggestive of Turner syndrome.
In the neonatal period, coarctation, often referred to as 
‘infantile’ or preductal coarctation, presents with symptoms 
of heart failure. The child may appear well in the first few 
days of life because the coarctation is bypassed by the ductus 
arteriosus and oxygenated blood reaches the entire systemic 
circulation. As the ductus closes, the child becomes progres -
sively more unwell. In adult-type coarctation, which is often 
juxtaductal or slightly postductal, obstruction is gradual with 
complications developing in adolescence or early adulthood. 
Hypertension is a common presenting problem in older chil-
dren, often upper body hypertension only with development 
of enormous collateral vessels that may cause rib-notching 
and flow murmurs over the scapula. Other symptoms include 
prominent pulsation in the neck, tired legs or intermittent 
claudication on exercise. Clinical examination of the pulses 
may demonstrate a radio-femoral delay and a murmur that is 
continuous and heard best over the thoracic spine or below 
the left clavicle.
The chest radiograph classically demonstrates rib-notch-
ing because of dilated posterior intercostal vessels. The heart 
is usually of normal size in the older child and shows a classi -
cal ‘three sign’ replacing the typical aortic knuckle. The upper 
part of the three sign is the dilated left subclavian, the middle 
part is the narrowing at the coarctation site and the lower 
part is the poststenotic dilatation of the descending aorta. 
Echocardiography is diagnostic. Infant coarctation typically 
presents with cardiac failure, often requiring vigorous medical 
treatment, including the administration of prostaglandin to 
reopen the ductus and general resuscitation, before corrective 
Henry Hubert Turner , 1892–1970, Professor of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.24Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Coarctation
Axillary artery
Intercostal
arteries
Internal thoracic artery
Descending aorta
Pulmonary
artery
Ascending
aorta
Ligamentum
 arteriosum
Figure 54.24 Coarctation of the aorta. Coarctation causes sever e 
obstruction of blood flow in the descending thoracic aorta. The 
descending aorta and its branches are perfused by collateral chan -
nels from the axillary and internal thoracic arteries through the inter -
costal arteries (arrows).
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   906 25/10/2017   09:27Congenital heart disease 907
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
surgery. Definitive treatment is usually surgical repair via a left 
thoracotomy. Coarctation presenting in the child or later typ-
ically requires surgical repair, as most patients die before the 
age of 40 years because of the associated complications. Percu-
taneous stenting is currently the standard treatment for adults 
with isolated coarctation. Without correction, the majority 
of deaths are caused by heart failure, infective endocarditis, 
rupture of the aorta or haemorrhagic stroke. The preoperative 
hypertension may not resolve despite surgical repair.
Atrial septal defects
An ASD is a defect in the septum between the left and right 
atria leading to a left-to-right shunt, the significance of which 
is determined by the size of the defect and the relative compli-
ance of the ventricles. The development of the atrial septum 
is complex and abnormalities of development lead to three 
commonly recognised ASDs (Figure 54.25).
The most common type is an ostium secundum ASD. 
The anomaly is caused by failure of the septum primum to 
develop, leading to incomplete coverage of the ostium secun-
dum. These defects are usually asymptomatic in childhood, 
with symptoms developing insidiously, typically presenting in 
middle age with congestive cardiac failure secondary to pul -
monary hypertension or with atrial arrhythmias.
In ostium primum ASD, the anomaly is a form of partial 
atrioventricular canal defect or endocardial cushion defect. 
The abnormalities are confined to the atrial septum and are 
caused by the endocardial cushions failing to develop and so 
close the ostium primum part of the interatrial septum. The 
defect is associated with abnormalities of the mitral valve, 
leading to mitral regurgitation. There is a relatively high inci-
dence of this abnormality in trisomy 21 (Down syndrome). 
Typically, the primum defect presents earlier than ostium 
secundum in childhood, with dyspnoea, recurrent chest infec-
tions and, if pulmonary hypertension develops, cyanosis.
A sinus venosus ASD is a rare defect and is the result of 
failure of partition of the pulmonary and systemic venous cir-
culations. These defects are most commonly located high in 
the atrial septum at the junction of the superior vena cava 
and the right atrium. They are frequently associated with 
anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, with right superior 
pulmonary veins draining into the superior vena cava or right 
atrium directly.
Summary box 54.14
Atrial septal defects (ASDs)
Common defects
●● Ostium secundum: fossa ovalis defect (approximately 70% of 
ASDs)
●● Ostium primum: atrioventricular septal defect (approximately 
20% of ASDs)
●● Sinus venosus defect: often associated with anomalous 
pulmonary venous drainage (approximately 10% of ASDs)
●● Patent foramen ovale: common in isolation, usually no left-to-
right shunt (not strictly an ASD)
Rarer defects
●● Inferior vena cava defects: a low sinus venosus defect and 
may allow shunting of blood into the left atrium
●● Coronary sinus septal defect: also known as unroofed 
coronary sinus, with the left superior vena cava draining to the 
left atrium as part of a more complex lesion
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:54.25Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
SVC
Tricuspid
valve
Coronary
sinus
IVC
Atrioventricular
defect
Fossa ovalis
defect
Sinus venosus
or superior
caval defect
Figure 54.25 Atrial septum viewed from the right. The fossa ovalis is 
a useful reference point; the most common defect is in this area and 
is called a fossa ovalis (or ostium secundum) defect. A defect near 
the atrioventricular junction may be part of the spectrum of atrioven -
tricular septal defects; if the defect is near the entry of the superior 
vena cava (SVC) it is commonly associated with anomalies of venous 
drainage into the atria. IVC, inferior vena cava.
John Langdon Haydon Down  (sometimes given as Langdon-Down), 1828–1896, physician, The London Hospital, London, UK.
Closure is performed during the first decade of life, even 
in the absence of symptoms, to avoid late-onset right ventric-
ular failure, endocarditis and paradoxical emboli. In adults, 
closure is still appropriate for symptomatic improvement and 
avoidance of complications. The traditional method of clo -
sure involves open-heart surgery with CPB and closure of the 
defect, either directly with sutures, as with most secundum 
defects, or, if the defect is large, using a pericardial or syn -
thetic patch. Closure of small to moderate ASDs using percu-
taneous catheter-delivered devices in the cardiology catheter 
laboratory is increasingly common. Primum atrioventricular 
defect repairs may require additional mitral valve repair. The 
operative mortality rate for isolated atrioventricular defect 
repairs is <1%, with an excellent prognosis. Surgical correc -
tion of complete atrioventricular canal defects, with closure of 
the ASD and ventricular septal components and mitral valve 
repair, is possible, but with a higher surgical mortality rate.
Ventricular septal defects
A VSD is a defect in the interventricular septum that allows 
a left-to-right shunting of blood. VSDs account for 20–30% 
of congenital heart disease and affect approximately 2 in 1000 
live births. They may occur in isolation or as part of a more 
complex set of cardiac abnormalities (e.g. tetralogy of Fallot, 
complete atrioventricular canal defect). Four major anatomi-
cal types of VSD are described, based on the anatomical sub -
sections of the interventricular septum (Figure 54.26).
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   907 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC908
The VSD permits a left-to-right shunt at the ventricu -
lar level, with subsequent right ventricular volume overload 
and increased pulmonary blood flow . This may lead to pro -
gressive pulmonary oedema and congestive cardiac failure. 
Persistently elevated pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary 
vascular resistance also lead to irreversible pulmonary hyper -
tension. They may eventually result in reversal of flow across 
the defect and Eisenmenger syndrome. The clinical presenta-
tion reflects the magnitude of the left-to-right shunt, which, 
in turn, depends on the size of the VSD and the pulmonary 
and systemic vascular resistances. Small defects may close or 
cause little systemic disturbance (maladie de Roger); infants 
are asymptomatic with normal development. In the first 5 
years, up to 30–50% of VSDs close spontaneously. Clinically, 
a loud pansystolic murmur can be detected at the left sternal 
border because of high pressure flow between the ventricles. 
Large defects typically present with congestive cardiac failure 
in the first 2 months of life. Because of the size of the VSD, 
ventricular pressures are equalised and often only a soft sys -
tolic murmur is detected. If left untreated, pulmonary hyper -
tensive changes start from about 1 year of age. Eisenmenger 
syndrome, secondary to shunt reversal in such cases, may 
become evident in the second decade of life.
Echocardiography confirms the diagnosis and can estimate 
the degree of shunting across the defect. Cardiac catheteri -
sation can quantify the various pressures within the cardiac 
chambers and so assess the degree of pulmonary hyperten -
sion, as well as demonstrating a step-up in oxygen saturation 
between left and right ventricles. Generally, surgical closure 
is indicated for large defects; when there is failure to respond 
to medical therapy; for left-to-right shunts of >2:1; when 
there are signs of increasing pulmonary vascular resistance; 
and in the presence of complications of VSD. These include: 
(1) aortic regurgitation, which occurs in about 5% of defects; 
(2) infundibular stenosis, which tends to be progressive 
and leads to shunt reversal; and (3) infective endocarditis, 
often presenting with pneumonia or pleurisy as the infected 
‘emboli’ in a VSD with a typical left-to-right shunt flows into 
the pulmonary circulation.
THE THORACIC AORTA
The most common pathologies affecting the thoracic aorta 
are aneurysm formation and aortic dissection.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms
A true aneurysm is a localised dilatation of a blood vessel 
involving all layers of the vessel, whereas a false aneurysm 
has compressed supporting tissue as its wall, and is usually the 
result of a defect in the vessel intima (from trauma, dissec -
tion or previous surgery). Aneurysms are described as fusiform 
when the whole circumference is affected or saccular when 
only part of the circumference is involved.
Aortic aneurysms can develop anywhere along its length, 
but thoracic aortic aneurysms, including those that extend 
into the upper abdomen (thoracoabdominal aneurysms) 
account for 25%, typically occurring in men in the fifth to 
seventh decade or younger in those with connective tissue 
disorders.
Aetiology
The most common aetiology is atherosclerosis, but connec -
tive tissue disorders account for many aneurysms in the aor -
tic root and ascending aorta now that tertiary syphilis is rare. 
Marfan syndrome is associated with cystic medial degener -
ation involving the vessel wall and causes widening of the 
proximal aorta and aortic root, leading to aortic valve insuf -
ficiency. Other disorders associated with aneurysm formation 
and dissection include Ehlers–Danlos syndrome and osteo -
genesis imperfecta.
Summary box 54.15
Types of ventricular septal defects (VSD)
Perimembranous defect
●● Also called conoventricular VSD; the most common defect 
(70–80%), usually located within the membranous septum 
and may extend to the tricuspid valve annulus or base of the 
aortic valve
Muscular defect
●● Also called trabecular VSD; occurs in 10% of cases and is 
located within the membranous septum and often multiple
Atrioventricular defect
●● Also called atrioventricular canal-type or inlet defect; occurs 
in 5% of cases and is located in the atrioventricular canal 
beneath the tricuspid valve
Subarterial defect
●● Also called outlet or subarterial VSD; occurs in 5–10% of 
cases and lies within the conal septum immediately beneath 
the pulmonary valve annulus.
Henri Louis Roger , 1809–1891, physician, Hôpital Sainte-Eugene, Paris, France.
Edward Ehlers , 1863–1937, Professor of Clinical Dermatology, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Henri Alexandre Danlos , 1844–1912, dermatologist, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France, gave his account of this condition in 1908.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 54.26Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Subarterial
Perimembranous
Atrioventricular
Muscular
Figure 54.26 Ventricular septum viewed from the right, showing the 
characteristic sites of ventricular septal defects.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   908 25/10/2017   09:27The thoracic aorta 909
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Trauma, typically following blunt chest injury , can lead to 
aneurysm formation, usually involving the descending aorta. 
However, these are usually false aneurysms containing hae -
matoma from injury to the aortic vessel wall.
Clinical features
Many aneurysms are asymptomatic and are discovered inci -
dentally on routine chest radiographs. Others present as a 
space occupying lesion in the thorax with pain caused by 
pressure on adjacent structures (vertebra), hoarseness (left 
recurrent laryngeal nerve), dysphagia (oesophagus) and respi-
ratory symptoms (left main bronchus). Aortic root aneurysms 
may lead to dilatation of the aortic root annulus and aortic 
regurgitation.
Rupture can lead to cardiac tamponade or haemorrhage 
into the left pleural space, leading to dyspnoea and, if the tra-
cheobronchial airway or oesophagus is involved, haemoptysis 
or haematemesis, respectively.
Investigations
The diagnosis is confirmed by CT or MRI. Arteriography is 
not necessary for diagnosis but is often required to demon -
strate the relation of the arch vessels to the aneurysm.
Indications for surgery
Without treatment the aneurysm is likely to expand and 
ultimately rupture. Important factors to consider when plan -
ning treatment are age, comorbidity and coexisting coronary  
disease.
In ascending aneurysms, the presence of progressive aor -
tic valve insufficiency is an important indication for surgery . 
Other indications in this group, including Marfan-related 
aneurysms, are a diameter of 4.5–5 cm and the presence of 
symptoms. In descending aneurysms, indications for surgery 
include symptoms, acute enlargement and a diameter of 
approximately 6 cm.
Surgical options
The approach adopted for surgical treatment depends on the 
location of the aneurysm, but typically involves a median 
sternotomy, CPB and cooling the patient to 18ºC before 
cross-clamping the aorta above the aneurysm (Figure 54.27). 
If the aortic root is involved, the aorta, together with its annu-
lus and valve, is resected and a composite graft is sutured to 
the aortic root. The circulation is arrested and, after removal 
of the aortic cross-clamp, the distal anastomosis is com-
pleted. The coronary ostia require reimplantation into the 
graft (Bentall’s operation). If the ascending aorta is involved, 
it is resected and replaced with a tube graft. For aortic arch 
aneurysms, surgery on this section of the aorta is a formidable 
undertaking because the cerebral and subclavian vessels have 
to be anastomosed to the graft, either separately or en bloc. 
Typically, it involves a period of circulatory arrest and some 
form of cerebral protection. Excision of a descending aortic 
aneurysm is with graft replacement under CPB, with expo-
sure via a left thoracotomy or with a heparin-bonded shunt. 
Increasingly, thoracic aneurysms at the aortic arch or more 
distal are repaired using a percutaneous approach via the 
femoral artery, with insertion of an endovascular stent under 
radiological guidance. The most recent guidelines support the 
use of endovascualr techniques over open surgical operations.
Surgical outcome
The operative mortality rate is variable depending on the 
location and type of repair required, but electively is between 
5% and 15%. An emergency repair has a considerably higher 
operative mortality rate. Long-term survival depends on 
underlying pathology but, for ascending aneurysm repairs, the 
5-year survival rate is approximately 65%. The major com -
plications of descending aneurysm repairs include paraplegia, 
renal failure and ventricular dysfunction.
Aortic dissection
This occurs when a defect or flap occurs in the intima of 
the aorta, resulting in blood tracking into the aortic tissues 
splitting the medial layer and creating a false lumen. It most 
commonly occurs in the ascending aorta or , less often, just 
Summary box 54.16
Predisposing factors for aortic dissection
●● Age
●● Hypertension
●● Marfan syndrome
●● Pregnancy
●● Other connective tissue disorders, for example Ehlers–Danlos 
syndrome, giant cell arteritis, systemic lupus erythematosus
●● Coarctation of the aorta
●● Turner or Noonan syndromes
●● Aortic cannulation site (iatrogenic)
Hugh Henry Bentall , 1920–2012, formerly Professor of Cardiac Surgery, The Royal Postgraduate Hospital, Hammersmith, London, UK.
Figure 54.27 A large thoracic aortic aneurysm.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   909 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC910
distal to the left subclavian artery. It is also more common in 
men, typically those aged 50–70 years, and in Afro-Caribbean 
patients.
Aetiology
It usually occurs as a spontaneous or sporadic event, although 
very often a history of hypertension is noted. Other important 
associations include Marfan syndrome and pregnancy.
Clinical features
The presentation is often a tearing intrascapular pain not 
unlike the pain of myocardial ischaemia, and it may be dif-
ficult to distinguish between the two. The extent of arterial 
dissection may produce widespread symptoms and signs.
The dissection can extend distally down the aorta to 
involve:
 ● the renal arteries (renal pain and renal failure);
 ● the mesenteric arteries (abdominal pain and bowel isch -
aemia);
 ● the spinal arteries (paraplegia);
 ● the iliac arteries (leg pain, pallor, loss or reduced pulses 
and limb ischaemia).
The dissection may track proximally to involve:
 ● the head and neck vessels (symptoms and signs of a stroke 
or transient ischaemic attack);
 ● the coronary vessels (MI);
 ● the aortic root (aortic regurgitation).
The dissection may also result in aortic wall rupture into 
the pericardium (cardiac tamponade) or mediastinum (left 
haemothorax).
Classification
There are two classifications, both of which are limited in 
their application but widely used. The DeBakey classifica -
tion is based on the pattern of dissection, whereas the Stan -
ford classification is based on whether the ascending aorta is 
involved (Figure 54.28).
Investigations
The diagnosis is suspected based on the clinical presentation 
and careful history taking. Diagnosis is confirmed by CT, 
which is accepted as the standard method for diagnosis. Other 
imaging modalities such as TOE or MRI can be utilised in 
cases when the CT is equivocal (Figure 54.29).
Management
Intitial management of all types of aortic dissection includes 
blood pressure (which is usually high at presentation) control 
and strict pain management, followed by prompt referral for 
specialist management.
Surgical options
TYPE A (OR TYPE I AND II) DISSECTIONS
Those involving the ascending aorta usually require surgical 
intervention. The chest is opened through a median sternot -
omy and CPB is started, with core cooling down to 18ºC. The 
aorta is cross-clamped as high as possible and opened. Cardio-
plegic solution is infused into the coronary ostia to arrest the 
heart in diastole. If the intimal tear is present and localised, 
the ascending aorta is excised with the tear and replaced with 
a synthetic graft. The distal anastomosis is performed with 
circulatory arrest. There has recently been attempts to carry 
out endovascular stenting of type A dissection with variable 
degrees of success.
TYPE B (OR TYPE III) DISSECTIONS
Initially, these are best managed medically with antihyper -
tensive drugs. Intervention is indicated in complicated cases 
if the pain increases (signalling impending rupture) or when 
dissection is associated with evidence of malperfusion, such 
as organ, limb or neurological symptoms. The use of percuta-
neously placed endovascular stents is currently the standard 
Michael Ellis DeBakey , 1908–2008, American cardiac surgeon, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
I II III (DeBakey)
Type A Type B (Stanford)
Figure 54.28 Stanford classification of aortic dissections according 
to whether the ascending aorta is involved (type A) or not (type B). 
This is simpler than the DeBakey classification (types I, II and III).
Figure 54.29 Computed tomography scan showing acute dissec -
tion of the descending thoracic aorta. F , false lumen; T, true lumen.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   910 25/10/2017   09:27Cardiac masses 911
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
intervention of choice in patients with complicated type B 
dissection, and surgery is only preserved for the rare cases 
which is not suitable for stenting.
Outcomes
If type A dissection is untreated, the mortality rate is 50% 
within 48 hours and 75% within 1–2 weeks, whereas patients 
with type B dissections have a better prognosis. The surgical 
mortality rate is variable but is around 20–25% for proximal 
aortic dissection. The overall survival rate for patients leaving 
hospital, regardless of the type of dissection, is around 80% at 
5 years and 40% at 10 years.
PERICARDIAL DISEASES
There is a fibrous envelope covering the heart and separat -
ing it from the mediastinal structures. This fibrous structure 
includes a parietal layer and allows the heart to move with 
each beat. It is not essential for life because it can be left wide 
open after cardiac surgery without any ill-effects; however, 
there are a number of conditions affecting the pericardium 
that may present to the surgeon.
Pericardial effusion
There is continuous production and resorption of pericardial 
fluid. If a disease process disturbs this balance a pericardial 
effusion may develop. If the pressure exceeds the pressure in 
the atria, compression will occur , venous return will fall and 
the circulation will be compromised. This state of affairs is 
called ‘tamponade’. A gradual build-up of fluid (e.g. malig -
nant infiltration) may be well tolerated for a long period 
before tamponade occurs, and the pericardial cavity may 
contain 2 litres of fluid. Acute tamponade (from penetrating 
trauma, during coronary angiography or postoperatively) may 
occur in minutes with small volumes of blood. The clinical 
features are low blood pressure with a raised jugular venous 
pressure and paradoxical pulse. Kussmaul’s sign is a charac -
teristic pattern that is seen when the jugular venous pressure 
rises with inspiration as a result of the impaired venous return 
to the heart.
Emergency treatment of pericardial tamponade is aspira-
tion of the pericardial space. A wide-bore needle is inserted 
under local anaesthesia to the left of the xiphisternum, between 
the angle of the xiphisternum and the ribcage (Figure 54.30). 
The needle is advanced towards the tip of the scapula into 
the pericardial space. An ECG electrode attached to the nee-
dle will indicate when the heart has been touched. This will 
relieve the situation temporarily until the cause of the tam -
ponade is established. Penetrating wounds of the heart usually 
require exploration through a median sternotomy. Emergency 
room thoracotomy is rarely required. Chronic tamponade is 
usually a result of malignant infiltration of the pericardium 
(usually secondary carcinoma from breast or bronchus) or, very 
occasionally, uraemia or connective tissue disease. Treatment 
sometimes requires a pericardial window between the pericar-
dial space and the pleural or peritoneal space.
Pericarditis
Infection and inflammation may also affect the pericardium. 
Acute pericarditis usually occurs following a viral illness. Treat-
ment is with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and bed 
rest (in case there is an underlying myocarditis). Acute puru-
lent pericarditis is uncommon but requires urgent drainage and 
intravenous antibiotics, with attention to the underlying cause.
Chronic pericarditis is an uncommon condition in which 
the pericardium becomes thickened and non-compliant. The 
heart cannot move freely and the stroke volume is reduced by 
the constrictive process. The central venous pressure is raised 
and the liver becomes congested. Peripheral oedema and asci-
tes are also a feature. Treatment is surgical and is aimed at 
relieving the constriction.
CARDIAC MASSES
Cardiac masses can be either thrombus (blood clots) or 
tumours. Thrombus can be found in patients with poor left 
ventricular function or long standing AF , as well as in patients 
with proximal pulmonary embolus, either in the ventricles or 
the left atrium.
Cardiac tumours can either be benign or malignant, which 
in turn can be secondary (from lung, esophagus, breast etc.) 
or primary.
Atrial myxoma
This is the most common benign cardiac mass in adult. Myxo-
mas are neoplasm of endocardial origin and often appear as an 
ovid pedunculated mass most commonly seen in the left atrium 
(75%) or the right atrium (20%) and, rarely, in the ventricles 
(Figure 54.31). Myxomas are associated with congenital dis-
order (Carney complex) in 5% of cases. They usually present 
(a) (b)
Figure 54.30  (a) Pericardial aspiration thr ough the subxiphoid 
region. (b) Site of needle insertion for pericardial aspiration.
Adolf Kussmaul , 1822–1902, successively Professor of Medicine at Heidelberg, Erlangen, Freiburg and Strasbourg, Germany.
J. Aidan Carney , b.1934, Co Roscommon, Ireland, pathologist at the Mayo Clinic, described a syndrome of  myxomas, spotty pigmentation and endocrine  
overactivity in 1985.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   911 25/10/2017   09:27CHAPTER 54  Cardiac surgery
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC912
with symptoms related to blood flow obstruction through heart 
valves or systemic embolisation. Treatment is by surgical exci-
sion and recurrence rates are usually <5%.
Rhabdomyoma
This is the most common benign cardiac tumour in childern. 
It usually presents with symptoms related to valve dysfuction 
or arrhythmias. There are usually multicentric pedunculated 
masses in either or both ventricles. Rhabdomyoma is associ-
ated with tuberus sclerosis in >50% of the cases. Treatment is 
usually by surgical excision.
Primary malignant cardiac tumours
These are extremely rare and less common than secondary 
malignencies. They include angiosarcoma, rhabdomyosar -
coma and leiomyosarcoma. Patients usually have advanced 
disease when they are discovered, and they are associated 
with poor outcomes even with multimodality treatment (sur-
gery and chemoradiation).
MANAGEMENT OF CARDIAC 
ARREST AFTER CARDIAC 
SURGERY
Introduction
The incidence of cardiac arrest after cardiac surgery is around 
0.7–2.9%, with 17–79% survival rates. Ventricular fibrilla -
tion (VF), tamponade and major bleeding account for most of 
arrests. Multiple variables may dictate differences in the man-
agement of cardiac arrest after cardiac surgery when compared 
to other situations. Therefore, EACTS published guidelines 
for resuscitation of cardiac arrest postcardiac surgery, which 
are summarised below.
Cardiac arrest with ‘non-shockable’ 
rhythm
Cardiac surgical patients who have a non-VF/ventricu-
lar tachycardia (VT) arrest may have tamponade, tension 
pneumothorax or severe hypovolaemia. Prompt treatment is 
associated with an excellent outcome. Resternotomy should 
be peformed promptly if connecting the pacemaker and 
administrating atropine fail to resolve the arrest, especially 
if prolonged period of CPR is needed, which will be better 
performed by internal massage.
Emergency resternotomy for 
ventricular fibrillation or pulseless 
ventricular tachycardia
A precordial thump may be performed if within 10  s of the 
onset of VF or pulseless VT; however , this should not delay 
cardioversion by defibrillation. In VF or pulseless VT, emer -
gency resternotomy should be performed after three failed 
attempts at defibrillation.
Emergency resternotomy
After the identification of cardiac arrest, basic life support 
according to the Advanced Life Support (ALS) guidelines 
should be initiated while preparing for emergency resternot -
omy. Emergency resternotomy may be required in 0.8–2.7% of 
all patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Emergency resternot-
omy is a multipractitioner procedure, which should be rapidly 
performed with full aseptic technique.
Preparation for emergency resternotomy
 ● A gown and gloves should be donned in a sterile fashion.
 ● The thoracic drape is applied, ensuring that the whole bed 
is covered (if an all-in-one sterile drape is used then there 
is no need to prepare the skin with antiseptic).
 ● The scalpel is used to cut the sternotomy incision, includ-
ing all sutures deeply down to the sternal wires.
 ● All the sternal wires are cut with the wire cutters. The 
sternal edges will separate a little, which may relieve tam-
ponade.
 ● Suction is used to clear excessive blood or clot.
 ● The retractor is placed between the sternal edges and the 
sternum opened.
 ● If cardiac output is restored expert assistance should then 
be summoned. If there is no cardiac output, the position 
of any grafts should be carefully identified and internal 
cardiac massage and internal defibrillation performed, if 
required.
Internal cardiac massage
This is a potentially dangerous procedure. Risks include avul-
sion of a bypass graft, with the left internal mammary artery 
being at particular risk, and right ventricular rupture, espe -
cially if it is thin or distended. Therefore, it is important to 
Figure 54.31 Transthoracic echocardiography view of left atrial (LA) 
myoma (arrow). RA, right atrium.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   912 25/10/2017   09:27Further reading 913
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
carefully remove any clot and identify structures at risk such 
as grafts before placing hands around the heart.
There are several metho ds of internal massage; however, 
the two-hand technique is the safest.
TWO-HAND TECHNIQUE
The heart should be inspected to locate the internal mam -
mary and any other grafts if present, followed by removing 
any blood clots. The right hand is passed over the apex of the 
heart and then advanced round the apex to the back of the 
heart, palm up and hand flat. The left hand is then placed 
flat onto the anterior surface of the heart and the two hands 
squeezed together at a rate of 100 per minute. Flat palms and 
straight fingers are important to avoid an unequal distribution 
of pressure onto the heart, thereby minimising the chance of 
trauma. If there is a mitral valve replacement or repair, care 
should be taken not to lift the apex by the right hand, as this 
can cause a posterior ventricular rupture.
FURTHER READING
Bojar RM. Manual of perioperative care in cardiac surgery, 5th edn. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
Cohn LH. Cardiac surgery in the adult, 4th edn. New York: MaGraw Hill 
Professional, 2011.
Dunning J, Fabbri A, Kolh PH et al. Guideline for resuscitation in cardi-
ac arrest after cardiac surgery. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2009; 36: 3–28.
Kirklin J, Barratt-Boyce B. Cardiac surgery, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Else -
vier Saunders, 2013.
Kolh P , Wijns W , Danchin N et al. Guidelines on myocardial revascular-
ization. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2010; 38 (Suppl):S1–S52.
Mery CM, Turek JW . TSRA Review of cardiothoracic surgery , 2nd edn. 
Chicago: The Thoracic Surgery Residents Association, 2015.
Moorjani N, Viola N, Ohri S. Key questions in cardiac surgery . Shrews-
bury: TFM publishing, 2011.
Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO et al. AHA/ACC guideline for 
the management of patients with valvular heart disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2014; 63(22): e57–e185.
09_54B-B&L27_Pt9_Ch54.indd   913 25/10/2017   09:27Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
55Chapter
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy and physiology of the thorax
 • Investigation of chest pathology
 • The role of surgery in pleural disease
 • The assessment of patients requiring lung surgery
 • Surgical oncology as applied to chest surgery
The thorax
INTRODUCTION
Anatomical development of the 
lungs
The lungs are derived from an outpouching of the primitive 
foregut during the fourth week of intrauterine life. This bud 
becomes a two-lobed structure, the ends of which ultimately 
become the lungs. The lobar arrangement is defined early and 
is fairly constant but anomalies of fissures and segments lead -
ing to anatomical variation in the adult are common.
The primitive lungs drain into the cardinal veins, which 
ultimately become the pulmonary veins draining into the 
left atrium. Variability in venous drainage is very common 
and is usually of little functional significance. At the most 
severe end of the spectrum is total anomalous drainage, which 
presents in early infant life because oxygenated blood is all 
directed back to the right heart.
Anatomy of the lungs
The left lung is divided by the oblique fissure, which lies 
nearer to the vertical than horizontal, so the upper and lower 
lobes could also be called anterior and posterior. On the right, 
the equivalent of the left upper lobe is further divided to give 
the middle lobe. Each lobe is composed of segments, with 
anatomically defined and named bronchial, pulmonary arter-
ial and venous connections (Figure 55.1).
The right main bronchus (RMB) is shorter, wider and 
nearly vertical compared with the left main bronchus (LMB). 
As a consequence, inhaled foreign bodies are more likely to 
enter the right main bronchus than the left (Figure 55.2). 
The trachea and bronchi have a systemic arterial blood supply 
delivered by the bronchial arteries, which arise directly from 
the nearby thoracic aorta.
Lymphatic drainage tends to follow the bronchi. Lymph 
nodes are both named and identified by numbered ‘stations’ 
and more recently into zones, which are of importance in 
staging of lung cancer (Figure 55.3).
Mechanics of breathing
The intercostal muscles contract, causing the ribs to move 
upwards and outwards, thereby increasing the transverse and 
anteroposterior dimensions of the chest wall. The diaphragm 
contracts simultaneously and flattens, increasing the vertical 
Basal
PosteriorA nteriorPosteriorA nterior
Basal
Posterior
Lateral
Anterior
Posterior
Right upper lobe
Middle lobe
Right lower lobe
PosteriorOblique /f_issure
Oblique /f_issure
Horizontal /f_issure
Apical
Anterior
Superior lingular
Inferior lingular
Left upper lobe
Apical
Anterior
Medial
Lateral
Posterior
Left lower lobe
Apical Apical
Anterior
Lateral
Basal
PosteriorA nteriorPosteriorA nterior
Basal
Posterior
Lateral
Anterior
Posterior
Right upper lobe
Middle lobe
Right lower lobe
PosteriorOblique /f_issure
Oblique /f_issure
Horizontal /f_issure
Apical
Anterior
Superior lingular
Inferior lingular
Left upper lobe
Apical
Anterior
Medial
Lateral
Posterior
Left lower lobe
Apical Apical
Anterior
Lateral
Figure 55.1 The lobar and segmental divisions of the lungs, right 
lung above and left lung below as if viewed from the side.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   914 25/10/2017   09:29Assessment of fitness for major thoracic surgery 915
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
dimension of the chest cavity. As the volume increases, the 
intrathoracic pressure falls and air flows in until the alveolar 
pressure is the same as the atmospheric pressure. The only 
force used in normal expiration is the elastic recoil of the lung.
Coughing to clear sputum is an essential part of recovery 
from surgery. In a vigorous cough, probably the only muscle 
in the body that is relaxed is the diaphragm; as the abdomen 
and chest wall muscles contract, the limbs are braced and 
the sphincters are tightened. When the intrathoracic and 
abdominal pressure is built up, the glottis is opened and the 
diaphragm is forced up as a piston, or like the plunger of a 
syringe, to expel air at high velocity.
ASSESSMENT OF FITNESS FOR 
MAJOR THORACIC SURGERY
The British Thoracic Society (BTS) recommends a tripartite 
risk assessment model for patients undergoing lung resection, 
considering the risk of operative mortality, risk of perioper -
ative myocardial events and risk of postoperative dyspnoea 
(Figure 55.4). (See also Chapter 17).
Risk of operative mortality
The Thoracoscore is the most widely used model to assess 
risk of operative mortality in thoracic patients. Risk is calcu -
lated based on nine variables – age, sex, American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, performance status, dyspnoea 
score, priority of surgery, extent of surgery, malignant diagno-
sis and composite comorbidity score. It is currently the most 
robust model available to estimate the risk of death when 
considering patients for thoracic surgery.
Risk of perioperative myocardial 
event
History, physical examination and resting electrocardiogram 
(ECG) form the basics of assessing perioperative cardiovas -
cular risk. Patients who are found to have an active cardiac 
condition should be evaluated by a cardiologist and optimised 
(medical, revascularistion or cardiac surgery) before thoracic 
surgery. Surgery should be avoided within 30 days of myocar-
dial infarction.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 55.02Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Left upper lobe
Lingula
Apical lower Middle
lobe
Basal
lower
Apical
lower
Right upper lobe
Basal
lower
Figure 55.2 Surgical anatomy of the bronchial tr ee. To surgically 
remove the right lower lobe and conserve the middle lobe, the sur -
geon must be prepared to dissect and separately divide the apical 
bronchial segment (red line).
2
4
10
11
7
8
9
11
12
6
5
Left pulmonary artery
13
14
Oesophagus
3
Supraclavicular zone
Station 1: low cervical, supraclavicular 
sternal notch
Upper zone
Station 2: upper paratracheal
Station 3: prevascular/retrotracheal
Station 4: lower paratracheal
Subcarinal zone
Station 7: subcarinal
Hilar/interlobular zone
Station 10: hilar
Station 11: interlobar
Lower zone
Station 8: paraoesophageal 
Station 9: pulmonary ligament
1
Peripheral zone
Station 12: lobar
Station 13: segmental
Station 14: subsegmental
AP zone
Station 5: subaortic
Station 6: para-aortic
Figure 55.3 Lymph node stations related to the bronchial tree are particularly important in the staging of lung cancer, 
with N1 nodes (10–14) and N2 nodes (2–9) shown.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   915 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC916
Risk of postoperative dyspnoea
Any patient undergoing general anaesthesia requires some 
assessment of respiratory function. This may be a clinical 
appraisal of fitness but more detail is necessary for patients 
who are undergoing lung resection.
Investigation of the respiratory 
system
Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) are useful in determining 
the functional capacity of the patient and the severity of 
pulmonary disease, and in predicting the response to various 
treatments. The tests range from simple clinic or bedside 
measurements to those only available in specialist centres. 
Spirometry is the most commonly performed PFT and 
measures specifically the amount (volume) and/or speed (flow 
rate) of air that can be inhaled or exhaled. It is reported in 
both absolute values and as a predicted percentage of normal. 
Normal values vary , depending on gender, race, age and 
height. The most common parameters measured in spirometry 
are defined below and illustrated in Figure 55.5.
Peak expiratory flow rate
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) is measured by a W right 
peak flow meter or a peak flow gauge. This is the maximum 
airflow velocity achieved during an expiration delivered with 
maximal force from the total lung capacity. It is a reliable 
and reproducible test but has the disadvantage of being effort 
dependent, and it may therefore be affected by abdominal 
or thoracic wound pain. PEFR measurements are often used 
in managing asthma, but there are many other causes of low 
PEFR such as a problem with large airway patency.
Forced expiratory volume in 1 second
The forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) is the amount of 
air forcibly expired in 1 s. It is low in obstructive lung disease 
and may be normal in patients with poor gas exchange.
Dynamic lung volumes, 
transfer factor
+/– split function testing
ACC/AHA risk
strati/f_ication
+/– cardiology review 
Offer surgery as part of 
multimodality management
Exclude surgery from 
multimodality management
Thoracoscore 
Postoperative 
cardiac event
Postoperative 
dyspnoea
Perioperative 
death
Risk assessment for surgery
Address potentially modi/f_iable risk factors and reassess
Does the patient accept the risk in each category +/– potential impact on lifestyle?
No Yes
Figure 55.4 Tripartite risk assessment. ACC, American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association.
Basil Martin Wright , 1912–2001, member of the scientific staff of the Medical Research Council Research Centre, Northwick Park Hospital, Harrow, Middlesex, 
UK.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   916 25/10/2017   09:29Assessment of fitness for major thoracic surgery 917
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Forced vital capacity
The forced vital capacity (FVC) is the volume of air forcibly 
displaced following maximal inspiration to maximal expira -
tion. The FEV1 and the FVC can be measured using a Vital -
lograph, and a ratio (FEV 1/FVC) can be calculated (Figure 
55.5). A low ratio indicates obstruction and the test should be 
repeated after bronchodilators. A normal ratio (FVC and FEV1 
reduced to the same extent) indicates a restrictive pathology.
There are two physiological categories of lung disease: 
obstructive and restrictive (Table 55.1). In obstructive condi-
tions such as asthma or emphysema, the flow of air in and out 
of the lungs is impaired. In restrictive disrease, such as lung 
fibrosis, the lungs have lost size or elasticity, becoming ‘stiff’ 
so that they do not fill or expand properly.
Diffusion capacity
The diffusion capacity (DLCO) is a measurement of the lung’s 
ability to transfer gases and is often referred to as the ‘trans -
fer factor’. It cannot be performed at the bedside, requires the 
patient’s current haemoglobin level and is a test of the integrity 
of the lung’s alveolar–capillary surface area for gas exchange. 
In lung diseases that damage the alveolar walls, such as emphy-
sema, or that thicken the alveolar membrane, such as lung fibro-
sis, it may be reduced. In patients who require surgery to remove 
part of their lung, for example for lung cancer, measurement of 
DLCO is an important determitant of ‘fitness’ for surgery and 
it should be measured formally as part of a lung function test.
Time (seconds)
Volume (litres)
(ii) Obstructive
5
4
3
2
1
0 1 23 45 6
p
q
(a) (i) Normal
5
4
3
2
1
0 1 23 45 6
(iii) Restrictive
5
4
3
2
1
0 1 23 45 6
VC
TLC
TLC
VC
Normal(b)
Vital
capacity
(VC)
Tidal volume
Total lung
capacity
(TLC)
RestrictiveObstructive
Figure 55.5 Spirometry. (a) Spirogram tracings obtained from a Vitallograph: (i) normal forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 3.1 litres, forced 
vital capacity (FVC) 3.8 litres, FEV1/FVC 82%; (ii) obstructive defect, reversible asthma, p before a bronchodilator, FEV1 1.4 litres, FVC 3.5 litres, 
FEV1/FVC 40%; q after a bronchodilator, FEV1 2.5 litres, FVC 3.5 litres, FEV1/FVC 71%; (iii) restrictive defect, fibrosing alveolitis, FEV1 1.8 litres, 
FVC 2.0 litres, FEV1/FVC 90%. No change with bronchodilators. (b) Changes in lung volume in obstructive and restrictive lung disease. (Repro-
duced from Gray HH. Pulmonary embolism. Medicine International 1993; 21: 477, by kind permission of the Medicine Group (Journals) Ltd.)
TABLE 55.1 Spirometry values in obstructive and 
restrictive lung diseases.
Obstructive pattern Restrictive pattern
PEFR ↓↓ Normal or ↓
FEV1 ↓↓ Normal or ↓
FVC Normal or ↓ ↓↓
FEV1/FVC <70 >80
FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 s; FVC, forced vital capacity; PEFR, peak 
expiratory flow rate.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   917 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC918
Oxygen saturation
Oxygen saturation (SpO2) refers to the degree of oxygen 
molecules (O2) carried in the blood attached to haemoglo -
bin molecules (Hb). It is a measure of how much oxygen the 
blood is carrying as a percentage of the maximum it could 
carry. The common method of monitoring the oxygenation of 
a patient’s haemoglobin is through a pulse oximeter.
Blood gases
The SpO 2 measured non-invasively with a pulse oximeter 
measures only oxygenation, not ventilation, and provides 
no information regarding a patient’s carbon dioxide or bicar -
bonate levels, blood pH or base deficit. This requires arterial 
blood sampling or ‘blood gases’ (Table 55.2).
there is gross pleural sepsis surrounding a leaking and trapped 
lung, management is difficult and the patient may require pro-
longed care with repeated interventions.
The physiology of pleural fluid
The turnover of fluid in the human pleural space is about 1–2 
litres in 24 hours, with only 5–10 ml of fluid present at any 
one time as a film, about 20  micrometres thick, between the 
visceral and parietal pleura.
The mechanisms and equations given are simplifications 
but serve to explain the clinical conditions encountered. The 
fluid is produced from the capillaries of the parietal pleura as a 
transudate, according to the Starling capillary loop pressures. 
However, there is a further negative force in the pleura. The 
elastic content of the lung causes it to recoil and collapse if 
not held open by the negative pressure in the pleura. This 
elastic recoil exerts about 4  mmHg of negative pressure and 
favours accumulation of fluid. The secreting forces add up 
to about 11  mmHg in health. Pleural fluid is mainly reab -
sorbed (about 90%) by the visceral pleura, whose capillaries 
are part of the pulmonary circulation. The principal force in 
absorption of pleural fluid is oncotic pressure (approximately 
25 mmHg) minus the difference in mean capillary hydrostatic 
pressure of the pulmonary capillary (8  mmHg). Thus, the 
overall absorbing pressure is 25 – 8 = 17  mmHg, producing a 
net drying effect (17 – 11) of about 6 mmHg (Figure 55.6).
TABLE 55.2 Arterial blood gases: ‘normal values’.
pH 7.35–7.45
PaCO2 4.5–6 kPa (35–50 mmHg)
PaO2 11–14 kPa (83–105 mmHg)
Standard bicarbonate 22–28 mmol/L
Anion gap 10–16 mmol/L
Chloride 98–107 mmol/L
Ernest Henry Starling , 1866–1927, Professor of Physiology, University College, London, UK.
Capillary
hydrostatic
pressure
Colloid
pressure –25 –5 –25
+32
4
80–90% into
pulmonary capillaries
and reabsorbed:
Produced at a rate of:
0.6 mL/kg per hour 
or 1000 mL 
per day
Net drying effect 6 mmHg
Elastic recoil
+8
10–20% (plus protein)
into lymphatics
(a)
(b)
Figure 55.6 (a) Production and absorption of pleural fluid. (b) Nor-
mal pleural physiology. (See the text for an explanation of this simplis-
tic physiological model.)
The FEV1 and DLCO are often used to predict the risk of 
postoperative dyspnoea after lung resection. The predicted  
postoperative values can be calculated by considering the vol-
ume of lung, more specifically the number of bronchopulmonary 
segments, expected to be removed at surgery. For example if five 
segments of the left upper lobe are to be removed, the postop-
erative predicted FEV1 in a patient with a preoperative FEV1 
of 2.5 litres (85% predicted) is (19 – 5)/19 × 2.5 = 1.84 litres, 
and (19 – 5)/19 × 85% = 62.6% predicted. This assumes that 
all bronchopulmonary segments are functioning (e.g. not col-
lapsed) and contribute equally to lung function. Although an 
optimum cut-off of postoperative predicted FEV 1 of 40% is 
widely cited, there are currently limited data to provide guid-
ance on this figure to help predict an acceptable degree of post-
operative dyspnoea and quality of life. Patients should still be 
offered surgical resection if the predicted risk of postoperative 
dyspnoea is moderate or high, as long as they are aware of and 
accept the risks of dyspnoea and associated complications.
Other functional assessments, including the shuttle walk 
test, 6-minute walk test, as well as cardiopulmonary exercise 
testing, could be considered for patients at moderate or high 
risk of postoperative dyspnoea.
The pleura
The key to many aspects of practical chest surgery is an under-
standing of the pleura and of the mechanics of breathing. 
Management of the essentially healthy pleural space is logi -
cal and simple and needs minimal technology. On the other 
hand, when pleural disease is advanced, for example when 
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   918 25/10/2017   09:29Disorders of the pleura 919
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Gas in the pleural space
There is normally no free gas in the pleural space because the 
same physiological mechanism that absorbs air from a pneu-
mothorax prevents any gas accumulating.
The partial pressures (water as saturated vapour pressure) 
of the gases in venous/end-capillary blood are:
 ● PO2  40 mmHg  5.3 kPa
 ● PCO2  46 mmHg  6.1 kPa
 ● PN2 573 mmHg 76.4 kPa
 ● PH2O  47 mmHg  6.3 kPa
These partial pressures add up to less than atmospheric 
pressure (760 mmHg). Free gas is therefore absorbed into the 
blood and lost to the atmosphere through the lungs, with the 
gases moving in relation to their solubility (carbon dioxide 
quickest and nitrogen slowest) and relative concentrations in 
the pleural space and the blood. This does not favour nitro -
gen, which constitutes about 80% of atmospheric air. Breath-
ing oxygen accelerates nitrogen removal by reducing the 
content of nitrogen in the blood and increasing the gradient 
for its absorption. Nitrous oxide anaesthesia is dangerous in 
the presence of a pneumothorax; nitrous oxide is very solu -
ble and, although not normally present in the pleural space, 
it will be rapidly transported into the space if the patient is 
given nitrous oxide to breathe.
DISORDERS OF THE PLEURA
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is the presence of air outside the lung, within 
the pleural space. It must be distinguished from bullae or air 
cysts within the lung. Bullae can be the cause of an air leak 
from the lung and can therefore coexist with pneumothorax.
Spontaneous pneumothorax occurs when the visceral 
pleura ruptures without an external traumatic or iatrogenic 
cause. Cases are divided into primary spontaneous pneumotho-
rax (PSP) and secondary spontaneous pneumothorax (SSP). 
Pneumothorax can also occur following trauma or iatrogenic 
injury such as insertion of a central line. Tension pneumotho-
rax is when (independent of aetiology) there is a build up of 
positive pressure within the hemithorax, to the extent that the 
lung is completely collapsed, the diaphragm is flattened, the 
mediastinum is distorted and, eventually, the venous return 
to the heart is compromised. Any pleural breach is inherently 
valve-like because air will find its way out through the alveoli 
but cannot be drawn back in because the lung tissue collapses 
around the hole in the pleura. Patients being mechanically 
ventilated following trauma are at particular risk.
Surgical emphysema is the presence of air in the tissues. It 
requires a breach of an air-containing viscus in communica-
tion with soft tissues, and the generation of positive pressure 
to push the air along tissue planes. The most serious cause is 
a ruptured oesophagus. Mediastinal surgical emphysema can 
also occur with asthma or barotrauma from positive pressure 
ventilation. A poorly managed chest drain with intermit -
tent build up of pressure allows air to track into the chest 
wall through the point where the drain breaches the parietal 
pleura.
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax
This is a common condition characteristically seen in young 
people from their mid-teens to late 20s. About 75% of cases are 
in young men who tend to be tall and have a family history of the 
condition. It is due to leaks from small blebs, vesicles or bullae, 
which may become pedunculated, typically at the apex of the 
upper lobe or on the upper border of the lower or middle lobes.
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax
This occurs when the visceral pleura leaks as part of an under-
lying lung disease; any disease that involves the pleura may 
cause pneumothorax, including tuberculosis, any degener -
ative or cavitating lung disease and necrosing tumours. As 
such it tends to occur in older patients, often with a history of 
underlying lung disease such as emphysema. The pneumotho-
rax may be less well tolerated.
Usually, pneumothorax presents with sharp pleuritic pain 
and breathlessness. The pleura is exquisitely sensitive and the 
movement of the lung on and off the parietal pleura causes severe 
discomfort. As a result mild cases are more painful, whereas 
complete collapse is usually painless but causes more breathless-
ness. Bleeding and tension pneumothorax can occur. They are 
usually self-limiting; careful observation is wiser than too-ready 
resort to a chest drain. If the patient is not in respiratory distress 
or hypoxic there is no urgency. Tension pneumothorax should 
be immediately relieved by inserting a cannula into the hemi-
thorax in as safe a position as possible (Figure 55.7).
The risk of recurrent pneumothorax is increased after the 
first episode. The best estimates of recurrence rates are:
 ● of patients who experience a first event, only about one-
third experience recurrence;
 ● of those who have a second episode, about one-half go on 
to experience a third episode;
 ● those who have had three episodes will probably go on to 
have repeated recurrences.
Current recommendations from the BTS are that, in 
cases of persistent air leak following drain insertion or failure 
of the lung to re-expand, an early (3–5 days) thoracic surgi -
cal  opinion should be sought. Other indications for thoracic 
 surgical referral are given.
Summary box 55.1
Indications for surgical intervention for pneumothorax 
include:
●● Second ipsilateral pneumothorax
●● First contralateral pneumothorax
●● Bilateral spontaneous pneumothorax
●● Pneumothorax fails to settle despite chest drainage
●● Spontaneous haemothorax: professions at risk (e.g. pilots, 
divers)
●● Pregnancy
Current recommendations focus on the use of small bore 
(10–14 Fr) chest drains, usually of a Seldinger type, inserted 
ideally under ultrasound guidance. However , knowledge of 
the role of the ‘surgical’ chest drain and how to insert it safely 
is still required.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   919 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC920
YES
YES
YES
YES*
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
Chest drain
size 8–14 Fr
Admit
Consider discharge
review in OPD
in 2–4 weeks
Admit
High /f_low oxygen
(unless suspected oxygen sensitive)
Observe for 24 hours
Aspirate
16–18 G cannula
Aspirate <2.5 L
Age >50 and
signi/f_icant smoking history
Evidence of underlying
lung disease on exam
or x-ray?
Size >2 cm
and/or
breathless
Primary
pneumothorax
Spontaneous pneumothorax
If bilateral/haemodynamically
unstable proceed to chest drain
Secondary
pneumothorax
Success
(<2 cm and
breathing
improved)
>2 cm or
breathless
Size
1–2 cm
Success
(size now
<1 cm)
Aspirate
16–18 G cannula
Aspirate <2.5 L 
*In some patients with a large pneumothorax but minimal
symptoms conservative mangement may be appropriate
Figure 55.7 British Thoracic Society (BTS) guidelines on management of spontaneous pneumothorax (2010) (adapted from www.bts.org.uk). 
OPD, outpatient department.
Inserting and managing a chest 
drain
An intercostal tube connected to an underwater seal is cen -
tral to the management of chest disease; however, the man -
agement of the pleura and of chest drains can be troublesome, 
even in experienced hands.
The safest site for insertion of a drain (Figure 55.8) is in 
the triangle that lies:
 ● anterior to the mid-axillary line;
 ● above the level of the nipple;
 ● below and lateral to the pectoralis major muscle.
This will ideally find the fifth space. The technique 
includes the following.
 ● Meticulous attention to sterility throughout.
 ● Adequate local anaesthesia to include the pleura.
 ● Sharp dissection to cut only the skin.
 ● Blunt dissection with artery forceps down through the 
muscle layers; these should only be the serratus anterior 
and the intercostals.
 ● An oblique tract, so that the skin incision and the hole 
in the parietal pleura do not overlie each other and the 
drain is in a short tunnel, which reduces the chance of 
entraining air.
 ● A drain for pneumothorax and haemothorax should aim 
towards the apex of the lung. A drain for pleural effusion 
or empyema should be nearer the base. The drain should 
pass over the upper edge of the rib to avoid the neurovas-
cular bundle that lies beneath the rib.
 ● The retaining stitch should be secure but should not oblit-
erate the drain.
 ● A vertical mattress suture is inserted for later wound closure. 
This is vital for pneumothorax management but should be 
omitted if the drain is for empyema (provided there is adher-
ence of the pleura) because that tract should lie open.
 ● Connect the drain to an underwater seal device which 
functions as a one-way valve.
 ● After completion, check that the drain has achieved its 
objective by taking a chest radiograph.
It is preferable not to apply suction to the drain or clamp it. 
The danger is that the clamp may be applied for transport and 
forgotten. Dangers of disconnection and siphoning are small 
or best averted in other ways apart from clamping. A bubbling 
drain should (almost) never be clamped. Remove the drain 
when it no longer has a function.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   920 25/10/2017   09:29Disorders of the pleura 921
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
fluid given above. Pleural effusions are divided into exudates 
and transudates, depending on protein content (more (exu -
dates) or less (transudates) than 30  g/L), and characterised 
further according to glucose content, pH and lactate dehy -
drogenase content. The following are the most common ways 
in which the pleural fluid balance is disturbed.
 ● Elevated pulmonary capillary pressure. If left atrial pres-
sure rises, the pulmonary capillary pressure must rise with 
it, as a result of either impaired cardiac performance or an 
overloaded circulation.
 ● Reduced intravascular oncotic pressure. If the plasma 
proteins fall because of renal or hepatic disease or malnu -
trition, the absorption mechanism fails.
 ● Accumulation of pleural protein  due to obstruction of 
the mediastinal lymphatics secondary to lymphoma or 
cancers that invade the lymphatic system.
 ● Excessive permeability of the capillaries to fluid and pro-
tein as in inflammatory diseases, particularly the collagen 
vascular diseases. Of particular importance to the surgeon 
is the effusion associated with pleural infection (empy -
ema) and malignant effusions.
Malignant pleural effusion
Pleural effusion is a common complication of cancer. This 
may be due to:
 ● lung cancer;
 ● pleural involvement with primary or secondary malignancy;
 ● mediastinal lymphatic involvement.
LUNG CANCER
There may be direct involvement of the parietal and/or vis-
ceral pleura, collapse of the lung parenchyma and spread to 
the mediastinal lymphatics, or a combination of these, caus -
ing pleural fluid accumulation. It is usually regarded as a fea -
ture that puts lung cancer beyond surgical cure.
Summary box 55.2
Suction on a pleural tube
●● Be aware! Inserting the drain, and not the suction, is the life-
saving manoeuvre
●● If the lung is reluctant to expand, the suction deviates the 
mediastinum
●● If the lung is fragile, it may worsen an air leak
Surgical management of 
pneumothorax
Pleurectomy and pleurodesis
Surgery for pneumothorax can be performed by video-assisted 
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) or as an open procedure (tho-
racotomy). The object of the exercise is threefold:
 ● to deal with any leaks from the lung;
 ● to search for and obliterate any blebs and bullae;
 ● to make the visceral pleura adherent to the parietal pleura 
so that any subsequent leaks are contained and the lung 
cannot completely collapse.
Pleural adhesion is achieved in one of three ways:
 ● Pleurectomy: systematically stripping the parietal pleura 
from the chest wall.
 ● Pleural abrasion: a scourer is used to scrape off the slick 
surface of the parietal pleura.
 ● Chemical pleurodesis : usually talc is used and is insuf -
flated into the chest cavity.
Pleural effusion
Pleural effusion can be readily understood with reference to 
the physiological mechanisms governing the flux of pleural 
Triangle of
‘safety’
(a)
(b)
(e)
(h)
(f) (g)
(c) (d)
Mid-axillary
line
Triangle of
‘safety’
(a)
(b)
(e)
(h)
(f) (g)
(c) (d)
Mid-axillary
line
Figure 55.8 Insertion of chest drain: (a) triangle of safety; (b) penetration of the skin, muscle and pleura; (c) blunt dissection of the parietal 
pleura; (d) suture placement; (e) gauging the distance of insertion; (f) digital examination along the tract into the pleural space; (g) withdrawal 
of central trochar and positioning of drain; (h) underwater seal chest drain bottle.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   921 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC922
PLEURAL MALIGNANCY
The only primary malignancy of the pleura seen with any reg-
ularity is malignant mesothelioma. This is a consequence of 
asbestos exposure, with few exceptions. The peak of asbes-
tos importation into the UK was from 1960 to 1975 and the 
incidence of mesothelioma is rising and was expected to peak 
in 2015. Mesothelioma commonly presents with breathless -
ness because of pleural effusions, pain and systemic features of 
malignancy. Diffuse seeding of the parietal and visceral pleura 
is a common pattern of dissemination of cancers, particularly 
adenocarcinoma of any origin.
MEDIASTINAL L YMPHATIC INVOL VEMENT
In many instances, particularly in breast cancer, there is no 
evident disease in the pleura. The disease is in the mediastinal 
lymphatics, which are obstructed, and this upsets the balance 
of physiological forces that control pleural fluid.
SURGERY FOR PATIENTS WITH MALIGNANT 
PLEURAL EFFUSION
The surgeon has two roles: to make the diagnosis and to achieve 
effective palliation by draining the fluid and pleurodesis.
DIAGNOSIS
Pleural biopsy can be obtained by a range of techniques, with 
VATS being the most common. An unequivocally positive 
biopsy is useful but a negative biopsy may be a sampling error.
influenzae in children), the scene is set for empyema. At 
this stage antibiotics may be all that is required. Aspira-
tion or drainage to dryness in addition is preferred.
2 Over subsequent days, the fluid thickens to what is known 
as the fibrinopurulent phase. Drainage at this stage is pru-
dent as antibiotics on their own are unlikely to be curative.
3 The organising phase causes the lung to be trapped by a 
thick peel or ‘cortex’ for which surgical management may 
be required.
Surgical management of pleural 
effusions and infections
Thoracoscopy or video-assisted 
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
The direct-vision thoracoscope has been used for many years, 
but its use was limited mainly to performing biopsies. The 
instrument had a limited view and was uncomfortable to use 
for any length of time. All this has changed since the advent 
of video-assisted thoracoscopy (Figure 55.9 ); the surgeon’s 
hands are freed because the camera is attached to the thoraco-
scope, which can be operated by an assistant with the image 
displayed on a screen. The surgeon is able to manipulate 
instruments with both hands to perform a variety of proce -
dures. The number of ports required depends on the type and 
complexity of the surgery. The patient is usually positioned 
with the diseased side uppermost, having had a double lumen 
endotracheobronchial tube placed by the anaesthetist to 
allow for single-lung ventilation. The principal advantage is 
that a large incision is avoided, resulting in less postoperative 
pain and a more rapid recovery.
VATS drainage, pleural biopsy and talc 
pleurodesis
VATS drainage, pleural biopsy and talc pleurodesis is increas-
ingly performed for the management of patients with an undi-
agnosed or malignant pleural effusion. It can be performed 
using a single port and allows direct visualisation of the pleu-
ral cavity for complete drainage, multiple pleural biopsies and 
excellent talc insufflation to achieve pleurodesis.
Leon David Abrams , 1923–2012, cardiothoracic surgeon, the United Birmingham Hospitals, Birmingham, UK.
Pleural infection and empyema
Empyema is the end stage of pleural infection from any cause. 
It most commonly results from infection of the underlying 
lung, involving pneumonia or a lung abscess, but can occur 
as a complication of any thoracic operation. It is seen if a 
traumatic haemothorax becomes infected or in the course of 
management of pneumothorax or pleural effusions. It may be 
associated with pus under the diaphragm (Table 55.3).The 
pathological diagnosis requires the presence of thick pus with 
a thick cortex of fibrin and coagulum over the lung.
When empyema presents de novo it usually follows pneu-
monia, and three phases are described:
1 In the exudative phase, there is protein-rich (>30  g/L) 
effusion. If this becomes infected with the organisms from 
the lung (typically Streptococcus milleri and Haemophilus 
Summary box 55.3
Biopsy of the pleura
●● Cytological examination of the pleural fluid (low yield)
●● Abrams’ needle (low yield in malignancy)
●● Computed tomography (CT)-guided needle biopsy of a 
suspicious area
●● VATS biopsy
●● Open surgical biopsy
TABLE 55.3 Conditions that predispose to empyema 
formation.
Pulmonary infection Unresolved pneumonia
Bronchiectasis
Tuberculosis
Fungal infections
Lung abscess
Aspiration of pleural effusion Any aetiology
Trauma Penetrating injury
Surgery
Oesophageal perforation
Extrapulmonary sources Subphrenic abscess
Bone infections Osteomyelitis of ribs or vertebrae
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   922 25/10/2017   09:29Disorders of the airway 923
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
VATS debridement of empyema
Pleural infection, particularly early in its evolution, requires 
drainage, but once the fluid component becomes fibrinopu -
rulent and loculated it requires surgical debridement, which 
can often be achieved through a VATS approach. The lung is 
isolated through the use of a double lumen tube, the patient 
is positioned disease side up, and the pleural cavity is entered. 
The fluid and debris are vigorously debrided, freeing the lung 
and allowing for re-expansion. At the end of the case, care -
fully positioned chest drains are placed to allow for depen -
dent drainage. The drain(s) must exit the skin anterior to the 
mid-axillary line otherwise the patient will have to lie on the 
drain(s), causing pain and possibly obstructing the tube. The 
drain should lie obliquely in its course through the skin and 
chest wall and into the pleura, or it will kink.
Following the procedure, the patient requires good anal -
gesic control, typically using patient-controlled analgesia 
(PCA), and physiotherapy to help fully re-expand the lung 
prior to final removal of chest drains.
Decortication
If the lung fails to re-expand after drainage of the empyema, the 
more radical operation of decortication may be required (Figure 
55.10). The fibrous cortex or peel from the entrapped underly-
ing lung is removed so that the lung can expand to obliterate the 
pleural space. This is usually performed through a posterolateral 
thoracotomy, though in selected cases it can be performed as a 
VATS procedure. It requires careful dissection to remove the 
parietal and visceral cortex, taking care not to damage the vis-
ceral pleura, so allowing the lung to re-expand fully.
DISORDERS OF THE AIRWAY
Haemoptysis
Diseases causing repeated haemoptysis include carcinoma, 
bronchiectasis, carcinoid tumours and some infections. 
Severe mitral stenosis is now a rare cause. Patients with 
repeated haemoptysis should be investigated, at the very least 
by chest radiography and bronchoscopy. Haemoptysis follow-
ing trauma may be from a lung contusion or injury to a major 
airway. Treatment depends on the underlying cause.
Common associated chest symptoms include cough with 
or without sputum, pain, breathlessness, hoarseness and more 
general symptoms of systemic upset, including fatigue and loss 
of weight. Occasionally, chest disease may cause palpitation 
due to atrial fibrillation. Any of these symptoms in association 
with haemoptysis requires urgent investigation.
Investigation
BRONCHOSCOPY (TABLE 55.4)
Flexible bronchoscopy may be performed with the patient 
awake and the oropharynx anaesthetised with topical lig -
nocaine (Figure 55.11). The bronchoscope is passed into 
the nose or mouth and through the vocal folds under direct 
vision. As the scope is flexible, its tip can be directed into the 
segmental bronchi with ease. Tissue and sputum samples may 
be obtained for diagnostic purposes. There is a greater range 
of movement with this instrument, but the biopsies are rela-
tively small and suction limited.
Figure 55.10 Chest computed tomography scan showing an empy-
ema with a grossly thickened pleura.
TABLE 55.4 Uses of bronchoscopy.
Diagnostic Confirmation of disease: carcinoma of the 
bronchus; inflammatory or infective processes
Investigative Tissue biopsy
Preoperative 
assessment
Before lung resection
Before oesophageal resection
Persistent haemoptysis
Therapeutic Removal of secretions
Removal of foreign bodies
Stent placement, endobronchial resection, etc.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 55.08Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 55.9  Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (V ATS) utilises 
modern thoracoscopic instruments and digital technology and avoids 
large  incisions.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   923 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC924
Rigid bronchoscopy requires general anaesthesia in most 
instances. It is ideal for therapeutic manoeuvres, such as 
removal of foreign bodies, aspiration of blood and thick secre-
tions, and intraluminal surgery (laser resection or stent place-
ment). The surgeon and the anaesthetist share control of the 
airway. Continuous ECG and pulse oximetry monitoring are 
now essential. The technique involves the operator standing 
behind the patient and lifting the maxilla by the upper teeth, 
using the middle finger and forefinger of the left hand. The 
bronchoscope rests on the left thumb as it is introduced over 
the tongue in the midline. Care must be taken not to trap 
the lips or tongue between the teeth and the bronchoscope, 
and the fulcrum should be the left thumb and not the teeth. 
The bronchoscope is passed under direct vision into the oro-
pharynx, behind the epiglottis, until the vocal folds are seen. 
Turning the instrument through 90° will help to negotiate the 
vocal folds; only then should the neck be extended.
The tracheal rings and the carina should be easily seen. 
Advancing the bronchoscope into the right or left main bron-
chus reveals the orifices of the more peripheral bronchi. Oper-
ability of an endobronchial tumour may be assessed in terms 
of its location (e.g. the proximity of a lesion to the carina). 
Complications are rare but include bleeding, pneumothorax, 
laryngospasm and arrhythmia.
Rigid bronchoscopy can be combined with endobron -
chial interventions to tackle airway tumours; these tech-
niques include use of laser or cryotherapy, with heat or cold 
respectively, to excise potentially obstructing endobronchial 
tumours and improve airway patency and breathing.
Other techniques of biopsy of intrathoracic lesions are 
often necessary to confirm diagnosis, stage disease and plan 
treatment. The options range from percutaneous needle biopsy 
under radiological control, to endobronchial ultrasound and 
open-lung biopsy. However, high-quality, contrast-enhanced, 
multislice helical CT scanning has reduced the requirement 
for invasive assessment.
Figure 55.11 (a) Rigid and flexible bronchoscopes. (b) View past 
the carina into the left main bronchus with a tumour seen in the bron-
chial lumen.
Summary box 55.4
Biopsy hazards
●● Bleeding disorders
●● Systemic anticoagulation
●● Pulmonary hypertension
Airway obstruction
Tracheal obstruction may present acutely as a life-threatening 
emergency or insidiously with little in the way of symptoms 
until critical narrowing and stridor occur. The more common 
causes of airway narrowing are outlined in Table 55.5.
Treatment depends on the underlying cause. Trache -
ostomy may be required to overcome the obstruction, but 
there are few indications to do this as an emergency. Tracheal 
replacement with artificial substitutes has so far been unsuc -
cessful, but resection of up to 6 cm of trachea is now possible. 
Sleeve resections of the major bronchi are also possible.
Inhaled foreign bodies
This is a fairly common occurrence in small children and 
is often marked by a choking incident that then apparently 
passes. Surprisingly large objects can be inhaled and become 
lodged in the wider -calibre and more vertically placed right 
main bronchus. There are three possible presentations:
 ● asymptomatic;
 ● wheezing (from airway narrowing) with a persistent cough 
and signs of obstructive emphysema;
 ● pyrexia with a productive cough from pulmonary suppur -
ation.
TABLE 55.5 Causes of airway narrowing.
Intraluminal Inhaled foreign body
Neoplasm
Intramural Congenital stenosis
Fibrous stricture (post-intubation or tuberculosis)
Extramural Neoplasm (thyroid cancer, secondary deposits)
Aortic arch aneurysm
(a)
(b)
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   924 25/10/2017   09:29Neoplasms of the lung 925
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
A chest radiograph is vital; even if the object is not radio-
opaque there may be other changes. An experienced anaes -
thetist is required. Endoscopic removal may be very difficult 
if there is a severe inflammatory reaction to the foreign body.
NEOPLASMS OF THE LUNG
Primary lung cancer
Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers throughout 
the world. In the UK, there are approximately 40  000 new 
cases a year. From the time of diagnosis, 80% of patients are 
dead within 1 year and only 5% survive 5 years, making lung 
cancer the most common cause of cancer death.
Surgical resection has a limited role in curative treatment 
because at the time of presentation many cancers are locally 
advanced or widely disseminated and are beyond surgical 
cure. The proportion of lung cancers in which resection is 
attempted varies but in most resource-rich countries approxi-
mately 20–30% of cases are potentially surgically resectable. 
The thoracic surgeon working in a cancer team has a role in 
diagnosis, staging and palliation, in addition to resection in 
appropriate cases. The disease is so common that surgeons of 
all disciplines will encounter cases of lung cancer presenting 
with various manifestations.
Cigarette smoking is undoubtedly the major risk factor for 
developing bronchial carcinoma and accounts for 85–95% of 
all cases. To a lesser extent, atmospheric pollution and cer -
tain occupations (mining of radioactive ore and chromium) 
contribute. The risk is related to the lifetime burden of cig -
arette smoking, which is commonly quoted as ‘pack-years’ 
(a ‘pack’ being 20 cigarettes): the number of packs smoked 
per day multiplied by the number of years of exposure. In the 
UK, the mortality rate from lung cancer for individuals smok-
ing more than 40 cigarettes per day is over 210 deaths per 
100 000 population per year. This compares with a mortality 
rate of less than 4 deaths per 100  000 population per year in 
non-smokers.
Pathological types
For practical purposes, lung cancers are divided into small cell 
lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which 
are seen in a ratio of about 1:4.
 ● The pattern of disease, the prognosis and the results of 
treatment for small cell (also known as oat cell) carci-
noma differ from all other types sufficiently for these to 
be managed differently from the outset on the basis of the 
histological classification.
 ● Subdivisions of NSCLC according to histological charac-
teristics are much less important, but pathological staging 
is critical to treatment and outcome.
Histological classification of lung cancer
Small cell lung cancers were known as oat cell cancers 
because of the packed nature of small dense cells. They are 
a type of neuroendocrine tumour (NET) and represent about 
20% of all lung cancers. They tend to metastasise early to 
lymph nodes and by blood-borne spread. The median survival 
is measured in months. The tumours are very responsive to 
chemotherapy such that median survival may be doubled 
(although it is still short) but they are rarely, if ever, cured. 
Surgery is rarely offered unless in very limited stage disease.
Adenocarcinoma is now the most common of the NSCLC 
types, having overtaken squamous cancer. The increasing 
incidence is partly due to an increasing incidence in women 
and may be the result, in part, of a move towards lower-tar 
cigarettes that are inhaled more deeply to get the same effect.
Squamous carcinoma typically appears as a cavitating 
tumour.
Large cell undifferentiated is a discrete histological type 
of NSCLC and is included within NETs.
Bronchioalveolar carcinoma (BAC), also known as ade-
nocarcinoma-in-situ, has a distinct pattern of growth follow-
ing the pre-existing pulmonary architecture and is thus much 
less dense; it appears as a patchy diffuse shadow (‘ground glass’) 
on radiographs rather than a solid mass and has a histological 
appearance to match. Recently, the pathological nomenca-
lature for BAC, a subtype of adenocarcinoma, has changed 
and they are now known as ‘lepidic’ neoplastic lesions, which 
have further been classified into precursor lesions, minimal 
invasive lepidic adenocarcinomas and frankly malignant lep-
idic adenocarcinomas. After resection, the cancer can appear 
in another lobe or on the other side, and these are often 
regarded as multifocal primary tumours rather than metastatic 
disease. Further resection may be appropriate depending on 
patient fitness and extent of disease.
Neuroendocrine tumours of the lung are a group of lung 
cancers that incude small cell cancer and large cell undiffer -
entiated lung cancer, but also include other less aggressive 
tumour types including typical carcinoid and atypical carci-
noid tumours. These occur in the major (central) bronchi 
and 20% are found peripherally. They are characteristi -
cally slow growing and highly vascular. Most behave in a 
benign way; however, approximately 15% metastasise. The 
patient often presents with a history of recurrent pneumo -
nia or haemoptysis, but carcinoid syndrome is rare unless 
there are extensive pulmonary or hepatic metastases. Sur -
gical excision is preferred because the prognosis following 
complete resection is excellent (>90% 10-year survival). 
Segmental or wedge resection may be sufficient for a small 
peripheral tumour, while lobectomy or pneumonectomy 
may be necessary for central tumours. Where possible, a 
lung-sparing bronchoplastic or sleeve resection should be 
considered. This allows resection of proximal endobronchial 
lesions in an effort to preserve more distal, uninvolved lung 
 parenchyma.
Accurate diagnosis and staging of the tumour are vital if 
surgery is to be considered.
Clinical features
Clinical features of lung carcinoma depend on:
 ● the site of the lesion;
 ● the invasion of neighbouring structures;
 ● the extent of metastases.
Common symptoms include a persistent cough, weight 
loss, dyspnoea and non-specific chest pain.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   925 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC926
 ● Haemoptysis occurs in fewer than 50% of patients pre -
senting for the first time.
 ● Cough, or a changed cough, is a common presentation but 
non-specific in this population.
 ● Severe localised pain suggests chest wall invasion with 
the infiltration of an intercostal nerve. Invasion of the 
apical area may involve the brachial plexus, leading to 
Pancoast’s syndrome.
 ● Dyspnoea may come from loss of functioning lung tissue, 
lymphatic invasion or the development of a large pleural 
effusion.
 ● Pleural fluid is an ominous feature and the presence of 
blood in a pleural effusion suggests that the pleura has 
been directly invaded.
 ● Clubbing (Figure 55.12) and hypertrophic pulmonary 
osteoarthropathy accompany some lung cancers and may 
resolve with excision of the primary lesion.
 ● Invasion of the mediastinum may result in hoarseness 
(because of recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement), 
dysphagia (because of the involvement of, or extrinsic 
pressure on, the oesophagus) and superior vena caval 
obstruction.
 ● Small cell carcinoma is associated with the development 
of myopathies including the Eaton–Lambert syndrome, 
which is similar to myasthenia gravis.
Survival
Carcinoma of the bronchus generally has a low survival rate 
after diagnosis (Table 55.7). Important factors in determining 
prognosis are the histological type of the tumour, the spread 
(stage) and the general condition of the patient. Early detec-
tion and surgical resection offer the best hope for cure.
Diagnosis and staging
Increasing emphasis in recent years has been the early detec -
tion of lung cancer, with guidance on symptoms and signs 
of potential lung cancer that require urgent chest x-ray and 
referral to a lung cancer team (Table 55.8).
Non-invasive investigations
CHEST RADIOGRAPHY
A chest radiograph will detect most lung cancers but some, 
particularly early curable tumours, are hidden by other struc -
tures. Secondary effects such as pleural effusion, distal collapse 
and raised hemidiaphragm may be evident (Figure 55.13).
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography (CT) is the first investigation in sus -
pected lung cancer. The surgeon needs to know whether  
the primary is resectable (T stage) and which, if any, lymph 
nodes are involved (N stage). Lymph nodes more than 2 cm in 
diameter are likely to be involved in the disease (70%) (Fig-
ure 55.14) and those less than 10 mm in the shorter axis are 
unlikely to be involved. If the presence of cancer in the nodes 
is critical to management, further evidence from positron 
emission tomography with radiolabelled fluorodeoxyglucose 
(FDG-PET) or biopsy (see below) is essential. Remote metas-
tases to the liver, adrenal glands or elsewhere may be detected.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
The patient is given radiolabelled FDG, which is taken up 
by all metabolising cells but more avidly by cancer cells. 
Henry Khunrath Pancoast , 1875–1939, Professor of Radiology, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, described this condition in 1932.
Lee M. Eaton , 1905–1958, neurologist who was a professor at The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Edward H. Lambert , b.1915, Professor of Physiology, The University of Minnesota, MN, USA. Eaton and Lambert described this condition in a joint paper in 
1956.
Figure 55.12 Example of finger clubbing in a patient with broncho-
genic carcinoma.
Summary box 55.5
Symptoms of lung cancer
●● Haemoptysis: <50% of patients
●● Cough, new or changed pattern
●● Pain
●● Dyspnoea
●● Clubbing
●● Hoarseness
●● Myopathies
Treatment of lung cancer
Careful investigation is required to determine which tumours 
are operable and will benefit from a major thoracic resection. 
The internationally agreed tumour–node–metastasis (TNM) 
staging system gives prognostic information on the natural 
history of the disease. Tumours graded up to T3, N1, M0 can 
be encompassed within an anatomical surgical resection and 
have a much improved prognosis when treated surgically so 
the tumour must be staged accurately before resection (Table 
55.6). A number of non-tumour related factors, including the 
general fitness of the patient and the results of lung function 
tests, help to determine the appropriate treatment. In patients 
with incurable disease, treatment is palliative to maximise 
quality of life.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   926 25/10/2017   09:29Neoplasms of the lung 927
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
The FDG enters the Kreb’s cycle but cannot complete it 
and accumulates in proportion to the glucose avidity of 
the cells. High accumulation is associated with lung can -
cers and secondaries. Infection or other inflammation, 
and lymphadenopathy secondary to it, are also FDG avid 
 (Figure 55.15).
Sir Hans Adolf Krebs , 1900–1981, Professor of Biochemistry, The University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
TABLE 55.6 The international tumour–node–metastasis (TNM) staging system.
T: Primary tumour
Tx Primary tumour cannot be assessed or tumour proven by presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not 
visualised by imaging or bronchoscopy
T0 No evidence of primary tumour
Tis Carcinoma in situ
T1 Tumour ≤3 cm in greatest dimension surrounded by lung or visceral pleura without bronchoscopic evidence of invasion more 
proximal than the lobar bronchus (i.e. not in the main bronchus)a
T1a(mi) Minimally invasive adenocarcinomab
T1a Tumour 1 cm in greatest dimensiona
T1b Tumour >1 cm but ≤2 cm in greatest dimensiona
T1c Tumour >2 cm but ≤3 cm in greatest dimensiona
T2 Tumour >3 cm but ≤5 cm or tumour with any of the following features:c 
– involves main bronchus regardless of distance from the carina but without involvement of the carina 
– invades visceral pleura 
– associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the hilar region, involving part or all of the lung
T2a Tumour >3 cm but ≤4 cm in greatest dimension
T2b Tumour >4 cm but ≤5 cm in greatest dimension
T3 Tumour >5 cm but ≤7 cm in greatest dimension or associated with separate tumour nodule(s) in the same lobe as the primary 
tumour or directly invades any of the following structures: chest wall (including the parietal pleura and superior sulcus tumours), 
phrenic nerve, parietal pericardium
T4 Tumour >7 cm in greatest dimension or associated with separate tumour nodule(s) in a different ipsilateral lobe than that of the 
primary tumour or invades any of the following structures: diaphragm, mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent 
laryngeal nerve, oesophagus, vertebral body, and carina
N: Regional lymph nodes involvement
Nx Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0 No regional lymph node metastasis
N1 Metastasis in ipsilateral peribronchial and/or ipsilateral hilar lymph nodes and intrapulmonary nodes, including involvement by 
direct extension
N2 Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal lymph node(s)
N3 Metastasis in contralateral mediastinal, contralateral hilar, ipsilateral or contralateral scalene, or supraclavicular lymph node(s)
M: Distant metastasis
M0 No distant metastasis
M1 Distant metastasis present
M1a Separate tumour nodule(s) in a contralateral lobe; tumour with pleural or pericardial nodule(s) or malignant pleural or pericardial 
effusiond
M1b Single extrathoracic metastasise
M1c Multiple extrathoracic metastases in one or more organs
aThe uncommon superficial spreading tumour of any size with its invasive component limited to the bronchial wall, which may proximal to the main bronchus, is 
also classified as T1a.
bSolitary adenocarcinoma, ≤3 cm with a predominately lepidic pattern and ≤5 mm invasion in any one focus.
cT2 tumours with these features are classified as T2a is ≤4 cm in greatest dimension or if size cannot be determined, and T2b if >4 cm but ≤5 cm in greatest 
dimension.
dMost pleural (pericardial) effusions with lung cancer are due to tumour. In a few patients, however, multiple microscopic examinations of pleural (pericardial) fluid 
are negative for tumour and the fluid is non-bloody and not an exudate. When these elements and clinical judgement dictate that the effusion is not related to the 
tumour, the effusion should be excluded as a staging descriptor.
eThis includes involvement of a single distant (non-regional) lymph node.
SPUTUM CYTOLOGY
Sputum cytology may reveal malignant cells but the false-  
negative rate is high.
Invasive investigations
Once lung cancer is suspected, diagnosis and further staging 
are sought. The choice of investigation depends on the 
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   927 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC928
BRONCHOSCOPY
Flexible bronchoscopy is usually performed under sedation, 
particularly in patients with more centrally placed lung can -
cers. It allows assessment of the segmental airway, cytologi -
cal testing through brushing and washing of the concerned 
segmental bronchi and transbronchial needle aspiration 
(TBNA).
ENDOBRONCHIAL UL TRASOUND (EBUS)
EBUS allows bronchoscopic assessment of suspicious medias-
tinal lymph nodes with an ultrasound probe incorporated into 
the tip of the bronchoscope to aid TBNA (Figure 55.16). 
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a similar technique that, by 
passing the probe down the oesophagus, allows fine needle 
aspiration (FNA) of less approachable mediastinal lymph 
nodes.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY-GUIDED BIOPSY
Percutaneous CT-guided FNA may give a good yield of cells 
for cytological examination. Alternatively, a core of tissue 
can be obtained for formal histology. These techniques are 
best for larger and more peripheral lesions. Pneumothorax is 
TABLE 55.8 Recent National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance on referral in patients with 
suspected lung cancer.
Symptoms and 
signs indicating 
urgent chest 
x-ray
Offer urgent chest x-ray to patients presenting 
with haemoptysis, or any of the following if 
unexplained or present for more than 3 weeks:
Cough
Chest/shoulder pain
Dyspnoea
Finger clubbing
Signs suggesting metastases (for example, in brain, bone, liver or 
skin)
Weight loss
Chest signs
Hoarseness
Cervical/supraclavicular lymphadenopathy
Symptoms and 
signs indicating 
urgent referral
Offer urgent referral to lung cancer MDT (usually 
the chest physician) while waiting for chest 
x-ray results if any of the following are present:
Persistent haemoptysis in a smoker or ex-smoker older than 40 years
Signs of superior vena cava obstruction (swelling of the face and/or 
neck with fixed elevation of jugular venous pressure)
Stridor
Offer urgent referral to lung cancer MDT (usually 
the chest physician) if: 
A chest x-ray or CT scan suggests lung cancer (including pleural 
effusion and slowly resolving consolidation) or
Chest x-ray is normal, but there is a high suspicion of lung cancer
CT, computed tomography; MDT, multidisciplinary team.
Figure 55.14 Paratracheal lymphadenopathy shown on a computed 
tomography scan.
Figure 55.13 Chest x-ray of carcinoma of the lung. This patient has 
a large mass in the right upper lobe, causing Horner’s syndrome.
TABLE 55.7 Survival table following operation for 
carcinoma of the bronchus.
(%)
Five-year survival according to presurgical staging
Stage I
Stage II
Stage IIIa
Stage IIIb
<56–67
<39–55
<23
<10
Five-year survival according to cell type
Squamous cell carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Undifferentiated carcinoma
Small cell carcinoma
35–50
25–45
20–35
15–25
 0–5
position of the primary tumour in the lung (peripheral or cen-
tral) and the clinical stage of the cancer (presence of enlarged 
lymph nodes or metastasis).
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   928 25/10/2017   09:29Neoplasms of the lung 929
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
common (30%) but rarely requires intercostal tube drainage. 
The contraindications include poor respiratory reserve, when 
even a small pneumothorax would be hazardous.
Surgical diagnosis and staging
Mediastinoscopy, mediastinotomy, VATS or thoracotomy lymph 
node/lung biopsy are aimed at establishing a tissue diagnosis 
and assessing the degree of spread (staging), which determines 
resectability. Histological proof of the status of mediastinal 
nodes may be important to avoid unnecessary thoracotomy for 
incurable cancers and, conversely, to avoid denying surgery to 
patients whose lymph nodes are enlarged but benign.
MEDIASTINOSCOPY
This procedure is performed under general anaesthesia with 
the patient supine and his or her neck extended (Figure 
55.17). A transverse incision is made 2  cm above the ster -
nal notch and deepened until the strap muscles are reached. 
These are retracted laterally and the thyroid isthmus is 
retracted superiorly to reveal the pretracheal fascia. Careful 
blunt dissection in this plane allows access to the paratracheal 
and subcarinal nodes. A mediastinoscope is introduced for 
direct visualisation and biopsy. Great caution should be used 
in the presence of superior vena caval obstruction. Complica-
tions include pneumothorax and haemorrhage.
MEDIASTINOTOMY
An incision is made through the second intercostal space to 
gain access to some of the mediastinal lymph nodes on the 
affected side. On the left, this includes lymph nodes in the 
para-aortic or subaortic fossa. Damage to the internal mam -
mary artery and the phrenic nerve must be avoided. Mediasti-
nal extension of tumour can also be assessed, for example left 
upper lobe tumours which invade the mediastinum around 
the aortic arch.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 55.15Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 55.16  Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) allows accurate 
detection of enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes for diagnosis and 
staging of lung cancer.
Figure 55.15 Multiple FDG-avid mediastinal lymph nodes (arrowheads) shown on a positr on emission tomography/computed tomography 
scan (main tumour, arrows) (courtesy of Dr Sally Barrington).
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   929 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC930
These techniques may also be used in the diagnosis of 
other mediastinal conditions, including:
 ● lymphoma;
 ● anterior mediastinal tumours;
 ● thymoma;
 ● sarcoid, tuberculosis or any other cause of lymphadenop -
athy.
VATS MEDIASTINAL L YMPH NODE AND LUNG 
BIOPSY
For inaccessible mediastinal lymph nodes, or when diagnosis 
of the lung tumour has not been possible through radiological 
or bronchoscopic techniques, VATS performed through two 
or three ports allows diagnosis of the tumour, staging of the 
mediastinum and gives the opportunity to assess the likely 
operability of the lung cancer.
Surgical approach to lung cancer 
resection
Thoracotomy
Although the most frequent indication for thoracotomy is 
lung cancer, all surgeons dealing with trauma should be able 
to perform a thoracotomy if required. The standard route into 
the thoracic cavity is through a posterolateral thoracotomy . 
The incision is used for access to the:
 ● lung and major bronchi;
 ● pleura;
 ● thoracic aorta;
 ● oesophagus;
 ● posterior mediastinum.
A double-lumen endotracheal tube is used to allow ven -
tilation of one lung while the other is collapsed, to facilitate 
surgery and to protect the non-operated lung and retain con-
trol of ventilation (Figure 55.18).
The patient is turned to the lateral position with the affected 
side up (Figure 55.19). The lower leg is flexed at the hip and 
the knee, with a pillow between the legs. Table supports are used 
to maintain the position and additional strapping is used at the 
hips for stability. The patient’s hips are placed below the break 
point of the operating table to allow opening of the intercos-
tal spaces as the table is angulated. The upper arm may be sup-
ported by a bracket in a position of 90° flexion. The lower arm 
is flexed and positioned near the head. It is important for both 
the surgeon and the anaesthetist to be completely satisfied with 
the position of the patient and the tube and lines at this stage.
 ● The incision passes 1–2 cm below the tip of the scapula, 
and extends posteriorly and superiorly between the medial 
border of the scapula and the spine.
 ● The incision is deepened through the subcutaneous tissues 
to the latissimus dorsi. This muscle is divided with coagu-
lating diathermy, taking care over haemostasis.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 55.17Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Bronchial
in/f_latable cuff
Tracheal
in/f_latable cuff
Figure 55.18 The double-lumen tube permits separate ventilation of 
the right and left lungs.
Double-lumen tube to protect the
underlying lung
90º angles of patient to table,
shoulder, elbow
Incision curves below angle
of scapula
Underlying leg bent
for stability
Upper leg cushioned
Figure 55.19 Correct positioning for thoracotomy.
Figure 55.17 Mediastinoscopy. The mediastinoscope slides down 
immediately in front of the trachea, behind the aortic arch, and behind 
and between the great vessels of the head and neck.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   930 25/10/2017   09:29Neoplasms of the lung 931
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
 ● A plane of dissection is developed manually, deep to the 
scapula and serratus anterior. The ribs can be counted 
down from the highest palpable rib (which is usually the 
second) and the sixth rib periosteum is scored with the 
diathermy near its upper border. A periosteal elevator is 
used to lift the periosteum off the superior border of the 
rib or, alternatively, the intercostal muscle is cut with dia-
thermy just above the rib (Figure 55.20).
 ● This reveals the pleura, which may be entered by blunt 
dissection. A rib spreader is inserted between the ribs and 
opened gently to prevent fracture.
 ● Exposure may be facilitated by dividing the rib at the 
costal angle or by dividing the costotransverse ligament. 
Resection of a rib is not usually required.
 ● The anaesthetist is now able to deflate the affected lung to 
allow a better view of the intrathoracic structures.
In an emergency thoracotomy for penetrating wounds 
of the heart, a more anterior approach is used and no spe -
cialised supporting equipment is required (Figure 55.21). 
The incision is taken down to the fourth or fifth rib with a 
scalpel, and the pleural cavity is opened using scissors. This 
gives rapid access to the left pleural cavity in cases of massive 
left hamothorax and the pericardium if cardiac tamponade 
is supected. A left anterior thoracotomy can be quickly con -
verted to a clamshell or bilateral thoracotomy if necessay.
Following the operation, 24–28 Fr chest drain/s are placed, 
typically through the seventh or eighth intercostal space, 
anterior to the mid-axillary line, so that the patient does not 
lie on them. Even if the site to be drained is posterior, as in 
empyema, the drains are tunnelled to emerge more anteri -
orly for easier management. The thoracotomy is closed using 
paracostal sutures placed around the rib above and below to 
reapproximate the ribs or, alternatively, intercostal muscles 
are sutured to the intercostal muscle below the stripped rib 
with a continuous absorbable suture. The fascia and muscles 
are closed in layers using an absorbable suture. Skin closure is 
a matter of personal preference.
Analgesia is an important aspect of postoperative care, 
and the process may be started prior to thoracotomy with an 
epidural catheter placed by the anaesthetist, or intraopera -
tively by infiltrating the intercostal nerves in the region of the 
incision with a long-acting local anaesthetic via a surgically 
sited paraveretebral catheter. Various strategies have been 
developed to deliver analgesics postoperatively to facilitate a 
normal breathing pattern.
Video assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
Various approaches utilising thoracoscopic techniques can 
be used to gain access to the chest cavity and facilitate lung 
resection. A combination of a smaller thoracotomy incision 
and VATS has been described, but increasingly lung resec-
tions can be performed through one to three port incisons and 
the dissection of hilar structures completed entirely through 
VATS. The technique avoids rib-spreading and appears to 
reduce postoperative pain and length of stay, and aids a speed-
ier recovery.
Surgical management of lung cancer
The principle of surgery is to remove all cancer (the primary 
and the regional lymph nodes) but to conserve as much lung 
as possible. The selection of patients in terms of the stage of 
the lung cancer and fitness to undergo such surgery is para -
mount. Surgery with curative intent is offered to patients with 
early stage lung cancer (T1–3, N0–1) (Table 55.9). Assesment 
of a patient’s  fitness to undergo lung cancer resection involves 
considering premorbid conditions, which can be aided using 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:55.19Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
5
6
7
8
9
Latissimus dorsi
muscle
Serratus anterior
muscle
A
B
C
Figure 55.20 Incision and layers encountered during anterolateral 
thoracotomy. A, The latissimus dorsi is divided in line with the skin 
incision. B, If the serratus anterior is divided, it should be close to 
its attachment to ribs 6, 7 and 8. It can be left intact and mobilised 
along its inferior border. C, The intercostal muscles are stripped off the 
upper border of the rib.
Arm for
anaesthetist’s
access
A sandbag or
dense pillow to
roll the patient
30º 
Arm back
Incision in 5th
intercostal 
space
Figure 55.21 Emergency left anterior thoracotomy for access to the 
heart. This requires no special supports or devices.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   931 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC932
risk scores such as Thorascore, Cardiovascular function and 
Lung function (see BTS guidelines in Assessment of Fitness 
for major thoracic surgery, above, and NICE guidelines in 
Table 55.10). Lung function, in particular, will aid the surgeon 
in selecting the type of procedure offered and the likelihood 
of breathlessness or dyspnoea following lung resection.
Choice of lung resection
SEGMENTECTOMY AND WEDGE RESECTION
Segmentectomy and wedge resections are performed in 
patients with small tumours, and with borderline fitness, 
through thoracotomy or VATS. Each lobe of the lung has 
segments, which allows anatomical dissection and ligation of 
the segmental pulmonary artery, vein and bronchus (segmen-
tectomy) (see Figure 55.2), or non-anatomical excision can 
be performed (wedge resection) combined with removal of 
regional lymph nodes.
LOBECTOMY
Lobectomy remains the treatment of choice for patients with 
early-stage lung cancer. The surgery can be performed via 
thoracotomy or VATS. Following dissection of the fissure and 
hilar structures, the branches of the pulmonary artery and 
veins to the lobe are isolated and ligated. The bronchus is 
usually stapled but can be sewn.
At completion of the operation, the remaining lung is rein-
flated. Some air leak is common and usually settles within a few 
days. One or two intercostal drains are inserted. The patient 
does not routinely need intensive care and postoperative ven-
tilation is best avoided. The 30-day mortality rate is 2–3%, 
with morbidity such as chest infection or cardiac arrhythmia 
at around 10%. The average length of stay is around 5–7 days.
PNEUMONECTOMY
Pneumonectomy is removal of a whole lung and has a higher 
mortality rate (5–8%). The surgeon must be satisfied that the 
patient is fit to tolerate this procedure from the preoperative 
work-up. This procedure is reserved for either centrally placed 
tumours involving the main bronchus or those that straddle 
the fissure. At thoracotomy, inspection of the lung and direct 
palpation of the mass will determine resectability and lymph 
node spread. Fixation of the tumour to the aorta, heart or 
oesophagus implies irresectability. Involvement of the medi -
astinal lymph node chain is associated with a poor prognosis. 
With modern preoperative imaging, resection is abandoned 
in only about 3% of cases.
Pneumonectomy is anatomically more straightforward 
than lobectomy and involves dissecting and ligating the main 
TABLE 55.10 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommendations for assessing fitness for treatment 
with curative intent (including surgery).
Perioperative mortality Consider global risk score, such as Thoracoscore Ensure patient is aware of risk before consenting
Cardiovascular function Assess risk factors and cardiac functional capacity Avoid surgery within 30 days of MI
Optimise primary cardiac treatment and begin secondary 
cardiac prophylaxis as soon as possible
Offer surgery if two or fewer risk factors and good 
cardiac functional capacity
Seek cardiology review if active cardiac condition, three 
or more risk factors or poor cardiac functional capacity
Consider revascularisation before surgery in stable 
angina
Continue anti-ischaemic treatment in perioperative 
period. Discuss perioperative platelet treatment if patient 
has a coronary stent
Lung function Perform spirometry, measure TLCO if 
disproportionate breathlessness or other lung 
pathology, perform segment count and assess 
exercise tolerance 
Offer surgery if normal FEV1 and good exercise tolerance 
or FEV1 or TLCO below 30% and patient accepts the 
risks of dyspnoea
Consider shuttle walk testing (cut-off 400 m) and 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing (cut-off 15 mL/
kg/minute) if moderate to high risk of postoperative 
dyspnoea
Offer radiotherapy with curative intent if lung function 
poor but patient is otherwise suitable for radiotherapy 
with curative intent and volume of irradiated lung is small
From NICE clinical guideline 21, available from: www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/13465/54208/54208.pdf. FEV1, forced expratory volume in 1 s; MI, myocardial 
infarction; TLCO, transfer factor for carbon monoxide.
TABLE 55.9 National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) recommendations for surgery for non-
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
Surgery with curative intent for NSCLC
Offer patients with NSCLC who are fit for surgery, open or 
thoracoscopic lobectomy as the treatment of first choice. If 
complete resection is possible, consider segmentectomy or 
wedge resection for patients with smaller tumours (T1a–b, N0, M0) 
and borderline fitness
Offer more extensive surgery (bronchoangioplastic surgery, 
bilobectomy, pneumonectomy) only when needed to obtain clear 
margins
Perform hilar and mediastinal lymph node sampling or en bloc 
resection for all patients undergoing surgery with curative intent
For T3 NSCLC with chest wall involvement, aim for complete 
resection by extrapleural or en bloc chest wall resection
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   932 25/10/2017   09:29Neoplasms of the lung 933
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
pulmonary artery, the superior and inferior pulmonary veins 
and the main bronchus, which is divided so that no blind 
stump remains (Figure 55.22). The technique of stump clo -
sure is important if a bronchopleural fistula is to be avoided. 
The tissues are carefully handled and the stump is usually 
stapled and sometimes covered using pleura, pericardium or 
a vascular pedicle such as an intercostal muscle. Drainage of 
the space is a matter of debate. Most use an underwater-seal 
drain and either leave it unclamped or unclamp it for 1 min -
ute every hour until the drainage ceases; others prefer not to 
drain. The critical point is that no suction should be applied 
as there is now a sealed space with the mobile mediastinum 
on one side of it. The air in the pneumonectomy space is 
gradually absorbed and the fluid level within the space rises 
(Figure 55.23).
BRONCHOPLASTIC LUNG RESECTIONS
Increasingly, owing to the associated complications and higher 
mortality of a pneumonectomy, preservation of lung tissue is 
being considered, but without compromise of the surgical 
resection margins. Sleeve lung resections involve removing 
a central tumour that is invading a major bronchus, such as 
the left or right main bronchus, together with the lobe of the 
lung involved, with re-anastomosis of the cut major bonchus 
to the remaining lobar bronchus. This type of operation is 
particularly useful in dealing with tumours such as carcinoids 
that, despite low-grade malignant potential, are often found 
in a major bronchus.
Complications of lung resection
 ● Bleeding. Bleeding should be avoidable by the use of a 
careful surgical technique, but may be severe in the pres -
ence of dense adhesions.
 ● Respiratory infection. Many of these patients are 
ex-smokers and therefore basal collapse and hypoxaemia 
are common postoperatively.
 ● Persistent air leak. Chest drains are placed at the time of 
surgery to deal with the air leak. Rarely, the air leak persists 
and the remaining lung does not expand. Re- thoracotomy 
may then be necessary to seal the leak.
 ● Bronchopleural fistula. This is a serious complication. 
Following pneumonectomy the space left behind is ini -
tially filled with air. This is slowly reabsorbed and the 
space fills with tissue fluid. The fluid level rises until the air 
is finally reabsorbed. Dehiscence of the bronchial stump 
leads to the development of a bronchopleural fistula and 
the fluid in the space (which is almost inevitably infected) 
is expectorated in large quantities. This complication has 
a high morbidity and mortality rate. The patient is nursed 
sitting up and turned so that the affected space is depen -
dent, to prevent infected fluid from entering the remain -
ing lung while arrangements are made to site a pleural 
drain. This should be connected to an underwater seal but 
not suction. Bronchopleural fistulas are unlikely to resolve 
spontaneously and management is highly specialised.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Patients have limited respiratory reserve following lung resec-
tion, so infection and fluid overload are to be avoided. Once 
air leaks have settled, the drains are removed. Mobilisation, 
breathing exercises and regular physiotherapy are begun as 
soon as the patient’s condition permits.
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN
It is important to deal with post-thoracotomy pain effectively 
so that a normal breathing pattern and gas exchange are 
achieved in the early postoperative period. Three strategies 
are routinely used in combination:
 ● patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) with intravenous 
boluses of opiates;
 ● paravertebral/extrapleural or epidural catheter-delivered 
local anaesthetic;
 ● background oral analgesia with paracetamol.
Long-term post-thoracotomy pain can be reduced by 
careful attention to detail during the operation. Sources of 
Superior vena cava
Right main bronchus
Pulmonary artery
Azygos vein
Oesophagus
Vagus nerve
Phrenic nerve
Pulmonary veins
Right atrium
Diaphragm
Figure 55.22 Mediastinal structures after removal of the right lung.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   933 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC934
avoidable chronic pain include rib fracture and the entrap -
ment of intercostal nerves during wound closure.
LUNG METASTASES
For all malignancies, the lung is the most common site of 
metastases, that often develop through haemotogenous 
spread. The presence of metastases is regarded as a sign of 
advanced disease and few curative treatment options exist, 
however surgical resection of lung metastases may result in 
a significant survival advantage, particularly with metastases 
from solid tumours such as colorectal cancer. This has not 
yet been proven in the context of a randomised controlled 
trial. The selection criteria often used when considering lung 
metastasectomy include control of primary tumour; no evi -
dence of metastases outside the lung; possibility of complete 
resection utilising lung sparing techniques; and acceptable 
operative risks with adequate pulmonary function.
Various approaches can be considered, though VATS is 
increasingly favoured over thoracotomy owing to reduced 
postoperative pain and length of stay, and therefore speedier 
recovery. The disadvantage of VATS is the inability to palpate 
and evaluate the lung in its entirety to locate other nodules 
deeper within the lung parenchyma, particularly those not 
identified on prior CT imaging. Median sternotomy can also 
be considered if there are bilateral lung metastases, located 
anteriorly or in the upper lobes, as this may be less painful 
than considering bilateral thoracotomies. The main principle 
when resecting lung metastases is to utilise lung-sparing tech-
niques as much as possible, e.g. wedge resections rather than 
lobectomy, because it is likely that later reoperations to resect 
new metastases may be necessary.
Long-term outcome depends on the primary tumour type, 
with germ-cell tumours having the best outcome. Patients 
with epithelial tumours (carcinomas) generally have a 
30–40% 5-year survival, as reported in several retrospective 
series.
BENIGN LUNG TUMOURS
Benign tumours of the lung are uncommon and account 
for fewer than 15% of solitary lesions seen on chest radio -
graphs. A peripheral tumour usually causes no symptoms 
until it is large; a central tumour may present with haemop -
tysis and signs of bronchial obstruction while still small. A 
tumour is likely to be benign if it has not increased in size 
on chest radiographs for more than 2  years or it has some 
degree of calcification; however, a tissue diagnosis is usually 
pursued.
Most benign nodules are granulomas (tuberculosis or his-
toplasmosis). The most common benign tumour is a hamar-
toma, a developmental abnormality containing mesothelial 
and endothelial elements. Diagnosis (and definitive treat -
ment) is achieved by excision of the lesion. Any of the meso-
dermal elements of the lung may form a mesodermal tumour 
(chondroma, lipoma, leiomyoma). Deposits of amyloid may 
have a similar radiographic appearance to a nodule (pseudo -
tumour).
Figure 55.23 Chest radiographs (a) pre- and (b) post-pneumonec-
tomy, with rising fluid level (c) in the left haemothorax.
(a)
(b)
(c)
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   934 25/10/2017   09:29The mediastinum 935
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
THE MEDIASTINUM
The mediastinum refers to the central area in the chest 
between the thoracic inlet and the diaphragm, between the 
right and left pleural surfaces, and which extends from the 
inner aspect of the sternum to the vertebral column. It con -
tains the heart, great vessels, trachea and oesophagus, and is 
arbitrarily subdivided into compartments (superior, inferior, 
anterior, middle and posterior). Many of the regional lymph 
node chains draining the chest and its organs are also found 
in the mediastinum. Various surgical procedures to approach 
structures, and particularly lymph nodes, in the mediastinum 
are performed, usually as diagnostic procedures. The surgi-
cal approach when mediastinal tumours require resection 
depends on the antomical location of the tumour (Figure 
55.24) and includes median sternotomy for anterior medias -
tinal pathology, thoracotomy or VATS for posterior mediasti-
nal pathology and transcervical (neck incisions) for superior 
mediastinal pathology. The middle mediastinum can usually 
be approached through thoracotomy or VATS.
Primary tumours of the mediastinum
Thymoma, neurogenic tumours, germ cell tumours and lym -
phoma are the usual primary tumours of the mediastinum.
 ● Thymoma. This is the most common mediastinal 
tumour, accounting for 25% of the total, and is derived 
from the thymus gland (Figure 55.25). Thymomas vary 
in behaviour from benign to aggressively invasive, as 
reflected in the Masoaka classification system used to 
stage thymomas (Table 55.11). They are often related to 
mysthenia gravis (MG), a neuromusclar condition which 
can have a high associated incidence of thymomas, and 
interestingly may respond to excision of the thymus gland even when the gland has no associated thymoma present. 
The only reliable indicator of malignancy is capsular inva-
sion. Diagnosis and treatment are best achieved by com -
plete thymectomy, which is usually performed as a median 
sternotomy. However, if the thymoma is small or when 
the patient has MG and the thymus is being excised as 
a treatment, a transcervical approach with or without an 
additional VATS procedure can be performed.
 ● Germ cell tumour. The anterior mediastinum is the most 
common site of extragonadal germ cell tumours. They  
account for 13% of all mediastinal masses and cysts and 
contain elements from all three cell types (mesoderm, 
endoderm and ectoderm). They tend to present in young 
adults and 75% are benign and cystic, although they may 
cause compression of neighbouring structures; hence, der-
moid cysts are best excised. Malignancy is suspected if ele-
vated levels of serum alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic 
gonadotrophin and carcinoembryonic antigen are detected. 
After initial treatment with chemotherapy, a patient with 
tumour marker normalisation and a persistent mass on CT 
may be considered for surgical resection. If tumour markers 
fail to normalise, further chemotherapy is usually offered.
 ● Lymphoma. Lymphoma is a common cause of a mediasti -
nal mass lesion, particularly in the anterior mediastinum, 
and can lead to superior vena cava obstruction or other 
symptoms of local compression. The main treatment is 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 55.23Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Superior
mediastinum
Lymphoma
Thyroid
Parathyroid
Posterior
mediastinum
Neurogenic
tumours
Cystic lesions
Mesenchymal
tumours
Middle
mediastinum
Cystic lesions
Lymphoma
Mesenchymal
tumours
Anterior
mediastinum
Thymoma
Lymphoma
Germ cell tumour
Figure 55.24 Mediastinal pathology. Subdivisions of the mediasti -
num with the most common mediastinal masses.
Figure 55.25 Computed tomography scan showing a thymoma pre-
senting as a mediastinal mass.
TABLE 55.11 Masaoka thymoma staging system.
Stage Description
I Macroscopically completely encapsulated
Microscopically no capsular invasion
II Macroscopic invasion into surrounding fatty tissue or 
mediastinal pleura
Microscopic invasion into the capsule
III Macroscopic invasion into neighbouring organs 
(pericardium, great vessels, lungs)
IVA Pleural or pericardial dissemination
IVB Lymphogenous or haematogenous metastasis
After Masaoka A et al., Cancer 1981; 48: 2485.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   935 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC936
chemotherapy, and surgery is rarely required apart from 
obtaining tissue for diagnosis.
 ● Mesenchymal tumours . Lipomas are common in the 
anterior mediastinum. Other mesenchymal tumours are 
very rare.
 ● Thyroid. Ectopic thyroid (and parathyroid) tissue may be 
found in the anterior mediastinum but usually the mass 
is an extension of a thyroid lesion (retrosternal goitre). 
Excision of retrosternal thyroids may be required if there is 
local airway compression and stridor and can be performed 
via a transcervical incision, but occasionally median ster -
notomy may be required.
 ● Neurogenic tumours. These may derive from the sym -
pathetic nervous system or the peripheral nerves and are 
more prevalent in the posterior mediastinum. They may 
be painful but are more often discovered accidentally on 
routine chest radiography and can be quite large (Figure 
55.26). They include neuroblastoma in childhood, and 
Schwannomas and neurofibromas in adults, which are 
usually benign. Phaeochromocytoma arises from the sym-
pathetic chain and produces the characteristic endocrine 
syndrome. Excision of neurogenic tumours is generally 
recommended, particularly if the patient is developing 
symptoms. This can be performed through a thoracotomy, 
though for smaller tumours a VATS approach can be used 
(Figure 55.27).
 ● Enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes are commonly involved 
by metastatic tumour, mimicking a primary mediastinal 
lesion. Symptoms are generally secondary to compression 
or invasion of a structure within the mediastinum. Surgery 
such as mediastinoscopy is reserved for diagnosis only.
Other conditions of the mediastinum
Many of the primary tumours such as neurogenic tumours and 
germ cell tumours can present as cysts or have a cystic quality. 
In addition, the mediastinum can contain other cysts, often 
with an embyrological aetiology . Thymic cysts, pericardial 
cysts, bronchogenic and foregut cysts can all present asymp-
tomatically or with local compression (Figure 55.28). Sur -
gical excision is recommended if diagnosis is unclear or the 
patient has symptoms.
MEDICAL CONDITIONS FOR 
WHICH SURGERY MAY BE 
REQUIRED
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiechtasis is chronic irreversible dilatation of the 
medium- sized bronchi, which may occur following a suppur -
ative pneumonia or bronchial obstruction. It is the patho-
logical end stage of a range of conditions. If generalised it is 
almost never considered for surgical resection. Cases caused 
by whooping cough and measles are decreasing in frequency 
in resource-rich countries.
Treatment
Removal of the bronchiectatic part of the lung for symptoms 
of bleeding, recurrent infection or copious symptoms can be 
very effective when the disease is localised.
Figure 55.26 Computed tomography scan showing a right-sided 
paravertebral neurogenic tumour.
Theodor Schwann , 1810–1882, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology successively at Louvain (1839–1848) and Liege, Belgium (1849–1888).
Figure 55.27 Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) image of 
a neurogenic tumour attached to the posterolateral chest wall prior 
to excision.
Figure 55.28 Computed tomography scan of the chest showing a 
bronchogenic cyst splaying the carina.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   936 25/10/2017   09:29Medical conditions for which surgery may be r equired 937
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Lung abscess
The causes of lung abscess are shown in Table 55.12. The chest 
radiograph shows a cavity with a fluid level or in myecetoma 
a fungal ball. Most acute abscesses resolve with appropriate 
antibiotic therapy and postural drainage. Surgery is avoided. 
Small radiologically sited drains are used sometimes in the 
intensive care unit.
veins in the majority of cases. The segment becomes cystic 
and infected, resulting in the common appearance of a solid 
lung mass that may be homogeneous or heterogeneous, occa-
sionally with cystic changes on CT scan. Interlobar seques -
tration occurs within the lung substance. It may present with 
recurrent chest infections and/or haemoptysis. Patients with 
extralobar sequestration are usually asymptomatic because air 
spaces are not present, and therefore it usually presents as an 
incidental finding.
Lung cysts
Developmental lung cysts have a tendency to become 
infected. Acquired lung cysts may contain air or fluid and may 
be single or multiple. Pulmonary hydatid disease is a cause 
in endemic areas. Air cysts (bullae) may be spontaneous but 
may be secondary to emphysematous degeneration (Figure 
55.29).
TABLE 55.12 Causes of lung abscess.
Specific pneumonia Streptococcal
Staphylococcal
Pneumococcal
Klebsiella spp.
Anaerobic
Bronchial obstruction Carcinoma
Carcinoid
Foreign body
Postoperative atelectasis
Chronic respiratory sepsis Sinusitis
Tonsillitis
Dental infection
Septicaemia
Penetrating lung injury
Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs , 1834–1913, Professor of Bacteriology successively at Prague, Czech Republic; Zurich, Switzerland; and The Rush Medical Col-
lege, Chicago, IL, USA.
Diagnosis
Surgical procedures may be necessary to establish the diagno-
sis if suspected clinically but sputum or pus cultures are per -
sistently negative.
Complications such as an aspergilloma in a chronic cavity 
causing life-threatening haemoptysis may require lobectomy.
Pulmonary sequestration
This describes a section of non-functional lung separated from 
the normal bronchial connection with other abnormalities of 
development, which often include a direct systemic arterial 
supply from the aorta. Venous return is to the pulmomary 
Summary box 55.6
Tuberculosis: indications for surgery
●● Suspicious lesion on chest radiograph in which neoplasia 
cannot be excluded
●● Chronic tuberculous abscess, resistant to chemotherapy
●● Aspergilloma within a tuberculous cavity
●● Life-threatening haemoptysis
Figure 55.29 (a) A large solitary bulla seen on videothoracoscopy. 
(b) The bulla deflated and rolled in preparation for staple resection.
(a)
(b)
Tuberculosis
Surgery is rarely indicated for tuberculosis in resource-rich 
countries but, when it is, it must be combined with adequate 
antitubercular chemotherapy or the benefit of surgery will 
be lost.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   937 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC938
LUNG TRANSPLANTATION (SEE 
ALSO CHAPTER 82)
Lung transplantation is an established therapy for those with 
end-stage parenchymal or pulmonary vascular disease; it is 
limited by the number of donor lungs available.
CHEST TRAUMA
The approach to trauma must be methodical and exact, 
because the signs, particularly in the presence of other injury, 
may easily be missed. The general principles of resuscitation 
and ATLS (Advanced Trauma and Life Support) must be 
 followed.
Thoracic trauma is responsible for over 70% of all deaths 
following road traffic accidents. Blunt trauma to the chest in 
isolation is fatal in 10% of cases, rising to 30% if other injuries 
are present. The indications for emergency room thoractomy 
in blunt chest trauma include massive haemothorax, sus -
pected cardiac tamponade and witnessed cardiac arrest in the 
resuscitation area. Success rates are low. Penetrating thoracic 
wounds vary according to the prevalence of civil violence, 
with a mortality rate of 3% for simple stabbing to 15% for 
gunshot wounds. The indications for emergency room thora-
cotomy are similar to those for blunt chest trauma. The 
standard approach is a left anterior thoracotomy, unless the 
penetrating injury is in the right chest, however it may be 
necessary to extend the incision to bilateral thoracotomies or 
a clampshell incision.
Early deaths after thoracic trauma are caused by hypoxae-
mia, hypovolaemia and tamponade. The first steps in treating 
such patients should be to diagnose and treat these problems 
as early as possible because they may be readily corrected. 
Young patients have a large physiological reserve, and seri -
ous injury may be overlooked until this reserve is used up, 
by which time the situation is critical and may be irretriev -
able. The best approach is to remain highly suspicious if life-  
threatening conditions are to be anticipated and treated. 
Early consultation with a regional thoracic centre is advised 
in cases of doubt. In an emergency it is essential that experi -
enced help is summoned.
Management of chest trauma is covered in detail in Chap-
ter 27.
THE DIAPHRAGM
The diaphragm is the fibromuscular structure separating the 
thorax from the abdomen.
Disorders of the diaphragm
Disorders of the diaphragm can be broadly classified as dis -
orders of innervation, leading to paralysis of the diaphragm, 
with elevation and reduction of thoracic volume leading to 
breathlessness, and disorders of anatomy, which are further 
categorised into congenital diaphragmatic hernias or acquired 
hernias, usually secondary to trauma. There are two well-  
recognised congenital sites where abdominal viscera can 
 herniate into the chest (Figures 55.30 and 55.31).
 ● The foramen of Morgagni: a hernia in the anterior part 
of the diaphragm with a defect between the sternal and 
costal attachments. The most commonly involved viscus 
is the transverse colon.
 ● The foramen of Bochdalek: through the dome of the dia-
phragm posteriorly.
Traumatic rupture of the diaphragm may occur with blunt 
trauma. Unless there is severe bleeding or strangulation of 
the viscera it is best managed after an interval. In a severely 
injured patient being ventilated it can wait until other inju -
ries are dealt with and weaning from the ventilator is being 
considered.
When the diaphragm is breached, as in anatomical dis -
orders, repair with either primary closure or with a mesh is 
usually possible via a thoracotomy. Diaphragmatic paralysis, 
particularly idiopathic unilateral paralysis, can be treated by 
plication, returning the diaphragm to a lower position and 
improving thoracic volume.
DISORDERS OF THE CHEST 
WALL
Tumours of the chest wall
These can be tumours of any component of the chest wall, i.e. 
bone, cartilage and soft tissue. They are treated similarly to 
those that occur at other sites and require specialist surgical 
input only if major resection and chest wall reconstruction 
are contemplated.
Giovanni Battista Morgagni , 1682–1771, Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy for 59 years, regarded as ‘the founder of Morbid Anatomy’.
Victor Alexander Bochdalek , 1801–1883, Professor of Anatomy, Prague, Czech Republic.
1
3
4
2
Figure 55.30 Diagram of sites of hernias. The usual sites of con -
genital diaphragmatic hernia: 1, foramen of Morgagni; 2, oesophageal 
hiatus; 3, foramen of Bochdalek (pleuroperitoneal hernia); 4, dome.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   938 25/10/2017   09:29Disorders of the chest wall 939
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC
Other diseases of the chest wall
Congenital abnormalities are often incidental findings on 
chest radiography (e.g. bifid rib), but there are some import -
ant exceptions.
Cervical rib and thoracic outlet syndrome
This rib is usually represented by a fibrous band originating 
from the seventh cervical vertebra and inserting onto the first 
thoracic rib. It may be asymptomatic, but because the sub -
clavian artery and brachial plexus course over it a variety of 
symptoms may occur. The lower trunk of the plexus (mainly 
T1) is compressed, leading to wasting of the interossei and 
altered sensation in the T1 distribution. Compression of the 
subclavian artery may result in a poststenotic dilatation with 
thrombus and embolus formation. The diagnosis, assessment 
and surgery are fraught with uncertainties and are best left to 
those with a well-developed interest in this problem.
Pectus excavatum
The sternum is depressed, with a dish-shaped deformity of 
the anterior portions of the ribs on one or both sides. It is 
never a cause of respiratory problems. It can be repaired to 
improve its cosmetic appearance either as an open proce -
dure (the Ravitch procedure) which involves resecting the 
affected costal cartilages and mobilising the sternum, or as a 
minimally invasive technique, the Nuss procedure. A metal 
bar is paced behind the sternum to hold this central panel in 
its new position and has to be removed after a period of time 
(Figure 55.32).
Figure 55.31  Chest x-ray of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
(a) Colon occupying a Morgagni hernia (courtesy of Dr Oliver Smith, 
Birmingham, UK). (b) Foramen of Bochdalek hernia on the left side in 
an infant. The left pleural cavity is occupied by intestine, the medias -
tinum is displaced to the right and the right lung is aerated very little.
Mark M Ravitch , 1910–1989, paediatric surgeon, University of Pittsburg, PA, USA.
Donald Nuss , contemporary, paediatric surgeon, Norfolk, VA, USA, described this technique in 1987.
Figure 55.32 (a) Insertion of preformed bar placed thoracoscopi -
cally beneath the pectus excavatum. (b) Chest x-ray following inser-
tion of a metal bar bracing the sternum forward (the Nuss procedure).
(a) (a)
(b)
(b)
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   939 25/10/2017   09:29CHAPTER 55  The thorax
PART 9 | CARDIOTHORACIC940
Pectus carinatum (pigeon chest)
In this condition the sternum is elevated above the level of 
the ribs and treatment is offered for cosmetic reasons. The 
sternum is mobilised and allowed to fall back into place.
It often comes to light during the growth spurt at adoles -
cence when, of course, the teenager is particularly sensitive 
about appearance. Most patients are asymptomatic and the 
only justification for treatment is on cosmetic grounds. Some 
surgeons make a very good case for this but the risk of morbid-
ity and of a less than perfect result must be clearly spelt out to 
the patient and his/her parents. Surgery involves mobilising 
the sternum with the costal cartilages so that the sternum can 
be flattened to a more anatomical position. Surgery is best left 
until the late teens, when further growth of the chest wall is 
unlikely.
FURTHER READING
Baas P , Fennell D, Kerr KM et al . Malignant pleural mesothelioma: 
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and 
follow-up. Ann Oncol 2015; 26 (Suppl 5): v31–9.
BTS Pleural Disease Guideline Group. British Thoracic Society Pleural 
Disease Guideline 2010. Thorax, 2010; 65(Suppl 2): 1–76.
Goldstraw P , Chansky K, Crowley J et al. The IASLC Lung Cancer Stag-
ing Project: proposals for revision of the TNM stage groupings in 
the forthcoming (eighth) edition of the TNM classification for lung 
cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2016; 11(1): 39–51.
Lim E, Baldwin D, Beckles M et al . Guidelines on the radical man-
agement of patients with lung cancer. Thorax 2010; 65(Suppl 3): 
iii1–27.
NICE. The diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer . National Institute for 
Health and Clinical Excellence. NICE clinical guideline 121, 2011. 
Available at: guidance.nice.org.uk/cg121
Vansteenkiste J, De Ruysscher D, Eberhardt WEE et al. Early and local-
ly advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): ESMO Clinical 
Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann 
 Oncol 2013; 24(Suppl 6): vi89–98.
09_55-B&L27_Pt9_Ch55.indd   940 25/10/2017   09:29PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
56 Arterial disorders........................................................................................ 942
57 Venous disorders ....................................................................................... 969
58 Lymphatic disorders ................................................................................ 995
Vascular
10
10_56A-B&L27_Pt10.indd   941 25/10/2017   09:30Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
56Chapter
Arterial disorders
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The nature and associated features of occlusive 
peripheral arterial disease
 • The investigation and treatment options for occlusive 
peripheral arterial disease
 • The principles of management of the severely ischaemic 
limb
 • The nature and presentation of peripheral aneurysmal 
disease, particularly of the abdominal aorta
 • The investigation and treatment options for peripheral 
aneurysmal disease
 • The arteritides and vasospastic disorders
INTRODUCTION
Arterial disorders represent the most common cause of mor -
bidity and death in Western societies. Much of this is due to 
the effects of atheroma on the arteries supplying the heart 
muscle (coronary thrombosis and myocardial infarction) and 
brain (stroke), although atheroma is also common at other 
sites. This chapter addresses diseases that are typically the 
province of the vascular surgeon, namely those affecting the 
peripheral arterial system: vascular disease that alters the nor-
mal structure and function of the aorta, its visceral branches 
and the arteries of the lower extremity.
ARTERIAL STENOSIS AND 
OCCLUSION
Cause and effect
Peripheral arterial stenosis or occlusion is predominantly 
caused by atherosclerosis and/or thromboembolic disease, 
but may also occur as a result of trauma, particularly in the 
younger adult. Stenosis or occlusion produces symptoms and 
signs that are related to the organ supplied by the artery: e.g. 
lower limb – claudication, rest pain and gangrene; brain – 
transient ischaemic attacks and stroke; myocardium – angina 
and myocardial infarction; kidney – hypertension and renal 
failure (Figure 56.1); intestine – abdominal pain and infarc -
tion. The severity of the symptoms is related to the size of the 
vessel occluded and whether the stenosis or occlusion occurs 
suddenly (acute) in a previously normal artery or gradually 
(chronic) with progressive narrowing of the artery over time. 
In chronic arterial narrowing, a collateral circulation may 
develop and provide an alternative route for blood flow that 
reduces symptoms until a critical stenosis or occlusion has 
developed (Figure 56.2).
Figure 56.1 Renal artery stenosis. Angiogram by retrograde femoral 
catheterisation. Note the poststenotic dilatation.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   942 25/10/2017   09:31Arterial stenosis and occlusion 943
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Features of chronic arterial stenosis 
or occlusion in the leg
Intermittent claudication
Intermittent claudication occurs as a result of anaerobic mus-
cle metabolism and is classically described as debilitating 
cramp-like pain felt in the muscles that is:
 ● reliably brought on by walking;
 ● not present on taking the first step (unlike osteoarthritis);
 ● reliably relieved by rest both in the standing and sitting 
positions; usually within 5 minutes (unlike nerve com -
pression from a lumbar intervertebral disc prolapse or 
osteoarthritis of the spine or spinal stenosis, which are 
typically relieved only when resting in the sitting position 
for greater than 5 minutes).
The distance that a patient is able to walk without stop -
ping varies (claudication distance) only slightly from day to 
day. It is decreased by increasing the work demands and hence 
oxygen requirements of the muscles affected, e.g. walking up 
hill, increasing the speed of walking and/or carrying heavy 
weights, and secondly by general health conditions that 
reduce the oxygen delivery capacity of the arterial system, e.g. 
anaemia or heart failure.
The muscle group affected by claudication is classically 
one anatomical level below the level of arterial disease and 
is usually felt in the calf because the superficial femoral 
artery is the most commonly affected artery (70% of cases). 
Aorto-iliac disease (30% of cases) may cause thigh or buttock 
claudication. Buttock claudication in association with sexual 
impotence resulting from arterial insufficiency is eponymously 
called Leriche’s syndrome. It is very rare.
Rest pain
As disease progression occurs the claudication distance 
decreases and perfusion to the leg may be so severely compro-
mised that anaerobic respiration occurs even at rest, typically 
affecting the foot and/or calf. The pain is exacerbated by lying 
down or elevation of the foot due to loss of the gravitational 
effects on perfusion pressure in the foot. The patient charac -
teristically describes pain that is worse at night and may be 
lessened by hanging the foot out of bed or by sleeping in a 
chair (effects of gravity restored). Even the pressure of bed -
clothes on the foot may make the pain worse.
Ulceration and gangrene
Ulceration occurs with severe arterial insufficiency and 
may present as painful erosion between toes or as shallow, 
non-healing ulcers on the dorsum of the feet, on the shins and 
especially around the malleoli. The blackened mummified tis-
sues of frank gangrene are unmistakable (Figure 56.3), and 
superadded infection often makes the gangrene wet. Patients 
with rest pain and/or ulceration/gangrene – critical limb isch-
aemia – should be considered to have an imminently threat -
ened leg and require urgent vascular assessment/intervention.
Colour, temperature, sensation and 
movement
Unlike an acutely ischaemic foot that is often cold, white, 
paralysed and insensate, a chronically ischaemic limb tends 
to equilibrate with the temperature of its surroundings and 
may feel quite warm under the bedclothes. Chronic isch -
aemia does not produce paralysis and sensation is usually 
intact. Patients with critical limb ischaemia who have been 
waiting for a consultation with their leg in dependence may 
have a red swollen foot that may be mistaken for cellulitis by 
the unwary clinician. However, elevation of the limb reveals 
the severity of the ischaemia, with venous guttering and foot 
pallor that changes to a red/purple colour when the limb is 
allowed to hang down again (dependent rubor or the sunset 
foot sign) (Figure 56.4). The capillary refill time may be elic-
ited by pressing the skin of the heel or toe causing blanching 
Claudication  from the Latin claudicare – to limp. The Roman emperor Claudius (10 BC to 54 AD) walked with a limp, which was possibly due to poliomyelitis.
Rene Leriche , 1879–1955, Professor of Surgery, Strasbourg, France, described this syndrome.
Figure 56.2 Right superficial femoral stenosis. Left superficial fem -
oral occlusion with collateral vessels present, causing claudication.
Figure 56.3 Severe chronic ischaemia with dry gangrene.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   943 25/10/2017   09:31CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR944
(press for 5 seconds) and then releasing to allow colour to 
return; normally this takes 2–3 seconds but may be prolonged 
to 10 seconds in severe ischaemia.
Arterial pulses
It is standard practice to examine the femoral, popliteal, 
posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries together with the 
abdomen for an aortic aneurysm or renal artery bruit, which 
may coexist with lower limb occlusive disease. Diminution of 
a femoral and/or popliteal pulse can often be appreciated by 
comparing it with its opposite number; however, pedal pulses 
are either clinically palpable or absent. Popliteal pulses are 
often difficult to feel; a popliteal artery aneurysm should be 
suspected if the popliteal pulse is prominent with concomi -
tant loss of the natural concavity of the popliteal fossa. Pulsa-
tion distal to an arterial occlusion is usually absent although 
the presence of a highly developed collateral circulation may 
allow distal pulses to be palpable – this is most likely to occur 
with an iliac stenosis. In this case, exercise (walking until 
claudication develops) usually causes the pulse to disappear as 
vasodilation occurs below the obstruction, causing the pulse 
pressure to reduce. An arterial bruit, heard on auscultation 
over the pulse, indicates turbulent flow and suggests a steno -
sis. It is an unreliable clinical sign as tight stenoses often do 
not have bruits. A continuous ‘machinery’ murmur over an 
artery usually indicates an arteriovenous fistula.
Relationship of clinical findings to site of 
disease
In most cases the site of arterial obstruction can be deter -
mined from the symptoms and signs (Table 56.1). Severe 
ischaemia (rest pain, ulceration, gangrene) is usually caused 
by multilevel disease, e.g. iliac and femoropopliteal disease.
Figure 56.4 Colour changes with elevation (a) and dependency (b).
TABLE 56.1 Relationship of clinical findings to site of 
disease.
Aortoiliac 
obstruction
Claudication in buttocks, thighs and calves
Femoral and distal pulses absent in both limbs
Bruit over aortoiliac region
Impotence (Leriche)
Iliac obstruction Unilateral claudication in the thigh and calf 
and sometimes the buttock
Bruit over the iliac region
Unilateral absence of femoral and distal 
pulses
Femoropopliteal 
obstruction
Unilateral claudication in the calf
Femoral pulse palpable with absent unilateral 
distal pulses
Distal obstruction Femoral and popliteal pulses palpable
Ankle pulses absent
Claudication in calf and foot
Summary box 56.1
Features of chronic lower limb arterial stenosis or 
occlusion
●● Intermittent claudication
●● Rest pain
●● Dependent rubor or sunset foot
●● Ulceration
●● Gangrene
●● Arterial pulsation diminished or absent
●● Arterial bruit
●● Slow capillary refilling
(a) (b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   944 25/10/2017   09:31Arterial stenosis and occlusion 945
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Investigation of arterial occlusive 
disease
Most patients with symptoms of arterial disease do not need 
invasive treatment, such as angioplasty or surgical reconstruc-
tion, and the decision whether or not to intervene can often 
be made without recourse to special investigations. When fur-
ther investigation is indicated, the purpose is to confirm the 
presence and severity of peripheral arterial disease, identify 
the anatomical location of disease and assess the suitability of 
the patient for intervention.
General investigation
Patients with arterial disease tend to be elderly and athero -
sclerosis is often a multisystem disease process; the presence 
of arterial disease in the leg is suggestive of disease in other 
arterial trees, including the coronary (50%) and cerebral (25–
50%). Many patients have other age-related diseases, such as 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and malignancy, that 
may impact on both their symptoms and suitability for inter -
vention. Blood tests to exclude anaemia, diabetes, renal dis -
ease and lipid abnormalities should include a full blood count, 
blood glucose, lipid profile and serum urea and electrolytes. 
High blood viscosity (polycythaemia and thrombocythaemia) 
may be caused by smoking but may also be associated with 
cancer; renal impairment (raised serum creatinine and low 
estimated glomerular filtration rate) may be caused by drugs 
and may be exacerbated by intravenous contrast agents used 
during angiography.
Electrocardiography (ECG) may show coronary isch-
aemia, left ventricular hypertrophy or a cardiac dysrhythmia 
although a normal ECG does not rule out these conditions. 
More information may be gained by an echocardiogram or 
exercise testing. Arterial blood gases and pulmonary function 
test may be appropriate in patients with severe lung disease.
Doppler ultrasound blood flow detection
A hand-held Doppler ultrasound probe is very useful in the 
assessment of occlusive arterial disease (Figures 56.5  and 
56.6). A continuous-wave ultrasound signal is transmitted 
from the probe at an artery, and a receiver within the probe 
itself picks up the reflected beam. The change in frequency 
in the reflected beam compared with that of the transmitted 
beam is due to the Doppler shift, resulting from the reflection 
of the beam by moving blood cells. The frequency change 
may be converted into an audio signal that is typically pulsa -
tile. Doppler ultrasound equipment can be used in conjunc -
tion with a sphygmomanometer to assess systolic pressure in 
small vessels. This is possible even when the arterial pulse 
cannot be palpated. Both the pressure and signal quality are 
important; a normal artery has a triphasic signal that can be 
detected by a trained observer. However, although the pres -
ence of a Doppler signal indicates moving blood, it does not 
necessarily indicate that the blood flow is sufficient to main -
tain limb viability and prevent limb loss.
Quantitative assessment can be performed at the bedside 
by measuring the ankle–brachial pressure index (ABPI); the 
ratio of systolic pressure at the ankle to that in the ipsilateral 
arm. The highest pressure in the dorsalis pedis, posterior tibial 
or peroneal artery serves as the numerator, with the highest 
brachial systolic pressure being the denominator. The nor -
mal resting ABPI is 0.9–1.3; values below 0.9 indicate some 
degree of arterial obstruction (claudication), <0.5 suggests 
rest pain and <0.3 indicates imminent necrosis. However, the 
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1856, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
Figure 56.5 Simple hand-held Doppler ultrasound probe.
Figure 56.6  Hand-held Doppler probe and sphygmomanometer 
used to determine systolic pressur e in the dorsalis pedis artery, as 
part of assessing the ankle–brachial pressure index.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   945 25/10/2017   09:31CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR946
values are merely a guide and normal values may be present 
with intermittent claudication. Retesting after exercise to 
the onset of pain can be useful; a drop in the resting ABPI 
of >20% after exercise is indicative of flow-limiting arterial 
disease. Artificially high ABPI readings (>1.3) can be caused 
by calcified, incompressible arteries that are often found in 
diabetic patients.
Duplex scanning
This major non-invasive technique uses B-mode ultrasound 
to provide an image of vessels (Figures 56.7 and 56.8). The 
image is created because of the varying ability of different tis-
sues to reflect the ultrasound beam. A second ultrasound beam 
is then used to insonate the imaged vessel and the Doppler 
shift obtained is analysed by a computer. Most scanners now 
have colour coding, which allows detailed visualisation of 
blood flow, turbulence, etc. Different colours indicate changes 
in direction and velocity of flow, with areas of high flow usu -
ally indicating a stenosis. In experienced hands, duplex scan-
ning is as accurate as angiography and has the advantages of 
cost-effectiveness and safety. However, the aortoiliac segment 
can be difficult to visualise particularly in obese patients. A 
computed tomography (CT) angiogram can provide better 
imaging of this segment in these cases (see below).
Digital subtraction percutaneous 
angiography
Digital subtraction percutaneous angiography (DSA) involves 
injection of a radio-opaque dye into the arterial tree by a per-
cutaneous catheter metho d (Seldinger technique), usually 
involving the femoral artery (Figures 56.9 and 56.10). The 
images obtained are digitalised by computer and the extrane-
ous background (bone, soft tissues, etc.) is removed to pro -
vide clearer images. The benefits of DSA are that it provides 
dynamic arterial flow information and can be combined with 
a definitive endovascular intervention when indicated. How-
ever, it is associated with potential complications including 
Figure 56.7 Colour duplex scanner.
Figure 56.8 Colour duplex scan of carotid vessels in the neck show-
ing stenosis at the common carotid bifur cation (courtesy of Dr Paul 
Allan, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, UK).
Figure 56.9  Seldinger needle and guidewir e for introducing an 
arterial catheter.
Sven Ivar Seldinger , 1921–1998, radiologist, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, introduced percutaneous arterial catheterisation in 1956.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   946 25/10/2017   09:31Arterial stenosis and occlusion 947
PART 10 | VASCULAR
bleeding, haematoma, false aneurysm formation, thrombosis, 
arterial dissection, distal embolisation, renal dysfunction and 
allergic reaction, which may occur in up to 5% of procedures. 
Furthermore, it is relatively expensive compared to other 
investigation modalities and its usage should be limited to 
patients in whom a concomitant intervention is predicted.
CT angiography and magnetic resonance (MR) angio -
graphy (Figure 56.11) are newer techniques gaining in popu-
larity, although the image quality is not as good as DSA. They 
can be useful where duplex scanning is not possible (intratho-
racic arteries) or produces poor images (aortoiliac segment). 
MR has the added advantage of avoiding the need for ionis -
ing radiation, but may be contraindicated in patients suffering 
with claustrophobia or those with certain metallic implants, 
e.g. pacemakers.
Management of arterial stenosis or 
occlusion
General
Only one-quarter of patients presenting with intermittent 
claudication will experience symptomatic deterioration 
during their lifetime, but the overall risk of progression to 
critical leg ischaemia and amputation is small with <5% of 
patients requiring amputation over a 5-year perio d. Patients 
with an ABPI of <0.50 are twice as likely to deteriorate as 
patients with an ABPI of >0.50, and a deteriorating ABPI 
is predictive of future limb loss. For patients with rest pain 
or tissue necrosis, intervention is usually required to prevent 
major amputation.
Claudication is often a marker of silent coronary arter -
ial disease, whose extent correlates with the ABPI; a 0.1 
decrease in ABPI below 0.9 is associated with a 10% increase 
in the relative risk of a major cardiovascular event. Similarly, 
one-quarter of patients with claudication have significant 
atherosclerotic disease affecting their carotid and renal arter-
ial systems. It is thus not surprising that the risk of suffering 
a major cardiovascular event per year in patients with clau -
dication is >5%, and that 50% of claudicants will die within 
10 years from myocardial infarction or stroke. The common 
modifiable risk factors for peripheral arterial disease mirror 
those for coronary artery disease: smoking, diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension and hyperlipidaemia. Therefore, the two main 
aims when treating claudication are prevention of major car-
diovascular morbidity through risk factor modification and 
symptom relief/improvement.
Non-surgical management
For many patients with claudication a structured exercise pro-
gramme – at least 2 hours of exercise per week for 3 months – 
in combination with smoking cessation will lead to sustained 
improvement in claudication distance and a reduction in 
cardiovascular risk. Diabetes mellitus increases the risk and 
severity of claudication proportional to the duration of afflic-
tion. Strict control in combination with weight loss in the 
obese patient is vital to reduce cardiovascular risk and pre -
vent symptom deterioration.
Figure 56.10 Arterial occlusion just above the knee causing claudi -
cation of the calf; good collateral circulation (a non-digital subtraction 
arteriogram by the Seldinger technique).
Figure 56.11 Magnetic resonance angiogram showing a tight steno-
sis at the midpoint of the left common iliac artery.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   947 25/10/2017   09:31CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR948
DRUGS
Medication may be required for diseases associated with 
arterial disorders, such as hypertension and diabetes; some 
antihypertensives (particularly β-blockers) may exacerbate 
claudication. Raised blood lipids require active drug treat -
ment, but even when the lipid profile is normal a statin 
(HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor) should be prescribed as 
they may stabilise atherosclerotic plaques and protect against 
cardiac death independently of baseline serum lipid levels. 
An antiplatelet agent is also necessary: recent National Insti-
tute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines rec-
ommend 75  mg per day of clopidogrel, or 75  mg per day of 
aspirin as an alternative. Other agents, such as vasodilators, 
are unlikely to provide either significant or sustained benefit. 
Drugs are now available to help with smoking cessation.
TRANSLUMINAL ANGIOPLASTY AND STENTING
Arterial occlusive disease may be treated by inserting a bal -
loon catheter into an artery and inflating it within a narrowed 
or blocked area (Figures 56.12 and 56.13) . This technique 
is suitable for patients with claudication, rest pain or tissue 
necrosis (Figures 56.14 and 56.15). Following percutaneous 
femoral artery puncture under local anaesthetic, a guidewire 
is inserted and negotiated through the stenosis or occlusion 
under fluoroscopic control. A balloon catheter is then inserted 
over the guidewire and positioned within the lesion. The bal-
loon is then inflated at high pressure for approximately 30 
seconds and deflated. Satisfactory dilation of the lesion is con-
firmed by performing an angiogram. Percutaneous translumi -
nal angioplasty (PTA) has proved very successful in dilating 
the iliac and femoropopliteal segments; the results below the 
knee are less successful. Long occlusions may be treated by 
the technique of subintimal angioplasty, where the guidewire 
crosses the lesion in the subintimal space (in the arterial wall) 
and a new lumen is created by inflation of the balloon. Com-
plications occur in about 5% of cases and include failure, hae-
matoma, bleeding, thrombosis and distal embolisation; these 
may impact on the surgeons’ ability to perform a subsequent 
open surgical revascularisation procedure.
If the vessel fails to stay adequately dilated (often caused 
by elastic recoil of the artery), it may be possible to hold the 
lumen open using a metal stent (Figures 56.16 and 56.17). 
This may be introduced on a balloon catheter and expanded 
by balloon inflation; or alternatively, a self-expanding stent 
may be used that is contained inside a plastic sheath and 
deployed by withdrawal of the sheath.
Figure 56.12 Balloon catheter for percutaneous transluminal angio-
plasty.
Figure 56.13 (a) Catheter balloon deflated; (b) balloon inflated.
Figure 56.14 (a, b) Narrowed superficial femoral artery befor e and 
after transluminal angioplasty (courtesy of J Mclvor, FRCR, London, 
UK). The advantage of this technique is that it can be carried out 
under local anaesthesia using the Seldinger technique of percutane -
ous arterial puncture, and is therefore especially useful in the treat-
ment of patients who are medically unfit for major surgery.
(a)
(b)
(b)(a)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   948 25/10/2017   09:32Arterial stenosis and occlusion 949
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Operations for arterial stenosis or 
occlusion
Site of disease and type of operation
Surgical operations are usually reserved for patients with 
severe symptoms where angioplasty has failed or is not pos -
sible. Aortoiliac occlusion responds well to aortofemoral 
bypass (Figure 56.18a) using a Dacron graft (Figure 56.19a); 
although the operation carries a perioperative mortality and 
systemic morbidity rates of about 5% and 15%, respectively. 
In unfit patients, an axillofemoral bypass is an alternative, 
although patency rates are less. If only one iliac system is 
occluded, an iliofemoral or femorofemoral crossover graft may 
be performed.
Superficial femoral artery disease can be treated by femo -
ropopliteal bypass (Figure 56.18b); long-term graft patency 
is determined by the quality of inflow and outflow, graft 
length (whether the distal anastomosis is above or below the 
knee) and the conduit used for the bypass. Autologous long 
saphenous vein (LSV) gives the best results and can be used 
reversed or in situ after valve disruption. If the LSV is not 
available from either leg, short saphenous or arm veins may 
be used. If no vein is available, a prosthetic polytetrafluoro -
ethylene (PTFE) graft may be employed (Figure 56.19b) 
although patency rates are lower; many surgeons construct 
the lower anastomosis using a small collar of vein (Miller 
cuff) between the PTFE and the recipient artery, which may 
improve patency. Isolated common femoral artery or profunda 
disease can be treated with endarterectomy and patch (vein 
or prosthetic) or a short bypass in the groin.
Sometimes, in patients with critical leg ischaemia, the occlu-
sion extends beyond the popliteal artery into the tibial vessels. 
Limb salvage can be attempted with a femorodistal bypass, with 
success even more dependent on the state of the run-off vessel 
and the quality of the vein conduit (minimum diameter 3 mm). 
The risk of early graft failure with limb loss is high and these  
long bypasses are only appropriate for limb salvage.
Figure 56.15 Before (a) and after (b) balloon dilatation of a severely stenosed left r enal artery in a 20-year-old woman with uncontrollable 
hypertension. The blood pressure fell to normal after the procedure. The stenosis was probably due to fibromuscular hyperplasia, but no tissue 
was available for histological diagnosis.
Figure 56.16  (a) Balloon catheter carrying stent; (b) expanded 
stent.
(a)
(b)
(a) (b)
Justin H Miller , vascular surgeon, Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   949 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR950
Technical details
For aortofemoral bypass, the aorta should be approached 
through a midline abdominal incision; a transverse abdom -
inal incision divides the inferior epigastric vessels (import -
ant collateral vessel in patients with an occluded aorta) and 
should be avoided. The common femoral arteries and their 
branches are exposed through vertical groin incisions. The 
small bowel is retracted to the right and the posterior peri -
toneum opened. Retroperitoneal tunnels are made from 
the aorta to the groins. Heparin (5000 U) is given intrave -
nously and the vessels clamped. A vertical incision is made 
in the anterior aspect of the aorta to which an obliquely cut, 
bifurcated Dacron® graft is sutured end-to-side with a non-  
absorbable suture (polypropylene). The graft limbs are then 
fed down to the groins where they are anastomosed end-to-
side to the common femoral arteries or, if there is evidence of 
profunda stenosis, to an arteriotomy running from the com -
mon femoral vessel down into the profunda. The posterior 
Figure 56.17 (a) External iliac artery stenosis before dilatation; (b) after dilatation by percutaneous transluminal angioplasty; and (c) dilated 
artery patency assured by stent (courtesy of Johnson and Johnson Interventional Systems, Bracknell, UK, and Dr W. Shaw, Ninewells Hospital, 
Dundee, UK).
Figure 56.18 (a) Atherosclerotic narrowing of the aortic bifurcation. 
Aortobifemoral graft to bypass stenosis. (b) Superficial femoral artery 
occlusion with profunda femoris stenosis providing poor collateral cir-
culation. Femoropopliteal graft used to bypass the occluded area into 
good ‘run-off’ below.
(a) (b)
(a) (b) (c)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   950 25/10/2017   09:32Arterial stenosis and occlusion 951
PART 10 | VASCULAR
peritoneum is closed over the Dacron ® to prevent adhesion 
of the graft to bowel, and the abdomen and groin wounds are 
closed.
For femoropopliteal bypass the popliteal artery above or 
below the knee is exposed through a medial incision. The 
common femoral artery is exposed at groin level. The LSV 
may be used in two different ways. First, it may be excised, 
its tributaries tied, and the vein used in a reversed fashion so 
the valves do not obstruct the flow of blood. Alternatively, it 
may be left in place ( in situ) and the valves disrupted with a 
valvulotome. The graft is sutured to the femoral artery proxi-
mally and to the popliteal artery distally. Femorodistal bypass 
involves fashioning the distal anastomosis to a tibial vessel. 
If no suitable vein is available, prosthetic material (usually 
PTFE) may be used, with or without a small vein collar 
(Miller cuff) at its distal end (Figures 56.20).
A femorofemoral crossover graft involves tunnelling a 
prosthetic graft subcutaneously above the pubis between the 
groins. An axillofemoral graft is tunnelled subcutaneously 
between the axillary artery proximally, to reach one or both 
femoral arteries; the patency rate of an axillobifemoral bypass 
is better than that of an axillo(uni)femoral bypass.
Results of operation
Long-term results of aortoiliac reconstructive surgery are 
good, usually marred only by progressive infrainguinal disease. 
Femoropopliteal surgery is less successful. Immediate postop -
erative success for vein bypass exceeds 90% but the 5-year 
patency is around 60%. PTFE bypass yields poorer results 
than vein bypass, with 5-year success rates of less than 50%. 
Although the results of femorodistal bypass are even less sat -
isfactory, such surgery can ensure limb salvage in patients who 
are generally debilitated and whose expected lifespan is lim -
ited; long-term patency is less important.
Other sites of atheromatous occlusive 
disease
The principles of arterial surgery outlined above can be 
applied at other arterial sites. Carotid stenosis (at the carotid 
bifurcation in the neck) may cause transient ischaemic 
attacks (TIAs). These short-lived mini-strokes are often 
recurrent and cause unilateral motor or sensory loss in the 
arm, leg or face, transient blindness (amaurosis fugax) or 
speech impairment. They are caused by distal embolisation 
of platelet thrombi that form on the atheromatous plaque 
into the cerebral circulation. They are a warning of impend -
ing major stroke. Patients should be assessed with a duplex 
scan. If a tight stenosis (>70%) is detected, carotid endarter -
ectomy should be offered (Figure 56.21). Current guidelines 
for carotid endarterectomy are listed in Summary box 56.2. 
This involves clamping the vessels, an arteriotomy in the 
common carotid artery continued up into the internal carotid 
artery through the diseased segment, removal of the occlu -
sive disease (endarterectomy) and closure of the arteriotomy, 
often with a patch. Many surgeons also use a temporary shunt 
to maintain cerebral blood flow while the carotid system is 
clamped.
Figure 56.19 (a) Dacron® bifurcation graft; (b) polytetrafluoroeth-
ylene graft.
Figure 56.20 (a) Completion angiogram of femoropopliteal bypass 
graft (with Miller cuff). (b) Completion angiogram of femorodistal 
bypass graft in situ.
(a)
(b)
(a) (b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   951 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR952
Subclavian artery stenosis may cause claudication in the 
arm or digital ischaemia from distal embolisation. It may be 
treated by angioplasty or surgical bypass. Sometimes subcla -
vian artery lesions are associated with neck pathology, such as 
a cervical rib, which should be removed during arterial repair 
(see Chapter 57, Figure 57.37). Subclavian steal syndrome 
may occur if the first part of the subclavian artery is occluded. 
Arm exercise causes syncope because of reversed flow in 
the vertebral artery leading to cerebral ischaemia. It can be 
treated by angioplasty or surgery and is rare.
Mesenteric artery occlusive disease may cause pain after 
eating (intestinal angina) and weight loss. In general, two 
of the three enteric vessels (coeliac axis, superior mesenteric 
artery, inferior mesenteric artery) must be occluded to produce 
symptoms and other intestinal disorders must be excluded 
before treatment with PTA, endarterectomy or bypass.
Renal artery stenosis may cause hypertension and even -
tual renal failure. Although it is possible to improve renal 
blood flow with PTA or surgery, the mainstay of treatment is 
the use of drugs to control hypertension, diabetes, etc.
GANGRENE
Gangrene refers to death of macroscopic portions of tissue, 
which turns black because of the breakdown of haemoglo -
bin and the formation of iron sulphide. It usually affects the 
most distal part of a limb because of arterial obstruction (from 
thrombosis, embolus or arteritis). Dry gangrene occurs when 
the tissues are desiccated by gradual slowing of the blood -
stream; it is typically the result of atheromatous occlusion of 
arteries. Wet gangrene occurs when superadded infection and 
putrefaction are present. Crepitus may be palpated as a result 
of infection by gas-forming organisms, commonly in diabetic 
foot problems, and should be considered a surgical emergency 
with urgent tissue debridement or amputation required.
Separation of gangrene
A zone of demarcation between the truly viable and the dead 
or dying tissue will eventually appear. Separation is achieved 
by the development of a layer of granulation tissue that forms 
between the dead and the living parts. In dry gangrene, if the 
blood supply of the proximal tissues is adequate, the final line 
of demarcation appears in a matter of days and separation 
occurs neatly and with the minimum of infection. If bone is 
involved, complete separation takes longer than when soft 
tissues alone are affected, and the stump tends to be conical 
as the bone has a better blood supply than its coverings. In 
moist gangrene, the infection and suppuration extend into 
the neighbouring living tissue, causing the final line of demar-
cation to be more proximal than in dry gangrene.
If the arterial supply to the proximal living tissue is poor, 
the line of final demarcation is very slow to form or does not 
develop at all. Unless the arterial supply can be improved, 
the gangrene will spread to adjacent tissues or will suddenly 
appear as ‘skip’ areas further up the limb. These skip lesions 
may occur on the other side of the foot, on the heel, on the 
dorsum of the foot or even in the calf. Infection may also 
cause gangrene to spread proximally into areas of extensive 
inflammation. To attempt local amputation in the presence of 
poor circulation will result in failure and gangrene will reap -
pear in the wound or skin edges.
Treatment of gangrene
How much of a limb or digit can be salvaged depends on the 
blood supply proximal to the gangrene. Poor circulation can 
sometimes be improved by radiological or surgical interven-
tion and this may allow a more conservative debridement or 
distal amputation. However, major limb amputation may be 
required in the presence of life-threatening sepsis, when the 
Summary box 56.2
Indications for carotid endarterectomy in symptomatic 
patients
70% or greater carotid stenosis and:
●● Ipsilateral amaurosis fugax or monocular blindness
●● Contralateral facial paralysis or paraesthesia
●● Arm/leg paralysis or paraesthesia
●● Hemianopia
●● Dysphasia (if dominant hemisphere)
●● Sensory or visual inattention/neglect
Figure 56.21 Carotid stenosis. A unilateral localised stenosis suit -
able for operation. CC, common carotid; EC, exter nal carotid; IC, 
internal carotid.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   952 25/10/2017   09:32Acute arterial occlusion 953
PART 10 | VASCULAR
blood supply cannot be improved or in patients whose limb is 
useless because of contractures, stroke, etc.
Specific varieties of gangrene
Diabetic gangrene
Diabetic gangrene is usually caused by a combination of three 
factors – ischaemia secondary to macrovascular disease and 
microvascular dysfunction, peripheral sensorimotor neuropa -
thy (PSN), which leads to trophic skin changes, and immu -
nosuppression caused by excess of sugar in the tissues, which 
predisposes to infection (Figure 56.22). Macrovascular dis-
ease is atherosclerotic and typically affects the crural vessels 
with relative sparing of the pedal vessels, whereas increased 
microcirculatory shunting causes microvascular dysfunction. 
The PSN is usually sensory in the early phase, classically in a 
stocking distribution and renders the patients at high risk of 
soft tissue injury and its subsequent neglect. The PSN may 
extend to the joints of the foot and ankle, resulting in loss 
of nociceptive and proprioceptive protective reflexes and a 
repeated cycle of joint injury and bony destruction. Motor 
involvement causes an imbalance between flexors and exten-
sor muscle groups of the foot, promoting altered foot biome -
chanics and abnormal pressure loading and resulting in thick 
callosities developing on the sole of the foot.
Ischaemia and PSN act synergistically to increase the risk 
of diabetic foot ulceration and reduce its subsequent healing 
potential. Superadded infection due to poor wound care can 
spread rapidly and proximally in subfascial planes leading to 
fulminant foot sepsis, gangrene and death.
Treatment depends on the degree of arterial involvement, 
which should be investigated and treated rapidly with angio -
plasty or surgery. The gangrene is treated by drainage of pus, 
liberal debridement of dead tissue and antibiotics. Unfortu-
nately, a number of patients present with life-threatening sys-
temic upset and should undergo primary amputation.
Bedsores
A bedsore is gangrene caused by local pressure (Figure 56.23). 
Bedsores are predisposed to by five factors: pressure, injury, 
anaemia, malnutrition and moisture. They can appear and 
extend rapidly in immobile patients and in those with debili-
tating illness. Prophylactic measures must be taken, including 
the avoidance of pressure over bony prominences by the use 
of foam blocks or similar, regular turning and nursing on spe-
cially designed beds that reduce the pressure to the skin. A 
waterbed or a ripple bed is sometimes desirable. Skilled nurs -
ing and the use of appropriate dressings must prevent macera-
tion of the skin by sweat, urine, faeces or pus.
A bedsore can be expected if erythema appears that does 
not change colour on pressure. Once pressure sores develop, 
they are difficult to heal. They should be kept clean and 
debrided if necessary. Advice from a plastic surgeon should be 
sought for major lesions; vacuum dressings and rotation flaps 
can be effective.
Frostbite
Frostbite is caused by exposure to cold. It is seen both in 
climbers at high altitudes and in the elderly or the vagrant 
during cold weather (Figure 56.24). Cold injury damages the 
wall of the blood vessel, which causes swelling, and leakage 
of fluid together with severe pain. When the pain disappears, 
a waxy appearance remains; blistering and then gangrene fol-
low. Treatment is gradual rewarming, analgesics and delayed 
conservative amputation after demarcation of devitalised 
 tissue.
ACUTE ARTERIAL OCCLUSION
Sudden occlusion of an artery is usually caused by an embolus. 
It may also happen when thrombosis occurs on an atheroscle-
rotic plaque, although the outcome is usually less dramatic 
because collaterals are likely to have developed in chronic 
arterial stenosis.
Embolic occlusion
An embolus is an object that has become lodged in a vessel 
causing obstruction having been carried in the bloo dstream 
from another site. It is often a thrombus that has become 
detached from the heart or a more proximal vessel. Sources 
include the left atrium in atrial fibrillation, a left ventricular 
mural thrombus following myocardial infarction, vegetations 
on heart valves in infective endocarditis, thrombi in aneu -
rysms and on atheroscerotic plaques. Emboli may lodge in any 
organ and cause ischaemic symptoms.
Figure 56.22 Diabetic gangrene.
Figure 56.23 Bedsores typically appear over areas exposed to pres-
sure, such as the sacrum and (as in this case) the heel.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   953 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR954
 ● Arm and leg – pain, pallor, paralysis, pulselessness and 
paraesthesia (Figure 56.25). Acute arterial occlusion due 
to an embolus differs from occlusion due to thrombosis on 
pre-existing atheroma; in the latter case a collateral cir -
culation has often built up over time (Figures 56.26 and 
56.27). It is essential to differentiate between the two, as 
they require different management.
 ● Brain – the middle cerebral artery (or its branches) is most 
commonly affected, resulting in major or minor (TIA) 
stroke.
 ● Retina – amaurosis fugax is fleeting blindness caused by a 
minute thrombus emanating from an atheromatous plaque 
Figure 56.24  (a) Frostbite of the foot. Note 
the clear demarcation. (b) Frostbite of the mid-
dle finger in the same patient. The index finger 
was lost 2 years before, also from frostbite.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 56.25Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Embolus
Pain
Paralysis
Pallor
Pulseless
Figure 56.25 The symptoms and signs of embolism (four Ps). The 
fifth feature, anaesthesia, is often stated to be paraesthesia (the fifth 
P) but, in truth, complete loss of sensation in the toes and feet is 
characteristic.
Figure 56.26 Aortic bifurcation embolus. Sour ce of embolus is a 
recent myocardial infarct or atrial fibrillation. This causes severe, dra-
matic symptoms.
Figure 56.27 Aortic bifurcation thr ombosis. No source of embolus 
but previous claudication worsens but there are no sudden features 
of distal ischaemia.
(a) (b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   954 25/10/2017   09:32Acute arterial occlusion 955
PART 10 | VASCULAR
in the carotid artery passing into the central retinal artery. 
Lasting obstruction causes permanent blindness.
 ● Mesenteric vessels – possible gangrene and perforation of 
the corresponding loop of intestine.
Acute limb ischaemia
Clinical features
Embolic arterial occlusion is an emergency that requires 
immediate treatment. Ischaemia beyond 6 hours is usually 
irreversible and results in limb loss. The leg is often affected, 
with pain, pallor, paralysis, loss of pulsation and paraesthesia 
(or anaesthesia) (Figure 56.25). The limb is cold and the 
toes cannot be moved, which contrasts with venous occlu -
sion when muscle function is not affected. The diagnosis can 
be made clinically in a patient who has no history of clau -
dication and has a source of emboli, who suddenly develops 
severe pain or numbness of the limb, which becomes cold 
and mottled. Movement becomes progressively more difficult 
and sensation is lost. Pulses are absent distally but the femo -
ral pulse may be palpable, even thrusting, as distal occlusion 
results in forceful expansion of the artery with each pressure 
wave despite the lack of flow. A similar picture will occur in 
the arm with a brachial embolus.
Treatment
Because of the ensuing stasis, a thrombus can extend distally 
and proximally to the embolus. The immediate adminis -
tration of 5000 U of heparin intravenously can reduce this 
extension and maintain patency of the surrounding (particu -
larly the distal) vessels until the embolus can be treated. The 
relief of pain is essential because it is severe and constant. 
Embolectomy and thrombolysis are the treatments available 
for patients with limb emboli.
Embolectomy
Local or general anaesthesia may be used. The artery (usually 
the femoral), bulging with clot, is exposed and held in silastic 
vessel loops. Through a transverse incision the clot begins to 
extrude and is removed, together with the embolus (Figure 
56.28), with the help of a Fogarty balloon catheter. The cath-
eter, with its balloon tip, is introduced both proximally and 
distally until it is deemed to have passed the limit of the clot. 
The balloon is inflated and the catheter withdrawn slowly, 
together with any obstructing material (Figure 56.29). The 
procedure is repeated until bleeding occurs. An angiogram 
may be performed in the operating theatre at the end of 
the procedure to ensure that flow to the distal leg has been 
restored. Postoperatively, heparin therapy is continued until 
long-term anticoagulation with warfarin is established to 
reduce the chance of further embolism.
Thrombolysis
If ischaemia is not so severe that immediate operation is essen-
tial, it may be possible to treat either embolus or thrombosis by 
intra-arterial thrombolysis (Figure 56.30). At arteriography 
of the ischaemic limb (usually via the common femoral artery) 
a narrow catheter is passed into the occluded vessel and left 
embedded within the clot. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 
is infused through the catheter and regular arteriograms are 
carried out to check on the extent of lysis, which, in success -
ful cases, is achieved within 24 hours. The method should be 
abandoned if there is no progression of dissolution of clot with 
time. There are several contraindications to thrombolysis, the 
most important of which are recent stroke, bleeding diathesis 
and pregnancy; results in those over 80 years old are poor.
Compartment syndrome
In limbs that have been subject to sudden ischaemia followed 
by revascularisation, oedema is likely. Muscles swell within 
confined fascial compartments and this can itself be a cause 
of tissue ischaemia, with both local muscle necrosis and 
nerve damage due to pressure, and systemic effects such as 
renal failure secondary to the liberation of muscle breakdown 
products. Liberal concomitant usage of fasciotomy following 
revascularisation of a prolonged ischaemic limb is advisable.
Thomas J Fogarty , b.1932, surgeon, University of Oregon Medical School, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Figure 56.28 Embolic material removed from the common femoral 
artery, along with a long distal extension thrombus.
(a) (b)
Figure 56.29 (a) A Fogarty catheter is inserted through an arteriot -
omy in the common femoral artery and fed distally down the super -
ficial femoral artery and through the embolus. (b) The balloon is 
inflated and the catheter withdrawn, removing the embolus; the deep 
femoral and iliac arteries are similarly treated.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   955 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR956
The classical clinical picture is that of severe pain out 
of proportion with clinical findings that worsens with time, 
despite appropriate analgesia. The patient often complains of 
numbness/paraesthesia in the distribution of nerves running 
within the compartment (non-myelinated type C sensory 
fibres are most sensitive to hypoxia). Examination of the limb 
reveals a tense compartment with passive flexion and exten -
sion of muscles causing pain. The presence of palpable pulses 
does not rule out compartment syndrome.
The treatment is urgent compartment fasciotomy to 
release the compression. The usual site for fasciotomy is the  
calf (especially the anterior tibial compartment), but compart-
ment syndrome may occasionally affect the thigh and the arm.
Acute mesenteric ischaemia
Acute mesenteric occlusion may be either thrombotic (follow-
ing atheromatous narrowing) or embolic. Embolic occlusion 
results in sudden, severe abdominal pain, with bowel emptying 
(vomiting and diarrhoea) and a source of emboli present (usu-
ally cardiac). Unfortunately, the diagnosis is often only made 
at laparotomy with widespread infarction of the small and large 
bowel present; in this situation, it is often fatal. Occasionally, 
the degree of bowel infarction is more limited; resection of the 
dead bowel and embolectomy of the superior mesenteric artery 
or bypass surgery can reduce the otherwise high mortality rate 
in these patients. A ‘second look’ laparotomy 24 hours later to 
check the viability of the bowel may be indicated.
Other forms of embolism
Infective emboli of bacteria or an infected clot may cause 
mycotic aneurysms, septicaemia or infected infarcts. Parasitic 
emboli, caused by the ova of Taenia echinococcus and Filaria 
sanguinis hominis, may occur in some countries. Tumour cells 
(e.g. hypernephroma and cardiac myxoma) are rare causes of 
emboli. Fat embolism may follow major bony fractures. How-
ever, venous emboli to the lungs are more common.
Air embolism
Air may be accidentally injected into the venous circulation 
or sucked into an open vein during head and neck surgery 
or a cut throat. It may also occur following Fallopian tube 
insufflation or illegal abortion. If a large volume of air reaches 
the right side of the heart it may form an air lock within the 
pulmonary artery and cause acute right heart failure.
The treatment of air embolism is to put the patient in a 
head-down (Trendelenburg) position to encourage the air to 
enter the veins in the lower part of the body. The patient 
should also be placed on the left side to help the air to float to 
the ventricular apex, away from the ostium of the pulmonary 
artery. In extreme cases, air may be aspirated from the heart 
through a needle introduced below the left costal margin.
Therapeutic embolisation
This is used to arrest haemorrhage from the gastrointestinal, 
urinary (Figure 56.31), gynaecological and respiratory tracts, 
to treat arteriovenous malformations by blocking their arter -
ial supply and to control the growth of unresectable tumours. 
Arterial embolisation requires accurate selective catheteri-
sation using the Seldinger technique. A variety of materials 
may be used, including gelfoam sponge, plastic microspheres, 
balloons, ethyl alcohol, quick-setting plastics and metal coils.
Gabrielle Falloppio (Fallopius) , 1523–1563, Professor of Anatomy, Surgery and Botany, Padua, Italy.
Friedrich Trendelenburg , 1844–1924, Professor of Surgery successively at Rostock, Bonn and Leipzig, Germany.
Figure 56.31 Before (a) and after (b) therapeutic embolisation of 
the internal iliac artery in a patient with gross haematuria from an 
ulcerating bladder carcinoma (courtesy of F Mclvor, FRCR, London, 
UK).
(a) (b)
Figure 56.30  Angiogram of an occluded popliteal artery before 
thrombolysis (a), during successful lysis (b) and after completion of 
lysis (c).
(a) (b) (c)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   956 25/10/2017   09:32Amputation 957
PART 10 | VASCULAR
AMPUTATION
General
Amputation should be considered when part of a limb is dead, 
deadly or a dead loss. A limb is dead when arterial occlusive dis-
ease is severe enough to cause infarction of macroscopic portions 
of tissue, i.e. gangrene. The occlusion may be in major vessels 
(atherosclerotic or embolic occlusions) or in small peripheral 
vessels (diabetes, Buerger’s disease, Raynaud’s disease, inad -
vertent intra-arterial injection). If the obstruction cannot be 
reversed and the symptoms are severe, amputation is required.
A limb is deadly when the putrefaction and infection of 
moist gangrene spreads to surrounding viable tissues. Celluli-
tis and severe toxaemia are the result. Amputation is required 
as a life-saving operation. Antibiotic cover should be broad 
and massive. Other life-threatening situations for which 
amputation may be required include gas gangrene (as opposed 
to simple infection), neoplasm (such as osteogenic sarcoma) 
and arteriovenous fistula.
A limb may be deemed a dead loss in the following cir -
cumstances: first, when there is relentless severe rest pain 
without gangrene and reconstruction is not possible – ampu -
tation will improve quality of life; second, when a contracture 
or paralysis makes the limb impossible to use and renders it 
a hindrance; and third, when there is major unrecoverable 
traumatic damage.
cellulitis is not present. For less extensive gangrene, if amputa-
tion is taken through a joint, healing is improved by removing 
the cartilage from the joint surface. A transmetatarsal ampu -
tation may be required when several toes are affected but the 
proximal circulation is adequate. The wound may be closed 
with a viable long plantar flap (Figure 56.32) or left open.
Major amputation
Choice of operation
The major choice is between an above- and below-knee oper-
ation. A below knee amputation preserves the knee joint and 
gives the best chance of walking again with a prosthesis. How-
ever, an above knee amputation is more likely to heal and 
may be appropriate if the patient has no prospect of walking 
again. If the femoral pulse is absent, the amputation should 
be above the knee. Unfortunately, the presence of a femoral 
pulse does not guarantee healing of a below-knee amputation, 
and sometimes a failed below-knee amputation may require 
revision to an above-knee procedure.
For above- or below-knee amputations with a good stump 
shape, it is possible to hold a prosthesis in place simply by 
suction, without any cumbersome and unsightly straps. The 
stump should be of sufficient length to give the required 
leverage, i.e. not less than 8  cm below the knee (preferably 
10–12 cm) and not less than 20 cm above the knee.
Leo Buerger , 1879–1943, Professor of Urologic Surgery, New York Polyclinic Medical School, New York, USA, described thromboangitis obliterans in 1908.
Maurice Raynaud , 1834–1881, physician, Hospital Lariboisière, Paris, France, described this condition in 1862.
Distal and transmetatarsal amputation
In patients with small-vessel disease, typically caused by dia -
betes mellitus, gangrene of the toes may occur with relatively 
good blood supply to the surrounding tissues. In such circum-
stances, local amputation of the digits can result in healing. 
However, if the metatarsophalangeal joint region is involved, 
a ray excision is required, taking part of the corresponding 
metatarsal bone and cutting tendons back. Most surgeons leave 
the wound open. Early mobility aids drainage provided that 
Summary box 56.3
Indications for amputation
Dead limb
●● Gangrene
Deadly limb
●● Wet gangrene
●● Spreading cellulitis
●● Arteriovenous fistula
●● Other (e.g. malignancy)
‘Dead loss’ limb
●● Severe rest pain with unreconstructable critical leg ischaemia
●● Paralysis
●● Other (e.g. contracture, trauma)
Figure 56.32 Transmetatarsal amputation for diabetic gangr ene of 
the toes.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   957 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR958
Below-knee amputation
T wo types of skin flap are commonly used: long posterior flap 
and skew flap (described by KP Robinson). For both methods, 
the total length of flap must be at least one and a half times 
the diameter of the leg at the point of bone section.
The long posterior flap technique is the older method 
and remains the more popular, probably because of its rel -
ative simplicity. The proposed incision should be marked 
carefully: the tibial tuberosity identified and a distance 
10 cm measured distally and marked with a sterile marker 
pen; this is the anterior landmark. The circumference is 
measured at this landmark with a long suture tie and this 
length divided into two thirds. The suture is centred over 
the anterior landmark so that there is one-third either side. 
The suture ends should be pulled directly posterior; this rep -
resents the posterior limit of the transverse incision (Figures 
56.33a–c). The transverse incision is then marked. From 
these posterior limits, the incision line is going to extend 
Kingsley Peter Robinson , formerly surgeon, the Westminster Hospital, London, UK.
Tibial
tuberosity
10 cm 10 cm 2/3
1/3
= Incision
Figure 56.33 (a) Schematic repr esentation of operative markings 
for a long posterior flap below-knee amputation. (b) Lateral view 
of operative markings. (c) Anterior view of operative markings. (d) 
Lateral view following removal of the leg. (e) Anterior view following 
removal of the leg. (f) Wound closure with suction drain and local 
anaesthetic infusion ‘stump’ catheter.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   958 25/10/2017   09:32Amputation 959
PART 10 | VASCULAR
longitudinally at least half the circumference of the leg at 
the level of the anterior landmark. The line of incision is 
now extended transversely around the back of the limb 
to join the distal extent of the longitudinal incisions. An 
incision is then made along the previously measured and 
marked lines through skin, subcutaneous fat and deep fascia. 
Anteriorly, the incision is deepened to bone and the lateral 
and posterior incisions are fashioned to leave the bulk of the 
gastrocnemius muscle attached to the flap, muscle and skin 
being transected together at the same level.
If bleeding is inadequate, the amputation is refashioned 
at a higher level. Blood vessels are identified and ligated. 
Nerves are not clamped but pulled down gently and sharply 
transected as high as possible. Vessels in nerves are ligated. 
The fibula is divided 2 cm proximal to the level of tibial divi-
sion using bone cutters. The tibia is cleared and transected at 
the desired level, the anterior aspect of the bone being sawn 
obliquely before the cross-cut is made. This, with filing, gives 
a smooth anterior bevel, which prevents pressure necrosis of 
the flap. The long muscle/skin flap is tapered after removing 
the bulk of the soleus muscle (much of the gastrocnemius may 
be left unless it is very bulky) (Figures 56.33d, e). The area is 
washed with saline to remove bone fragments and the muscle 
and fascia are sutured with an absorbable material to bring the 
flap over the bone ends. A suction drain is placed deep to the 
muscle and brought out through a stab incision in the skin; 
a local anaesthetic infusion ‘stump’ catheter can be inserted 
for perioperative pain relief. The skin flap should lie in place 
with all tension taken by the deep sutures (Figure 56.3f). 
Interrupted skin sutures are inserted. Gauze, wool and crepe 
bandages are usually used for the stump dressing.
The skew flap amputation makes use of anatomical knowl-
edge of the skin blood supply. Equally long fascial-cutaneous 
flaps are developed; they join anteriorly 2.5 cm from the tibial 
crest, overlying the anterior tibial compartment, and poster -
iorly at the exact opposite point on the circumference of the 
leg. After division of bone and muscle in a fashion similar 
to that described above, the gastrocnemius myoplastic flap 
is sutured over the cut bone end to the anterior tibial peri -
osteum with absorbable sutures. Finally , drainage and skin 
sutures are inserted and the limb dressed as for the long pos -
terior flap operation.
Above-knee amputation
The site is chosen as indicated above but may need to be 
higher if bleeding is poor on incision of the skin. Equal curved 
anterior and posterior skin flaps are made of sufficient total 
length. Skin, deep fascia and muscle are transected in the 
same line. Vessels are ligated. The sciatic nerve is pulled down 
and transected cleanly , as high as possible, and the accom -
panying artery ligated. Muscle and skin are retracted and 
the bone cleared and sawn at the point chosen. Haemosta -
sis is achieved. The muscle ends are united over the bone by 
absorbable sutures incorporating the fascia. A suction drain 
deep to the muscle is brought out through the skin clear of 
the wound. The fascia and subcutaneous tissues are further 
brought together so that the skin can be apposed by inter -
rupted sutures. Gauze, wool and crepe bandages form the 
stump dressing.
Through-knee amputation
More recently through-knee or knee disarticulation has 
regained popularity as an alternative to above-knee ampu-
tation if soft-tissue viability permits. This amputation pre-
serves the full length of the femur and patella, providing a 
long mechanical lever that is controlled by stronger muscles 
as the line of muscle transection is distal and occurs through 
fascial tissue, as opposed to thick muscular bellies as is the 
case with an above-knee amputation. The bulbous nature of 
the amputation end, initially thought a hindrance for subse -
quent prosthetic fitting, is now seen as beneficial as it allows 
for a self-suspending prosthetic that is less likely to rotate 
compared to an above-knee amputation prosthetic. For the 
patient unlikely to mobilise with a prosthetic, e.g. elderly 
patients or patients with bilateral amputations, the increased 
length of the stump provides better counterweight to the 
torso, enabling better core stability.
The line of incision is marked preoperatively: equal anter-
ior and posterior semicircular flaps are constructed, with the 
proximal extent of incision being the joint line laterally and 
medially, and the distal extent of the anterior flap being 3 cm 
below the tibial tuberosity and directly posterior to this level 
for the posterior flap. The anterior incision is carried down 
to the tibia and the patellar tendon insertion into the tibial 
tuberosity is identified and released. The patellar tendon is 
followed proximally to the patella, releasing it from surround-
ing fascial structures. The anterior knee capsule is entered 
and the lateral and medial capsule divided along with the 
collateral knee ligaments. The cruciate ligaments are released 
from their tibial insertions. The knee is flexed to 90˚ and the 
dense posterior capsule divided, paying attention to identify 
the popliteal artery and vein located immediately behind the 
capsule. The tibial and peroneal nerves are sharply divided. 
The medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle along with its 
vascular pedicle is transected 3  cm below the tibial plateau. 
The lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle is divided at 
the level of the knee joint. The popliteal artery and vein are 
ligated distal to the medial head of gastrocnemius pedicle 
origin. The posterior flap incision is now carried through to 
join the anterior dissection and the limb is removed. The 
menisci do not need to be removed but can be trimmed to 
provide a smooth surface. With the hip flexed the patellar 
tendon is pulled down and sutured to the posterior cruciate 
ligament with polypropylene, restoring the normal position of 
the patellar tendon between the femoral condyles. The ham-
string muscles are sutured to the posterior capsule. The resid-
ual head of gastrocnemius is retroflexed and sutured to the 
knee capsule, to provide a covering of the femur and reduce 
synovial fluid drainage. A suction drain is applied to the 
muscle bed and the skin flaps closed with skin clips or sutures
Postoperative care of an amputee
Opiate pain relief should be given regularly. Care of the 
good limb must not be forgotten, as a pressure ulcer on the 
remaining foot will delay mobilisation despite satisfactory 
healing of the stump. Exercise and mobilisation are of the 
greatest importance. After surgery, flexion deformity must be 
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   959 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR960
prevented and exercises started to build up muscle power and 
coordination. Mobility is progressively increased with walk-
ing between bars and the use of an inflatable artificial limb, 
which allows weight-bearing to be started before a pylon or 
temporary artificial limb is ready (Figure 56.34). Early assess-
ment of the home is part of the programme; it allows time for 
minor alterations, such as the addition of stair rails, move -
ment of furniture to give support near doors and provision of 
clearance in confined passages.
Complications
Early complications include haemorrhage, which requires 
return to the operating room for haemostasis; haematoma, 
which requires evacuation; and infection, usually in associ -
ation with a haematoma. Any abscess must be drained and 
appropriate antibiotics given. Gas gangrene can occur in a 
mid-thigh stump from faecal contamination. Wound dehis -
cence and gangrene of the flaps are caused by ischaemia; a 
higher amputation may be necessary. Amputees are at risk of 
deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in the early 
postoperative period and prophylaxis with subcutaneous hep-
arin is essential.
Later complications include pain resulting from unre -
solved infection (sinus, osteitis, sequestrum), a bone spur, a 
scar adherent to bone and an amputation neuroma. Patients 
frequently remark that they can feel the amputated limb 
(phantom limb) and sometimes remark that it is painful 
(phantom pain). The surgeon’s attitude should be one of firm 
reassurance that this sensation will almost certainly disappear 
with time; amitriptyline or gabapentin may help. Other late 
complications include ulceration of the stump because of 
pressure effects of the prosthesis or increased ischaemia.
ANEURYSM
General
Dilatations of localised segments of the arterial system are 
called aneurysms when there is a >50% increase in the 
diameter of the vessel; below 50% they are termed ectac-
tic. They can either be true aneurysms, containing the three 
layers of the arterial wall (intima, media, adventitia) in the 
aneurysm sac, or false aneurysms, having a single layer of 
fibrous tissue as the wall of the sac, e.g. aneurysm following 
trauma. Aneurysms can also be grouped according to their 
shape (fusiform, saccular) or their aetiology (atheromatous, 
traumatic, mycotic, etc.). The term mycotic is a misnomer 
because, although it indicates infection as the cause of the 
aneurysm, it is due to bacteria, not fungi. Aneurysms may 
occur in the aorta, iliac, femoral, popliteal, subclavian, axil -
lary, carotid, cerebral, mesenteric, splenic and renal arteries 
and their branches. The majority are true fusiform athero -
sclerotic aneurysms.
Figure 56.34 Inflatable artificial limb.
Clinical features
The majority of arterial aneurysms are asymptomatic at the 
time of identification and are often identified during rou-
tine health checks or investigations for other pathologies. 
All aneurysms can cause symptoms, but aneurysms measur -
ing twice the size of the corresponding normal vessel are at 
increased risk of complications. The symptoms relate to the 
vessel affected and the tissues it supplies and occur as a result 
of compression of surrounding structures, thrombosis, rupture 
or the release of emboli. Many aneurysms of clinical signifi -
cance can be palpated and, typically, an expansile pulsation 
is felt. Transmitted pulsation through a mass lesion, cyst or 
abscess lying adjacent to a large artery may be mistaken for 
aneurysmal pulsation. Before incising a swelling believed 
to be an abscess, it is essential to make sure that it does not 
pulsate. Finally, a tortuous (and often ectatic) artery, usually 
the innominate or carotid, may seem like an aneurysm to the 
inexperienced clinician.
Summary box 56.4
Classification of aneurysms
Wall
●● True (three layers: intima, media, adventitia)
●● False (single layer of fibrous tissue)
Morphology
●● Fusiform
●● Saccular
Aetiology
●● Atheromatous
●● Mycotic (bacterial rather than fungal)
●● Collagen disease
●● Traumatic
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   960 25/10/2017   09:32Aneurysm 961
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Abdominal aortic aneurysm
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is by far the most common 
type of large vessel aneurysm and is found in 2% of the popu-
lation at autopsy; 95% have associated atheromatous degen-
eration and 95% occur below the renal arteries. Most remain 
asymptomatic until rupture occurs; the risk of rupture increases 
with increasing size (diameter) of the aneurysm. Asymptomatic 
aneurysms are found incidentally on physical examination, radi-
ography or ultrasound investigation. A national screening pro-
gramme for AAA has recently started in England and offers an 
ultrasound scan to men in their 65th year. Symptomatic aneu-
rysms may cause minor symptoms, such as back and abdominal 
discomfort, before sudden, severe back and/or abdominal pain 
develops from expansion and rupture. Rarely, symptoms may 
occur as a result of erosion or compression of surrounding struc-
tures, e.g. aortoenteric fistula, ureteric obstruction.
Asymptomatic abdominal aortic 
aneurysm
An asymptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysm (Figure 56.35) 
in an otherwise fit patient should be considered for repair if 
>55 mm in diameter (measured by ultrasonography). The 
annual incidence of rupture rises from 1% or less in aneurysms 
that are <55 mm in diameter to a significant level, perhaps as 
high as 25%, in those that are 70  mm in diameter. Assuming 
open elective surgery (transabdominal) carries a 5% mortality 
rate, the balance is in favour of elective operation once the 
maximum diameter is >55  mm, provided there is no major 
comorbidity. Regular ultrasonographic assessment is indi -
cated for asymptomatic aneurysms <55 mm in diameter.
Investigations
Full blood count, electrolytes, liver function tests, coagula -
tion tests and blood lipid estimation should be performed. 
Blood should be cross-matched a few days prior to surgery. 
Many patients now have an anaesthetic assessment and the 
need for cardiac and respiratory function tests are decided at 
this time. ECG and chest radiographs are essential; further 
assessment may include echocardiography or isotope ventric-
ulography, cardiopulmonary exercise testing and spirometry.
The morphology of the aneurysm is best assessed by CT 
scan (Figures 56.36 and 56.37). 75% of aneurysms are 
suitable for endovascular (minimally invasive) repair, usu-
ally via the femoral arteries in the groin. If lower limb pulses 
are absent, there may be associated arterial occlusive disease 
that should be assessed by duplex scanning initially. Further 
assessment with CT, MR or DSA may be required and angio-
plasty may be appropriate. The aneurysm is often filled with 
circumferential clot (Figure 56.38a) that produces a falsely 
narrowed appearance on DSA (Figure 56.38b); this method 
should not therefore be used to assess aneurysm size.
Choice of operation – open or 
endovascular repair
Open aneurysm repair
Under general anaesthesia, with the patient lying supine, a 
full-length midline or supraumbilical transverse incision is 
Figure 56.35  Ultrasonogram of an aortic aneurysm showing the 
large clot-filled sac with a small central lumen (transverse and longi -
tudinal scans).
Figure 56.36  Computed tomogram of the abdomen showing an 
aortic aneurysm. Blood flowing through the thrombus-containing sac 
is enhanced with contrast agent and appears white.
(a)
(b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   961 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR962
made. The small bowel is lifted to the patient’s right and the 
aorta identified. The posterior peritoneum overlying the aorta 
is opened and the upper limit of the aneurysm identified. The 
aorta immediately above the dilatation is exposed; this is 
generally just inferior to the left renal vein and renal arteries 
(Figure 56.39). The common iliac arteries are then exposed 
and clamps applied above and below the lesion. Many sur -
geons give systemic heparin before clamping. The aneurysm 
is opened longitudinally and back-bleeding from lumbar and 
mesenteric vessels controlled by sutures placed from within 
the sac. Upper and lower aortic necks are prepared to which 
an aortic prosthesis is then sutured end-to-end inside the sac 
with a monofilament non-absorbable suture (Figure 56.40). 
Clamps are released slowly to prevent sudden hypotension. 
If haemostasis is satisfactory at this point, the aneurysm sac 
is closed around the prosthesis to exclude both it and the 
suture lines from the bowel, to reduce the risk of adherence 
and potential fistula formation. The abdomen is then closed. 
Occasionally, when the iliac vessels are also involved with 
dilatation or severe atheroma, it is necessary to construct an 
aortobi-iliac or aortobifemoral bypass, rather than use a sim-
ple aortoaortic tube.
Endovascular aneurysm repair
Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is now established  
in clinical practice and has been shown to reduce mortality 
compared to open repair over the first 6 years. Currently, 
about 75% of infrarenal aneurysms are suitable for EVAR, 
depending on the morphology of the aneurysm assessed by CT 
scan. Common causes of unsuitability include a short, flared 
or angulated neck and difficult iliac artery access because of 
Figure 56.37 (a) Spiral computed tomogram 
showing an infrarenal abdominal aortic aneu -
rysm; (b) with the bony elements subtracted.
Figure 56.38 (a) Thrombus removed from an abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm; this thrombus is the reason an angiogram may give a false impres-
sion of aneurysm diameter on digital subtraction angiography (b).
(a) (b)
(a)
(b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   962 25/10/2017   09:32Aneurysm 963
PART 10 | VASCULAR
narrowing or tortuosity. The usual technique is to expose both 
femoral arteries (under general or local anaesthetic), which 
allows access to the aorta. Then, under radiological control, 
guidewires and catheters are used to cross the aneurysm and 
an angiogram performed to mark the level of the renal arteries.
The endovascular prosthesis (often termed a ‘stent graft’) 
is usually made up of three separate parts – a main body (Fig-
ure 56.41a) and two limbs, which are enclosed in separate 
delivery catheters (Figure 56.41b). Some types have only two 
pieces, a main body with ipsilateral limb attached and a sepa-
rate contralateral limb. The prosthesis is made from Dacron ® 
or PTFE, with integral metallic stents for support. The deliv -
ery catheter is inserted in the aneurysm sac and the stent-graft 
deployed by withdrawal of the delivery system. Most systems 
now have hooks or barbs to anchor the prosthesis in the aortic 
wall and some surgeons inflate a moulding balloon catheter in 
the stent-graft to ensure the hooks and barbs are engaged and 
a good seal is obtained (Figure 56.42). Although the top edge 
of the fabric of the stent-graft has to be deployed below the 
renal arteries (infrarenal fixation), some systems have addi -
tional bare metal stents at the proximal end of the main body 
that lie across the renal arteries to give better support and 
fixation (suprarenal fixation). Blood flows between the metal 
struts of the stent into the renal arteries. Success is dependent 
on a good seal between the stent-graft and the proximal and 
distal ‘landing zones’ in the aorta and iliac arteries. Failure to 
achieve a good seal results in an endoleak, that means that 
the aneurysm is not excluded from the circulation and may 
still expand and rupture. Patients who undergo EVAR require 
Figure 56.39 Operative appearance of a large, non-ruptur ed infra-
renal abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Figure 56.40 (a) Aneurysm sac opened. Note that the posterior wall of the aorta immediately above and below the sac is not divided. 
A Dacron tube graft is laid in place within the sac ready for suture. (b) Graft sutured in place and vascular clamps removed.
(a) (b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   963 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR964
life-long follow-up and surveillance with duplex or CT scans 
to detect endoleak, disconnection of the components and 
migration of the stent-graft, all of which predispose to late 
rupture (Figure 56.43).
Ruptured abdominal aortic 
aneurysm
Abdominal aortic aneurysms can rupture anteriorly into the 
peritoneal cavity (20%) or posterolaterally into the retroper -
itoneal space (80%). Less than 50% of patients with rupture 
survive to reach hospital. Anterior rupture results in free 
bleeding into the peritoneal cavity; very few patients reach 
hospital alive. Posterior rupture, on the other hand, produces 
a retroperitoneal haematoma (Figure 56.44). Often a brief 
period ensues when a combination of moderate hypotension 
and the resistance of the retroperitoneal tissues arrests fur -
ther haemorrhage and may allow transport to hospital. The 
patient may remain conscious but in severe pain. If no oper -
ation is performed, death is virtually inevitable. Operative 
mortality is around 50% and the overall combined mortality 
(community and hospital) is around 80–90%.
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm is a surgical emer -
gency; it should be suspected in a patient with the triad of 
severe abdominal and/or back pain, hypotension and a pul-
satile abdominal mass. If there is doubt about the presence 
of an aneurysm an ultrasound scan may help, but this cannot 
diagnose rupture. CT scanning should be used to establish the 
diagnosis and to determine whether an endovascular repair is 
possible.
Good venous access is needed for infusion of saline or vol-
ume expanding fluids, but the systolic blood pressure should 
not be raised any more than is necessary to maintain con-
sciousness and permit cardiac perfusion (<100 mmHg). Many 
surgeons now adopt a policy of permissive hypotension, where 
fluids are withheld if the patient is conscious (and cerebral 
perfusion is therefore adequate) in order to avoid provoking 
further uncontrolled haemorrhage. After CT scanning, the 
patient should be transferred immediately to an operating 
theatre, where a urinary catheter and arterial line are usually 
inserted. If the patient appears stable, surgery may be delayed 
Figure 56.41 (a) Endovascular prosthesis main body, with separate 
limbs (b).
Figure 56.42 Spiral computed tomogram showing an endoluminal 
aortoiliac ‘stent-graft’. The metallic stent structure is clearly observed.
Figure 56.43 Duplex ultrasound scan post endovascular aneurysm 
repair (EVAR), showing the aortic sac in cross-section and two limbs 
of EVAR (red ovals). There is a type II endoleak from the inferior mes-
enteric artery, with blood flowing retrogradely into the aneurysm sac 
(arrow)
(a)
(b)
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   964 25/10/2017   09:32Aneurysm 965
PART 10 | VASCULAR
until cross-matched blood is available but surgery should com-
mence immediately if haemodynamic instability develops. 
The abdomen is usually prepared and draped with the patient 
awake. It is important to remember that the treatment of rup-
tured aneurysm is operation, not monitoring and resuscitation.
Symptomatic abdominal aortic 
aneurysm
These patients most commonly present with abdominal and/
or back pain but the aneurysm is not ruptured on CT scan. 
Pain may also occur in the thigh and groin because of nerve  
compression. Gastrointestinal, urinary and venous symptoms 
can also be caused by pressure from an abdominal aneurysm. 
About 3% of all aneurysms cause pain as a result of inflam -
mation of the aneurysm itself (Figure 56.45). Finally, a few 
cause symptoms from distal embolisation of fragments of their 
intraluminal thrombus. An operation is usually indicated in 
patients who are otherwise reasonably fit. Pain may be a warn-
ing sign of stretching of the aneurysm sac and imminent rup-
ture; surgery should be performed as soon as possible (usually 
on the next available operating list). The operative mortality 
of symptomatic aneurysms is usually higher than elective cases.
Postoperative complications
The most common complications after open repair are car -
diac (ischaemia and infarction) and respiratory (atelectasis 
and lower lobe consolidation). A degree of colonic ischaemia 
Figure 56.44 The retr operitoneal haematoma of a ruptured aortic 
aneurysm. The aortic pulsation is palpated through the haematoma 
at its upper limit and fingers are insinuated on each side of the aorta. 
With finger control, the upper clamp is positioned and closed on the 
aorta. The procedure is then as for a planned case. In this illustration, 
the clamp is at the proximal end of the aneurysm; the haematoma has 
spread from the left paracolic gutter to encircle the aneurysm and the 
aortic bifurcation.
Summary box 56.5
Management of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
●● Early diagnosis (abdominal/back pain, pulsatile mass, shock)
●● Immediate resuscitation (oxygen, intravenous replacement 
therapy, central line)
●● Maintain systolic pressure, but not >100 mmHg, consider 
permissive hypotension
●● Urinary catheter
●● Cross-match 6 units of blood
●● Rapid transfer to the operating room
 Figure 56.45 An inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm. Note the 
white ‘icing’ effect. Such lesions can be technically difficult to manage.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   965 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR966
because of lack of a collateral blood supply occurs in about 
10% of patients, but fortunately this usually resolves sponta -
neously. Renal failure is an uncommon event after elective 
procedures but may complicate procedures undertaken for 
rupture. Renal failure is more likely if there is preoperative 
renal impairment or considerable intraoperative blood loss. 
Neurological complications include sexual dysfunction and 
spinal cord ischaemia. An aortoduodenal fistula is an uncom-
mon but treatable complication of abdominal aortic replace -
ment surgery. It should be suspected whenever haematemesis 
or melaena occurs in the months or years after operation. 
Prosthetic graft infection is also uncommon; it may require 
explantation of the original graft and replacement with an 
autologous deep vein (superficial femoral vein) graft limb, or 
removal of the original graft with oversewing of the aortic 
stump and limb revascularisation by insertion of an axillobi -
femoral bypass. Both techniques are associated with signifi -
cant risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality.
Cardiac, respiratory, renal and neurological complications 
are less common after endovascular repair. However, there 
are complications that are unique to EVAR such as endoleak, 
graft migration, metal strut fracture and graft limb occlusion. 
Life-long surveillance with duplex or CT (together with 
plain abdominal x-ray for strut fracture) is required to detect 
endoleak and migration. High-pressure endoleaks may require 
repeat ballooning or a proximal cuff or distal limb extension to 
reseal the endograft. Migration may also require extension of 
the graft. Overall, 10–20% of patients with EVAR will require 
secondary interventions to treat complications at some future 
date, although many of the interventions can be performed 
with a percutaneous approach via the femoral artery in the 
angiography suite.
Peripheral aneurysm
Popliteal aneurysm
Popliteal artery aneurysm accounts for 70% of all peripheral 
aneurysms classically diagnosed in males in their seventh 
decade of life; 50% are bilateral. Examination of the abdomi-
nal aorta is indicated if a popliteal aneurysm is found because 
one-third are accompanied by aortic dilatation.
Popliteal aneurysms present as a swelling behind the knee 
or with symptoms caused by complications, such as severe 
ischaemia following thrombosis or distal ischaemia as a result 
of emboli. The diagnosis is usually confirmed with duplex 
scanning but assessment of the distal vessels (with CT, MR 
or DSA) is important prior to repair if the foot pulses are 
diminished or absent. An asymptomatic aneurysm exceeding 
20 mm in diameter should be considered for elective repair, to 
prevent future complications. Some surgeons would also offer 
elective repair for smaller diameters if the sac contains throm-
bus, because of a perceived increased risk of distal embolisa -
tion. All symptomatic popliteal aneurysms, including those in 
which single crural vessel embolisation has occurred, should 
be considered for repair.
Two techniques for surgical repair may be used: exclu -
sion bypass and inlay repair. An exclusion bypass involves 
a medial approach to the above- and below-knee popliteal 
arteries, ligation of the aneurysm and restoration of flow to 
the foot with a bypass graft using saphenous vein. Many sur -
geons favour this approach because the anatomy is similar to 
that for a femoropopliteal bypass and therefore familiar. An 
inlay graft repair is performed through a posterior approach 
and has the benefits of allowing free ligation of feeding genic-
ulate branches as well as aneurysmectomy in cases with neu -
rovascular compression. However, the posterior approach 
limits exposure of the superficial femoral and crural arteries 
and should only be used when the popliteal aneurysm is con-
fined to the popliteal fossa.
In the acute situation, the presentation is usually with 
a thrombosed aneurysm and an ischaemic foot; popliteal 
aneurysms very rarely rupture. Surgery is often unsuccess-
ful because the distal vessels are thrombosed and difficult to 
clear. Attempts should be made with a Fogarty catheter and 
intra-arterial thrombolysis. The limb loss rate is high (50%).
Femoral aneurysm
True aneurysm of the femoral artery is uncommon. Compli -
cations occur in less than 3% so conservative treatment is 
generally indicated, but it is important to look for aneurysms 
elsewhere as over half are associated with abdominal or pop -
liteal aneurysms. Large aneurysms should be repaired. False 
aneurysm of the femoral artery occurs in 2% of patients after 
arterial surgery at this site. Local repair may involve reanas -
tomosis of the bypass in the groin under suitable antibiotic 
cover. However, if infection is the cause, the treatment may 
involve excision of the infected graft and insertion of a fur -
ther bypass routed around the infected area. In the latter case, 
the failure rate is high, and limb loss may be unavoidable. 
For false aneurysms caused by femoral artery puncture mea -
suring <3 cm, thrombin injection under ultrasound guidance 
may be successful and avoids surgery. False aneurysms measur-
ing >3 cm are unlikely to be successfully treated by thrombin 
injection and require open surgical arterial repair with sutur-
ing of the puncture site.
Iliac aneurysm
This usually occurs in conjunction with aortic aneurysm and 
only rarely on its own. When occurring in isolation it is diffi-
cult to diagnose clinically, so about half present already rup -
tured. Open surgery usually involves an inlay graft but some 
iliac aneurysms may be suitable for EVAR.
Arteriovenous fistula
Communication between an artery and a vein (or veins) may 
be either a congenital malformation or the result of trauma. 
Arteriovenous fistulas for haemodialysis access are also cre -
ated surgically . All arteriovenous communications have a 
structural and a physiological effect. The structural effect of 
arterial blood flow on the veins is characteristic; they become 
dilated, tortuous and thick walled (arterialised). The phys -
iological effect, if the fistula is big enough, is an increase in 
cardiac output. In extreme circumstances this can cause left 
ventricular enlargement and even cardiac failure.
A pulsatile swelling may be present if the lesion is superfi-
cial. A thrill is detected on palpation and auscultation reveals 
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   966 25/10/2017   09:32Arteritis and vasospastic conditions 967
PART 10 | VASCULAR
a buzzing continuous bruit (‘machinery murmur’). Dilated 
veins may be seen, in which there is rapid blood flow. Pressure 
on the artery proximal to the fistula reduces the swelling and 
the thrill and bruit cease.
Duplex scan and/or angiography confirms the lesion, 
which is noteworthy for the speed with which venous filling 
occurs.
Management
Treatment is by embolisation. Excision surgery can be advo -
cated only rarely , perhaps for severe deformity or recurrent 
haemorrhage; the assistance of a plastic surgeon is wise. It is 
important to realise that ligation of a ‘feeding’ artery on its 
own is of no lasting value and is actually detrimental as it may 
preclude treatment by embolisation.
ARTERITIS AND VASOSPASTIC 
CONDITIONS
Thromboangiitis obliterans 
(Buerger’s disease)
This is characterised by occlusive disease of small- and 
medium- sized arteries (plantar, tibial, radial, etc.), throm -
bophlebitis of the superficial or deep veins and Raynaud’s 
 syndrome; it occurs in male smokers, usually under the age of 
30 years. Often, only one or two of the three manifestations 
are present. Histologically, there are inflammatory changes in 
the walls of arteries and veins, leading to thrombosis. Treat -
ment is total abstinence from smoking, which arrests, but 
does not reverse, the disease. Established arterial occlusions 
are treated as for atheromatous disease, but amputations may 
eventually be required.
Other forms of arteritis
Arteritis occurs in association with many connective tissue 
disorders, e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythema -
tosus and polyarteritis nodosa. This is usually the province of 
the specialist physician, but the surgeon may be called on to 
carry out minor amputations. Sympathectomy has previously 
been used but is usually ineffective.
Temporal arteritis is a disease in which localised infil-
tration with inflammatory and giant cells leads to arterial 
occlusion, ischaemic headache and tender, palpable, pulse -
less (thrombosed) arteries in the scalp. Irreversible blindness 
occurs if the ophthalmic artery becomes occluded. The sur -
geon may be required to perform a temporal artery biopsy, but 
this should not delay immediate steroid therapy to arrest and 
reverse the process before the ophthalmic artery is involved. 
The length of the biopsy should be at least 2.5 cm.
Takayasu’s disease is an arteritis that obstructs major arter-
ies, particularly the large vessels coming off the aortic arch. It 
usually pursues a relentless course.
Cystic myxomatous degeneration
This is typified by an accumulation of clear jelly (like a syno-
vial ganglion) in the outer layers of a main artery, especially 
the popliteal artery. The lesion may narrow the vessel, caus -
ing claudication. Duplex scan is the investigation of choice. 
Decompression, by removal of the myxomatous material, is 
often all that is required, but the ‘ganglion’ may recur, neces-
sitating excision of part of the artery with interposition vein 
graft repair.
Raynaud’s disease
This idiopathic condition usually occurs in young women and 
affects the hands more than the feet. There is abnormal sensi-
tivity in the arteriolar response to cold. These vessels constrict 
and the digits (usually the fingers) turn white and become 
incapable of fine movements. The capillaries then dilate and 
fill with slowly flowing deoxygenated blood, resulting in the 
digits becoming swollen and dusky. As the attack passes off, 
the arterioles relax, oxygenated blood returns into the dilated 
capillaries and the digits become red. Thus, the condition is 
recognised by the characteristic sequence of blanching, dusky 
cyanosis and red engorgement, often accompanied by pain. 
Superficial necrosis is very uncommon. This condition must 
be distinguished from Raynaud’s syndrome, which has similar 
features (see below). Treatment of Raynaud’s disease consists 
of protection from cold and avoidance of pulp and nail bed 
infection. Calcium antagonists, such as nifedipine, may also 
have a role to play and electrically heated gloves can be useful 
in winter. Sympathectomy has been used in the past but it is 
either ineffective or its effects are short-lived.
Raynaud’s syndrome
Although peripheral vasospasm may be noted in athero -
sclerosis, thoracic outlet syndrome, carpal tunnel syndrome, 
etc., the term Raynaud’s syndrome is most often used for a 
peripheral arterial manifestation of a collagen disease, such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus or rheumatoid arthritis. The 
clinical features are as for Raynaud’ s disease but they may be 
much more aggressive. Raynaud’s syndrome may also follow 
the use of vibrating tools. In this context, it is a recognised 
industrial disease and is known as ‘vibration white finger’.
Treatment is directed primarily at the underlying con -
dition, although the conservative measures outlined above 
are often helpful. The syndrome when secondary to colla-
gen disease leads frequently to necrosis of digits and multi-
ple amputations. Sympathectomy yields disappointing results 
and is not recommended. Nifedipine, steroids and vasospastic 
antagonists may all have a role in treatment. Patients with 
vibration white finger should avoid vibrating tools.
Acrocyanosis
Acrocyanosis may be confused with Raynaud’s disease but it 
is painless and not episodic. It tends to affect young women 
Mikito Takayasu , 1860–1938, Japanese ophthalmologist, described this disease in 1908.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   967 25/10/2017   09:32CHAPTER 56  Arterial disor ders
PART 10 | VASCULAR968
and the mottled cyanosis of the fingers and/or toes may be 
accompanied by paraesthesia and chilblains.
Cervical sympathectomy
Open cervical sympathectomy was previously performed for 
vasospastic conditions affecting the hands and to treat pal -
mar (sometimes axillary) hyperhidrosis. The operation is now 
obsolete, having been replaced by endoscopic transthoracic 
sympathectomy. Furthermore, it has been increasingly rec-
ognised that the vasospastic conditions do not respond to this 
form of treatment, rendering the endoscopic intervention a 
therapy that is suitable solely for hyperhidrosis.
Lumbar sympathectomy
Lumbar sympathectomy has been used to treat chronic 
lower limb ischaemia in the past. Lumbar sympathectomy 
by open operation has, however, been obsolete for several 
years and even chemical sympathectomy, its minimally inva-
sive equivalent, can now be regarded as outdated. Chemical 
sympathectomy requires the injection of small quantities of 
a sclerosant into the lumbar sympathetic chain under radio -
graphic  control.
FURTHER READING
Ascher E, Veith FJ, Gloviczki P (eds). Haimovici’s vascular surgery, 6th 
edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, 2012.
Bhattacharya V , Stansby G (eds). Postgraduate vascular surgery: the can -
didates’ guide to the FRCS . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2011.
Cronenwett JL, Johnstone WK (eds). Rutherford’s vascular surgery, 8th 
edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2014.
England T, Nasim A (eds). ABC of arterial and venous disease, 3rd edn. 
London: BMJ Books, 2014.
Moore WS (ed). Vascular and endovascular surgery: a comprehensive re -
view, 8th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2013.
10_56B-B&L27_Pt10_Ch56.indd   968 25/10/2017   09:32Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • Venous anatomy and the physiology of venous  
return
 • The pathophysiology of venous hypertension
 • The clinical significance and management of superficial 
venous reflux
 • The management of venous ulceration
 • Venous thromboembolism
Chapter
Venous disorders
57
INTRODUCTION
Up to 40% of the adult population in resource-rich coun -
tries have diseases of the veins of the leg. This extraordinary 
prevalence along with the associated impairment in health-  
related quality of life make it a very important area of surgical 
practice. Surgical intervention has been revolutionised by the 
development of endovenous techniques, and level 1 evidence 
has demonstrated that treatment can be associated with very 
high clinical- and cost-effectiveness. Despite the consider -
able importance placed on lower limb function during the 
management of orthopaedic and arterial diseases, venous dis-
eases are often forgotten or dismissed as cosmetic practice. 
An understanding of the nature and management of venous 
disease is critical to address this imbalance and improve the 
quality of patients’ lives.
THE ANATOMY OF THE VENOUS 
SYSTEM OF THE LOWER LIMB
The venous system of the lower limb can be divided anatom-
ically into the superficial venous system, which is located 
within the superficial tissues and the deep venous system , 
beneath the deep fascia of the leg, accompanying the arterial 
tree. The superficial veins drain into the deep system, either at 
junctions or via fascial perforating veins, and the deep veins 
then return blood to the right atrium of the heart. V enous 
anatomy is characteristically variable. The terminology used 
below is consistent with international consensus.
The deep veins of the lower limb (Figure 57.1a) include 
three pairs of venae commitantes, which accompany the 
three crural arteries (anterior and posterior tibial and pero-
neal arteries). These six veins intercommunicate and come 
together in the popliteal fossa to form the popliteal vein, 
which also receives the soleal and gastrocnemius veins. The 
popliteal vein passes up through the adductor hiatus to enter 
the subsartorial canal as the femoral vein, which receives the 
deep (profunda) femoral vein (or veins) in the femoral trian-
gle before passing behind the inguinal ligament to become 
the external iliac vein. The internal iliac vein combines with 
the external iliac vein in the pelvis to form the common iliac 
vein. The left common iliac vein passes behind the right com-
mon iliac artery to join the right common iliac vein on the 
right side of the abdominal aorta to form the inferior vena 
cava, which goes on to the right atrium.
Far more anatomical variations exist within the superfi -
cial veins of the lower limb, but there are almost always two 
trunks or axes, the great and small saphenous veins (Figures 
57.1b, c). These lie superficial to the fascia lata (deep fascia) 
but deep to the saphenous fascia, in the saphenous ‘envelope’.
As the sole of the foot is often placed under significant 
pressure, the majority of the venous drainage of the foot is 
into the dorsal venous arch, running in the subcutaneous tis-
sues over the metatarsal heads. The medial end of this arch 
drains into the first axis: the great saphenous vein (GSV). 
This is the longest vein in the body and the most frequently 
affected by superficial incompetence. The GSV passes anter -
ior to the medial malleolus and ascends the leg accompanied 
by the saphenous nerve in the superficial tissues medial to the 
tibia, looping posteriorly at the level of the medial condyle of 
the femur and continuing in the medial thigh. In the groin, it 
unites with tributaries corresponding to the arterial branches 
of the common femoral artery, before piercing the cribriform 
fascia covering the saphenous opening (approximately 2.5 cm 
below and lateral to the pubic tubercle, but often somewhat 
higher) and terminates by draining into the common femoral 
vein (CFV) at the saphenofemoral junction (SFJ). Through -
out its course the GSV unites variably with other superficial 
tributaries. The anterior (accessory) saphenous vein (ASV) 
is one of the most common. This is often seen originating 
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   969 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR970
around the lateral border of the knee, although it sometimes 
originates as low as the lateral end of the dorsal venous arch. 
Occasionally, this vein may also course up the medial aspect 
of the thigh, anterolateral to the GSV following its course. 
In this instance, its origin is typically a confluence of small 
tributaries around the knee. There is usually an in-line GSV 
axis passing uninterrupted from the foot (in some cases this 
may be hypoplastic), but this pattern of ASV is commonly 
mistaken for the GSV itself (some surgeons will call this a 
duplex GSV; a true duplex GSV is rare). The ASV may drain 
into the GSV in the thigh, but is typically at or near the junc-
tion itself.
The small saphenous vein (SSV) originates from the 
lateral side of the dorsal venous arch and accompanies the 
sural nerve as it passes posterior to the lateral malleolus, then 
upwards in the posterior midline of the leg. In the proximal 
calf it is usually found sitting in the groove between the two 
muscular heads of gastrocnemius. Its termination commonly 
occurs by piercing the fascia of the popliteal fossa to drain 
into the popliteal vein at the saphenopopliteal junction 
(SPJ). However, this junction is highly variable and the vein 
may terminate as low as the mid-calf. The SSV may extend 
cranially beyond the SPJ, in which case it is known as either 
a cranial extension of the SSV , which terminates by piercing 
the fascia in the posterior thigh to drain into the deep system, 
or the Giacomini vein, which communicates with the GSV 
system occasionally joining the GSV at or about the SFJ. In 
some cases, the SSV does not terminate at or below the popli-
teal fossa at all, but continues on as described above.
In the calf and thigh there are a number of valved per -
forating (communicating) veins that join the superficial to 
the deep veins at inconstant sites and which allow blood 
to flow from the superficial to the deep venous system. The 
most important of these are the direct perforating veins of the 
medial and lateral calf and the communicating veins around 
the knee and in the mid-thigh.
VENOUS PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
The purpose of the venous system is primarily to return blood 
back to the heart so that it can be delivered into the pulmo-
nary circulation. The venous system contains approximately 
60% of the total blood volume, with an average pressure 
of around 5–10  mmHg. Mechanical factors, alongside the 
autonomic nervous and endocrine systems, control the rate 
Anterior tributary
of the leg
Saphenofemoral junction
Great saphenous vein
Posteromedial thigh
tributary
Anterior (accessory)
saphenous vein
Saphenopopliteal
junction
Small saphenous vein
Cranial extension
of small saphenous
(Giacomini) vein
Carlo Giacomini , 1840–1898, anatomist, Turin, Italy, on his death left his skeleton to the Anatomical Museum in Turin.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Common
femoral vein
Super/f_icial
femoral vein
Anterior tibial veins
(usually paired)
Saphenofemoral
junction
Profunda femoral
vein
Posterior tibial veins
(usually paired)
Peroneal veins
(usually paired)
Popliteal vein
Figure 57.1 (a) Anatomy of the deep veins of the lower limb; (b) 
anatomy of the superficial veins of the lower limb (great saphenous 
axis); (c) anatomy of the superficial veins of the lower limb (small 
saphenous axis). 
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   970 25/10/2017   09:34Venous pathophysiology 971
PART 10 | VASCULAR
at which blood is delivered to the right atrium. Through its 
effects upon myocardial contractility via the Starling mecha-
nism, venous return is one of the factors responsible for deter-
mining cardiac output.
Blood enters the lower limb through the femoral arteries 
before passing through arterioles into the capillaries, which 
have a pressure of about 32 mmHg at their arterial ends. This 
pressure is reduced along the course of the capillaries and is 
approximately 12 mmHg at the venular end of the capillary. 
The pressure continues to fall in the main veins, and is as low 
as 5 mmHg at the upper end of the vena cava where it enters 
the right atrium.
The venous pressure in a foot vein on standing is equivalent 
to the height of a column of blood extending from the heart to 
the foot, e.g. approximately 100 mmHg (Figure 57.2). To enable 
blood to be returned against gravity in the standing position a 
pressure gradient must exist between the veins in the leg and the 
chest. This gradient is created in two ways. Firstly, the increase in 
thoracic volume during inspiration decreases intrathoracic pres-
sure. Secondly, the pressure in the veins of the leg is increased by 
compression by the surrounding muscles (the ‘calf muscle pump’) 
and to a lesser extent the tone of the venous wall. The deep 
veins of the calf are capacious and are joined by blind- ending 
sacks called the soleal sinusoids, which force blood into the pop-
liteal and crural veins during calf muscle pump contraction, e.g. 
walking. The foot pump also ejects blood from the plantar veins 
during walking. As the calf muscles contract, the veins are com-
pressed and the valves only allow blood to pass in the direction 
of the heart. The pressure within the calf compartment rises to 
200–300 mmHg during muscle contraction. Rapid blood flow 
in the deep veins at junctions and perforators draws blood from 
the superficial veins, driving this up the deep veins also. During 
muscle relaxation, the pressure falls and further blood from the 
superficial veins enters the deep vein. Each time this occurs 
the pressure falls in the superficial venous compartment until a 
threshold is reached, when the venous inflow keeps pace with 
ejection from the deep veins. This is normally around 30 mmHg, 
a fall of approximately two-thirds of the resting venous pressure. 
The net reduction in the pressure of the superficial system is 
dependent on the presence of a pressure gradient between the 
leg and the thorax and a patent and compliant venous system 
containing competent valves. An absence of one or more of 
these results in venous hypertension, which leads to further vein 
wall damage including loss of compliance, thickening, dilatation 
and valvular dysfunction. This venous damage goes on to reduce 
the function of the affected veins, worsening the venous hyper-
tension in a vicious cycle. When exposed to high venous and 
capillary pressures chronically, the soft tissues of the leg will be 
damaged, causing a spectrum of damage that become irreversible. 
The causes of venous hypertension are listed in Table 57.1.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 10 20 30 40
Time (seconds) 
Foot vein pressure (mmHg)  
Walking
Post-thrombotic 
limb
Normal limb
Standing
Standing
Figure 57.2 (a, b) Effect of exercise on the superficial venous pres-
sure in health and disease.
(a)
(b)
Ernest Henry Starling , 1866–1927, physiologist, University College, London, UK.
Rudolf Virchow , 1821–1902, pathologist Charite Hospital, Berlin, Germany, was the first to be credited with describing iliac vein compression. It was not until 
1957 that May and Thurner (Innsbruck, Austria) clearly described compression of the left common iliac vein by the right common iliac artery.
TABLE 57.1 Factors causing venous hypertension.
●● Pressure gradient dysfunction:
Increased abdominal or thoracic pressure:
●■ COPD
●■ Pregnancy
●■ Obesity
●■ Large tumour
●■ Constipation
Decreased calf muscle pump function:
●■ Immobility
●■ Ankle joint fusion
●■ Paralysis
●● Dysfunction of the venous system:
Venous structural deficit:
●■ Valvular agenesis
●■ Valvular incompetence
●■ Venous dilatation
●■ Venous tortuosity
●■ Loss of vein wall compliance
●■ Loss of venous tone
●■ Arteriovenous fistula
Venous occlusion:
●■ Agenesis
●■ Thrombosis
●■ Iatrogenic/trauma
Venous compression:
●■ May–Thurner syndrome
●■ Pelvic/abdominal tumour
●■ Pelvic/abdominal radiotherapy
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   971 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR972
The majority of patients with venous disease have a prob-
lem primarily with the vein wall structure and in most this 
is confined to the superficial veins. Little is known about 
the mechanism of initiation of the changes in the vein wall. 
These changes are complex, but are typified by valvular failure 
allowing retrograde flow within the vein with gravity (venous 
incompetence). It is no longer thought that venous incompe-
tence is caused by a primary mechanical valvular failure.
The vein wall changes include inflammatory cell infiltra -
tion and activation, dysfunctional smooth muscle cell prolif -
eration, collagen deposition, decreased elastin content and 
increased matrix metalloproteinases. These effects typically 
lead to loss of compliance, dilatation, elongation (causing tor-
tuosity) and secondary valvular dysfunction. This process can 
be initiated anywhere in the venous tree. Secondary varicose 
veins may develop in patients with post-thrombotic limbs and 
in patients with congenital abnormalities such as the Klippel–
Trenaunay syndrome or multiple arteriovenous fistulae.
The extent and number of incompetent veins governs the 
extent of the venous hypertension and correlates to the sever-
ity of the soft tissue complications seen. Importantly however, 
neither the reflux burden nor the presence of skin changes, 
short of ulceration, correlate with the presence or degree of 
symptoms.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF 
VENOUS HYPERTENSION OF 
THE LEG
The following clinical features are commonly seen:
 ● Varicose vein: subcutaneous dilated vein 3  mm in diam-
eter or larger. They are frequently elongated and tortu -
ous, with intermittent ‘blowouts’, but are defined by the 
presence of reflux and may be straight and uniform tubes 
morphologically (Figure 57.3).
 ● Telangiectasia (thread veins, spider veins, and hyphen 
webs): represent tiny intradermal venules less than 1  mm 
in diameter (Figure 57.4).
 ● Reticular vein: small dilated ‘bluish’ subdermal vein 
1–2.9 mm in diameter, usually tortuous, can be difficult to 
distinguish this from a normal subdermal vein in someone 
with white thin transparent skin.
 ● Saphena varix (Figure 57.5 ) is a (usually painless) groin 
swelling apparent on standing.
 ● Corona phlebectatica (malleolar flare): a fan-shaped pat-
tern of telangiectasia on the ankle or foot. It is thought to 
be an early sign of advanced venous disease.
 ● Oedema: increased volume of fluid in the skin and soft 
tissues of the leg. Commonly starts distally and moves 
more proximally with increasing venous dysfunction. 
Classically this is ‘pitting oedema’, with firm digital 
pressure leaving an indentation in the soft tissues.
Figure 57.3 Varicose veins: (a) left leg varicose veins in the distribution of an incompetent great saphenous vein (marked for intervention); (b) 
right leg varicose veins in the distribution of the small saphenous system with a recent episode of phlebitis; (c) varicose veins in distribution of 
an isolated incompetent anterior accessory saphenous vein with associated gaiter area skin changes.
(a) (b) (c)
A gaiter  is a leather or cloth covering for the lower leg and ankle. The name is derived from the French ‘guetre’ for the same piece of clothing.
Maurice Klippel , 1858–1942, neurologist, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Paul Trenaunay , b.1875, French neurologist. Klippel and Trenaunay described this condition in a joint paper in 1900.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   972 25/10/2017   09:34Clinical features of v enous hypertension of the leg 973
PART 10 | VASCULAR
 ● Eczema: an erythematous dermatitis, often appears minor, 
although it may be associated with significant itching and 
discomfort. In extreme cases it may progress to blistering 
and weeping (Figures 57.6–57.8).
 ● Pigmentation (haemosiderosis): a brownish discolouration 
of the skin, usually permanent. It is usually seen around 
the ankle, but is also seen in proximity to varicose veins 
and incompetent perforators (Figures 57.7 and 57.9)
 ● Lipodermatosclerosis (LDS): chronic inflammation and 
fibrosis of the skin and subcutaneous tissues, resulting in 
a tight, contracted, ‘woody’ leg on examination. It occa -
sionally results in significant contractures of the Achilles 
tendon. This is a sign of severe chronic venous disease 
(Figures 57.6 and 57.9).
 ● Atrophie blanche: localised areas of atrophic, white skin, 
often surrounded by telangiectasia and pigmentation. 
Some authors distinguish this from the white scarring left 
by ulceration, others do not. Either way, this is a sign of 
severe chronic venous disease (Figure 57.6).
 ● Venous ulcer: full-thickness skin loss, usually around the 
ankle, which fails to heal spontaneously and is propagated 
by continuing venous hypertension and the changes asso-
ciated with chronic venous disease (Figure 57.10).
Figure 57.5 A saphena varix.
Figure 57.6 Advanced skin changes – lipodermatosclerosis, eczema 
and atrophie blanche.
Figure 57.7 Pigmentation (haemosiderosis) and mild eczema.
Figure 57.8 Severe eczema.
Figure 57.4 Telangiectasia and reticular veins.
Figure 57.9 Haemosiderosis and mild lipodermatoscler osis of the 
calf skin. 
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   973 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR974
Classification system
The descriptive CEAP (Clinical-aEtiology-Anatomy-Patho-
physiology) classification for chronic venous disorders is 
widely utilised.
For clinical classification:
 ● C0: no signs of venous disease;
 ● C1: telangectasia or reticular veins;
 ● C2: varicose veins;
 ● C3: oedema;
 ● C4a: pigmentation or eczema (some include malleolar 
flare in this category);
 ● C4b: lipodermatosclerosis or atrophie blanche;
 ● C5: healed venous ulcer;
 ● C6: active venous ulcer.
Each clinical class is further characterised depending upon 
whether the patient is symptomatic (S) or asymptomatic (A), 
e.g. C2S.
For aetiological classification:
 ● Ec: congenital;
 ● Ep: primary;
 ● Es: secondary (post-thrombotic);
 ● En: no venous cause identified.
For anatomical classification:
 ● As: superficial veins;
 ● Ap: perforator veins;
 ● Ad: deep veins;
 ● An: no venous location identified.
For pathophysiological classification:
 ● Pr: reflux;
 ● Po: obstruction;
 ● Pr,o: reflux and obstruction;
 ● Pn: no venous pathophysiology identifiable.
VARICOSE VEINS
In clinical practice, patients are normally categorised as 
having ‘varicose veins’ or ‘venous ulcers’. Cases of varicose 
veins may be uncomplicated or complicated. Complications 
include superficial thrombophlebitis, bleeding or any of the 
skin changes listed above. Uncomplicated varicose veins may 
be asymptomatic or symptomatic.
Epidemiology
The adult prevalence of visible varicose veins is between 30% 
and 50%. Factors affecting prevalence include:
 ● Gender: the vast majority of studies report a higher preva-
lence in women than men, though community prevalence 
may differ.
 ● Age: the prevalence of varicose veins increases with age. 
In the Edinburgh Vein study, the prevalence of trunk vari-
cosities in the age groups 18–24 years, 25–34 years, 35–44 
years, 45–57 years and 55–64 years was 11.5%, 14.6%, 
28.8%, 41.9% and 55.7%, respectively.
 ● Ethnicity: does seem to influence the prevalence of vari -
cose veins.
 ● Body mass and height: increasing bo dy mass index and 
height may be associated with a higher prevalence of vari-
cose veins.
 ● Pregnancy: increases the risk of varicose veins.
 ● Family history: evidence supports familial susceptibility to 
varicose veins.
 ● Occupation and lifestyle factors: there is inconclusive evi-
dence regarding increased prevalence of varicose veins in 
smokers, patients who suffer constipation and occupations 
that involve prolonged standing.
Symptoms
Varicose veins frequently cause symptoms. Patients describe 
aching, heaviness, throbbing, burning or bursting over affected 
areas and sometimes the whole limb. Such symptoms typi -
cally increase throughout the day or with prolonged standing, 
and are relieved by elevation or compression hosiery. Itching 
is also commonly described, though is more frequent in the 
presence of complications as is swelling of the ankle. Venous 
symptoms in the absence of complications can be vague and it 
may be difficult to ascertain from history alone whether they 
are truly venous in origin and, therefore, whether treatment 
will help. A trial of compression hosiery can help as venous 
symptoms should show some beneficial improvement.
Symptoms can be very severe and interfere with a patient’s 
daily activities such as work, recreation and caring for 
Figure 57.10 Venous ulcer.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   974 25/10/2017   09:34Varicose veins 975
PART 10 | VASCULAR
children and adults. Such symptoms are independent of the 
degree of venous incompetence or the presence of compli -
cations, including skin changes short of ulceration. Studies 
have also shown that symptoms are associated with a signif -
icant deficit in health-related quality of life, and significant 
improvements are seen with treatment to remove or ablate 
the refluxing veins. The maximal benefit is seen in those with 
uncomplicated symptomatic varicose veins, as skin changes 
and a proportion of the associated morbidity are frequently 
irreversible.
Telangiectasia (not associated with malleolar flare) and 
reticular veins occur very commonly in the absence of sig -
nificant reflux or obstruction and in the vast majority do not 
cause any physical symptoms, though cosmetic treatment is 
commonly sought.
Signs
The presence of tortuous dilated subcutaneous veins is usually 
clinically obvious. These are confined to the GSV and SSV 
systems in approximately 60% and 20% of cases, respectively. 
The distribution of varicosities may indicate which superfi -
cial axis is defective; medial thigh and calf varicosities suggest 
GSV incompetence (Figure 57.3a), posterolateral calf vari -
cosities are suggestive of SSV incompetence (Figure 57.3b), 
whereas anterolateral thigh and calf varicosities may indi -
cate isolated incompetence of the ASV (Figure 57.3c). Any 
of the clinical features above may be present. Large dilated 
veins around the SFJ may present as a (usually painless) lump, 
emergent when standing and disappearing when recumbent. 
This is a saphena varix (Figure 57.5). Gentle palpation over 
the varix during coughing may elicit a thrill, though it may be 
mistaken for a groin hernia.
Investigation
Tourniquet tests and the use of hand-held Doppler have now 
largely been abandoned. There is good evidence to support 
the policy of duplex ultrasound scanning for all patients with 
varicose veins prior to any intervention. The best clinical 
results come from clinicians who are personally very skilled 
in the use of duplex ultrasound and use it to design a bespoke 
treatment for each individual patient, based upon their 
unique anatomy.
A high-frequency linear array transducer of 7.5–13 MHz is 
appropriate for the majority of lower limbs in order to obtain 
good quality images. The B-mode settings (depth, focal zone, 
overall gain and dynamic gain) should be optimised to ensure 
the area of interest is in the centre and occupies the majority 
of the image, and that the lumen of the vein appears as a dark 
void in the subcutaneous and deep tissues. The pulsed wave 
spectral or colour Doppler settings should be optimised for the 
low-flow velocities encountered within veins. It is conven -
tional to use blue to represent antegrade venous flow towards 
the heart and red for the reverse. Visible venous flow can be 
augmented by a calf squeeze.
The aim of the duplex scan in a patient with varicose 
veins is to establish:
 ● The presence of reflux in the deep and superficial venous 
system.
 ● The exact distribution and extent of reflux in the super -
ficial venous system including affected junctions and per -
forators.
 ● The presence of obstruction in the deep venous system.
 ● The suitability of the incompetent superficial veins for 
the different treatments available (based upon diameter, 
extent, tortuosity, saphena varix).
 ● The presence of thrombus within the superficial veins.
 ● An indication of a pelvic source of reflux or obstruction.
In order to standardise measurements of venous diameter 
and reflux, it is recommended that examination of the super-
ficial veins is performed with the patient standing. Superfi -
cial or crural vein reflux is defined as retrograde flow in the 
reverse direction to physiological flow lasting for 0.5 seconds 
or more. The proximal deep veins require a duration of 1 sec-
ond or more to be classified as incompetent. Reflux may be 
elicited by release of a calf or foot squeeze for proximal or calf 
varicosities, respectively, manual compression over varicosity 
clusters, pneumatic calf cuff deflation, active foot dorsiflexion 
and relaxation or the Vasalva manoeuvre.
The patient should stand facing towards the examiner 
with the leg rotated outwards, heel on the ground and weight 
on the opposite limb (Figure 57.11). The use of a platform, 
Figure 57.11 Patient position for venous duplex examination of the 
great saphenous system.
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   975 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR976
ideally with a handle or support bar for the patient and a 
stool that can drop to a low height, will improve the ergo -
nomic comfort of both the sonographer and the patient. The 
scan should commence in the groin, using a transverse view 
to identify the GSV and CFV lying medial to the common 
femoral artery (the ‘Micky Mouse’ sign, Figure 57.12). SFJ 
competence is assessed in the transverse view and potential 
destinations for reflux, including the GSV , the ASV and 
other major thigh tributaries superficial to the saphenous fas-
cia, are noted. Any indication of a pelvic source of reflux sug-
gests the need for more proximal imaging. The full length of 
the GSV within its fascial compartment should be examined 
(Figure 57.13), and its diameter measured if required. The 
groin is next examined for reflux or obstruction in the CFV , 
superficial femoral vein, and SFJ using spectral and/or colour 
Doppler (Figure 57.14).
A loss of phasic flow with respiration in the CFV suggests 
upstream obstruction and the need for proximal imaging. The 
presence and competence of thigh and calf perforators should 
be noted and the crural veins examined for reflux or obstruc -
tion. For examination of the SSV and posterior thigh exten-
sion of the SSV (Giacomini vein), the patient is positioned 
facing away, knee slightly flexed, heel on the ground and the 
weight taken on the opposite leg. If the SPJ is incompetent, 
the level of the SPJ in relation to the knee crease and whether 
the SSV joins the popliteal vein posteriorly, medially or lat -
erally is noted if open surgical ligation is to be entertained. In 
the transverse view, the SSV vein is followed distally, check-
ing its competence and diameter in the proximal, mid and 
distal calf. Finally, the patency and competence of the popli -
teal vein is assessed.
Pelvic and iliac veins may be investigated using trans -
abdominal or transvaginal duplex. Very occasionally inves -
tigations other than duplex are required, and these may be 
non-invasive, such as MR venography, or invasive such as 
contrast venography or intravenous ultrasound (IVUS). The 
use of varicography has become historical (Figure 57.15).
Management
Many patients with asymptomatic varicose veins do not 
progress to develop complications, although a significant pro-
portion do, and little is known about whether treating such 
patients prevents the development of future complications. 
Figure 57.12 ‘Micky Mouse’ transverse B-mode image of the right 
common femoral vein (CFV) and artery (CFA), gr eat saphenous vein 
(GSV) and saphenofemoral junction.
Figure 57.13 ‘Saphenous eye’ transverse B-mode view of the great 
saphenous vein in fascial compartments of the thigh. The fascial line 
above the vein is the saphenous fascia. A true great or small saphe -
nous vein will not cr oss this line, although the fascia may become 
discontinuous around the knee. The line deep to the vein is the fascia 
lata, with the muscle beneath.
Figure 57.14 Spectral Doppler trace of the saphenofemoral junc -
tion showing antegrade and retrograde flow. The downward spike on 
the trace is the antegrade augmented flow and this is followed by 
approxi mately 4 seconds of retrograde flow. 
Figure 57.15 Varicogram
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   976 25/10/2017   09:34Varicose veins 977
PART 10 | VASCULAR
There is clear evidence, however, that those with symptoms 
and/or complications see a significant quality of life benefit 
from treatment to remove or ablate refluxing superficial veins.
When interventional treatment is planned there are con-
siderable variations in practice and treatment strategies. A 
detailed description of the nuances, merits and criticisms of 
the various options is beyond the scope of this chapter; how -
ever, a description of the basic treatment modalities available 
is presented below. An experienced surgeon will have his/her 
own preferred methods, but will frequently employ several or 
all methods in chosen circumstances, not infrequently in the 
same patient.
Compression
Compression hosiery relies on graduated external pressure 
to improve deep venous return and reduce venous pressures. 
It may be knee length or thigh length; there is no evidence 
which length of stocking is more effective and hence below-
knee stockings are usually prescribed as they are easier to 
don and have much better patient acceptance. Compression 
hosiery are classified according to the pressure they exert: 
the British classification class 1 stockings exert pressure of 
14–17 mmHg, class 2 exert 18–24  mmHg and class 3 exert 
25–35 mmHg.
Compression hosiery significantly improves varicose vein 
symptoms but is not popular with patients, with compliance 
rates and long-term tolerance being universally poor. There 
is no evidence to suggest that compression hosiery prevents 
the occurrence or progression of varicose veins. Further -
more, incorrect application of compression hosiery can have 
serious consequences (pressure necrosis, tourniquet effects); 
thus assessment, prescription and application of compres -
sion hosiery should be limited to those with the appropriate 
skills and training. There are level 1 trial data to demonstrate 
that interventional treatment offers superior improvements 
in quality of life and is cost-effective. Compression is there-
fore to be regarded as an adjunct to assessment or treatment, 
unless by patient choice.
Endothermal ablation
Endothermal ablation technologies replaced surgical liga-
tion and stripping as the gold standard treatment once ran -
domised trials demonstrated that they were marginally safer, 
have extremely high technical efficacy, offer superior quality 
of life post procedure (with a rapid recovery) and equiva -
lent improvements in quality of life in the longer term. The 
techniques are cost effective as they can be performed as an 
outpatient under local anaesthetic. The basic concept is that 
a treatment device is inserted into the incompetent axial 
vein percutaneously. The vein is surrounded by tumescent 
local anaesthetic solution. This compresses the vein onto the 
treatment device, emptying it of blood. It also hydro-dissects 
tissues such as nerves away from the zone of injury. Finally, 
it acts as a heat sink, mopping up excess thermal energy to 
prevent remote damage. The treatment device then produces 
thermal energy that destroys the structure of the vein, result-
ing in permanent occlusion. T wo broad technologies exist: 
laser and radiofrequency ablation.
LASER ABLATION
Endovenous laser ablation (EVLA) utilises a small flexible 
glass fibre that is inserted into the vein. Laser energy (typically 
at a wavelength of 1470 nm) is transmitted down the fibre and 
is absorbed at the point of treatment at the end of the fibre. 
Absorption of this radiation results in a vigorous production 
of thermal energy . The tip of the fibre may be bare, focus -
ing the energy in a very small area; divergent forward firing, 
spreading the energy over a larger area; or divergent side or 
radial firing. It is postulated that the latter two designs allow 
a more even distribution of energy, reducing vein wall perfo -
rations that are thought to be associated with postprocedural 
pain and bruising. There is no clear evidence to support one 
design over another. This procedure is very good for treat-
ment of any vein that will allow the passage of a guidewire. 
No technique has reported a higher technical efficacy rate.
The procedure begins with ultrasound-guided marking 
of the truncal vein to be treated and the site of proposed 
cannulation. The varicosities are also marked at this stage 
if concomitant treatment (phlebectomy or foam sclerother -
apy) is to be undertaken. The patient is then positioned on 
the procedure couch in the reverse Trendelenberg position. 
For the GSV , the patient is supine with the hip of the leg 
to be treated externally rotated and slightly flexed. A pillow 
under the contralateral hip/lower back may improve patient 
comfort. For the SSV the patient is positioned in the prone 
position. The vein is then cannulated percutaneously under 
ultrasound guidance, at the lowest point of reflux. Some 
devices allow passage of the fibre directly through a short 
sheath, while others use a wire first, allowing passage of a 
catheter that then carries the laser fibre. The former is slightly 
faster with fewer steps, the latter allows greater success with 
more tortuous veins. Accurate positioning of the fibre tip 
with ultrasound is crucial (Figure 57.16), but the exact loca-
tion is controversial, with some surgeon positioning the tip 
several centimetres distal to the junction and others aiming 
for a flush occlusion. Proponents of the former cite that this 
strategy protects the deep vein from inadvertent damage and/
or thrombosis. Proponents of the latter argue that neoreflux 
in junctional tributaries is a common pattern of recurrence 
Figure 57.16 Endovenous laser ablation; B-mode image of catheter 
tip positioning at the saphenofemoral junction. 
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   977 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR978
and that in expert hands the rate of deep vein injury is no 
different and the thrombosis rate may be lower (presumably 
as there is minimal patent stump in which to form throm -
bus). Following the administration of perivenous tumescent 
anaesthesia (Figure 57.17), the ablation can be performed. 
Practice varies as to the power of the laser and the withdrawal 
speed, but commonly an energy delivery of around 60 J/cm is 
used to achieve a durable closure. There is no clear evidence 
to guide the optimal power and pullback speed. Following 
treatment compression is applied, but there is no consensus 
over the method, degree or duration, and this is true of post -
procedural compression with all techniques.
RADIOFREQUENCY ABLATION
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) uses the same treatment 
principles, but an electromagnetic current is used to create 
the thermal energy. A range of different devices have been 
created but the most popular, which has the most supportive 
evidence, is the ClosureFast™ device (Medtronic) (Figure 
57.18). This device has a wire coil on the end of a treatment 
catheter. The generator passes an electrical current through 
the coil until the surrounding temperature reaches 120 oC. 
This is then maintained for a treatment cycle of 20 seconds. 
The coil is then withdrawn for a set length and another 
treatment cycle is commenced. Coils of 3  cm and 7  cm are 
produced, with the latter increasing the speed of treatment, 
while still being suitable for most anatomies.
There have been a range of studies comparing EVLA and 
RFA. The evidence is generally equivocal, with both treat -
ments having relative advantages and disadvantages; choice 
often comes down to personal preference. Both are excel -
lent treatment options and can be applied successfully to the 
majority of patients.
Advantages in favour of EVLA over RFA include:
 ● EVLA can ablate any vein that can take a guidewire suc-
cessfully, with a very low rate of recanalisation. While the 
RFA catheter can be advanced over a 0.014 guidewire, 
in practice the relatively inflexible tip may not advance 
through very tortuous veins. Recanalisation rates may be 
higher for larger-diameter veins as the energy delivery and 
penetration are limited.
 ● A standard EVLA fibre may be used to treat perforators, 
whereas a specific additional device is required for RFA, 
increasing costs.
Figure 57.17  (a) Ultrasound-guided infiltration of perivenous 
tumescent anaesthetic via a long spinal needle. The anaesthetic solu-
tion is infiltrated using an electronic foot operated pump; (b) ultra-
sound image of perivenous ‘halo’ of anaesthetic solution around the 
vein and catheter in transverse section. 
Figure 57.18 Radiofrequency ablation with ClosureFast™ introduc-
ing the tr eatment catheter thr ough a sheath. The distal 7  cm of this 
device comprises a metal coil.
(a)
(b)
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   978 25/10/2017   09:34Varicose veins 979
PART 10 | VASCULAR
 ● Laser fibres are relatively inexpensive to produce, reduc -
ing the procedural costs.
 ● In a catheter-based system, the catheter can be used to 
deliver targeted foam sclerotherapy , for instance to areas 
of neovascularisation, prior to the actual laser fibre being 
inserted.
Advantages in favour of RFA over EVLA include:
 ● RFA has a standardised treatment protocol that is auto -
mated, minimising the uncertainty and learning curve for 
the ablation portion of the procedure and the possibility of 
a novice making a mistake with the energy delivery.
 ● RFA does not require a continuous pullback, again reduc-
ing the learning curve. This also frees the surgeon’s focus 
allowing better communication with the patient and 
indeed, with care, concurrent treatment, e.g. infiltrating 
local anaesthetic into the tributaries and performing phle-
bectomy, reducing procedural times.
 ● RFA does not require laser safety precautions, reducing 
the administrative burden associated with setting up a 
service and location and allowing it to be performed in a 
wider range of settings with minimal adaptations.
 ● RFA may be associated with a marginal reduction in pain 
and bruising, athough this has not been shown to impact 
upon periprocedural quality of life or recovery.
As endothermal ablation treats only junctional and trun-
cal incompetence, debate exists regarding the management of 
varicosities. These can be managed concomitantly or sequen-
tially by either phlebectomy or sclerotherapy. Concomitant 
phlebectomy (Figure 57.19) results in a more rapid improve-
ment in disease-specific quality of life, and allows the vast 
majority of patients to complete treatment in a single visit.
Non-endothermal, non-tumescent ablation
Endothermal ablation was a large step forwards in the man-
agement of superficial incompetence; however, all techniques 
require the injection of tumescent local anaesthetic solution 
and this can be uncomfortable for the patient. Other tech-
niques that avoid injection are being developed.
UL TRASOUND-GUIDED FOAM SCLEROTHERAPY
Sclerotherapy is the original non-endothermal, non-tumes-
cent technique and has been performed for over 100 years. 
It involves the injection of a sclerosing agent directly into 
the superficial veins. The most commonly used is sodium tet-
radecyl sulphate. The direct contact with detergent causes 
cellular death and initiates an inflammatory response, aiming 
to result in thrombosis, fibrosis and obliteration (sclerosis). 
Blood deactivates the action of the sclerosing agent and the 
doses administered need to be limited to avoid adverse effects, 
causing a trade-off between poor efficacy and safety. This led 
to the development of ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy 
(UGFS). The use of foam increases the effective volume of 
the agent, maximising endothelial contact and displacing any 
blood that deactivates it.
The procedure commences with the patient standing, 
and the sites of venous cannulation are selected and marked 
using ultrasound. With the patient supine, the major venous 
trunks and superficial varicosities to be treated are then all 
cannulated using ultrasound guidance prior to any injection 
(Figure 57.20). Once all injection sites are cannulated the 
foam can be prepared. The most widely used method is that of 
Tessari, which utilises two syringes connected using a three-
way tap. A 1:3 or 1:4 ratio mixture of sclerosant and air is drawn 
into one syringe, and is then oscillated vigorously between 
the two syringes about 10 or 20 times (Figure 57.21). The 
foam produced in this way is stable for about 2 minutes so it 
should be injected as soon as it has been made. The leg is then 
elevated to empty the veins of blood, and injection of foam 
commences first with superficial varicosities and ends with 
injection of the GSV or SSV . Only 1 or 2 mL of foam should 
be injected at a time and the distribution of the foam should 
be monitored and massaged with the ultrasound probe. When 
the foam is visualised at the site of junctional incompetence 
no further foam should be injected. The maximum volume 
of foam that should be injected at a single session should not 
exceed 10–12 mL as the incidence of complications is directly 
related to the volume of foam injected. Compression is then 
Figure 57.19 Phlebectomy performed under tumescent anaesthesia 
following endothermal ablation. 
Figure 57.20  Foam sclerotherapy; cannulation of veins during 
ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy.
Lorenzo Tessari , b.1949, physician Trieste, Italy.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   979 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR980
applied as following endothermal ablation. While it is postu -
lated that compression may have a larger effect upon efficacy 
for this treatment, practice is not informed by evidence and a 
wide variation exists.
Outside of a small number of centres, the efficacy of UGFS 
is significantly worse than for endothermal ablation, leading 
to high reintervention rates, and the rates of complications 
such as phlebitis and pigmentation can be high. UGFS does 
however carry some significant advantages:
 ● It avoids tumescent anaesthetic and is therefore a less 
painful procedure (although postoperative pain is prob -
ably similar).
 ● No axial or tributary veins are too tortuous.
 ● It also allows the treatment of calf veins with overlying 
skin damage or ulceration without the need to pierce 
through damaged skin.
 ● Consumable treatment costs are very low.
These factors mean that many surgeons using endo -
thermal techniques also use foam sclerotherapy as an adjunct 
in specific circumstances.
CATHETER-DIRECTED SCLEROTHERAPY AND 
MECHANICOCHEMICAL ABLATION
The efficacy of sclerotherapy relies on endothelial contact 
with fresh, undiluted sclerosant. Some have therefore exper -
imented with catheter-delivered sclerotherapy rather than 
trying to milk the sclerosant down the vein lumen. There is 
no good evidence to date that this increases efficacy and the 
technique is not in widespread use.
A related technology that has shown more promise is 
mechanicochemical ablation (Figure 57.22). This involves 
a treatment device that deploys an angled wire from the end. 
This attaches to a motorised handle. The catheter is placed 
within the vein lumen as for endothermal ablation. The trig-
ger on the handle is depressed, spinning the wire around and 
liquid sclerosant is infiltrated via the catheter simultaneously 
during catheter withdrawal. It is thought that the spinning 
wire causes physical damage to the endothelium and allows a 
deeper penetration of the sclerosant into the vein wall. The 
technique is possible in most cases without tumescent anaes -
thesia, although a small number of patients find the procedure 
uncomfortable and the device can ‘snag’ on the vein, tearing 
it or rarely stripping it altogether. Early studies suggest simi -
lar early efficacy rates as for endothermal ablation, which is 
encouraging. The axial ablation is usually less painful than 
endothermal ablation, but this advantage is lost when it is 
combined with phlebectomy of the tributaries; therefore, it 
is uncertain whether it can replace endothermal ablation, 
unless axial ablation is to be performed in isolation. Treat -
ing longer veins can also be challenging due to limitations 
in catheter length and the safe dose of sclerosant. It is a good 
choice for a patient with needle phobia, who is happy to forgo 
treatment of varicose tributaries.
ENDOVENOUS GLUE
The final non-tumescent technique is the endoluminal appli-
cation of cyanoacrylate adhesive (Figure 57.23). Again, this 
involves a treatment catheter placed within the vein lumen. 
A handle is used to infiltrate the adhesive in 0.1  mL applica-
tions via the catheter. The vein is then compressed, sealing 
the lumen closed. Early efficacy results are similarly promising 
and patients experience minimal intraprocedural pain. Long-
term results and, similar to mechanicochemical ablation, 
the optimal management of tributaries are unknown. The 
consumable costs are currently the highest for any venous 
ablative technique.
Figure 57.22 Mechanochemical ablation device (repr oduced with 
permission of Vascular Insights).
Figure 57.23 Endovenous glue device (reproduced with permission 
of Medtronic Inc.).
Figure 57.21 Foam sclerotherapy; Tessari method of foam sclero -
sant preparation.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   980 25/10/2017   09:34Varicose veins 981
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Open surgery
The principles of traditional ligation and stripping are to 
fully dissect the point of junctional incompetence and to 
remove the refluxing axial vein and dilated tributaries. The 
operation is usually performed under general anaesthesia but 
loco-regional anaesthesia is used by some and the infiltration 
of tumescent local anaesthesia around the axial vein prior to 
stripping may have some advantages, but is not widely used.
The role of open surgery as a primary treatment of a 
refluxing superficial axis has been considerably reduced with 
development of the minimally invasive techniques described 
above, the long-term results of which are at least comparable 
with open surgery, but with significantly less morbidity and 
faster recovery. Experienced endovenous surgeons do still use 
open surgery in some circumstances and a venous surgeon 
needs to be trained and experienced in this area.
Surgical adjuncts including phlebectomy and, occasion-
ally, perforator ligation are much more commonly used, and 
the former has been shown to have a significant impact upon 
outcome.
SAPHENOFEMORAL LIGATION AND GREAT 
SAPHENOUS STRIPPING
An oblique groin incision is made at the level of, and lateral 
to, the pubic tubercle, ideally above the groin crease. The 
GSV is identified and dissected to the SFJ, which should be 
clearly established before the vein is divided to avoid disas -
trous inadvertent transection of the superficial femoral vein. 
The anatomy is often variable but six GSV tributaries may be 
encountered close to the SFJ:
 ● Laterally:
 ● superficial inferior epigastric vein;
 ● superficial circumflex iliac vein;
 ● Medially:
 ● superficial external pudendal vein;
 ● deep external pudendal vein;
 ● Distally:
 ● anterior accessory saphenous vein;
 ● posteriomedial thigh vein.
Classically, these are ligated distal to their divisions. A 
flush SFJ ligation is then performed and the GSV retrogradely 
stripped to around the knee (Figure 57.24). Phlebectomy is 
performed as discussed above.
Closure of the cribriform fascia, with sutures or synthetic 
patches over the ligated SFJ, does not reduce groin recurrence. 
Stripping to the lowest point of reflux may improve results, 
but at a cost of increased saphenous nerve complications and 
is not widely performed. More recently, some surgeons argue 
that surgical trauma and subsequent inflammation in the groin 
is associated with neovascularisation, which in turn may lead 
to recurrence. Furthermore, others hypothesise that it is the 
loss of the normal groin tributaries that may be responsible 
for driving the process of neovascularisation. These concepts 
have led some to believe that ligation of the refluxing vein 
should be distal to the tributaries and that the junction itself 
should be left untouched. There is no clear clinical evidence 
to support these hypotheses.
SAPHENOPOPLITEAL JUNCTION LIGATION AND 
SMALL SAPHENOUS STRIPPING
Preoperative duplex to mark the position of the SPJ is highly 
recommended (Figure 57.25). The patient is positioned in 
the prone position, a transverse incision is made over the 
premarked SPJ, the fascia is divided and the SSV is exposed. 
The SPJ can then be formally dissected with a flush ligation 
or the SSV can be gently retracted and ligated as proximally 
as possible. No good evidence exists to favour one technique 
over the other; proponents of the flush ligation would argue 
that it avoids leaving a stump of SSV , a common source of 
recurrence, while proponents of the simple SSV ligation 
technique argue it reduces the incidence of the most common 
serious complications, nerve injury and popliteal vein injury. 
Point of division
Long saphenous vein
Femoral
vein
Ligature
Figure 57.24  Saphenofemoral junction ligation and great saphe -
nous vein stripping.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   981 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR982
The SSV can then either be stripped or the proximal section 
of the vein can be resected. Those who strip argue it reduces 
the incidence of recurrence, while opponents feel it increases 
the incidence of sural nerve injury. There are no randomised 
trials comparing these techniques. Once again, phlebectomy 
is then performed.
Adjunctive surgical techniques
PHLEBECTOMY
This may be performed following treatment of junctional 
incompetence and axial vein reflux, or as sole treatment 
under local anaesthetic in patients with isolated tributary 
incompetence, or possibly in very early axial reflux, which 
reverts to normal upon occlusion of the refluxing tributary on 
duplex ultrasound. Phlebectomy is usually performed through 
small stab incisions using small mosquito forceps and/or phle-
bectomy hooks that have been demonstrated to be superior 
in terms of bruising, pain and generic quality of life than 
trans illuminated-powered phlebectomy (see Figure 57.19).
PERFORATOR LIGATION
The majority of studies assessing the role of perforator ligation 
have been in patients with venous ulcers, analysing the effects 
on ulcer healing, and even in this situation randomised data 
are lacking. The role of perforator ligation in patients with 
uncomplicated varicose veins is even less clear. In uncom -
plicated varicose veins, perforators may be ligated through 
a small, duplex-guided incision, while in patients with skin 
changes, subfascial endoscopic perforator ligation may be pre-
ferred, although the benefits are unproven. Perforators can 
also be ablated with endovenous techniques.
Complications of standard varicose vein 
surgery
Complications (minor and major) are reported in up to 
20% of patients who undergo traditional varicose vein sur -
gery. Wound infections, the most common complication, are 
reduced by prophylactic antibiotics. Nerve injury is the most 
common serious complication. The incidence of saphenous 
nerve neuralgia is up to 7% following GSV stripping to the 
knee (the incidence is higher with stripping to the ankle). 
The incidence of sural nerve neuropraxia and common pero-
neal nerve injury may be as high as 20% and 4%, respectively, 
following SSV surgery. The incidence of venous thromboem-
bolic complications is approximately 0.5% following varicose 
vein surgery; however, patient risk factors must be individually 
assessed and appropriate prophylaxis administered according 
to guidelines.
Recurrent varicose veins
Approximately 10–20% of patients who present to hospital 
with varicose veins have had previous intervention. Pro -
spective data on long-term results following intervention for 
recurrent varicose veins are sparse and the criteria for defining 
recurrence are variable.
Significant clinical recurrence 5–10 years following var -
icose vein surgery occurs in 10–35% of patients, but minor/
duplex-detected recurrence is much more common, being 
in the order of 70%. Causes of recurrence include: neovas-
cularisation, reflux in residual axial vein, inadequate initial 
surgery and new junctional reflux. Neovascularisation is the 
development of new veins within postsurgical tissue. These 
veins lack valves and over time can span the tissue between 
a ligated junction and nearby tributary veins. If significant in 
size and/or number, these may contribute to recurrent venous 
hypertension.
Recurrence is more common following SSV versus GSV 
surgery, and in patients with high body mass index, while 
stripping of the incompetent axial vein reduces recurrence 
rates. Limited data suggest recurrence rates following endo -
venous thermal ablation may be lower than following surgery. 
Recurrent varicose veins often have an atypical distribution 
and duplex assessment is mandatory (Figures 57.26 and 
57.27). Open surgery for recurrent varicose veins is associ -
ated with a high (40%) complication rate, the most common 
being lymph leak and wound infection, thus endovenous 
interventions would seem to offer an attractive alternative, 
where feasible.
VENOUS LEG ULCER
Venous disease is responsible for around 85% of all chronic 
lower limb ulcers in resource-rich countries. Community-  
based prevalence is 0.1–0.3% in adults (2–4% in the elderly). 
Venous leg ulcer has a disproportionate cost to society, with 
profound impairment in health-related quality of life for 
Figure 57.25 Preoperative marking of the saphenopopliteal junction 
and small saphenous vein mapped using duplex scanning.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   982 25/10/2017   09:34Venous leg ulcer 983
PART 10 | VASCULAR
both patients and their carers; the dressings alone account 
for 1–3% of western healthcare expenditure. Furthermore, 
15–30% of patients with ‘venous’ leg ulcers have concomi-
tant arterial occlusive disease. This is termed a ‘mixed’ ulcer. 
There are many other causes of leg ulcers and these must be 
excluded in any patient presenting with ulceration. Causes of 
leg ulceration include:
 ● venous disease: superficial incompetence, deep incompe -
tence or obstruction;
 ● arterial ischaemic ulcers;
 ● vasculitic ulcers;
 ● traumatic ulcers;
 ● neuropathic ulcers;
 ● neoplastic ulcers;
 ● infections, especially in resource-poor countries.
Pathophysiology of ulceration
The exact pathophysiology of ulcer development has not been 
established. Originally, it was thought that static blood within 
the superficial veins led to hypoxia, which caused tissue death 
(stasis ulcers). This was not confirmed by investigation of 
venous oxygen saturation, which was found to be higher in 
ulcerated limbs. This led to the concept of arteriovenous fis -
tulae, which were thought to develop in response to the high 
venous pressure; however, this could not be confirmed. High 
venous pressure was found to be associated with a pericapil -
lary infiltrate. This includes fibrin and other proteins, which 
are known to lead to fibrosis. It was hypothesised that these 
‘cuffs’ could act as an impediment to diffusion of oxygen and 
nutrients.
Leukocytes were found to decrease in the venous effluent 
coming out of dependent limbs. This decrease in leukocyte 
passage was shown to increase if short-term venous hyperten-
sion was induced by application of a tourniquet. This led to 
the concept of white cell ‘trapping’, which, however, has not 
been confirmed by further investigation. Polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes were not found within the tissues, but increased 
numbers of mast cells, monocytes and lymphocytes have been 
found in periulcer tissues.
Reactive oxygen species are increased in the ulcer envi -
ronment and these may generate free radicals, leading to tis -
sue damage. Proteolytic enzymes are also increased in ulcers 
and the fibroblasts in the ulcer surrounds are also abnormal, 
being in a ‘senescent’ state. Growth factors may be inhibited, 
leading to poor repair, and their absence may also lead to 
ulceration. It is proving difficult to show whether any of these 
factors is the cause of or the result of an ulcer.
At present, ambulatory venous hypertension is the only 
accepted underlying cause of venous ulceration. This also 
explains why venous ulcers are never seen in the upper limb. 
It is important to try to define the exact mechanism of ulcer 
development. Venous hypertension may be the result of pri -
mary valve incompetence of the saphenous veins, incompe -
tence of the perforating veins or incompetence or obstruction 
of the deep veins.
Summary box 57.1
Varicose veins
●● Are one of the most common conditions causing a physical 
impairment in quality of life
●● Interventional treatment improves quality of life and is highly 
cost-effective
●● Anatomical and physiological assessment using duplex 
ultrasound is invaluable in the diagnosis and planning of 
treatment
●● Ultrasound-guided endovenous ablation has revolutionised 
treatment, minimising procedural morbidity while being highly 
effective
Figure 57.26 Recurrent anterior abdominal wall varicose veins fol -
lowing saphenofemoral junction ligation complicated by iliac deep 
vein thrombosis. 
Figure 57.27 Recurrent varicose veins secondary to an incompetent 
thigh perforator.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   983 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR984
Clinical features
The ulcer must be carefully examined. A venous ulcer usually 
has a gently sloping edge and the floor contains granulation 
tissue covered by a variable amount of slough and exudate. 
Any significant elevation of the ulcer edge should indicate 
the need for a biopsy to exclude a carcinoma (usually a squa -
mous cell).
The venous ulcer of the leg characteristically develops in 
the skin of the gaiter region, the area between the muscles 
of the calf and the ankle. This is the region where many of 
the Cockett perforators join the posterior tibial vein to the 
surface vein, known as the posterior arch vein. The majority 
of ulcers develop on the medial side of the calf, but ulcers 
associated with SSV incompetence may develop on the lat -
eral side of the leg. Ulcers can develop on any part of the calf 
skin in patients with post-thrombotic syndrome (PTS); how-
ever, venous ulcers rarely extend on to the foot or into the 
upper calf and, if there is ulceration at these sites, other diag-
noses should be seriously considered. Ulcers often develop in 
response to minor trauma; many patients notice some itching, 
perhaps associated with mast cell degranulation, before the 
ulcers develop. Almost all venous ulcers have surrounding 
haemosiderosis (seen as pigmentation) and the more chronic 
ulcers develop lipodermatosclerosis with associated fibrosis of 
the subcutaneous tissue (see Figure 57.10). This is manifest 
as thickening, pigmentation, inflammation and induration 
of the calf skin. The pigmentation comes from haemosiderin 
and melanin and the haemosiderin itself may be an important 
factor in ulcer development.
A full examination of the front and back of the limbs 
with the patient standing should be carried out to assess the 
presence of varicosities and truncal incompetence of the 
saphenous systems (note that venous ulcers are not always 
accompanied by varicose veins). All patients should have 
their pulses palpated and, if there is any doubt, their arterial 
Doppler pressures should be measured. Sensation and proprio-
ception should be assessed to exclude neuropathy, especially 
in diabetic patients. A careful examination of the hand and 
other joints may confirm the presence of rheumatoid arthritis 
or osteoarthritis.
Investigation
Most vascular surgeons will carry out a duplex scan when the 
patient with an ulcer is first seen to assess the status of the deep 
and superficial veins. The presence of reflux in these veins 
does not confirm a venous ulcer, but supports the diagnosis 
in the absence of another cause and helps direct treatment.
All patients presenting for the first time with a new leg 
ulcer should have a full blood count, bloo d glucose, erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or C-reactive protein (CRP) 
and sickle cell test if they have an appropriate racial back -
ground. Anaemia can both cause ulcers (e.g. sickle cell 
disease and pernicious anaemia) and be a result of ulceration 
(e.g. iron deficiency anaemia and the anaemia of chronic dis-
ease). Polycythaemia is a rare cause of ulceration. An anti -
body screen should be obtained if the ulcer appears ‘atypical’ 
or there is any suggestion of joint disease (e.g. rheumatoid 
arthritis). All patients presenting with a new ulcer should 
have their Doppler pressures measured, unless the foot pulses 
are easily palpable and have been confirmed as such by a vas-
cular specialist.
Venous ulcers are characteristically difficult to heal; how-
ever, persistence may indicate that there is another or coex -
isting cause (e.g. malignancy, rheumatoid arthritis or arterial 
ischaemia). Biopsies are indicated if malignancy is suspected 
and it is important to remember that a Marjolin’s type of ulcer 
(a squamous cell or basal cell carcinoma) can develop in a 
chronic long-standing venous ulcer (Figure 57.28).
Management
Compression
The very best results are seen in specialist multidisciplinary 
ulcer services. The cause of a venous leg ulcer is venous 
hypertension and the key-stone of management is to decrease 
this hypertension. The primary way of doing this is with the 
use of compression. Most patients are suitable for the classic 
‘four-layer bandaging system’ (4LB):
 ● Orthopaedic wool: distributes the pressure and reduces 
undue pressure on sensitive areas susceptible to pressure 
damage. Also helps to absorb excess exudate that escapes 
the primary dressing.
 ● Cotton crepe: smooths the wool and holds it in place.
Frank Bernard Cockett , 1916–2014, surgeon, St. Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK.
Jean-Nicholas Marjolin , 1780–1850, surgeon, Paris, France, described the development of malignant ulcers in scars in 1828.
Figure 57.28 A Marjolin’s ulcer (a squamous cell cancer arising in a 
chronic venous ulcer).
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   984 25/10/2017   09:34Pelvic congestion syndr ome 985
PART 10 | VASCULAR
 ● Elastic bandage: first compressive layer, contributes about 
one-third of the interface pressure.
 ● Cohesive bandage: second compressive layer, increases 
stiffness and adds approximately two-thirds of the inter -
face pressure
The ideal interface pressure in pure venous ulceration is 
35–40 mmHg. Skilled application of these dressings is essen -
tial for both safety and efficacy, and the best results come from 
specialist nursing teams either based in secondary care or in 
the community. Newer compression systems are being created 
with the aim of reducing the learning curve and variability in 
application, and some are designed to be applied by patients 
themselves. There remains little evidence that these are set 
to replace 4LB for the time being. The interval between ban-
dage applications is based upon the amount of exudate and 
the speed of healing and best judged by an experienced nurse.
Compression in mixed ulcers is controversial, but emerg -
ing evidence suggests that it is both safe and effective when 
performed and monitored appropriately. With an ankle bra -
chial pressure index (ABPI) of 0.5–0.8 modified compression 
with an interface pressure of 30  mmHg is safe and effective 
and pressures of up to 40  mmHg have been described in 
studies using inelastic bandages without ill effect. Contrary 
to conventional thinking, studies have shown an increase 
in perfusion in patients treated in this way, presumably by a 
reduction in capillary back pressure. Patients do see respect -
able healing rates in this group, but they remain lower than 
in those patients with an ABPI >0.8. It is not clear whether 
revascularisation followed by full compression yields better 
results, but this is common practice. Patients with an ABPI 
<0.5 or an ankle pressure <60  mmHg must undergo revascu -
larisation prior to any compression treatment.
Superficial venous ablation or surgery
The next method of reducing venous hypertension is to treat 
superficial reflux. There has been only one trial of adequate 
power and design to answer the question of whether the abo-
lition of superficial reflux improves ulcer healing rates. This 
trial has completed recruitment, but follow-up is ongoing and 
practice continues to vary.
Other treatments
The only drug that shows promise to date is pentoxifylline, 
which increases microvascular perfusion by decreasing plasma 
cellular viscosity and cytokine inhibition, although its exact 
mechanism of action is not fully understood.
A number of biological dressings have been developed, 
including fetal keratinocytes and collagen meshes, which 
have been shown to improve healing; however, they are not 
cost-effective for the majority of ulcers. Pinch grafts and ulcer 
excision with mesh grafting have been shown to provide good 
early healing with moderate long-term results (50% healed 
at 5 years).
Antibiotics do not speed ulcer healing in the absence of 
cellulitis and all other specific ulcer-healing drugs are of dubi-
ous validity. A large range of topical therapies and primary 
dressings have similarly failed to have an impact.
Prevention of recurrence
Once an ulcer has healed the patient must be re-evaluated in 
an attempt to prevent recurrence. If not already performed, 
there is level 1 evidence that patients should undergo treat -
ment for their superficial venous incompetence, unless they 
have deep venous occlusion. Class II below-knee graduated 
compression stockings should be prescribed for all patients 
with residual reflux or deep venous occlusion, or those with 
recurrent ulceration despite not being in this group. These 
should be worn for life.
Prognosis
Nearly all venous ulcers can be healed but, even in those 
who have successful ablation or wear their stockings reli -
giously, there is a 20–30% incidence of reulceration by 
5 years. The greatest risk of reulceration is in the post-  
thrombotic leg.
PEL VIC CONGESTION 
SYNDROME
Pelvic congestion syndrome (PCS) is among the differen-
tial diagnoses to be considered in female patients presenting 
with chronic pelvic pain and may be significantly under-diag-
nosed. PCS sufferers are typically premenopausal, multiparous 
women aged 20–45 years, who present with severe dull aching 
pelvic pain thought to be the direct result of ovarian and pel-
vic varicosities. The pain is usually non-cyclical, and may be 
precipitated by prolonged standing. Other symptoms include 
dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, rectal discomfort or urinary 
frequency. Signs may include tenderness over the uterus/
ovaries, vulval varicosities and haemorrhoids. There may be 
vulval and atypically distributed thigh varicosities. The road 
to a diagnosis of PCS is often a long and laborious one, usu -
ally only made following extensive investigations to exclude 
other more common causes of pelvic pain. Abdominal, pelvic 
and transvaginal duplex examination allows dynamic visuali-
sation of pelvic blood flow and should be the initial investiga-
tion of choice, as these are rapid, readily accessible outpatient 
procedures that are also valuable in excluding other patholo-
gies. Alternatives include magnetic resonance (MR) venog -
raphy and diagnostic venography.
Medical treatments for PCS include psychotherapy, pro -
gestins, danazol, gonadotrophin receptor agonists (GnRH) 
Summary box 57.2
Venous leg ulcer
●● Is associated with a profound impairment in quality of life
●● Ulcers are not infrequently difficult to heal and prone to 
recurrence
●● The treatment of these chronic wounds is associated with 
high costs to healthcare systems and patients
●● The mainstay of treatment is the reduction in venous 
hypertension, with compression and increasingly superficial 
venous ablation
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   985 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR986
with hormone replacement therapy, and non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs. Historical open surgical procedures 
(extraperitoneal resection of ovarian veins) have now largely 
been superseded by percutaneous pelvic vein embolisation 
(Figure 57.29), reducing peri- and postprocedural morbidity 
while maintaining high success rates.
VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is an important condition 
within surgery, and autopsy studies suggest that it is the most 
common direct cause of death in surgical patients. Venous 
thrombosis is the formation of a semisolid coagulum within 
the venous system and may occur in the superficial system 
(usually described as superficial thrombophlebitis) or the deep 
system (deep venous thrombosis, DVT). Venous thrombosis 
of the deep veins of the leg may be complicated by the imme-
diate risk of pulmonary embolus and sudden death. Subse-
quently, patients are at risk of developing PTS (Figure 57.30) 
and venous ulceration. While DVT may occur in the upper 
limb, it is the leg that gives rise to the vast majority of the 
morbidity and subsequent complications of this condition.
Aetiology
The three factors described by Virchow over a century ago 
are still relevant in the development of venous thrombosis. 
These are:
 ● contact of blood with an abnormal surface (e.g. endothe -
lial damage);
 ● abnormal flow (e.g. stasis);
 ● abnormal blood (e.g. thrombophilia).
There are many predisposing causes for VTE. These are 
listed in Table 57.2. The most important factor is a hospital 
admission for treatment of a medical or surgical condition. 
Injury, especially fractures of the lower limb and pelvis, preg-
nancy and the oral contraceptive pill are other well-recognised 
predisposing factors. Endothelial damage is now known to be 
critically important. The interaction of the endothelium with 
inflammatory cells, or previous deep vein damage, renders the 
endothelial surface hypercoagulable and less fibrinolytic.
Stasis is a predisposing factor seen in many of the condi -
tions described in Table 57.2, especially in the postoperative 
period, in patients with heart failure and in those with arterial 
 ischaemia.
Figure 57.29 (a, b) Left ovarian vein incompetence supplying pelvic and pudendal varicosities: (a) diagnostic venogram; (b)therapeutic 
embolisation. 
(a)
 (b)
Figure 57.30  Post-thrombotic leg demonstrating featur es of 
eczema, pigmentation and mild lipodermatosclerosis.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   986 25/10/2017   09:34Venous thromboembolism 987
PART 10 | VASCULAR
A number of conditions are associated with increased 
coagulability of the blood (thrombophilia) (Table 57.3). Defi-
ciencies of antithrombin, activated protein C and protein S 
have all been shown to predispose to venous thrombosis in 
young patients. Activated protein C deficiency is associated 
with inheritance of the factor V Leiden gene and may account 
for the higher incidence of venous thrombosis in Caucasian 
populations (being present in 6–7%). It results in a small 
increase in the risk of VTE, although it may act in concert 
with some of the other predisposing factors. A thrombophilia 
should be excluded in any patient presenting with an episode 
of VTE who gives a family history of VTE or in whom there is 
no other predisposing factor.
Although the development of DVT is probably multifac -
torial, immobility (and hence stasis) remains one of the most 
important factors. DVT is recognised as a complication of 
long-haul flights and other forms of travel.
Pathology
The thrombus commences as a platelet aggregate. Subse-
quently, fibrin and red cells form a mesh until the lumen of the 
vein wall occludes. The coralline thrombus then progresses as 
a propagated loose red fibrin clot containing many red cells 
(Figure 57.31). This is likely to extend up to the next large 
venous branch and it is possible for the clot to break off and 
embolise to the lung as a pulmonary embolus. In this situa-
tion the embolus arising from the lower leg veins becomes 
detached, passes through the large veins of the limb and vena 
cava, through the right heart and lodges in the pulmonary 
arteries. This may totally occlude perfusion to all or part of 
one or both lungs. This results in a clinical spectrum from 
tachycardia and pain, through respiratory failure (despite 
adequate ventilation) to cardiovascular collapse and death. 
Moderate-sized emboli can cause pyramidal-shaped infarcts 
on imaging.
Diagnosis
The most common presentation of a DVT is pain and swell-
ing, especially in the calf, usually in one leg; however, bilat -
eral DVTs are common, occurring in up to 30%. When the 
TABLE 57.2 Risk factors for venous thromboembolism.
Patient factors
Age
Obesity
Varicose veins
Immobility
Pregnancy
Puerperium
High-dose oestrogen therapy
Previous deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism
Thrombophilia (see Table 57.3)
Disease or surgical procedure
Trauma or surgery, especially of pelvis, hip and lower limb
Malignancy, especially pelvic, and abdominal metastatic
Heart failure
Recent myocardial infarction
Paralysis of lower limb(s)
Infection
Inflammatory bowel disease
Nephrotic syndrome
Polycythaemia
Paraproteinaemia
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria antibody or lupus 
anticoagulant
Behçet’s disease
Homocystinaemia
TABLE 57.3 Abnormalities of thrombosis and fibrinolysis 
(thrombophilia) that lead to an increased risk of venous 
thrombosis.
Congenital
Deficiency of antithrombin III, protein C or protein S
Antiphospholipid antibody or lupus anticoagulant
Factor V Leiden gene defect or activated protein C resistance
Dysfibrinogenaemias
Acquired
Antiphospholipid antibody or lupus anticoagulant
Figure 57.31 An organised thrombus.
Hulusi Behçet , 1889–1948, Turkish dermatologist described a disease of inflamed blood vessels in 1937.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   987 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR988
swelling is bilateral, DVT must be differentiated from other 
causes of systemic oedema, such as hypoproteinaemia, renal 
failure and heart failure. Some patients have no symptoms of 
thrombosis and may first present with signs of a pulmonary 
embolus, e.g. pleuritic chest pain, haemoptysis and shortness 
of breath. Patients may also develop shortness of breath from 
chronic pulmonary hypertension. Sometimes the leg appears 
cellulitic and very occasionally it may be white or cyanosed: 
phlegmasia alba dolens and phlegmasia cerulea dolens (Figure 
57.32). This indicates venous pressures that are so high that 
they are impeding tissue perfusion. Patients who present with 
venous gangrene (Figure 57.33) often have an underlying 
neoplasm.
Clinical examination for DVT is unreliable. Physical signs 
may also be absent. Mild pitting oedema of the ankle, dilated 
surface veins, a stiff calf and tenderness over the course of 
the deep veins should be sought. Leg pain occurs in about 
50% of patients with DVT but is nonspecific. Homans’ 
sign – resistance (not pain) of the calf muscles to forcible 
dorsiflexion – is not specific and should not be elicited. Ten -
derness occurs in 75% of patients but is also found in 50% of 
patients without objectively confirmed DVT. The pain and 
tenderness associated with DVT does not usually correlate 
with the size, location or extent of the thrombus. Clinical 
signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolus occur in about 
10% of patients with confirmed DVT.
A low-grade pyrexia may be present, especially in a 
patient who is having repeated pulmonary embolus. Patients 
may have signs of cyanosis, dyspnoea, raised neck veins, a 
fixed split second heart sound and a pleural rub if they have 
pulmonary emboli causing right heart strain, although these 
signs may be subtle or absent.
Investigation
The diagnosis of DVT and pulmonary embolus should be 
established by special investigations as the symptoms and 
signs are non-specific and may be absent. In addition, treat -
ment with anticoagulation is not without risk and the diagno-
sis must be made with reasonable certainty.
Many centres direct investigation based upon the modi -
fied Wells score (Table 57.4), with further imaging dictated by 
these results. These scores can be unreliable though, especially 
in hospital inpatients, and should only be considered a guide.
Venous duplex ultrasound is commonly performed to look 
for evidence of thrombosis throughout the deep or superficial 
venous system. Ideally, this should be performed by an expe -
rienced vascular sonographer, but the volume of cases is such 
that compression ultrasound is frequently being performed by 
non-specialists. Compression ultrasound involves applying 
pressure with the ultrasound probe over the common femoral 
and popliteal veins. Under normal circumstances these veins 
Figure 57.32 Phlegmasia cerulea dolens.
Figure 57.33 A foot with venous gangrene. The gangr ene is sym -
metrical involving all of the toes. There is no clear-cut edge and there 
is marked oedema of the foot.
John Homans , 1877–1957, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Philip Wells , contemporary, physician, University of Ottawa, Canada.
TABLE 57.4 Modified Wells criteria for predicting deep 
vein thrombosis (DVT). 
Variable Score
Lower limb trauma or surgery or immobilisation in a 
plaster cast
1
Bedridden for >3 days or surgery in last 4 weeks 1
Tenderness along the line of femoral or popliteal veins 1
Entire limb swollen 1
Calf >3 cm larger circumference than the other side
10 cm below the tibial tuberosity 1
Pitting oedema 1
Dilated collateral superficial veins (not varicose veins) 1
Previous DVT 1
Malignancy (including treatment up to 6 months ago) 1
Intravenous drug abuse 3
Alternative diagnosis more likely than DVT −2
Low probability (5%) of DVT (score –2 to 0), moderate probability (17%) of 
DVT (score 1–2), high probability (17–53%) of DVT (score >2).
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   988 25/10/2017   09:34Venous thromboembolism 989
PART 10 | VASCULAR
will compress tightly shut. In the presence of DVT they will 
not fully compress. It is rapid to both learn and perform, but 
not ideal and most importantly misses calf vein thrombosis. 
Calf vein thromboses may propagate to form a more extensive 
thrombus, which may in turn embolise. The optimal manage-
ment of calf vein thrombosis when detected is not clear, and 
some units use surveillance, with others anticoagulating such 
patients upon detection.
Ascending venography, which shows a thrombus as a fill -
ing defect, is now rarely required unless thrombolysis is being 
considered (Figure 57.34). MR venography may also be used.
Pulmonary embolus is diagnosed definitively by computed 
tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram, which will demon -
strate the presence of filling defects in the pulmonary arteries 
(Figure 57.35). Pulmonary angiography is rarely required 
unless thrombolysis is being considered.
The differential diagnosis of a DVT includes a ruptured 
Baker’s cyst, a calf muscle haematoma, a ruptured plantaris 
muscle, a thrombosed popliteal aneurysm and arterial isch-
aemia. Duplex scanning will detect many of these conditions 
but often patients present with non-specific pain in the calf 
that resolves with no firm diagnosis being made. The differ -
ential diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism includes myocardial 
infarction, pleurisy, pneumonia and aortic dissection.
Prophylaxis
Prophylactic methods can be divided into mechanical and 
pharmacological. A variety of mechanical methods have been 
tried, but only the use of graduated elastic compression stock-
ings and external pneumatic compression have been shown 
to be worthwhile by reducing the incidence of thrombosis. 
Newer devices, such as electronic nerve stimulators, lack evi-
dence of efficacy to date. Compression-based prophylactic 
measures should be avoided in patients with peripheral vas -
cular disease.
Pharmacological methods are more effective than 
mechanical methods at risk reduction, although they carry an 
increased risk of bleeding. In the past, low-dose unfraction -
ated heparin was used both intravenously and subcutaneously. 
In the absence of renal impairment, most centres currently 
use low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) given subcuta -
neously. This is given once daily, does not require monitoring 
and has a lower risk of bleeding complications.
Patients who are being admitted for surgery may be graded 
as low, moderate or high risk for PE and VTE (Tables 57.5 and 
57.6). Patients in the medium- or high-risk groups should be 
considered for pharmacological prophylaxis with an antico -
agulant medication. A combination of mechanical and phar-
macological treatment with heparin can be used in patients 
considered at high risk.
Figure 57.34  An ascending venogram of a deep vein thrombo -
sis seen as filling defects (arrows) with contrast passing around the 
thrombus.
TABLE 57.5 Modified Wells criteria for predicting 
pulmonary embolism (PE).
Variable Score
Clinical signs and symptoms of deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) (minimum of leg swelling and pain on palpation of 
deep veins)
3
Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE 3
Heart rate >100 bpm 1.5
Immobilisation >3 days or surgery within past 4 weeks 1.5
Previous DVT or PE 1.5
Haemoptysis 1
Malignancy (treatment or palliation within past 6 months) 1
A score of <4 means PE is unlikely (12.4%), >4 is suggestive of PE (37.1%).
William Morrant Baker , 1839–1896, surgeon, St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described these cysts in 1877.
Figure 57.35 A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram show-
ing pulmonary emboli as filling defects (arrow) in the pulmonary artery. 
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   989 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR990
Treatment
Deep vein thrombosis
The management of DVT has in the past been focused 
upon reducing the risk of pulmonary embolus. Patients who 
are confirmed to have a DVT on duplex imaging should be 
 rapidly anticoagulated with a ‘treatment dose’ of subcutaneous 
LMWH. Patients with significant renal impairment should be 
commenced on intravenous unfractionated heparin. Patients 
who have a sensitivity towards heparinoids, such as those 
with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, should commence 
on another anticoagulant, such as fondaparinux (an indirect 
factor Xa inhibitor) or bivalirudin (a direct thrombin inhib-
itor). This will achieve rapid anticoagulation and reduce the 
risk of embolisation. Typically, patients will then commence 
on warfarin for at least 3 months (or longer depending upon 
the persistence of risk factors or in recurrent cases). Patients 
who cannot be safely anticoagulated (usually due to bleed-
ing risks) should be considered for a temporary inferior vena 
cava filter, until either they are safe to be anticoagulated or 
the risk of embolisation has subsided and the filter may be 
retrieved. Patients with active cancer typically remain on a 
LMWH. There is a range of newer or ‘novel’ anticoagulants 
(NOACs). These oral agents either directly inhibit factor Xa 
(rivaroxaban and apixaban) or thrombin (dabigatran). Work 
is ongoing to explore their place within patient management.
Alongside the risk of pulmonary embolus is the risk to 
the patient’s leg. T wo-thirds of patients will have developed 
a PTS within 5 years of their DVT. A PTS limb may present 
with any of the symptoms, signs and complications of venous 
hypertension discussed earlier, but are typically towards the 
most severe end of the spectrum and patients face a consid-
erable deficit in their quality of life. A small number of cen -
tres are performing procedures aiming to treat this and these 
include venous recanalisation and stenting and sometimes 
venous bypass procedures. These procedures can be very chal-
lenging and although good results are possible, many patients 
are condemned to lifelong compression with unaddressed 
symptoms and complications. As the treatment of PTS is so 
challenging, attention is being turned towards prevention 
with the use of thrombolysis, endovenous thrombectomy and 
stenting.
During thrombolysis, an agent such as tissue plasminogen 
activator is administered directly into the thrombus, either 
via the popliteal vein or by direct puncture in the groin. 
New devices are being marketed that physically disrupt the 
thrombus at the same time as local lysis is carried out. Some 
thrombi can be compressed by stent grafting, allowing the 
venous lumen to be opened, especially in the iliac region. A 
meta-analysis of randomised trials has shown that these treat-
ments result in a significant reduction in PTS at 5 years (from 
67% to 39%) but at a cost of an increased risk of significant 
bleeding complications (from 4% to 10%). Patient selection 
is important. Despite such promising data, access to these 
treatments remains limited.
Pulmonary embolus
Most pulmonary emboli can be treated by anticoagulation 
and observation, but severe right heart strain and shortness 
of breath indicates the need for thrombolysis or radiologically 
guided catheter embolectomy.
Superficial thrombophlebitis
This is a superficial venous thrombosis. An abnormal endo -
thelium is a much more common precipitating factor than 
in most DVTs. Common causes include external trauma 
(especially to varicose veins), venepunctures and infusions of 
hyperosmolar solutions and drugs. The presence of an intrave-
nous cannula for longer than 24–48 hours often leads to local 
thrombosis. Some systemic diseases such as thromboangiitis 
obliterans (Buerger’s disease) and malignancy, especially of 
the pancreas, can lead to a flitting thrombophlebitis (throm -
bophlebitis migrans), affecting different veins at different 
times. Finally, coagulation disorders such as polycythaemia, 
thrombocytosis and sickle cell disease are often associated, as 
is a concomitant DVT.
The surface vein feels solid and is tender on palpation. 
The overlying skin may be attached to the vein and in the 
early stages may be erythematous before gradually turning 
brown. A linear segment of vein of variable length can be 
easily palpated once the inflammation has died down.
A full blood count, coagulation screen and duplex scan 
of the deep veins should usually be obtained. Any suggestion 
of an associated malignancy should be investigated using 
TABLE 57.6 Low-, medium- and high-risk patient groups 
for venous thromboembolism.
LOW
Minor surgery <30 minutes; any age; no risk factors
Major surgery >30 minutes; age <40; no other risk factors
Minor trauma or medical illness
MODERATE
Major surgery; age 40+ or other risk factors
Major medical illness: heart/lung disease, cancer, inflammatory 
bowel disease
Major trauma/burns
Minor surgery, trauma, medical illness in patient with previous 
DVT, PE or thrombophilia
HIGH
Major orthopaedic surgery or fracture of pelvis, hip, lower limb
Major abdominal/pelvic surgery for cancer
Major surgery, trauma, medical illness in patient with DVT, PE or 
thrombophilia
Lower limb paralysis (e.g. stroke, paraplegia)
Major lower limb amputation
DVT, deep vein thrombosis; PE, pulmonary embolus.
Leo Buerger , 1879–1943, Professor of Urologic Surgery, The New York Polyclinic Medical School, New York, NY, USA, described thromboangiitis obliterans 
in 1908.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   990 25/10/2017   09:34Venous entrapment syndr omes 991
PART 10 | VASCULAR
appropriate endoscopy and imaging studies, such as an 
abdominal CT scan.
Most patients are treated with non-steroidal anti-  
inflammatory drugs and topical heparinoid preparations and 
the condition resolves spontaneously. Rarely, infected thrombi 
require incision or excision. Ligation to prevent propagation 
into the deep veins is almost never required, although some 
advocate saphenofemoral ligation when the thrombus is seen 
on ultrasound to be at the SFJ. Associated DVT or thrombo -
philia is treated by anticoagulation.
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome
This is a combined anomaly of a cutaneous naevus, persistent 
vestigial veins with varicose veins and soft tissue and bone 
hypertrophy. The condition is a mesodermal abnormality that 
is not familial (Figure 57.36).
Segments of the deep veins are hypoplastic or aplastic 
and there may be an associated obstruction of the lymphatics. 
The condition must be distinguished from the Parkes-Weber 
syndrome, in which there are multiple arteriovenous fistulae 
causing venous hypertension, ulceration and high-output car-
diac failure.
Virtually all patients with Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome 
should be treated conservatively with compression hosiery; 
however, some will benefit from laser ablation of the naevus, 
stapling of the bones to avoid leg length discrepancy and 
occasional removal of large superficial varicose veins, pro -
vided the deep veins are patent. LMWH should be given to 
all patients having surgery as this syndrome is associated with 
an increased risk of VTE.
VENOUS ENTRAPMENT 
SYNDROMES
The axillary vein and the popliteal vein are the two veins 
that are most commonly compressed. The former is com -
pressed at the thoracic outlet between the first rib and the 
clavicle, where it usually presents as an axillary vein thrombo-
sis (see below) (Figure 57.37a). The latter is compressed by 
Summary box 57.3
Venous thromboembolism
●● May be unprovoked, in which case an association with an 
inherited ‘thrombophilia’ should be considered
●● Is much more commonly seen as a complication of illness or 
surgery
●● Is associated with both quality of life impairment and a risk of 
mortality
●● All healthcare professionals should actively assess the 
risk and consider preventative measures where this risk is 
increased
●● Management should involve measures to reduce the risk 
of extension and/or embolisation, typically with systemic 
anticoagulation
●● Consideration should be given to local thrombolysis to reduce 
the risk of postphlebitis limb
George Budd , 1808–1882, Professor of Medicine, King’s College Hospital, London, UK, described this syndrome in 1845.
Hans Chiari , 1851–1916, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Strasbourg, Germany (Strasbourg was returned to France after the end of World War I, in 1918), 
gave his account of this condition in 1898.
Frederick Parkes-Weber , 1863–1962, physician, The German Hospital, Dalston, London, UK.
Figure 57.36 Two patients with Klippel–T renaunay syndrome. (a) 
This patient has a longer leg and a capillary naevus; (b) this patient 
has a large lateral anomalous axial vein.
CONGENITAL VENOUS 
ANOMALIES
There are four main types of anomaly:
 ● aplasia;
 ● hypoplasia;
 ● duplication;
 ● persistence of vestigial vessels.
Aplasia is most commonly seen in the inferior vena 
cava and has a similar presentation to the post-thrombotic 
limb. Membranous occlusion of the left common iliac vein 
(May–Thurner syndrome) often develops where the vein 
passes behind the right common iliac artery (iliac vein com-
pression syndrome). This leads to an iliac vein thrombosis, 
which most commonly affects the left common and external 
iliac veins. Membranes may also narrow the hepatic veins, 
which can become totally occluded, leading to a Budd–
Chiari syndrome.
Hypoplasia results in a narrow vein, which frequently 
offers little significant venous function and amounts to a 
functional venous occlusion, being circumvented by enlarged 
collateral venous tributaries. Duplications are quite common, 
with double vena cava, femoral and renal veins; they often 
present as an incidental finding.
(a) (b)
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   991 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR992
an abnormal insertion of the gastrocnemius muscles. Entrap -
ment may cause discomfort and swelling of the limb during 
exercise before thrombosis develops. Treatment is by surgical 
decompression, excising the first rib or dividing the abnormal 
musculature of the gastrocnemius insertion.
AXILLARY VEIN THROMBOSIS
Thrombosis of the axillary vein (Paget–Schrötter disease) 
may occur following excessive exercise in a patient with an 
anatomically abnormal thoracic outlet, but is also associated 
with excessive muscle bulk as found in weight lifters. The 
vein may be compressed by a cervical rib if this is present 
(Figure 57.37b). The arm is swollen and painful and, at an 
early stage, the thrombus can be disrupted by thrombolysis 
delivered through one of the arm veins. The vein must then 
be imaged to see if there is any compression on elevation of 
the arm. If this is confirmed, thoracic outlet decompression 
can be carried out by resecting the cervical rib or first rib.
VENOUS INJURY
Blunt or penetrating trauma almost always damages some 
small- and medium-sized veins, which can be safely ignored 
or ligated without causing any problems. Larger axial venous 
channels have in the past been ligated when injured, but it 
is now recognised that these axial veins should be repaired 
whenever possible to reduce subsequent morbidity (pain and 
swelling in the tissues being drained) and limb loss when 
associated with a concomitant arterial injury. Many venous 
injuries remain undiagnosed at the time of injury (e.g. crural 
vein damage associated with a fractured tibia) and only pres -
ent many years later when post-thrombotic changes become 
apparent. Venous injuries occur from both civilian and mili -
tary trauma but the incidence of venous military injuries 
has been particularly well documented. In total, 40–50% of 
arter ial injuries have concomitant venous injuries, especially 
in the popliteal fossa.
The mechanism may be laceration, contusion or avulsion 
(Figure 57.38). Iatrogenic injuries result from damage at the 
time of surgery and from punctures caused by catheter inser -
tion. Thrombosis, haemorrhage and embolisation are all com-
mon complications and arteriovenous fistulae may develop 
when there is a local concomitant arterial injury.
Associated injuries to soft tissue, arteries and bones often 
overshadow the venous injury. Massive haemorrhage from 
the pelvic bones or the inferior vena cava can rapidly lead to 
hypovolaemic shock and death if left untreated. Haematomas 
are common and engorgement, cyanosis and swelling are also 
indicative of a major venous injury.
Management
As with all traumatic injuries, the management priorities are 
the assessment and management of issues affecting the air -
way, then breathing and then circulation. V enous injuries 
have the potential to threaten life through massive bleeding 
and patients require vascular access, circulatory support and 
blood products. Trauma patients with life-threatening haem-
orrhage are at risk of hypothermia, acidosis, functional and 
consumptive coagulopathy and paradoxical thrombosis, and 
these issues need to be prevented where possible and managed 
when present (see Chapter 2).
Venous pressures are low and so where there is access to 
the site of injury, pressure will control bleeding and in most 
cases offer definitive management. Intervention is required 
Sir James Paget , 1814–1899, English surgeon and pathologist, best known for his description of Paget’s disease of the bone.
Leopold von Schrötter , 1837–1908, Austrian physician and laryngologist, Chair of Laryngology, University of Vienna, Austria.
Figure 57.37 Thoracic outlet syndrome: (a) cervical ribs on plain 
x-ray; (b) elevation of the arm causing occlusion of the axillary vein 
with collaterals. The patient has had previous surgery to decompress 
the left side. 
(a)
(b)
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   992 25/10/2017   09:34Venous tumours 993
PART 10 | VASCULAR
where pressure cannot be applied, or where the loss of venous 
function itself threatens life or limb. Intervention can include 
reduction and stabilisation of a fracture (e.g. pelvis), endove-
nous embolisation or stent grafting.
A small proportion of venous injuries will require formal 
exploration and ligation or repair. Different types of repair 
are shown in Figure 57.39; the type of repair carried out 
depends on the extent of the venous injury, including how 
much venous wall has been lost or damaged. Lateral sutures 
and vein patches are ideal methods of repair and end-to-end 
anastomosis is satisfactory, provided that it is not carried out 
under tension. A jump graft may be required.
Vein replacement should be by autogenous tissue when -
ever possible, using vein harvested from another site, e.g. the 
internal jugular vein or the GSV from an undamaged limb. 
Artificial grafts, such as PTFE grafts, are at risk of infection 
and have given poor results in recent conflicts. The use of 
anticoagulants and an arteriovenous fistula to reduce the risk 
of thrombosis in the vein graft are controversial and depend 
on the associated injuries that are present. In contaminated 
wounds, tetanus toxoid and antibiotics should be given. A 
fasciotomy should always be considered if there is a concomi-
tant arterial and venous injury.
Prognosis
It is now recognised that repair of a major vein can be carried 
out with a 70–80% success rate, reducing the morbidity of a 
combined arterial and venous injury considerably (especially 
limb loss). Complex repairs should not, however, be carried 
out if a patient’s life is at risk, when ligation may have to suf-
fice in the short term.
VENOUS TUMOURS
Venous malformation cavernous 
angioma/haemangioma
These malformations are common, representing one end of a 
spectrum of arteriovenous malformations. They often affect 
the skin but also extending into the deep tissues, including 
bones and joints. They usually present with variable swell -
ing and dilated veins beneath the skin. Occasionally, there 
is no visible mass and the complaint is one of pain. Haem -
orrhage and thrombophlebitis may exacerbate the pain. A 
soft compressible mass, which is venous in colour especially 
if it is under the skin, is usually present (Figure 57.40a). A 
dark blue tinge is often apparent, even if the malformation 
is deeply situated. Nodules within the mass usually represent 
previous episodes of thrombosis. The size and extent of the 
haemangioma are best visualised by nuclear MR with a short 
tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequence (Figure 57.40b) or 
CT scanning with contrast enhancement. Venography rarely 
shows an abnormality, but direct puncture with contrast 
injection shows the connections of the malformation.
Treatment is a highly specialised area. Treatment options 
nowadays rarely initially involve surgical excision as once this 
is done future embolisation and sclerotherapy are very diffi-
cult. No treatment is entirely curative because it is difficult to 
remove all of the angiomatous tissue or sclerose the angioma 
completely. Sclerosis can be dangerous when the veins con -
nect to the deep system, particularly near the central nervous 
system.
Figure 57.38 Types of venous damage: (a) incision; (b) transection; 
(c) irregular laceration; (d) avulsion of a tributary. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
d
e
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 57.39 Types of venous repair: (a) lateral suture (risk of ste -
nosis); (b) patch graft; (c) Carrel triangulation technique of venous 
anastomosis; (d) panel graft; (e) spiral graft.
Alexis Carrel , 1873–1944, a French surgeon who emigrated to work at the University of Chicago, IL, USA. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or 
Medicine in 1912 for pioneering vascular suturing techniques.
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   993 25/10/2017   09:34CHAPTER 57  Venous disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR994
Leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma of 
the vein wall
These are extremely rare tumours that are usually slow grow-
ing. They present with pain and a mass with signs of venous 
obstruction, e.g. oedema and distended veins. Duplex scan -
ning, CT (Figure 57.41) and MR imaging show a filling 
defect within the vein wall. Treatment is by resection with 
replacement by autogenous vein taken from another site. 
Rarely, a PTFE graft is required. When the tumour affects the 
vena cava it must be resected and replaced with a prosthetic 
graft.
Cystic degeneration
As in the peripheral arterial system, cystic degeneration of the 
vein wall is an uncommon cause of venous occlusion. It may 
be detected by ultrasound. The cyst may be deroofed or the 
venous segment excised.
FURTHER READING
Barwell JR, Davies CE, Deacon J et al. Comparison of surgery and compres-
sion with compression alone in chronic venous ulceration (ESCHAR 
study): randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2004; 363: 1857–59.
Brittenden J, Cotton SC, Elders A et al. Clinical effectiveness and 
cost-effectiveness of foam sclerotherapy, endovenous laser ablation 
and surgery for varicose veins: results from the Comparison of LAser, 
Surgery and foam Sclerotherapy (CLASS) randomised controlled 
trial. Health Technol Assess 2015; 19(27): 1–342.
Carradice D, Mekako AI, Mazari FA et al. Randomized clinical trial of 
endovenous laser ablation compared with conventional surgery for 
great saphenous varicose veins. Br J Surg 2011; 98(4): 501–10.
Carradice D, Mekako AI, Mazari FA et al. Clinical and technical out -
comes from a randomized clinical trial of endovenous laser ablation 
compared with conventional surgery for great saphenous varicose 
veins. Br J Surg 2011; 98(8): 1117–23.
Carradice D, Wallace T, Gohil R, Chetter I. A comparison of the 
effectiveness of treating those with and without the complications 
of superficial venous insufficiency. Ann Surg 2014; 260(2): 396–401.
Coleridge-Smith P , Labropoulos N, Partsch K et al. Duplex ultrasound in-
vestigation of the veins in chronic venous disease of the lower limbs – 
UIP consensus statement. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2006; 31: 83–92.
Eklof B, Rutherford RB, Bergan JJ et al. Revision of the CEAP classifica-
tion for chronic venous disorders: Consensus statement. J Vasc Surg 
2004; 40:1248–52.
Gohel MS, Epstein DM, Davies AH. Cost-effectiveness of tradition -
al and endovenous treatments for varicose veins. Br J Surg  2010; 
97(12): 1815–23.
Michaels JA, Campbell WB, Brazier JE et al. Randomised clinical tri -
al, observational study and assessment of cost-effectiveness of the 
treatment of varicose veins (REACTIV trial). Health Technol Assess 
2006; 10(13): 1–196.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. NICE CG92: 
Venous thromboembolism: reducing the risk for patients in hospital. 
2010. www.nice.org.uk.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. NICE CG168: 
Varicose veins: diagnosis and management. 2013. www.nice.org.uk. 
‘VEINS’ Supplement. Phlebology 2015; 30(2), supplement.
Figure 57.40 (a) Venous angioma of the leg; (b) magnetic resonance 
imaging showing extensive angioma (white) throughout the superficial 
tissues, anterior and posterior compartments of the left leg.
Figure 57.41 Inferior vena cava containing a filling defect from a 
leiomyosarcoma (arrow).
.
(a)
(b)
10_57-B&L27_Pt10_Ch57.indd   994 25/10/2017   09:34Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The main functions of the lymphatic system
 • The development of the lymphatic system
 • The various causes of limb swelling
 • The aetiology, clinical features, investigations and 
treatment of lymphoedema
Chapter
Lymphatic disorders
58
INTRODUCTION
The lymphatic system was first described by Erasistratus in 
Alexandria more than 2000 years ago. William Hunter, in the 
late eighteenth century, was the first to describe the function 
of the lymphatic system. Starling’s pioneering work on the 
hydrostatic and haemodynamic forces controlling the move -
ment of fluid across the capillary provided further insights 
into the function of the lymphatics. However, there is much 
about the lymphatic system that is not understood and debate 
continues over the precise aetiology of the most common 
abnormality of the system, namely lymphoedema.
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF 
THE L YMPHATIC SYSTEM
Functions
The principal function of the lymphatics is the return of pro-
tein-rich fluid to the circulation through the lymphaticove-
nous junctions in the jugular area. Thus, water, electrolytes, 
low molecular weight moieties (polypeptides, cytokines, 
growth factors) and macromolecules (fibrinogen, albumin, 
globulins, coagulation and fibrinolytic factors) from the inter-
stitial fluid (ISF) return to the circulation via the lymphatics. 
Intestinal lymph (chyle) transports cholesterol, long-chain 
fatty acids, triglycerides and the fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, 
E and K) directly to the circulation, bypassing the liver. Lym-
phocytes and other immune cells also circulate within the 
lymphatic system.
Development and macroanatomy
In the human embryo lymph sacs develop at 6–7 weeks’ gesta-
tion as four cystic spaces, one on either side of the neck and one 
in each groin. These cisterns enlarge and develop communi-
cations that permit lymph from the lower limbs and abdomen 
to drain via the cisterna chyli into the thoracic duct, which in 
turn drains into the left internal jugular vein at its confluence 
with the left subclavian vein. Lymph from the head and right 
arm drains via a separate lymphatic trunk, the right lymphatic 
duct, into the right internal jugular vein. Lymphatics accom-
pany veins everywhere except in the cortical bony skeleton 
and central nervous system, although the brain and retina 
possess cerebrospinal fluid and aqueous humour, respectively.
The lymphatic system comprises lymphatic channels, lym-
phoid organs (lymph nodes, spleen, Peyer’s patches, thymus, 
tonsils) and circulating elements (lymphocytes and other 
mononuclear immune cells). Lymphatic endothelial cells are 
derived from embryonic veins in the jugular and perimeso -
nephric areas from where they migrate to form the primary 
lymph sacs and plexus. Both transcription (e.g. Prox1) and 
growth (e.g. vascular endothelial growth factor-C (VEGF-C)) 
factors are essential for these developmental events.
Microanatomy and physiology
Lymphatic capillaries
Lymphatics originate within the ISF space from special -
ised endothelialised capillaries (initial lymphatics) or non-  
endothelialised channels such as the spaces of Disse in the 
Erasistratus of Chios , c.300–250bc, of the Medical School at Alexandria in Egypt is regarded by many as the first physiologist.
William Hunter , 1718–1783, anatomist and obstetrician who became the first Professor of Anatomy at the Royal Academy of Arts, London, UK. He was the elder 
brother of John Hunter, the anatomist and surgeon.
Ernest Henry Starling , 1866–1927, Professor of Physiology, University College, London, UK.
Josef Disse , 1852–1912, a German anatomist.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   995 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR996
liver. Initial lymphatics are unlike arteriovenous capillaries in 
that:
 ● they are blind-ended;
 ● they are much larger (50 µm);
 ● they allow the entry of molecules of up to 1000 kDa in size 
because the basement membrane is fenestrated, tenuous 
or even absent and the endothelium itself possesses intra- 
and intercellular pores;
 ● they are anchored to interstitial matrix by filaments. In 
the resting state, initial lymphatics are collapsed. When 
ISF volume and pressure increases, initial lymphatics and 
their pores are held open by these filaments to facilitate 
increased drainage.
Terminal lymphatics
Initial lymphatics drain into terminal (collecting) lymphat -
ics that possess bicuspid valves and endothelial cells rich in 
the contractile protein actin. Larger collecting lymphatics are 
surrounded by smooth muscle. Valves partition the lymphat -
ics into segments (lymphangions) that contract sequentially 
to propel lymph into the lymph trunks.
Lymph trunks
Terminal lymphatics lead to lymph trunks, which have a struc-
ture similar to that of veins, namely a single layer of endothe-
lial cells, lying on a basement membrane overlying a media 
comprising smooth muscle cells that are innervated with sym-
pathetic, parasympathetic and sensory nerve endings. About 
10% of lymph arising from a limb is transported in deep lym -
phatic trunks that accompany the main neurovascular bun -
dles. The majority, however, is conducted against venous flow 
from deep to superficial in epifascial lymph trunks. Superficial 
trunks form lymph bundles of various sizes, which are located 
within strips of adipose tissue, and tend to follow the course 
of the major superficial veins.
Starling’s forces
The distribution of fluid and protein between the vascular 
system and ISF depends on the balance of hydrostatic and 
oncotic pressures between the two compartments (Star -
ling’s forces), together with the relative impermeability of 
the blood capillary membrane to molecules over 70  kDa. In 
health, there is net capillary filtration, which is removed by 
the lymphatic system.
Transport of particles
Particles enter the initial lymphatics through interendothe -
lial openings and vesicular transport through intraendothelial 
pores. Large particles are actively phagocytosed by macro -
phages and transported through the lymphatic system intra -
cellularly.
Mechanisms of lymph transport
Resting ISF pressure is negative (-2 to -6  mmH2O), whereas 
lymphatic pressures are positive, indicating that lymph flows 
against a small pressure gradient. It is believed that prograde 
lymphatic flow depends upon three mechanisms:
1 transient increases in interstitial pressure secondary to 
muscular contraction and external compression;
2 the sequential contraction and relaxation of lymphan -
gions;
3 the prevention of reflux because of valves.
Lymphangions are believed to respond to increased lymph 
flow in much the same way as the heart responds to increased 
venous return, in that they increase their contractility and 
stroke volume. Contractility is also enhanced by noradren-
aline, serotonin, certain prostaglandins and thromboxanes, 
and endothelin-1. Pressures of up to 30–50 mmHg have been 
recorded in normal lymph trunks and up to 200  mmHg in 
severe lymphoedema. Lymphatics may also modulate their 
own contractility through the production of nitric oxide and 
other local mediators. Transport in the thoracic and right 
lymph ducts also depends upon intrathoracic (respiration) 
and central venous (cardiac cycle) pressures. Therefore, car -
diorespiratory disease may have an adverse effect on lym -
phatic function.
In summary, in the healthy limb, lymph flow is largely 
due to intrinsic lymphatic contractility, although this is 
augmented by exercise, limb movement and external com -
pression. However, in lymphoedema, when the lymphatics 
are constantly distended with lymph, these external forces 
assume a much more important functional role.
ACUTE INFLAMMATION OF THE 
L YMPHATICS
Acute lymphangitis is an infection, often caused by Strepto-
coccus pyogenes or Staphylococcus aureus, which spreads to the 
draining lymphatics and lymph nodes (lymphadenitis) where 
an abscess may form. Eventually this may progress to bacte -
raemia or septicaemia. The normal signs of infection (rubor , 
calor, dolor) are present and a red streak is seen in the skin 
along the line of the inflamed lymphatic (Figure 58.1). The 
part should be rested to reduce lymphatic drainage and ele -
vated to reduce swelling, and the patient should be treated 
with intravenous antibiotics based upon actual or suspected 
sensitivities. Failure to improve within 48 hours suggests 
Figure 58.1 Acute lymphangitis of the arm. Erythematous streaks 
extend from the site of primary infection on the volar aspect of the 
forearm to epicondylar nodes at the elbow, and from there to enlarged 
and tender axillary lymph nodes.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   996 25/10/2017   09:35Lymphoedema 997
PART 10 | VASCULAR
The severity of unilateral limb lymphoedema can be clas-
sified as:
 ● mild: <20% excess limb volume;
 ● moderate: 20–40% excess limb volume;
 ● severe: >40% excess limb volume.
Pathophysiology
The ISF compartment (10–12 litres in a 70-kg man) consti -
tutes 50% of the wet weight of the skin and subcutaneous 
tissues and, in order for oedema to be clinically detectable, its 
volume has to double. About 8 litres (protein concentration 
approximately 20–30 g/L, similar to ISF) of lymph is produced 
each day and travels in afferent lymphatics to lymph nodes. 
There, the volume is halved and the protein concentration 
doubled, resulting in 4 litres of lymph re-entering the venous 
circulation each day via efferent lymphatics. In one sense, all 
oedema is lymphoedema in that it results from an inability of 
the lymphatic system to clear the ISF compartment. However, 
in most types of oedema this is because the capillary filtration 
rate is pathologically high and overwhelms a normal lymphatic 
system, resulting in the accumulation of low-protein oedema 
fluid. In contrast, in true lymphoedema, when the primary 
problem is in the lymphatics, capillary filtration is normal and 
the oedema fluid is relatively high in protein. Of course, in 
a significant number of patients with oedema there is both 
abnormal capillary filtration and abnormal lymphatic drain -
age, as in chronic venous insufficiency (CVI) for example.
Lymphoedema results from lymphatic aplasia, hypoplasia, 
dysmotility (reduced contractility with or without valvular 
insufficiency), obliteration by inflammatory, infective or neo-
plastic processes, or surgical extirpation. Whatever the primary 
abnormality, the resultant physical and/or functional obstruc-
tion leads to lymphatic hypertension and distension, with 
further secondary impairment of contractility and valvular com-
petence. Lymphostasis and lymphotension lead to the accumu-
lation in the ISF of fluid, proteins, growth factors and other 
active peptide moieties, glycosaminoglycans and  particulate 
matter, including bacteria. As a consequence, there is increased 
inappropriate antibiotic therapy, the presence of undrained 
pus or the presence of an underlying systemic disorder (malig-
nancy, immunodeficiency). The lymphatic damage caused by 
acute lymphangitis may lead to recurrent attacks of infection 
and lymphoedema; patients with lymphoedema are prone to 
so-called acute inflammatory episodes (see below).
L YMPHOEDEMA
Definition
Lymphoedema may be defined as abnormal limb swelling 
caused by the accumulation of increased amounts of high 
protein ISF secondary to defective lymphatic drainage in the 
presence of (near) normal net capillary filtration.
The scope of the clinical problem
At birth, 1 in 6000 people will develop lymphoedema with 
an overall prevalence of 0.13–2%. The condition is not only 
associated with significant physical symptoms and complica -
tions but is also a frequent cause of emotional and psycholog-
ical distress, which can lead to difficulties with relationships, 
education and work.
Despite this significant impact on quality of life, many 
sufferers choose not to seek medical advice because of embar-
rassment and a belief that nothing can be done. Patients who 
do come forward for help, especially those with non-cancer- 
related lymphoedema, often find they have limited access to 
appropriate expertise and treatment. Lymphoedema is often 
misdiagnosed and mistreated by doctors, who frequently have a 
poor understanding of the importance of the condition, believ-
ing it to be primarily a cosmetic problem in the early stages. 
However, making an early diagnosis is important because rela-
tively simple measures can be highly effective at this stage and 
can prevent the development of disabling late disease, which is 
often very difficult to treat. It is also an opportunity for patients 
to make contact with patient support groups.
Summary box 58.1
Symptoms frequently experienced by patients with 
lymphoedema
●● Swelling, clothing or jewellery becoming tighter
●● Constant dull ache, even severe pain
●● Burning and bursting sensations
●● General tiredness and debility
●● Sensitivity to heat
●● ‘Pins and needles’
●● Cramp
●● Skin problems, including flakiness, weeping, excoriation and 
breakdown
●● Immobility, leading to obesity and muscle wasting
●● Backache and joint problems
●● Athlete’s foot
●● Acute infective episodes
Summary box 58.2
What every patient with lymphoedema should receive
●● An explanation of why the limb is swollen and the underlying 
cause
●● Guidance on skin hygiene and care and the avoidance of 
acute infective episodes
●● Antifungal prophylactic therapy to prevent athlete’s foot
●● Rapid access to antibiotic therapy if necessary, hospital 
admission for acute infective episodes
●● Appropriate instructions regarding exercise therapy
●● Manual lymphatic drainage (MLD)
●● Multilayer lymphoedema bandaging (MLLB)
●● Compression garments and, if appropriate, specialised 
footwear
●● Advice on diet
●● Access to support services and networks
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   997 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR998
collagen production by fibroblasts, an accumulation of inflam-
matory cells (predominantly macrophages and lymphocytes) 
and activation of keratinocytes. The end result is protein-rich 
oedema fluid, increased deposition of ground substance, 
subdermal fibrosis and dermal thickening and proliferation. 
Lymphoedema, unlike all other types of oedema, is confined 
to the epifascial space. Although muscle compartments may be  
hypertrophied because of the increased work involved in limb 
movement, they are characteristically free of oedema.
Classification
T wo main types of lymphoedema are recognised:
1 Primary lymphoedema, in which the cause is unknown 
(or at least uncertain and unproven); it is thought to be 
caused by ‘congenital lymphatic dysplasia’.
2 Secondary or acquired lymphoedema, in which there is a 
clear underlying cause.
Primary lymphoedema is usually further subdivided on the 
basis of the presence of family history, age of onset and lymph-
angiographic findings (Tables 58.1 and 58.2).
Risk factors for lymphoedema
Although the true risk factor profile for lymphoedema is not 
currently known, a number of factors are thought to predis -
pose an individual to its development and predict progres -
sion, severity and outcome of the condition (Table 58.3).
Symptoms and signs
In most cases, the diagnosis of primary or secondary lymph -
oedema can be made and the condition can be differentiated 
from other causes of a swollen limb on the basis of history 
and examination without recourse to complex investigation 
(Table 58.4). Unlike other types of oedema, lymphoedema 
characteristically involves the foot (Figure 58.2). The con-
tour of the ankle is lost through infilling of the submalleolar 
depressions, a ‘buffalo hump’ forms on the dorsum of the foot, 
the toes appear ‘square’ because of confinement of footwear 
and the skin on the dorsum of the toes cannot be pinched 
because of subcutaneous fibrosis (Stemmer’s sign). Lymphoe -
dema usually spreads proximally to knee level and less com -
monly affects the whole leg (Figure 58.3). In the early stages, 
TABLE 58.2 Clinical classification of lymphoedema.
Grade (Brunner) Clinical features
Subclinical 
(latent)
There is excess interstitial fluid and histological 
abnormalities in lymphatics and lymph nodes, 
but no clinically apparent lymphoedema
I Oedema pits on pressure and swelling largely 
or completely disappears on elevation and bed 
rest
II Oedema does not pit and does not significantly 
reduce upon elevation, positive Stemmer’s sign
III Oedema is associated with irreversible skin 
changes, i.e. fibrosis, papillae
TABLE 58.1 Aetiological classification of lymphoedema.
Primary 
lymphoedema
Congenital (onset <2 years old): sporadic; familial 
(Nonne–Milroy’s disease)
Praecox (onset 2–35 years old): sporadic; familial 
(Letessier–Meige’s disease)
Tarda (onset after 35 years old)
Secondary 
lymphoedema
Parasitic infection (filariasis) 
Fungal infection (tinea pedis)
Exposure to foreign body material (silica 
particles)
Primary lymphatic malignancy 
Metastatic spread to lymph nodes 
Radiotherapy to lymph nodes
Surgical excision of lymph nodes
Trauma (particularly degloving injuries) 
Superficial thrombophlebitis
Deep venous thrombosis
Robert Stemmer , 1925–2000, phlebologist, Strasbourg, France.
Figure 58.2 The foot of a patient with typical lymphoedema.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   998 25/10/2017   09:35Lymphoedema 999
PART 10 | VASCULAR
lymphoedema will ‘pit’ and the patient will report that the 
swelling is down in the morning. This represents a reversible 
component to the swelling, which can be controlled. Failure 
to do so allows fibrosis, dermal thickening and hyperkeratosis 
to occur. In general, primary lymphoedema progresses more 
slowly than secondary lymphoedema. Chronic eczema, fungal 
infection of the skin (dermatophytosis) and nails (onychomy-
cosis), fissuring, verrucae and papillae (warts) are frequently 
seen in advanced disease. Ulceration is unusual, except in the 
presence of chronic venous insufficiency.
Lymphangiomas are dilated dermal lymphatics that ‘blis -
ter’ onto the skin surface. The fluid is usually clear but may 
be blood-stained. In the long term, lymphangiomas throm -
bose and fibrose, forming hard nodules that may raise concerns 
about malignancy. If lymphangiomas are <5 cm across, they are 
termed lymphangioma circumscriptum, and if they are more 
widespread, they are termed lymphangioma diffusum. If they  
form a reticulate pattern of ridges then it has been termed 
lymphoedema ab igne. Lymphangiomas frequently weep (lym-
phorrhoea, chylorrhoea), causing skin maceration, and they act 
as a portal for infection. Protein-losing diarrhoea, chylous asci-
tes, chylothorax, chyluria and discharge from lymphangiomas 
suggest lymphangectasia (megalymphatics) and chylous reflux.
Ulceration, non-healing bruises and raised purple-red 
nodules should lead to suspicion of malignancy. Lymphangio-
sarcoma was originally described in postmastectomy oedema 
(Stewart–Treves’ syndrome) and affects around 0.5% of patients 
at a mean onset of 10 years. However, lymphangiosarcoma can 
develop in any long-standing lymphoedema, but usually takes 
longer to manifest (20 years). It presents as single or multi -
ple bluish/red skin and subcutaneous nodules that spread to 
form satellite lesions, which may then become confluent. The 
TABLE 58.3 Risk factors for lymphoedema.
Upper limb/trunk lymphoedema Lower limb lymphoedema
Surgery with axillary lymph node dissection, particularly if extensive 
breast or lymph node surgery
Scar formation, fibrosis and radiodermatitis from postoperative 
axillary radiotherapy
Radiotherapy to the breast or to the axillary, internal mammary or 
subclavicular lymph nodes
Drain/wound complications or infection 
Cording (axillary web syndrome) 
Seroma formation
Advanced cancer 
Obesity
Congenital predisposition
Trauma in an ‘at-risk’ arm (venepuncture, blood pressure 
measurement, injection)
Chronic skin disorders and inflammation 
Hypertension
Taxane chemotherapy
Insertion of pacemaker 
Arteriovenous shunt for dialysis 
Air travel
Living in or visiting an area for endemic lymphatic filariasis
Surgery with inguinal lymph node dissection 
Postoperative pelvic radiotherapy
Recurrent soft tissue infection at the same site 
Obesity
Varicose vein stripping and vein harvesting
Genetic predisposition/family history of chronic oedema 
Advanced cancer
Intrapelvic or intra-abdominal tumours that involve or directly 
compress lymphatic vessels
Orthopaedic surgery 
Poor nutritional status
Thrombophlebitis and chronic venous insufficiency, particularly post- 
thrombotic syndrome
Any unresolved asymmetrical oedema 
Chronic skin disorders and inflammation
Concurrent illnesses such as phlebitis, hyperthyroidism, kidney or 
cardiac disease
Immobilisation and prolonged limb dependency 
Air travel
Living in or visiting an area for endemic lymphatic filariasis
Reproduced with permission from: Lymphoedema Framework. Best practice management of lymphoedema. International Consensus. London: MEP Ltd, 2006. 
© MEP Ltd 2006.
Ab igne  is Latin for ‘from fire’.
Fred Waldorf Stewart , 1894–1991, Chairman of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Hospital, New York, NY, USA. An annual award was instituted in his 
name by the Department of Pathology called the Fred Waldorf Stewart Award.
Norman Treves , 1894–1964, American surgeon. He had a special interest in male breast cancer.
Stewart and Treves  reported this condition in a joint paper in 1948.
Summary box 58.3
Malignancies associated with lymphoedema
●● Lymphangiosarcoma (Stewart–Treves’ syndrome)
●● Kaposi’s sarcoma (human immunodeficiency virus)
●● Squamous cell carcinoma
●● Liposarcoma
●● Malignant melanoma
●● Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
●● Basal cell carcinoma
●● Lymphoma
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   999 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1000
diagnosis is usually made late and confirmed by skin biopsy.  
Amputation offers the best chance of survival but, even then, 
most patients live for less than 3 years. It has been suggested that 
lymphoedema leads to an impairment of immune surveillance 
and so predisposes to other malignancies, although the causal 
association is not as definite as it is for lymphangiosarcoma.
William Morrant Baker , 1839–1896, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described these cysts in 1877.
Mauirice Klippel and Paul Trenaunay , two French physicians, described this syndrome in 1900.
TABLE 58.4 Differential diagnosis of the swollen limb.
Non-vascular 
or lymphatic
General disease states Cardiac failure from any cause
Liver failure
Hypoproteinaemia due to nephrotic syndrome, malabsorption, protein-losing enteropathy 
Hypothyroidism (myxoedema)
Allergic disorders, including angioedema and idiopathic cyclic oedema 
Prolonged immobility and lower limb dependency
Local disease processes Ruptured Baker’s cyst
Myositis ossificans
Bony or soft-tissue tumours 
Arthritis
Haemarthrosis
Calf muscle haematoma 
Achilles tendon rupture
Retroperitoneal fibrosis May lead to arterial, venous and lymphatic abnormalities
Gigantism Rare
All tissues are uniformly enlarged
Drugs Corticosteroids, oestrogens, progestagens
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, phenylbutazone, methyldopa, hydralazine, nifedipine
Trauma Painful swelling due to reflex sympathetic dystrophy
Obesity Lipodystrophy
Lipoidosis
Venous Deep venous thrombosis There may be an obvious predisposing factor, such as recent surgery
The classical signs of pain and redness may be absent
Post-thrombotic syndrome Swelling, usually of the whole leg, due to iliofemoral venous obstruction
Venous skin changes, secondary varicose veins on the leg and collateral veins on the  
 lower abdominal wall
Venous claudication may be present
Varicose veins Simple primary varicose veins are rarely the cause of significant leg swelling
Klippel–Trenaunay’s syndrome 
 and other malformations
Rare
Present at birth or develops in early childhood
Comprises an abnormal lateral venous complex, capillary naevus, bony abnormalities,  
 hypo(a)plasia of deep veins and limb lengthening
Lymphatic abnormalities often coexist
External venous compression Pelvic or abdominal tumour including the gravid uterus 
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Ischaemia–reperfusion Following lower limb revascularisation for chronic and particularly chronic ischaemia
Arterial Arteriovenous malformation May be associated with local or generalised swelling 
Aneurysm Popliteal
Femoral
False aneurysm following (iatrogenic) trauma
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1000 25/10/2017   09:35Primary lymphoedema 1001
PART 10 | VASCULAR
PRIMARY LYMPHOEDEMA
Aetiology
It has been proposed that all cases of primary lymphoedema 
are due to an inherited abnormality of the lymphatic system, 
sometimes termed ‘congenital lymphatic dysplasia’. However, 
it is possible that many sporadic cases of primary lymphoe-
dema occur in the presence of a (near-)normal lymphatic sys-
tem and are actually examples of secondary lymphoedema for 
which the triggering events have gone unrecognised. These 
might include seemingly trivial (but repeated) bacterial and/or 
fungal infections, insect bites, barefoot walking (silica), deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT) or episodes of superficial thrombo-
phlebitis. In animal models, simple excision of lymph nodes 
and/or trunks leads to acute lymphoedema, which resolves 
within a few weeks, presumably because of the development 
of collaterals. The human condition can only be mimicked by 
inducing extensive lymphatic obliteration and fibrosis. Even 
then, there may be considerable delay between the injury and 
the onset of oedema. Primary lymphoedema is much more 
common in the legs than the arms. This may be because of 
gravity and a bipedal posture, the fact that the lymphatic sys-
tem of the leg is less well developed, or the increased suscepti-
bility of the leg to trauma and/or infection. Furthermore, loss 
of the venoarteriolar reflex (VAR), which protects lower limb 
capillaries from excessive hydrostatic forces in the erect pos -
ture, with age and disease (CVI, diabetes), may be important.
Classification
Primary lymphoedema is usually classified on the basis of 
apparent genetic susceptibility, age of onset or lymphan -
giographic findings. None of these is ideal and the various 
classification systems in existence can appear confusing and 
conflicting, as various terms and eponyms are used loosely and 
interchangeably. This has hampered research and efforts to 
gain a better understanding of underlying mechanisms, the 
effectiveness of therapy and prognosis.
Genetic susceptibility
Primary lymphoedema can be familial or sporadic. In familial 
cases the genetic mutations can be inherited in an autoso -
mal dominant, recessive or x-linked pattern. In the last few 
years the application of Next Generation Sequencing, which 
allows identification of genetic mutations, even in sporadic 
cases and smaller families, has increased our understanding of 
the genetic basis of lymphoedema.
So far, mutations in more than 20 genes have been linked 
to the development of primary lymphoedema. In individuals 
with familial mutations the penetrance of lymphoedema can 
often be incomplete leading to a large variability in clinical 
presentation. Involvement of other systems (cardiovascular , 
respiratory, nervous, digestive) is common and can indicate 
a specific mutation. Presence of isolated lower limb lymph-
oedema at birth, classically described as Milroy’s disease, 
suggests mutation in FMS-like tyrosine kinase 4 (FLT4)/
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (VEGFR-3) or 
VEGF-C. In these patients, reduced initial uptake and pres-
ence of tortuous lymphatic tracts with evidence of rerouting 
in lymphangiography suggests mutation in the VEGF-C gene. 
The unique signs and lymphangiographic features of some of 
the genes currently known to cause primary lymphoedema are 
summarised in Table 58.5. Lymphoedema can also be present 
as a minor sign in some well-recognised syndromes. Primary 
lymphoedema is present in less than 10% of cases of tuberous 
sclerosis (TSC1 and 2 gene mutations). Lymphoedema has 
been reported in patients with Noonan syndrome in the pres-
ence of PTPN11, SOS1 or KRAS mutations, and in patients 
with Turner syndrome (monosomy X) and capillary malfor -
mation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome (RAS p21 
protein activator 1 (RASA1) mutation).
William Forsyth Milroy , 1855–1942, Professor of Clinical Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, described the condition in 1892.
Jacqueline Noonan , b.1928, paediatric cardiologist, University of Kentucky, USA.
Henry Hubert Turner , 1892–1970, Professor of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma, OK, USA.
Figure 58.3 The lower leg of a patient with typical lymphoedema.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1001 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1002
Most of the proteins encoded by these genes belong to 
the VEGF-C-VEGF R-3 ligand–receptor signalling complex 
and RAS/MAPK axis. The VEGF-C–VEGFR-3 signalling 
pathway is a major regulator of lymphangiogenesis. Down -
stream, transcription factors such as FOXC2 and ITGA9 
play a major role in the development of valves in the lym -
phatic vessels. Mutations in the FLT4 gene that encodes 
VEGFR-3 protein were the first to be discovered and affect 
the tyrosine-kinase domain of the receptor, causing congen-
ital primary lymphoedema. Mutations in the genes encod-
ing the RAS/MAPK pathway cause several rare genetic 
conditions often called RASopathies. All RASopathies 
have some common clinical features such as distinct facial 
features and cardiac abnormalities. In addition to lymphoe -
dema, these patients can also present with chylothorax and 
chylous ascites.
Age of onset
Lymphoedema congenita (onset at or within 2 years of birth) 
is more common in males and is more likely to be bilateral and 
involve the whole leg. L ymphoedema praecox (onset from 2 
to 35 years) is three times more common in females, has a 
peak incidence shortly after menarche, is three times more 
likely to be unilateral than bilateral and usually only extends 
to the knee. Lymphoedema tarda develops, by definition, after 
the age of 35 years and is often associated with obesity, with 
lymph nodes being replaced with fibrofatty tissue. The cause 
is unknown. Lymphoedema developing for the first time after 
50 years should prompt a thorough search for underlying (pel-
vic, genitalia) malignancy. It is worth noting that, in such 
patients, lymphoedema often commences proximally in the 
thigh rather than distally (Figure 58.4).
Max Nonne , 1861–1959, a neurologist of Hamburg, Germany, described this disease in 1891.
Raoul Hennekam , contemporary, geneticist, Amsterdam Medical Centre, the Nederlands.
Jean-Marie Emberger , contemporary, haematologist, Montpellier, France.
Henri Meige ,1866-1940, physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France, gave his description of the disease in 1899.
TABLE 58.5 Genes associated with primary lymphoedema.
Affected gene Unique clinical sign(s) Lymphoscintigraphy findings
FMS- like tyrosine kinase 4 (FLT4) Isolated lower limb oedema present at birth 
(Nonne–Milroy disease)
Failure of initial lymphatic absorption 
(functional aplasia)
Vascular endothelial growth factor C 
(VEGF-C)
Milroy-like disease Reduced initial uptake with tortuous 
lymphatic tracts and evidence of rerouting
Forkhead box C2 (FOXC2) Distichiasis, cleft lip and/or palate Hyperplastic lymphatic vessels with reflux 
of lymph
Gap junction protein gamma-2 (GJC2) Lymphoedema on all four extremities (Meige 
syndrome)
Significant reduction in initial uptake, normal 
lymphatic tracts
Gap junction protein alpha – 1 (GJA1) Oculodentodigital dysplasia Significant reduction in initial uptake, normal 
lymphatic tracts
Kinesin family member 11 (KIF11) Microcephaly, chorioretinopathy, 
lymphoedema and intellectual disability 
(MCLMR syndrome)
Failure of initial lymphatic absorption 
(functional aplasia)
Collagen and calcium-binding EGF domain-
containing protein 1 (CCBE1)
Microcephaly, unusual face and 
lymphoedema affecting all four limbs 
(Hennekam syndrome)
Abnormal lymph drainage in all four limbs 
and the thoracic duct
Homolog of drosophila FAT tumor 
suppressor 4 (FAT4)
Microcephaly, unusual face and 
lymphoedema affecting all four limbs 
(Hennekam syndrome)
Abnormal lymph drainage in all four limbs 
and the thoracic duct
Gata-binding protein 2 (GATA2) Myelodysplasia (Emberger syndrome)
Warts, recurrent viral and/or bacterial 
infections
Predisposition to several cancers
Hypoplasia of the lymphatics
Inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene 
enhancer in B-cells, kinase gamma (IKBKG)
Ectodermal dysplasia, anhidrotic, 
osteopetrosis and immunodeficiency 
(OLEDAID syndrome)
Protein-tyrosine phosphatase non- receptor-
type 14 (PTPN14)
Choanal atresia
SRY-Box 18 (SOX18) Hypotrichosis, lymphoedema, telangiectasia 
and renal defects (HLTR syndrome)
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) Lymphangectasia
Integrin subunit alpha 9 (ITGA9) Fetal chylothorax
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1002 25/10/2017   09:35Secondary lymphoedema 1003
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Lymphangiographic classification
Browse has classified primary lymphoedema on the basis of 
lymphangiographic findings ( Table 58.6 and Figures 58.5 
and 58.6). These findings may be related to the clinical pre -
sentations described above. Some patients with lymphatic 
hyperplasia possess megalymphatics in which lymph or chyle 
refluxes freely under the effects of gravity against the physi -
ological direction of flow. The megalymphatics usually end 
in thin-walled vesicles on the skin, serous surfaces (chylous 
ascites, chylothorax), intestine (protein-losing enteropathy), 
kidney or bladder (chyluria) (Figure 58.7).
SECONDARY L YMPHOEDEMA
This is the most common form of lymphoedema. There are 
several well-recognised causes including infection, inflamma-
tion, neoplasia and trauma (Table 58.7).
TABLE 58.6 Lymphangiographic classification of primary lymphoedema.
Congenital hyperplasia (10%) Distal obliteration (80%) Proximal obliteration (10%)
Age of onset Congenital Puberty (praecox) Any age
Sex distribution Male > female Female > male Male = female
Extent Whole leg Ankle, calf Whole leg, thigh only
Laterality Unilateral = bilateral Often bilateral Usually unilateral
Family history Often positive Often positive No
Progression Progressive Slow Rapid
Response to compression 
therapy
Variable Good Poor
Comments Lymphatics are increased in 
number; although functionally 
defective, there is usually an 
increased number of lymph 
nodes. May have chylous 
ascites, chylothorax and protein- 
losing enteropathy
Absent or reduced distal 
superficial lymphatics. Also 
termed aplasia or hypoplasia
There is obstruction at the level 
of the aortoiliac or inguinal 
nodes. If associated with distal 
dilatation, the patient may 
benefit from lymphatic bypass 
operation. Other patients have 
distal obliteration as well
Sir Norman Leslie Browse , b.1931, formerly Professor of Surgery, the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy’s and St Thomas’s Hospitals, London, UK; 
former President of the Royal College of Surgeons of England.
Figure 58.4 This patient, in her sixth decade, presented with rapid 
onset of lymphoedema of the right leg. On further investigation she 
was found to have locally advanced bladder carcinoma. Note that 
unlike most cases of lymphoedema, the swelling is greater proximally 
than distally.
Figure 58.5 This patient presented with congenital lymphoedema of 
the right leg. The lymphangiogram shows lymphatic hypoplasia.
Filariasis
This is the most common cause of lymphoedema worldwide, 
affecting up to 100 million individuals. It is particularly prev-
alent in Africa, India and South America where 5–10% of the 
population may be affected. The viviparous nematode Wuche-
ria bancrofti, whose only host is man, is responsible for 90% of 
cases and is spread by the mosquito. The disease is associated 
with poor sanitation. The parasite enters lymphatics from the 
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1003 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1004
blood and lodges in lymph nodes, where it causes fibrosis and 
obstruction, due partly to direct physical damage and partly 
to the immune response of the host. Proximal lymphatics 
become grossly dilated with adult parasites. The degree of 
TABLE 58.7 Classification of causes of secondary 
lymphoedema.
Classification Example(s)
Trauma and tissue damage Lymph node excision
Radiotherapy
Burns
Variscose vein surgery/harvesting
Large/circumferential wounds
Scarring
Malignant disease Lymph node metastases 
Infiltrative carcinoma 
Lymphoma
Pressure from large tumours
Venous disease Chronic venous insufficiency 
Venous ulceration
Post-thrombotic syndrome 
Intravenous drug use
Infection Cellulitis/erysipelas 
Lymphadenitis 
Tuberculosis 
Filariasis
Inflammation Rheumatoid arthritis 
Dermatitis
Psoriasis 
Sarcoidosis
Dermatosis with epidermal 
involvement
Endocrine disease Pretibial myxoedema 
Immobility and dependency Dependency oedema
Paralysis
Factitious Self-harm
Reproduced with permission from: Lymphoedema Framework. Best practice 
management of lymphoedema. International Consensus. London: MEP Ltd, 
2006. © MEP Ltd 2006.
Summary box 58.4
Features of filariasis
Acute
●● Fever
●● Headache
●● Malaise
●● Inguinal and axillary lymphadenitis
●● Lymphangitis
●● Cellulitis, abscess formation and ulceration
●● Funiculo epididymo-orchitis
Chronic
●● Lymphoedema of legs (arm, breast)
●● Hydrocoele
●● Abdominal lymphatic varices
Chyluria
Lymphuria
Figure 58.6 This patient presented with lymphoedema of the right 
leg. A bipedal lymphangiogram demonstrated normal lymphatics in 
the right leg up to the inguinal nodes, but no progr ession of contrast 
above the inguinal ligament – a case of proximal obstruction.
Figure 58.7  Lymphangiogram demonstrating r eflux from dilated 
para-aortic vessels into the left kidney in a patient with filariasis who 
presented with chyluria.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1004 25/10/2017   09:35Secondary lymphoedema 1005
PART 10 | VASCULAR
oedema is often massive, in which case it is termed elephan-
tiasis (Figure 58.8). Immature parasites (microfilariae) enter 
the blood at night and can be identified on a bloo d smear, in 
a centrifuged specimen of urine or in lymph itself. A comple-
ment fixation test is also available and is positive in present or 
past infection. Eosinophilia is usually present.
Diethylcarbamazine destroys the parasites but does not 
reverse the lymphatic changes, although there may be some 
regression over time. Once the infection has been cleared, treat-
ment is as for primary lymphoedema. Public health measures 
to reduce mosquito breeding, protective clothing and mosquito 
netting may be usefully employed to combat the condition.
Bacterial infection
Lymphangitis and lymphadenitis can cause lymphatic destruc-
tion that predisposes to lymphoedema complicated by further 
acute inflammatory episodes. Interestingly, in such patients, 
lymphangiography has revealed abnormalities in the contra -
lateral, unaffected limb, suggesting an underlying, possibly 
inherited, susceptibility. Lymphatic and lymph node destruc-
tion by tuberculosis is also a well-recognised cause of lymph-
oedema, especially in resource-poor countries.
Malignancy and its treatment
Treatment (surgery, radiotherapy) for breast carcinoma is the 
most common cause of lymphoedema in resource-rich coun-
tries, but is decreasing in incidence as surgery becomes more 
conservative (see Chapter 53). Lymphoma may present with 
lymphoedema, as may malignancy of the pelvic organs and 
external genitalia. Kaposi’s sarcoma, developing in the course 
of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related illness, may 
cause lymphatic obstruction and is a growing cause of lymph-
oedema in certain parts of the world.
Trauma
It is not unusual for patients to develop chronic localised or 
generalised swelling following trauma. The aetiology is often 
multifactorial and includes disuse, venous thrombosis and lym-
phatic injury or destruction. Degloving injuries and burns are 
particularly likely to disrupt dermal lymphatics. Tenosynovitis 
can also be associated with localised subcutaneous lymphoe -
dema, which can be a cause of troublesome persistent swelling 
following ankle and wrist ‘sprains’ and repetitive strain injury.
Lymphoedema and chronic venous 
insufficiency
It is important to appreciate the relationship between lymph-
oedema and CVI as both conditions are relatively common 
and so often coexist in the same patient, and it can be diffi -
cult to unravel which components of the patient’s symptom 
complex are caused by each. There is no doubt that superficial 
venous thrombophlebitis (SVT) and DVT can both lead to 
lymphatic destruction and secondary lymphoedema, espe -
cially if recurrent. Lymphoedema is an important contributor 
to the swelling of the post-thrombotic syndrome. It has also 
been suggested that lymphoedema can predispose to DVT, 
and possible SVT, through immobility and acute inflamma-
tory episodes. Certainly, tests of venous function (duplex 
ultrasonography, plethysmography) are frequently abnormal 
in patients with lymphoedema.
It is not uncommon to see patients (usually women) with 
lymphoedema in whom a duplex ultrasound scan has revealed 
superficial reflux (such reflux is present subclinically in up to 
one-third of the adult population). Although isolated, super -
ficial venous reflux rarely, if ever, leads to limb swelling; such 
patients are frequently misdiagnosed as having venous disease 
Figure 58.8 Elephantiasis due to filariasis.
Endemic elephantiasis 
(podoconiosis)
This is common in the tropics and affects more than 500 000 
people in Africa. The barefoot cultivation of soil composed of 
alkaline volcanic rocks leads to destruction of the peripheral 
lymphatics by particles of silica, which can be seen in macro-
phages in draining lymph nodes. Plantar oedema develops in 
childhood and rapidly spreads proximally. The condition is 
prevented and its progression is slowed by the wearing of shoes.
Moritz Kaposi , 1837–1902, Hungarian dermatologist, described multiple pigmented skin sarcoma in 1872.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1005 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1006
rather than lymphoedema, and are subjected mistakenly to var-
icose vein surgery. Not only will such surgery invariably fail to 
relieve the swelling, it will usually make it worse as saphenofem-
oral and saphenopopliteal ligation, together with saphenous 
stripping, will compromise still further drainage through the 
subcutaneous lymph bundles (which follow the major super -
ficial veins) and draining inguinal and popliteal lymph nodes.
Miscellaneous conditions
Rheumatoid and psoriatic arthritis (chronic inflammation 
and lymph node fibrosis), contact dermatitis, snake and 
insect bites and retroperitoneal fibrosis are all rare but well-  
documented causes of lymphoedema. Pretibial myxoedema  
is due to the obliteration of initial lymphatics by mucin.
Conditions mimicking 
lymphoedema
Factitious lymphoedema
This is caused by application of a tourniquet (a ‘rut’ and 
sharp cut-off is seen on examination) or ‘hysterical’ disuse in 
patients with psychological and psychiatric problems.
Immobility
Generalised or localised immobility of any cause leads to chronic 
limb swelling that can be misdiagnosed as lymphoedema; for  
example, the elderly person who spends all day (and sometimes 
all night) sitting in a chair (armchair legs), the hemiplegic 
stroke patient and the young patient with multiple sclerosis.
Lipoedema
This presents almost exclusively in women and comprises 
bilateral, usually symmetrical, enlargement of the legs and,  
sometimes, the lower half of the body because of the abnormal 
deposition of fat. It may or may not be associated with gen -
eralised obesity. There are a number of features that help to 
differentiate the condition from lymphoedema but, of course, 
lipoedema may coexist with other causes of limb swelling. It has 
been proposed that lipoedema results from, or at least is asso-
ciated with, fatty obliteration of lymphatics and lymph nodes.
INVESTIGATION OF 
L YMPHOEDEMA
Are investigations necessary?
It is usually possible to diagnose and manage lymphoedema 
purely on the basis of history and examination, especially 
when the swelling is mild and there are no apparent compli-
cating features. In patients with severe, atypical and multifac-
torial swelling, investigations may help confirm the diagnosis, 
inform management and provide prognostic information.
‘Routine’ tests
These include a full blood count, urea and electrolytes, cre -
atinine, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, plasma 
total protein and albumin, fasting glucose, C-reactive protein, 
urine dipstick including observation for chyluria, blood smear 
for microfilariae, chest radiograph and ultrasound.
Lymphangiography and isotope 
lymphoscintigraphy
Direct lymphangiography remains the ‘gold standard’ for 
showing structural abnormalities of larger lymphatics and 
nodes (Figure 58.9). However, it can be technically difficult, 
it is unpleasant for the patient, it may cause further lymphatic 
injury and, largely, it has become obsolete as a routine method 
of investigation.
Isotope lymphoscintigraphy has largely replaced lymph -
angiography as the primary diagnostic technique in cases 
of clinical uncertainty. Radioactive technetium-labelled 
protein or colloid particles are injected into an interdigital 
web space and specifically taken up by lymphatics, and serial 
radiographs are taken with a gamma camera. The technique 
provides a qualitative measure of lymphatic function rather 
than quantitative function or anatomical detail. Quantitative 
lymphoscintigraphy is performed using a dynamic (exercise) 
component in addition to the static test and provides infor -
mation on lymphatic transport.
Computed tomography
A single, axial computed tomography (CT) slice through 
the mid-calf has been proposed as a useful diagnostic test for 
lymphoedema (coarse, non-enhancing, reticular ‘honeycomb’ 
pattern in an enlarged subcutaneous compartment), venous 
oedema (increased volume of the muscular compartment) 
and lipoedema (increased subcutaneous fat). CT can also be 
used to exclude pelvic or abdominal mass lesions. It can also 
be used to monitor response to treatment through serial mea-
surements of cross-sectional area and tissue density.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is also 
useful in identifying the classical circumferential reticular 
pattern (honeycomb) within the epifascial compartment. 
Summary box 58.5
Features of lipoedema that help differentiate it from 
lymphoedema
●● Occurs almost exclusively in women
●● Onset nearly always coincides with puberty
●● Nearly always bilateral and symmetrical
●● Involvement of trunk
●● The feet are not involved, leading to an inverse shouldering 
effect at the malleoli
●● No pitting
●● No response to elevation or compression
●● No skin changes of lymphoedema (negative Stemmer’s sign)
●● MRI shows subcutaneous fat but no fluid accumulation
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1006 25/10/2017   09:35Management of lymphoedema 1007
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Involvement of the subfascial compartment is more sugges -
tive of venous disease. In lipoedema, there is fat deposition 
in the subcutaneous tissues without the typical reticular pat-
tern and lymphatic congestion. Using the principles of spin 
labelling MRI, the lymphatic flow velocities can be assessed 
and monitored. MRI lymphography, using gadopentetate 
dimeglumine contrast, correlates substantially with lympho-
scintigraphy and provides detailed anatomical and functional 
status of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound can provide useful information about venous 
function including DVT and venous abnormalities.
Lympho-fluoroscopies
More recently, fluorescent molecules, such as indocyanine 
green (ICG), are being used to image the superficial lym -
phatic system. When excited using appropriate light energy , 
these molecules emit photons with a different wavelength 
that can be detected using dedicated near-infrared imaging 
devices, providing excellent anatomic and functional details 
of the lymphatic system. This imaging is increasingly being 
used to study the lymphatic system and the effects of some 
therapies.
Pathological examination
In cases in which malignancy is suspected, samples of lymph 
nodes may be obtained by fine-needle aspiration, needle core 
biopsy or surgical excision. Skin biopsy will confirm the diag-
nosis of lymphangiosarcoma.
Limb volume measurement
While not helpful in the diagnosis of lymphoedema, limb 
volume measurement is a useful tool to determine severity 
of lymphoedema, guide management and assess response to 
treatment. Limb volume is typically measured at diagnosis, 
following intensive treatment and at follow-up. In unilateral 
limb swelling the affected side can be compared to the con -
tralateral unaffected limb. In bilateral swelling the volume of 
both limbs is tracked with time.
Measurements are recorded in millilitres or expressed as 
a percentage of the normal limb. Water plethysmography 
(water displacement) is the ‘gold standard’ method, but is 
limited by practicalities of measurement and hygiene issues. 
Other options include circumferential limb measurements 
and perometry (infrared light beams measure the outline of 
the limb to calculate volume).
MANAGEMENT OF 
L YMPHOEDEMA
Overview
The evaluation of the lymphoedema patient needs to be 
‘holistic’ and their care delivered by a multiprofessional team 
comprising physical therapists, nurses, orthotists, physicians 
(dermatologists, oncologists, palliative care specialists), sur -
geons and social service professionals. Although surgery itself 
has a very small role, surgeons (especially those with breast 
and vascular interests) are frequently asked to oversee the 
management of these patients. Early diagnosis and institution 
of management are essential because at that stage relatively 
simple measures can be highly effective and will prevent 
Normal Congenital
hyperplasia
Distal obliteration
(hypo/aplasia)
Proximal
obliteration
(hypo/aplasia)
with distal
hyperplasia
Proximal
obliteration
(hypo/aplasia)
with distal
obliteration
Thoracic duct
Nodes
Para-aortic
Iliac
Femoral
Figure 58.9 Lymphangiographic patterns of primary lymphoedema.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1007 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1008
the development of disabling late-stage disease, which is 
extremely difficult to treat. There is often a latent period of 
several years between the precipitating event and the onset of 
lymphoedema. The identification, education and treatment 
of such ‘at-risk’ patients can slow down, even prevent, the 
onset of disease. In patients with established lymphoedema, 
the three goals of treatment are to relieve pain, reduce swell -
ing and prevent the development of complications.
exercises, was first described at the end of the nineteenth 
century, and through the twentieth century various epony -
mous schools developed. Although there is little doubt that 
physical therapy can be highly effective in reducing swelling, 
its general acceptance and practice has been hampered by a 
lack of proper research and confusing terminology. The cur -
rent preferred term is decongestive lymphoedema therapy 
(DLT), which comprises two phases. The first is a short inten-
sive period of therapist-led care and the second is a mainte -
nance phase in which the patient uses a self-care regime with 
occasional professional intervention. The intensive phase 
comprises skin care, manual lymphatic drainage (MLD) and 
multilayer lymphoedema bandaging (MLLB), and exercises. 
The length of intensive treatment will depend upon the 
disease severity, the degree of patient compliance and the 
willingness and ability of the patient to take more responsi -
bility for the maintenance phase. However, weeks rather than 
months should be the goal.
Skin care
The patient must be carefully educated in the principles and 
practice of skin care. The patient should inspect the affected 
skin daily, with special attention paid to skinfolds, where 
maceration may occur. The limb should be washed daily; the 
use of bath oil, e.g. Balneum, is recommended as a moisturiser 
and the limb must be carefully dried afterwards. A hair drier 
on low heat is more effective and hygienic, and less traumatic, 
than a towel. If the skin is in good condition daily application 
of a bland emollient, e.g. aqueous cream, is recommended to 
keep the skin hydrated. If the skin is dry and flaky then a 
bland ointment, e.g. 50:50 white soft paraffin/liquid paraffin 
(WSP/LP), should be used twice daily and, if there is marked 
hyperkeratosis, a keratolytic agent, such as 5% salicylic acid, 
should be added. Many commercially available soaps, creams 
and lotions contain sensitisers, e.g. lanolin in E45 cream, and 
are best avoided as patients with lymphoedema are highly 
susceptible to contact dermatitis (eczema). Apart from caus-
ing intense discomfort, eczema acts as an entry point for 
infection. Management comprises avoidance of the allergen 
(patch testing may be required) and topical corticosteroids. 
Fungal infections are common, difficult to eradicate and pre -
dispose to acute inflammatory episodes. Chronic application 
of antifungal creams leads to maceration and it is better 
to use powders in shoes and socks. Ointment containing 3% 
benzoic acid helps prevent athlete’s foot and can be used 
safely over long periods. Painting at-risk areas with an anti -
septic agent such as eosin may be helpful. Lymphorrhoea is 
uncommon but extremely troublesome. Management com -
prises emollients, elevation, compression and sometimes 
cautery under anaesthetic.
Apart from lymphangiosarcoma, acute inflammatory epi-
sodes are probably the most serious complications of lymph -
oedema and frequently lead to emergency hospital admission. 
About 25% of primary and 5% of secondary lymphoedema 
patients are affected. Acute inflammatory episodes start rap -
idly, often without warning or a precipitating event, with 
tingling, pain and redness of the limb. Patients feel ‘viral’ 
Summary box 58.6
Initial evaluation of the patient with lymphoedema
●● History (age of onset, location, progression, exacerbating and 
relieving features)
●● Past medical history including cancer history
●● Family history
●● Obesity (diet, height and weight, body mass index)
●● Complications (venous, arterial, skin, joint, neurological, 
malignant)
●● Assessment of physical, emotional and psychosocial 
symptoms
●● Social circumstances (mobility, housing, education, work)
●● Special needs (footwear, clothing, compression garments, 
pneumatic devices, mobility aids)
●● Previous and current treatment
●● Pain control
●● Compliance with therapy and ability to self-care
Relief of pain
On initial presentation, 50% of patients with lymphoedema 
complain of significant pain. The pain is usually multifacto-
rial and its severity and underlying cause(s) will vary depend-
ing on the aetiology of the lymphoedema. For example, 
following treatment for breast cancer, pain may arise from the 
swelling itself (radiation and surgery induced); nerve (bra -
chial plexus and intercostobrachial nerve), bone (secondary 
deposits, radiation necrosis) and joint (arthritis, bursitis, cap-
sulitis) disease; and recurrent disease. Treatment involves the 
considered use of non-opioid and opioid analgesics, cortico -
steroids, tricyclic antidepressants, muscle relaxants, antiepi-
leptics, nerve blocks, physiotherapy and adjuvant anticancer 
therapies (chemo-, radio- and hormonal therapy), as well as 
measures to reduce swelling, if possible. In patients with non-
cancer- related lymphoedema, the best way to reduce pain is 
to  control swelling and prevent the development of complica-
tions. Whatever the cause, pain is a somatopsychic experience 
that is affected by mood and morale. These issues are import-
ant in patients with both cancer-related lymphoedema, who 
are concerned about recurrent disease and non-cancer-related 
disease, who often have poor self-esteem and problems with 
body image and perception.
Control of swelling
Physical therapy for lymphoedema, comprising bed rest, 
elevation, bandaging, compression garments, massage and 
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1008 25/10/2017   09:35Management of lymphoedema 1009
PART 10 | VASCULAR
and severe attacks can lead to the rapid onset of fever, rigors, 
headache, vomiting and delirium. Patients who have suffered 
previous attacks can usually predict the onset and many learn 
to carry antibiotics with them and self-medicate at the first 
hint of trouble.This may stave off a full-blown attack and 
prevent the further lymphatic injury that each acute inflam -
matory episode causes. It is rarely possible to isolate a respon-
sible bacterium, but the majority are presumed to be caused by 
group A β-haemolytic streptococci and/or staphylococci. The 
diagnosis is usually obvious but dermatitis, thrombophlebitis 
and DVT are in the differential diagnosis. Oral amoxycillin 
is the treatment of choice with erythromycin or clarithromy-
cin in those with penicillin allergy. Flucloxacillin should be 
added for those with evidence of S. aureus infection (follic-
ulitis, crusted dermatitis). Oral clindamycin is a second-line 
agent for those with failure to respond to initial therapy. Hos-
pital admission is required for patients with: signs of septi -
caemia; continuing or deteriorating systemic signs after 48 
hours of antibiotic treament; unresolving or deteriorating 
local signs despite trials of first- and second-line antibiotics. 
Intravenous amoxycillin or benzyl penicillin with clinda-
mycin in penicillin-allergic patients or as second-line therapy 
is most commonly recommended. Bed rest will reduce lym-
phatic drainage and the spread of infection, elevation will 
reduce the oedema and heparin prophylaxis will reduce the risk 
of DVT. 
Analgesia is often required but non-steroidal anti-  
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided as they 
have been associated with increased complications, includ-
ing necrotising fasciitis. Any lymphatic massage should be 
ceased in the presence of active infection. Amoxycillin can 
be taken by patients who self-medicate. The use of long-term 
prophylactic antibiotics is not evidence based, but penicillin 
V 500 mg daily is probably reasonable in patients who suffer 
two or more attacks per year. However, the benefits of scru-
pulous compliance with physic al therapy and skin care cannot 
be underestimated.
Manual lymphatic drainage
Several different techniques of MLD have been described and 
the details are beyond the scope of this chapter. However , 
they all aim to evacuate fluid and protein from the interstitial 
space and stimulate lymphangion contraction, with decon -
gestion of impaired lymphatic pathways and development of 
collateral routes. The therapist should perform MLD daily; 
they should also train the patient (and/or carer) to perform 
a simpler, modified form of massage termed simple lymphatic 
drainage (SLD). In the intensive phase, SLD supplements 
MLD and, once the maintenance phase is entered, SLD will 
carry on as daily massage.
Multilayer lymphoedema bandaging 
and compression garments
Elastic bandages provide compression, produce a sustained 
high resting pressure and ‘follow in’ as limb swelling reduces. 
However, the sub-bandage pressure does not alter greatly in 
response to changes in limb circumference consequent upon 
muscular activity and posture. By contrast, short-stretch ban-
dages exert support through the production of a semi-rigid 
casing where the resting pressure is low, but changes quite 
markedly in response to movement and posture. This pressure 
variation produces a massaging effect within the limb and 
stimulates lymph flow. Whether the aim is to provide sup -
port or compression, the pressure exerted must be graduated 
(100% ankle/foot, 70% knee, 50% mid-thigh, 40% groin).
Non-invasive assessment of the ankle–brachial pressure 
index (ABPI) using a hand-held Doppler ultrasound device is 
usually necessary prior to commencing any form of compres -
sion therapy, as it is rarely possible to feel pulses in the lymph-
oedematous limb. Standard MLLB and compression is used in 
patients with ABPI ≥0.8 and modified techniques with lower 
pressures in those with moderate arterial disease (ABPI 0.5–
0.8). MLLB is contraindicated in severe arterial insufficiency 
(ABPI <0.5), uncontrolled heart failure and severe peripheral 
neuropathy.
It is generally believed that non-elastic MLLB is preferable 
(and arguably safer) in patients with severe swelling during 
the intensive phase of DLT, whereas compression (hosiery, 
sleeves) is preferable in milder cases and during the mainte-
nance phase. MLLB is highly skilled and to be effective and 
safe it needs to be applied by a specially trained therapist. It is 
also extremely labour intensive, needing to be changed daily.
Summary box 58.7
Skin care
●● Protect hands when washing up or gardening; wear a thimble 
when sewing
●● Never walk barefoot and wear protective footwear outside
●● Use an electric razor to depilate
●● Never let the skin become macerated
●● Treat cuts and grazes promptly (wash, dry, apply antiseptic 
and a plaster)
●● Use insect repellent sprays and treat bites promptly with 
antiseptics and antihistamines
●● Seek medical attention as soon as the limb becomes hot, 
painful or more swollen
●● Do not allow blood to be taken from, or injections to be given 
into, an affected arm (and avoid blood pressure measurement)
●● Protect the affected skin from sun (shade, high-factor sun block)
●● Consider taking antibiotics if going on holiday
Summary box 58.8
Effects of multilayer lymphoedema bandaging
●● Reduces oedema
●● Restores shape to the affected area
●● Reduces skin changes (hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis)
●● Eliminates lymphorrhoea
●● Supports inelastic skin
●● Softens subcutaneous tissues
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1009 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1010
Compression garments form the mainstay of manage-
ment in most clinics. The control of lymphoedema requires 
higher pressures (30–40 mmHg arm, 40–60  mmHg leg) 
than are typically used to treat CVI. These may be reduced 
to 15–25  mmHg in those with moderate arterial insuffi -
ciency (Figure 58.10). Confusingly, the British (classes I: 
14–17 mmHg; II: 18–24 mmHg; III: 25–35 mmHg) and inter-
national (USA) (classes I: 20–30  mmHg; II: 30–40  mmHg; 
III: 40–50 mmHg; IV: 50–60 mmHg) standards are different. 
The patient should put the stocking on first thing in the 
morning before rising. It can be difficult to persuade patients 
to comply. Putting lymphoedema- grade stockings on and off 
is difficult and many patients find them intolerably uncom -
fortable, especially in warm climates. Furthermore, although 
intellectually they understand the benefits, emotionally they 
may find wearing them presents a greater body image problem 
than the swelling itself.
Enthusiasm for pneumatic compression devices has waxed 
and waned. Unless the device being used allows the sequen -
tial inflation of multiple chambers up to >50  mmHg, it will 
probably be ineffective for lymphoedema. The benefits to the 
patient are maximised and complications are minimised if 
these devices are used under the direction of a physical thera-
pist as part of an overall package of care.
Lower limb lymphoedema
suitable for compression hosiery
NO COMPRESSION
Refer to vascular specialist
• Prophylaxis
• Early/mild lymphoedema
• ISL stages 0–11
• No or minimal shape 
distortion
• Maintenance
• Palliation
• Elderly/arthritic
• Pressure sensitive
• Lipoedema
• Controlled cardiac oedema
• Dependency oedema
• Neurological de/f_icit
• Moderate/severe lymphoe-
dema
• ISL late stage II–III
• Some shape distortion*
• Phlebolymphoedema 
(healed ulcer)
• Lipoedema
• Elderly/arthritic
• Maintenance
• Severe lymphoedema
• ISL stage III
• Shape distortion*
• Active patients and those 
at risk of oedema returning
• Phlebolymphoedema 
(active ulcer)
• Gross forefoot oedema
• Retromalleolar swelling
• Severe complex lymphoe-
dema
• ISL stage III
• Shape distortion*
• ‘Pressure resistant’ 
(i.e. medium or high 
pressure garments do 
not contain swelling)
Severe arterial disease
ABPI <0.5
Moderate arterial disease
ABPI 0.5–0.8
ABPI >0.8
Peripheral arterial assessment
(ABPI)
Low: 14–21 mmHg
• Circular or /f_lat knit
• Ready to wear
• All styles
Medium: 23–32 mmHg
• Circular or /f_lat knit or 
combination
• Ready to wear or custom 
made
• All styles
Successful outcome
• No increase in swelling
• No deterioration of skin, tissue density or shape
• Improvement in patient/carer involvement and self-management skills
High: 34–46 mmHg
• Flat or circular knit or 
combination
• Custom made (or ready to 
wear)
• All styles† 
Very high: 49–70 mmHg
• Flat or circular knit or 
combination
• Custom made (or ready to 
wear)
• All styles†
• MLLB
*For patients with shape distortion, /f_lat knit hosiery is 
often preferable.
†Including inelastic adjustable compression device.
ABPI, ankle brachial pressure index; ISL, International 
Society of Lymphology; 
MLLB, multilayer lymphoedema bandaging.
Figure 58.10 Compression garments for lower limb oedema and lymphovenous oedema. Repr oduced with permission from: Lymphoedema 
Framework. Best practice management of lymphoedema. International Consensus. London: MEP Ltd, 2006. © MEP Ltd 2006.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1010 25/10/2017   09:35Management of lymphoedema 1011
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Exercise
Lymph formation is directly proportional to arterial inflow 
and 40% of lymph is formed within skeletal muscle. Vigorous 
exercise, especially if it is anaerobic and isometric, will tend 
to exacerbate lymphoedema and patients should be advised to 
avoid prolonged static activities, for example carrying heavy 
shopping bags or prolonged standing. In contrast, slow, rhyth-
mic isotonic movements (e.g. swimming) and massage will 
increase venous and lymphatic return through the production 
of movement between skin and underlying tissues (essential 
to the filling of initial lymphatics) and augmentation of the 
muscle pumps. Exercise also helps to maintain joint mobil -
ity. Patients who are unable to move their limbs benefit from 
passive exercises. When at rest, the lymphoedematous limb 
should be positioned with the foot/hand above the level of 
the heart. A pillow under the mattress or blocks under the 
bottom of the bed will encourage the swelling to go down 
overnight.
Drugs
There are considerable, and scientifically inexplicable, dif -
ferences in the use of specific drugs for venous disease and 
lymphoedema between different countries. The benzpyrones 
are a group of several thousand naturally occurring substances, 
of which the flavonoids have received the most attention. 
Enthusiasts will argue that a number of clinical trials have 
shown benefit from these compounds, which are purported to 
reduce capillary permeability, improve microcirculatory per -
fusion, stimulate interstitial macrophage proteolysis, reduce 
erythrocyte and platelet aggregation, scavenge free radicals 
and exert an anti-inflammatory effect. Detractors will argue 
that the trials are small and poorly controlled with short fol -
low-up and ‘soft’ end points, and that any benefits observed 
can be explained by a placebo effect. In the UK, oxerutins 
(Paroven®) are the only such drugs licensed for venous dis -
ease and none has a license for lymphoedema. Diuretics are 
of no value in pure lymphoedema. Their chronic use is asso-
ciated with side effects, including electrolyte disturbance, and 
should be avoided.
With increasing understanding of lymphangiogenesis 
pathways there is hope that specific pharmacological targets 
or gene therapy may become available in the future, but this 
remains in the very early stages at present.
Surgery
Only a small minority of patients with lymphoedema benefit 
from surgery. Operations fall into three categories: bypass pro-
cedures, liposuction and reduction procedures.
Bypass procedures
The rare patient with proximal ilioinguinal lymphatic obstruc-
tion and normal distal lymphatic channels might benefit, at least 
in theory, from lymphatic bypass. A number of methods have 
been described, including the omental pedicle, the skin bridge 
(Gillies), anastomosing lymph nodes to veins (Neilubowicz) 
and the ileal mucosal patch (Kinmonth). More recently, direct 
lymphaticovenular anastomosis (L VA) has been carried out 
on vessels of 0.3–0.8  mm diameter using super-microsurgical 
techniques. The procedures are technically demanding and 
not without morbidity. They are more often attempted in the 
upper limb following lymph node resection or radiotherapy for 
breast cancer. The outcomes are best in patients with earlier 
stages of lymphoedema, for whom the majority can be con-
trolled with best medical therapy alone. In those with later 
stage disease who have failed conservative management, the 
outcomes of L VA have generally been disappointing.
Liposuction
Liposuction has been used in the treament of chronic lymph-
oedema. It is usually reserved for patients who have progressed 
to non-pitting oedema. Case series reported thus far have 
shown promising results with more than 100% reduction in 
limb oedema volume, which can be maintained by ongoing 
use of compression hosiery for at least 1 year. While liposuc -
tion appears to be safe, results of long-term efficacy and effects 
on the incidence of future lymphoedema complications (e.g. 
infection) are awaited.
Limb reduction procedures
These are indicated when a limb is so swollen that it interferes 
with mobility and livelihood. These operations are not ‘cos-
metic’ in the sense that they do not create a normally-shaped 
leg and are usually associated with significant scarring. Four 
operations have been described.
SISTRUNK
A wedge of skin and subcutaneous tissue is excised and the 
wound closed primarily. This is most commonly carried out to 
reduce the girth of the thigh.
HOMANS
First, skin flaps are elevated, and then subcutaneous tissue is 
excised from beneath the flaps, which are then trimmed to 
size to accommodate the reduced girth of the limb and closed 
primarily. This is the most satisfactory operation for the calf 
(Figure 58.11). The main complication is skin flap necrosis. 
There must be at least 6 months between operations on the 
medial and lateral sides of the limb and the flaps must not 
pass the midline. This procedure has also been used on the 
Sir Harold Delf Gillies , 1882–1960, plastic surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK. Born in New Zealand, he is widely considered the ‘father of Plastic 
Surgery’, Gillies started his craft to better the lives of the victims of the First World War. Later he became a pioneer in ‘gender reassignment (sex-change) surgery’. 
He was joined in private practice by his cousin, the other world famous plastic surgeon, Sir Archibald McIndoe. He excelled in most sports – cricket, rowing, golf, 
and was an accomplished painter.
Jan Nielubowicz , 1915–2000, surgeon, Warsaw, Poland.
John Bernard Kinmonth , 1916–1982, surgeon, St Thomas’s Hospital, London, UK.
Walter Ellis Sistrunk , 1880–1933, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Baylor University College of Medicine, Dallas, TX, USA.
John Homans , 1877–1957, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1011 25/10/2017   09:35CHAPTER 58  Lymphatic disorders
PART 10 | VASCULAR1012
upper limb, but is contraindicated in the presence of venous 
obstruction or active malignancy.
THOMPSON
This is a mo dification of the Homans’ procedure aimed to 
create new lymphatic connections between the superficial 
and deep systems. One skin flap is denuded (shaved of epi -
dermis), sutured to the deep fascia and buried beneath the 
second skin flap (the so-called ‘buried dermal flap’) (Figure 
58.12). This procedure has become less popular as pilonidal 
sinus formation is common. The cosmetic result is no better 
than that obtained with the Homans’ procedure and there 
is no evidence that the buried flap establishes any new lym -
phatic connections.
CHARLES
This operation was initially designed for filariasis and involved 
excision of all of the skin and subcutaneous tissues down to 
the deep fascia, with coverage using split-skin grafts (Figure 
58.13). This leaves a very unsatisfactory cosmetic result and 
graft failure is not uncommon. However, it does enable the 
surgeon to reduce greatly the girth of a massively swollen 
limb.
Frederick Thompson , 1910–1975, plastic surgeon, The Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.
Major-General Sir Richard Havelock Charles , 1887–1934, surgeon in The Indian Medical Service.
Subcutaneous
fat
Skin
Deep fascia
Bone
1
34
2
Figure 58.12  A cr oss-sectional representation of Thompson’s 
reduction operation; r ed arrows illustrate the buried dermal flap 
sutured to deep fascia.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 58.13 Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 58.13  The Charles procedur e involves circumferential 
excision of lymphoedematous tissue down to, and including, the deep 
fascia followed by split-skin grafting. This procedure gives a very poor 
cosmetic result but does allow the surgeon to remove very large 
amounts of tissue and is particularly useful in patients with severe 
skin changes.
Figure 58.11 Homans’ procedure involves raising skin flaps to allow 
the excision of a wedge of skin and a larger volume of sub  cutaneous 
tissue down to the deep fascia. Surgery to the medial and lateral 
aspects of the leg must be separated by at least 6 months to avoid 
skin flap necrosis.
Summary box 58.9
Surgical options for lymphoedema
●● Bypass procedures
Lymphatic bypass, e.g. omental pedicle, the skin bridge 
(Gillies) and the ilieal mucosal patch (Kinmonth)
Lymphaticovenular anastomosis (LVA)
Lymph nodes to vein anastomosis (Kinmonth)
●● Liposuction
●● Limb reduction procedures
Sistrunk 
Homans 
Thompson 
Charles 
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1012 25/10/2017   09:35Further reading 1013
PART 10 | VASCULAR
Chylous ascites and chylothorax
These are associated with megalymphatics. The diagnosis may 
be obvious if accompanied by lymphoedema and lymphangi -
oma. However, some patients develop chylous ascites and/or 
chylothorax in isolation, in which case the diagnosis can be 
confirmed by aspiration and the identification of chylomicrons 
in the aspirate. Cytology for malignant cells should also be car-
ried out. A CT scan may show enlarged lymph nodes and CT 
with guided biopsy, laparoscopy or even laparotomy and biopsy 
may be necessary to exclude lymphoma or other malignancy. 
Lymphangiography may indicate the site of a lymphatic fis -
tula that can be surgically ligated. Even if no localised lesion is 
identified, it may be possible to control leakage at laparotomy 
or even remove a segment of affected bowel. If the problem is 
too diffuse to be corrected surgically, a peritoneal venous shunt 
may be inserted, although occlusion and infection are import-
ant complications. Medical treatment comprising the avoid-
ance of fat in the diet and the prescription of medium-chain 
triglycerides (which are absorbed directly into the blood rather 
than via the lymphatics) may reduce swelling. Chylothorax 
is best treated by pleurodesis, but this may lead to death from 
lymph-logged lungs as the excess lymph has nowhere to drain.
Chyluria
Filariasis is the most common cause, with chyluria occurring 
in 1–2% of cases 10–20 years after initial infestation. It usually 
presents as painless passage of milky white urine, particularly 
after a fatty meal. The chyle may clot, leading to renal colic, 
and hypoproteinaemia may result. Chyluria may also be caused 
by ascariasis, malaria, tumour and tuberculosis. Intravenous 
urography and/or lymphangiography will often demonstrate the 
lymphourinary fistula. Treatment includes a low-fat and high- 
protein diet, increased oral fluids to prevent clot colic, and lap-
arotomy and ligation of the dilated lymphatics. Attempts have 
also been made to sclerose the lymphatics either directly or via 
instrumentation of the bladder, ureter and renal pelvis.
Lymphocoele
Lymphocoele is a localised collection of lymph without a dis-
tinct epithelial lining. It results from leakage of lymph into the 
soft tissues or body cavity secondary to surgical disruption of 
lymphatic vessels. They were first described as a postoperative 
complication after groin lymph node dissection for gynaeco -
logical tumours. Other causes include radical prostatectomy, 
vascular reconstructive procedures, renal transplant and 
body contouring surgery after massive weight loss. Clinically, 
lymphocoele presents as a non-tender, non-pulsatile mobile 
lump and can be differentiated from a seroma or a localised 
postoperative oedema by the presence of lymph-rich fluid. 
Depending upon the site and size they can deform the adja -
cent soft tissue structures or cause pressure symptoms. Com -
plications include infection, chronic drainage (lymph fistula) 
and prolonged morbidity. In the early stages, repeated  needle 
aspiration and compression can be attempted.  However, 
 lymphocoeles are generally refractory to these simple mea -
sures and may require insertion of drainage catheters, packing 
and compression or surgical excision. For a successful surgi-
cal result, combining preoperative lymphoscintigraphy with 
on-table isosulfan blue dye injection technique enhances 
the chance of accurately identifying the feeding lymphatic 
channels and ligation. After resecting a large lymphocoele 
the residual dead space may need muscle flap transposition to 
reduce recurrence. Other emerging concepts include perform-
ing prophylactic muscle flaps in high-risk groups and negative 
pressure wound therapy.
FURTHER READING
Cheng M, Chang DW , Patel KM. Principles and practice of lymphedema 
surgery. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2016.
Greene AK, Slavin SA, Brorson H (eds). Lymphedema: presentation, diag-
nosis and treatment. New York: Springer, 2015.
International Lymphoedema Framework. Best practice for the management 
of lymphoedema, 2nd edn. Position document. London: ILF , 2012.
Lee B-B, Bergan J, Rockson SG. Lymphedema: a concise compendium of 
theory and practice. New York: Springer, 2011.
Lymphoedema Framework. Best practice for the management of lymphoede-
ma. International consensus. London: MEP Ltd, 2006.
Szuba A, Rockson SG. Lymphedema: anatomy, physiology and patho-
genesis. Vasc Med 1997; 2: 321–6.
T wycross R, Jenns K, Todd J. Lymphoedema. Oxford: Radcliffe Medical 
Press, 2000.
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1013 25/10/2017   09:3510_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1014 25/10/2017   09:35
PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
59 History and examination of the abdomen .....................................1016
60 Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus ............................................1022
61 The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal  
space ............................................................................................................1047
62 The oesophagus ......................................................................................1067
63 Stomach and duodenum .....................................................................1106
64 Bariatric and metabolic surgery  ........................................................1144
65 The liver ......................................................................................................1153
66 The spleen .................................................................................................1176
67 The gall bladder and bile ducts .........................................................1188
68 The pancreas ............................................................................................1212
69 The small intestine ..................................................................................1240
70 The large intestine ..................................................................................1258
71 Intestinal obstruction .............................................................................1280
72 The vermiform appendix ......................................................................1299
73 The rectum .................................................................................................1318
74 The anus and anal canal .......................................................................1339
Abdominal
11
11_59A-B&L27_Pt11.indd   1015 25/10/2017   09:36Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The pathway for clinical diagnosis of a patient 
presenting with an abdominal complaint
 • The importance of recognising the organ or system 
responsible for the clinical features
 • The pathophysiological basis of common abdominal 
symptoms and signs
To identify:
 • Leading questions based on the organ or system 
affected and reach the most likely differential diagnosis
 • The relevant physical signs and come to an appropriate 
clinical diagnosis
INTRODUCTION
Abdominal symptoms are a frequent cause for surgical con -
sultation. The underlying cause may be acute, presenting 
with the euphemistically termed ‘acute abdomen’, subacute, 
indicating an evolving disorder, or long-standing, suggesting 
a functional or degenerative condition. Occasionally symp -
toms are due to disorders outside the abdomen, in which case 
the term ‘referred’ is used, for example epigastric pain experi-
enced as a result of a myocardial infarction.
At first presentation, a detailed clinical history and care-
ful clinical examination are essential to establish a differential 
diagnosis which, in turn, leads to appropriate triage into urgent 
and non-urgent investigation and subsequent treatment.
GATHERING INFORMATION
The experienced clinician will recognise the acuity and sever-
ity of the patient’s condition even before a history has been 
taken. Initial observation provides clues to the direction that 
the history should take: general appearance, gait, position in 
bed, facial expression and tone of speech all provide useful 
hints. In an acute presentation, it is important to realise that 
the patient will feel anxious and vulnerable and may well be 
in severe pain; therefore, the clinician should introduce him-/
herself, try to comfort the patient and gain his or her con -
fidence. This is particularly important in a busy emergency 
department where the patient is only one among many.
Obtaining a history
The patient’ s history is obtained during the initial part of 
the consultation. It is crucial that the patient be allowed to 
explain the presenting complaint without interruption, after 
which carefully directed questions are used to further refine 
the history; this will then guide subsequent clinical examina-
tion and investigation.
Presenting complaint
To establish the presenting complaint one should start with 
an open question inviting the patient to explain the reason 
for seeking medical advice. In the acute situation, pain is the 
most common presenting feature. The classic features of site, 
nature, onset, duration, radiation, and aggravating or reliev -
ing features of the pain should be established. In a non-acute 
presentation anorexia, weight loss, jaundice, altered bowel 
habit, blood loss and fatigue are all features that should be 
enquired about.
Once the patient has finished explaining the problem, 
direct questions should be used to support or exclude possible 
diagnoses. It should be possible to identify a likely organ or 
system responsible for the patient’s symptoms and come to a 
differential diagnosis.
Past history
The past history is important because it may have a bearing on 
the diagnosis and management. A history of previous similar 
episodes or past abdominal surgery often guides the diagno -
sis, for example adhesive small bowel obstruction in a patient 
with a history of laparotomy or recurrent left iliac fossa pain 
in a patient with a past history of diverticulitis. Some symp -
toms and signs may be due to cardiac, respiratory , haemato-
logical or musculoskeletal conditions, for example abdominal 
pain in sickle cell crisis.
59Chapter
History and examination of the 
abdomen
11_59B-B&L27_Pt11_Ch59.indd   1016 25/10/2017   09:37Clinical presentation of abdominal pr oblems 1017
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Drug history and allergies
Some drugs will have an effect on the symptoms and signs or 
may have to be discontinued before surgery. For example, a 
patient with bleeding who is taking a β-blocking drug will not 
have tachycardia proportionate to the blood loss, a patient 
taking long-term corticosteroids will need intravenous steroid 
supplementation to prevent an adrenal crisis in the periop -
erative period and a patient taking anticoagulant drugs may 
require reversal of the effects before surgical intervention.
Social history
The use of alcohol and illicit drugs, smoking and occupation 
is important. Family background will inform potential diffi-
culties with later discharge planning.
Family history
It is important to establish a family history of similar or related 
conditions, particularly cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, 
endocrine disease (e.g. hyperparathyroidism causing hyper -
calcaemia or renal calculi) and genetic disorders, including 
adverse reactions to anaesthetics or medications.
Review of the systems
A system review should highlight any comorbid disease, such 
as cardiac, vascular, respiratory or endocrine problems.
Abdominal pain
Pain is the most common of all abdominal symptoms and 
may be due to inflammatory, infective, obstructive, neoplas -
tic or ischaemic pathology. Sometimes no organic cause can 
be found, a situation often labelled ‘functional abdominal 
pain’ for want of a better term. Improved understanding of 
pain pathways and the relationship with the gastrointestinal 
microbiome is likely to provide a more precise diagnosis, par-
ticularly in common ‘functional’ disorders such as non-ulcer 
dyspepsia and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
It is essential to establish the site, nature and radiation of 
the pain, the rapidity of onset, and associated or relieving fea-
tures. Thus biliary colic will classically result in colicky pain in 
the right upper quadrant of the abdomen which radiates to the 
angle of the scapula and is associated with food intake (which 
results in cholecystokinin release and gallbladder contraction). 
Acute pancreatitis often has an abrupt onset of severe epigastric 
pain radiating to the back, which may be similar to pain emanat-
ing from peptic ulcer perforation or a leaking aortic aneurysm. 
Intestinal colic is most frequently associated with periumbilical 
pain and abdominal distension: the more distal in the intestine 
the pathology, the greater the degree of distension. Vomiting is 
an early feature of proximal small bowel obstruction, whereas 
absolute constipation is an early feature of colonic obstruction. 
Renal or ureteric colic is intense, located in the flanks and radi-
ating towards the lower midline. It is usually associated with 
either macroscopic or microscopic haematuria.
With regard to altered bowel habit, the onset, nature, dura-
tion, type of alteration (constipation or diarrhoea) and its rela-
tionship to abdominal pain will help to differentiate organic 
pathology causing obstruction or inflammation (colon cancer or 
inflammatory bowel disease [IBD]) from functional conditions 
such as IBS. When patients complain of diarrhoea, they may 
imply different meanings – some use the term for loose stools, 
others may mean frequent but normal stools. A long-standing 
increase in frequency of stools, with left-sided abdominal pain 
before defecation, that eases after defecation, is suggestive of 
IBS. However, if such symptoms are of recent onset or are asso-
ciated with blood or mucus in the stools, colonic carcinoma or 
IBD is more likely. A history of progressive change in bowel 
habit with an acute presentation with abdominal pain, dis-
tension and absolute constipation suggests acute-on-chronic 
intestinal obstruction, often from a stenotic left colon cancer. 
Marked distension with tenderness over the caecal area sug-
gests a closed-loop obstruction with impending caecal rupture.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF 
ABDOMINAL PROBLEMS
Pain, weight loss, anorexia or vomiting, jaundice, alteration 
of bowel habit, and blood loss or anaemia are the common 
clinical presentations of abdominal pathology . It is import -
ant to be vigilant about insidious presentations of malignan-
cies. Classic examples are right colon cancer presenting with 
symptoms of anaemia, metastatic liver cancer with weight 
loss, gastric cancer with loss of appetite, ovarian cancer with 
abdominal distension, and malignant obstruction of the 
extrahepatic biliary tree presenting with jaundice.
Summary box 59.1
Principles of history taking
●● Identify the reason for consultation – the presenting complaint
●● Determine the onset, duration and evolution of the symptoms
●● Deduce the most likely organ or system affected
●● Refine the history with relevant direct questions
●● Establish relevant past, social, family, drug and allergy history
●● Complete with a thorough review of other systems
●● Devise a list of differential diagnoses
Summary box 59.3
Classic presentations of abdominal pathology
●● Obstructive and inflammatory pathology must be excluded in 
patients with abdominal pain and altered bowel habit
●● Closed-loop obstruction with tenderness in the right iliac 
fossa is indicative of imminent caecal rupture
●● Caecal cancer classically presents with anaemia
●● Patients who have had previous abdominal surgery may have 
adhesions
●● Check carefully for small incarcerated hernias, particularly 
femoral, in obese patients
Summary box 59.2
Sources of abdominal symptoms
●● Abdominal pain, weight loss, anorexia or vomiting, jaundice, 
alteration of bowel habit, and blood loss or anaemia are the 
common clinical presentations of abdominal pathology
●● Occult malignancies may have atypical presentation
11_59B-B&L27_Pt11_Ch59.indd   1017 25/10/2017   09:37CHAPTER 59  History and examination of the abdomen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1018
PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL BASIS 
OF COMMON ABDOMINAL 
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
The abdominal wall and parietal peritoneum are innervated 
by the somatic nervous system, whereas the abdominal organs 
and visceral peritoneum are innervated by the autonomic 
nervous system. Therefore pain may change in its character 
and distribution as the underlying pathology evolves. Visceral 
pain from the foregut is generally felt in the epigastrium, in 
the periumbilical area from the mid-gut and in the suprapubic 
area from the hind-gut.
The skin and the muscles of the abdominal wall are sup -
plied by the lateral and anterior cutaneous branches of the 
lower six intercostal nerves, the iliohypogastric and ilioin-
guinal nerves (Figure 59.1). The dermatome levels of the 
xiphoid process, umbilicus and pubis are T7, T10 and T12, 
respectively. The parietal peritoneum is supplied segmentally 
by the same nerves that innervate the overlying muscles. The 
central part of the diaphragmatic peritoneum is supplied by 
the phrenic nerve (C4); therefore, pain arising in this region is 
referred to the tip of the shoulder as it has the same segmental 
supply. The peripheral rim of the diaphragmatic peritoneum 
is supplied by the intercostal nerves. The obturator nerve is 
the principal nerve supply of the pelvic parietal peritoneum.
touches the parietal peritoneum, the pain becomes sharp 
and localises to the appropriate segmental dermatome of the 
abdominal wall. Pain arising from the parietal peritoneum 
may radiate to the back or the front along the appropriate 
dermatome. This referral pattern is classically seen in acute 
cholecystitis when an inflamed gall bladder touches the pari -
etal peritoneum. Pain then radiates round to the back along 
the involved dermatome. The overlying muscle and skin are 
supplied by the same nerve root, so, when the patient takes 
a deep breath, the tenderness in the right subcostal region 
is markedly increased, causing the patient to stop breathing; 
this is Murphy’s sign. In children with abdominal pain, who 
hold their right hip in a flexed position to obtain relief from 
the pain, one should suspect retrocaecal appendicitis causing 
irritation of the psoas muscle.
Summary box 59.4
Nerves responsible for abdominal pain
●● Abdominal wall and parietal peritoneum are supplied by the 
somatic nerves
●● Abdominal organs and the visceral peritoneum are supplied 
by the autonomic nervous system
●● Skin, muscles and parietal peritoneum are supplied by the 
iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves and the lower six 
intercostal nerves
●● Afferent pain fibres from the abdominal organs and visceral 
peritoneum travel with sympathetic nerves
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 59.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Iliohypogastric nerve – L1
Ilioinguinal nerve – L1 L1
T7
T10
T12
Figure 59.1 Distribution of the anterior abdominal wall dermatome 
and nerves.
John Apley , 1909–1980, consultant paediatrician, Bristol, UK. The further away the chronic abdominal pain in a child is from the umbilicus, the more likely an 
organic cause.
John Benjamin Murphy , 1857–1916, Professor of Surgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA, described his sign in 1903. He was the son of Irish 
immigrants fleeing the potato famine in Ireland, and was known as the ‘Stormy Petrel’ of American surgery, demonstrating the benefit of appendicectomy over 
conservative treatment among many things.
Pain from the viscera is principally due to ischaemia, 
 muscle spasm or stretching of the visceral peritoneum. 
Unlike somatic pain, autonomic pain is deep and poorly 
localised. This pain is transmitted via sympathetic fibres and 
so is referred to the appropriate somatic distribution of that 
nerve root from T1 to L2. However, when an inflamed organ 
Obstruction
Central colicky abdominal pain is a classic presentation of 
small bowel obstruction. The central distribution is because 
of the segmental nerve supply of the mid-gut. When the per-
istaltic waves hit an obstruction, the contractions increase 
to overcome the resistance, producing the colic. The pain 
reaches a crescendo and then disappears in minutes when the 
peristaltic wave passes. This is different from that of biliary 
Summary box 59.5
Specific characteristics of abdominal pain
●● Visceral pain arises from ischaemia, muscle spasm or 
stretching of the visceral peritoneum
●● Autonomic pain, deep and poorly localised, is referred to the 
equivalent somatic distribution of that nerve root from T1 to 
L2
●● When an inflamed organ touches the parietal peritoneum, 
pain is then localised to the segmental dermatome of the 
abdominal wall
●● The pain in the parietal peritoneum may radiate to back or 
front along the dermatome
11_59B-B&L27_Pt11_Ch59.indd   1018 25/10/2017   09:37Examination of the abdomen 1019
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Rupture and perforation of organs
The urinary bladder, gall bladder and gastrointestinal tract 
are hollow organs containing fluid. The gastrointestinal 
system also contains faeces, air and a high concentration of 
organisms. Trauma, ischaemia or tissue ulceration may cause 
perforation, with resulting leak of luminal contents, and peri-
tonitis, with resulting severe abdominal pain. This may be 
localised to the area immediately adjacent to the perforation 
(for example, in a localised perforation of an appendix) or 
more generalised. The initial site of onset of the pain may 
give a clue as to the organ involved and so help with the dif -
ferential diagnosis. For example, the diagnosis of a perforated 
peptic ulcer is supported by a past history of ulcer-type pain 
followed by sudden onset of upper abdominal pain.
The abdomen is divided into nine areas for ease of descrip-
tion (Figure 59.2). These regions are demarcated by the mid-
clavicular lines in the vertical axis and by the transpyloric 
and transtubercular lines in the horizontal axis. Figure 59.2 
also indicates some of the common organs and pathological 
processes that commonly cause pain experienced in these 
regions.
EXAMINATION OF THE 
ABDOMEN
Abdominal examination must be preceded by a detailed gen-
eral examination of the patient as a whole. Physical exam -
ination should be systematic using the following sequence: 
inspection, palpation, percussion and auscultation.
General examination
When examining the abdomen it is essential to obtain 
the patient’s prior consent and to ensure the presence of a 
chaperone if appropriate. The examination should be per -
formed in a comfortable environment that ensures privacy. 
The patient must be lying flat but without causing distress 
(this may require provision of a pillow) and the abdomen 
should be adequately exposed.
The examination should be performed sequentially, begin-
ning with general inspection looking for evidence of weight 
loss, dehydration, anaemia, jaundice or abnormal pigmen-
tation. Examination of the hands may provide evidence of 
anaemia or chronic liver disease whereas examination of the 
head and neck may identify features indicative of liver dis -
ease or lymph adenopathy (particularly left supraclavicular) 
suggestive of intra-abdominal malignancy. The patient’s vital 
signs (heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate and body 
temperature) should always be noted. It is wise in the elective 
setting also to record the patient’s weight at this point.
Inspection
Scars, abdominal distension, visible peristalsis or abdomi-
nal masses, dilated veins, pulsation or abdominal wall swell -
ing suggestive of hernia should all be carefully sought. In an 
abdominal emergency look for Grey Turner’s sign – skin dis -
coloration of the flanks due to retroperitoneal haemorrhage in 
severe acute pancreatitis and leaking abdominal aortic aneu -
rysm. Cullen’s sign – discoloration around the umbilicus – may 
Vermiculation : meaning wave-like contraction similar to a worm, particularly as referring to peristalsis of the ureter (from the Latin vermiculus – little worm).
George Grey Turner , 1877–1951, Professor of Surgery, the University of Durham (1927–1934) and at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith 
Hospital, London, UK (1935–1946). He had the surgical club, Grey Turner Surgical Club, named after him. It is said that he dressed shabbily so that when his 
friends met him they used to ask him to ‘mend the clock’. He had a habit of keeping his cup of tea warm by covering it with his bowler hat!
Thomas Stephen Cullen , 1868–1953, Professor of Gynecology, the Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, described the sign in ruptured ectopic 
pregnancy in 1916.
Summary box 59.6
Colicky abdominal pain
●● Pain of ‘small bowel colic’ comes in waves and disappears 
completely in minutes when the peristaltic wave ceases
●● Pain of biliary colic is insidious in onset, reaches the peak in 
half an hour or so and does not ease off completely between 
spasms
●● Pain of ureteric colic is intense lasting one to two minutes of 
the ureter
Hepatitis
Cholecystitis
Peptic ulcer
Pancreatitis Splenic
injury
Renal and
ur eteric
pain
Renal and
ureteric
pain
(back)
Bowel
obstruction
Aortic
aneurysm
(     back)
Appendicitis
Pelvic
pain
Diverticulitis
(Ovarian cysts, pelvic in/f_lammatory disease, etc.)
1
2
3
4 5 6
7
8
9
Figure 59.2 Nine sites of abdominal pain: 1, right subcostal; 2, epi -
gastrium; 3, left subcostal; 4, right flank; 5, periumbilical; 6, left flank; 7, 
right iliac fossa; 8, suprapubic/hypogastrium; 9, left iliac fossa. (From 
Bailey and Love, 25th edn., courtesy of Mr Simon Paterson-Brown, 
Consultant Surgeon, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh.)
colic. When the gall bladder contracts against a stone, pain is 
relatively insidious in onset and reaches its peak in about half 
an hour and then eases off. A basal pain persists between the 
bouts of colic.
11_59B-B&L27_Pt11_Ch59.indd   1019 25/10/2017   09:37CHAPTER 59  History and examination of the abdomen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1020
indicate severe acute pancreatitis, ruptured ectopic pregnancy 
or trauma to the liver. In these situations, blood tracks to the 
umbilicus along the ligamentum teres (Figure 59.3).
In a patient with acute abdominal pain, it is important 
to observe if the abdominal wall moves with respiration. A 
thin patient with diffuse peritonitis may be unable to lie flat 
and the abdominal wall will have a ‘scaphoid’ appearance due 
to protective contraction of the rectus abdominis muscles. 
It is often appropriate to ask the patient to cough gently – 
this will evoke sudden discomfort in the area of underlying 
peritoneal irritation (equivalent to eliciting rebound tender -
ness, but not as distressing for the patient). A cough will also 
help to identify an abdominal wall hernia, if present. Visible 
abdominal masses, mobility on respiration and peristalsis are 
all best observed if the clinician kneels by the patient’s bed so 
that the observer’s eye is at the level of the patient’s anterior 
abdominal wall. The same position is useful during palpation 
for abdominal masses (Figure 59.4).
Palpation
Palpation should be performed in a systematic manner check-
ing all nine regions of the abdomen (see Figure 59.2). Pal-
pation should start in the region furthest away from the site 
of pain and the patient instructed to let the examiner know if 
tenderness is elicited. The examination should be gentle and 
the hands warm. The patient’s facial expression will imme -
diately reveal discomfort. Superficial palpation is followed 
by deep palpation if tenderness will allow. Finally, palpation 
during respiration is performed to identify the lower margins 
of the liver and spleen as they move with respiration.
Signs of parietal peritoneal irritation 
(tenderness, guarding, rebound tenderness, 
rigidity)
In the presence of abdominal pain, the degree of abdominal 
wall rigidity and involuntary guarding should be assessed. 
Guarding represents contraction of the abdominal wall mus-
cles over the area of pain. This might occur ‘voluntarily’ when 
the patient wishes to avoid the pain from examination, or 
‘involuntarily’ when the muscles go into spasm as the inflamed 
viscus touches the parietal peritoneum. This produces a reflex 
spasm of the overlying abdominal wall muscles. The presence 
of rebound tenderness indicates underlying peritoneal inflam-
mation and is examined best using gentle percussion, although 
pain on coughing is also found when there is rebound tender-
ness. When the underlying peritoneal inflammation becomes 
generalised, the abdomen is ‘board-like rigid’ to palpation, 
and selective tenderness can no longer be elicited. This sign 
represents widespread involuntary guarding.
Abdominal masses
A mass arising from the anterior abdominal wall will usually 
be mobile when the patient is relaxed. On contracting the 
abdominal wall muscles (ask the patient to lift his or her legs 
with the knees extended, or perform Valsalva’s manoeuvre for 
laterally placed swellings), lumps superficial to the abdominal 
wall muscles will become more obvious, and those attached to 
the deep fascia will become less mobile. Those arising within 
the muscle layer will become fixed and remain unchanged in 
size. Lumps arising deep to the abdominal wall (i.e. within 
the peritoneal cavity or behind the peritoneum) will become 
impalpable or less prominent on tensing the anterior abdom-
inal wall muscles.
An intraperitoneal mass in contact with the diaphragm 
will move on respiration whereas retroperitoneal masses are 
usually fixed and do not move with respiration; an enlarged 
kidney is ‘ballotable’ and bimanually palpable. Normal aor -
tic pulsations can be both seen and felt in a thin abdomen, 
but expansile pulsation is characteristic of an abdominal aor-
tic aneurysm. This should be differentiated from transmit -
ted pulsation of a mass sitting on the aorta (e.g. pseudocyst 
of the pancreas). When ‘palpating during inspiration’, the 
 examining hand is placed distal to the normal site of the 
organ, and is held there until the edge of the organ descends 
Figure 59.3 Cullen’s and Grey Turner’s sign of skin discoloration of 
flanks and around the umbilicus (courtesy of Mr Pradip Datta, Honor-
ary Consultant Surgeon, Wick, Scotland).
Antonio Maria Valsalva , 1666–1723, Professor of Anatomy in Bologna, of whom Morgagni wrote ‘there is nobody of those times who goes ahead of him, very 
few who are his equals’.
Figure 59.4 Eye at the level of patient’s abdominal wall.
11_59B-B&L27_Pt11_Ch59.indd   1020 25/10/2017   09:37Further reading 1021
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
and touches the examiner’s fingers. Liver, spleen, gall bladder 
and kidneys are best palpated during inspiration. An abdom -
inal mass in a female, the lower limit of which cannot be dis-
tinguished, is likely to arise from the pelvis. If the mass can 
be moved in a transverse direction, it is likely to be a uterine 
or ovarian mass.
Spleen
In a healthy patient the spleen is not normally palpable. 
An enlarged spleen descends downwards, forwards and medi-
ally. Palpation for an enlarged spleen is best performed in 
a supine patient. The examining hand should start in the 
right lower abdomen, with the tips of the fingers pointing 
upwards and pressed inwards. The patient is then asked to 
take a deep breath, and if the spleen is enlarged the lower 
edge with the characteristic notch will touch the fingers. If it 
is not palpable, then the hand is gradually moved upwards in 
the direction of the position of the edge of the normal-sized 
spleen with each breath. If the spleen is still not palpable, 
the patient is moved to the right lateral position and the 
examination repeated.
Liver
In a supine patient, the hand is placed in line with the 
potential enlarged liver edge lateral to the rectus muscle. 
The patient is then asked to take a deep breath. If the liver 
is enlarged sufficiently below the costal margin, then surface 
irregularities can also be felt.
Percussion
Percussion helps to distinguish distension due to bowel gas 
from solid masses and free fluid in the abdomen. Percus -
sion is most sensitive when the examiner moves from res -
onant parts of the abdomen to dull areas. In patients with 
free fluid in the peritoneal cavity, percussion from the centre 
to the periphery reveals dullness of flanks. Shifting dullness 
is elicited if the patient is re-examined lying on his or her 
side. The margin of dullness is then found to shift when the 
patient has moved.
Percussion is a very sensitive and refined method of test-
ing for rebound tenderness. If the patient winces with pain on 
abdominal percussion it denotes underlying peritonitis.
Auscultation
High-pitched bowel sounds are heard during early stages of 
mechanical intestinal obstruction. Aortic and iliac bruits 
are heard when blood flows through a stenosis. A succussion 
splash is a sound like ‘shaking a half-filled bottle with water’ 
and is found most often in patients with gastric stasis due to 
gastric outlet obstruction. In generalised peritonitis, bowel 
sounds will not be heard or be very few and far between.
Inspection of hernia sites, 
examination of genitalia, inspection 
of anal region and digital rectal 
examination
Abdominal examination is not complete until all external 
hernia sites and the anal area have been carefully inspected, 
the genitalia examined and a digital rectal examination per -
formed. A vaginal examination may also be needed in females. 
The thoracic and lumbar spine and renal angles should also 
be examined.
VALUE OF OBSERVATION AND 
REVIEW
In the case of acute abdominal pain, there will be a subset of 
patients in whom, after full clinical assessment, the surgeon  
remains uncertain about the need for an urgent operation. This 
is probably the most difficult group to deal with compared with 
those in whom an urgent operation is either clearly required, 
or clearly not required, and undoubtedly the one in which 
the majority of errors occur. Further urgent investigations are 
obviously important in this group and these are discussed in 
some detail elsewhere in this book. However, while these are 
taking place, regular review of the patient is essential. This 
period of observation has now become an integral part of the 
early management of patients with acute abdominal pain.
FURTHER READING
Lumley JS, D’Cruz AK, Hoballah JJ, Scott-Connor CE. Hamilton Bailey’s 
demonstrations of physical signs in clinical surgery , 19th edn. London: 
CRC Press, 2016.
11_59B-B&L27_Pt11_Ch59.indd   1021 25/10/2017   09:37Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To know and understand:
 • Basic anatomy of the abdominal wall and its weaknesses
 • Causes of abdominal hernia
 • Types of hernia and classifications
 • Clinical history and examination findings in hernia
 • Complications of abdominal hernia
 • Non-surgical and surgical management of hernia – 
including mesh
 • Complications of hernia surgery
 • Other abdominal wall conditions
THE ABDOMINAL WALL
Basic anatomy and function 
related to pathology
The abdominal wall is a complex structure composed primarily 
of muscle, bone and fascia. Its major function is to protect the 
enclosed organs of the gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts 
but a secondary role is mobility, being able to flex, extend, 
rotate and vary its capacity. Flexibility requires elasticity and 
stretch, which compromise abdominal wall strength.
The roof of the abdomen is formed by the diaphragm sepa-
rating the thoracic cavity above, with negative pressure, from 
the abdomen below, with positive pressure. Weakness of the 
diaphragm can lead to much of the bowel being drawn into 
the chest down this pressure gradient. The bony pelvis forms 
the floor of the cavity but a muscular central portion, the 
perineum, may also weaken and allow rectum, bladder and 
gynaecological organs to bulge downwards, a condition called 
prolapse.
The overall design of the abdominal muscles is best seen 
on a transverse computed tomography (CT) scan through 
the mid-abdomen. Posteriorly the muscles are strong, fur -
ther supported by the vertebral column, ribs and pelvis. T wo 
regions called the posterior triangles represent areas of weak-
ness which can lead to rare lumbar hernias. Laterally there 
are three thin muscle layers the fibres of which criss-cross for 
strength and flexibility. Surgeons can make use of these layers, 
by making releasing incisions, separating the layers and then 
sliding one layer over another to increase girth and allow clo-
sure of defects in the centre of the abdomen, e.g. the ‘Ramirez 
slide’ used in large incisional hernia repair (Figure 60.1).
Anteriorly the two powerful rectus abdominis muscles 
extend vertically from ribs to pelvis. Herniation through 
these strong muscles does not occur naturally but their central 
join, the linea alba, is an area of weakness resulting in epigas-
tric and paraumbilical herniation. Divarification of the recti 
is the condition where the linea alba stretches laterally as the 
two rectus muscles separate. It occurs in the upper abdomen 
in middle-aged, overweight men (Figure 60.2) but also as a 
result of birth trauma in women when it occurs below the 
umbilicus.
Abdominal pressure
The positive pressure within the abdomen is used by a surgeon 
when drains are placed to allow blood, pus, bile, bowel con -
tent and urine to flow outwards down the pressure gradient. 
However, this constant pressure from within can also lead to 
the condition of abdominal hernia where tissue, meant to 
be within the abdominal cavity, is forced outwards through 
defects in the muscular wall.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 60.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Rectus abdominisL inea alba Transversalis
fascia
Extraperitoneal
fascia
Parietal
peritoneum
Psoas
major
Erector
spinaeAbdominal
aorta
Quadratus
lumborum
Latissimus
dorsi
Transversus
abdominis
Internal
oblique
External
oblique
Figure 60.1  A cross-section of the midabdomen showing the 
muscular layout.
60Chapter
Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1022 25/10/2017   09:39Abdominal hernia 1023
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
ABDOMINAL HERNIA
A hernia is the bulging of part of the contents of the abdomi-
nal cavity through a weakness in the abdominal wall.
Anatomical causes of abdominal 
wall herniation
Despite the complex design of the abdominal wall, the only 
natural weaknesses caused by inadequate muscular strength 
are the lumbar triangles and the posterior wall of the inguinal 
canal (Figure 60.3).
Many structures pass into and out of the abdominal cavity 
creating weakness which can lead to hernia formation. The 
most common example is the inguinal canal in males, along 
which the testis descends from abdomen to scrotum at the 
time of birth. The testicular artery, veins and vas pass though 
this canal (the round ligament in females). The resultant 
weakness leads to an indirect or lateral-type inguinal hernia. 
In adult surgery, 80% of all hernia repairs are for inguinal her-
nia. The evolutionary advantage of testicular descent must 
outweigh the disadvantage of a high risk of herniation. Other 
examples are: oesophagus → hiatus hernia, femoral vessels → 
femoral hernia, obturator nerve → obturator hernia, sciatic 
nerve → sciatic hernia.
An inguinal hernia (indirect) also occurs through the 
developmental failure of the processus vaginalis to close. As 
the testis descends, it pulls a tube of peritoneum along with 
it. This tube should naturally fibrose and become obliterated 
but often it fails to fibrose and allows a hernia to form. Recent 
studies have shown that calcitonin gene-related peptide and 
hepatocyte growth factor influence the closure of the pro -
cessus, raising the possibility of a hormonal cause of hernia 
development.
Failure of normal development may lead to weakness of 
the abdominal wall. Examples are diaphragmatic, umbilical 
and epigastric hernias. Muscles which should unite during 
development fail to form strong unions with hernia develop -
ment at birth or in later life.
Herniation at the umbilicus has both components, i.e. 
weakness due to structures passing through the abdominal 
wall in fetal life and developmental failure of closure.
The risk of inguinal hernia is related to the anatomical 
shape of the pelvis and is higher in patients having a wider 
and shorter pelvis.
Weakness of abdominal muscles may be the result of 
sharp trauma. Most commonly, this results from abdominal 
surgery but also occurs after stabbing. A surgical scar, even 
with perfect wound healing, has only 70% of the initial 
 muscle strength. This loss of strength can result in hernia -
tion in at least 10% of surgical incisions. Smaller laparoscopic 
port-site incisions have a hernia rate of 1%. Increasing use of 
this  surgical approach should lead to a fall in the incidence of 
 incisional hernia.
Muscle damage by blunt trauma or tearing of the abdomi-
nal muscles requires exceptional force and is rare.
The sudden presence of a mass in the rectus muscle may 
be a rectus sheath haematoma, occasionally due to trauma 
but nowadays more often due to excessive anticoagulation 
therapy.
Primary muscle pathology and neurological conditions 
can lead to muscle weakness and occasionally present to the 
surgeon as a ‘hernia’.
Figure 60.2 Divarification.
Figure 60.3 Posterior wall defect.
Pathophysiology of hernia formation
A normal abdominal wall has sufficient strength to resist 
high abdominal pressure and prevent herniation of con -
tent. Herniation has been attributed to high pressures from 
Summary box 60.1
Causes of hernia
●● Basic design weakness
●● Weakness due to structures entering and leaving the 
abdomen
●● Developmental failures
●● Genetic weakness of collagen
●● Sharp and blunt trauma
●● Weakness due to ageing and pregnancy
●● Primary neurological and muscle diseases
●● ? Excessive intra-abdominal pressure
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1023 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1024
constipation, prostatic symptoms, excessive coughing in 
respiratory disease and obesity. However , it has been shown 
that hernia is no more common in Olympic weight lifters 
than the general population, suggesting that high pressure is 
not a major factor in causing a hernia. Many patients will first 
notice a hernia after excessive straining.
There is good evidence that hernia is a ‘collagen disease’ 
and due to an inherited imbalance in the types of collagen. 
This is supported by histological evidence and relationships 
between hernia and other diseases related to collagen, such 
as aortic aneurysm.
Hernia development is more common in pregnancy due 
to hormonally induced laxity of pelvic ligaments. It is also 
more common in elderly people due to degenerative weak-
ness of muscles and fibrous tissue. A recent Swedish report has 
shown that inguinal hernia is less common in obese patients, 
with hernia risk being negatively related to body mass index 
(BMI), contrary to widespread belief. Hernia is more common 
in smokers.
Common principles in abdominal 
hernia
An abdominal wall hernia has two essential components, a 
defect in the wall and content, i.e. tissue that has been forced 
outwards through the defect. The weakness may be entirely in 
muscle, such as an incisional hernia. It may also be in fascia, 
similar to an epigastric hernia through the linea alba. It may 
have a bony component, such as a femoral hernia. The weak-
ness in the wall is usually the narrowest part of the hernia 
which expands into the subcutaneous fat outside the muscle. 
The defect varies in size and may be very small or indeed very 
large. The nature of the defect is important to understanding 
the risk of hernia complications. A small defect with rigid 
walls traps the content and prevents it from freely moving 
in and out of the defect, increasing the risk of complications.
The content of the hernia may be tissue from the extra -
peritoneal space alone, such as fat within an epigastric her -
nia or urinary bladder in a direct inguinal hernia. However, 
if such a hernia enlarges then peritoneum may also be pulled 
into the hernia secondarily along with intraperitoneal struc-
tures such as bowel or omentum; a good example is a ‘sliding 
type’ of inguinal hernia.
More commonly, when peritoneum is lying immediately 
deep to the abdominal wall weakness, pressure forces the peri-
toneum through the defect and into the subcutaneous tissues. 
This ‘sac’ of peritoneum allows bowel and omentum to pass 
through the defect. In most cases, the intraperitoneal organs 
can move freely in and out of the hernia, a ‘reducible’ hernia, 
but if adhesions form or the defect is small, bowel can become 
trapped and unable to return to the main peritoneal cavity, an 
‘irreducible’ hernia, with high risk of further complications. 
The narrowest part of the sac, at the abdominal wall defect, is 
called the ‘neck of the sac’.
When tissue is trapped inside a hernia it is in a confined 
space. The narrow neck acts as a constriction ring  impeding 
venous return and increasing pressure within the hernia. 
Resulting tension leads to pain and tenderness. If the hernia 
contains bowel then it may become ‘obstructed’, partially or 
totally. If the pressure rises sufficiently , arterial blood is not 
able to enter the hernia and the contents become ischaemic 
and may infarct. The hernia is then said to have ‘strangu -
lated’. The wall of the bowel perforates, releasing infected, 
toxic bowel content into the tissues and ultimately back into 
the peritoneal cavity. The risk of strangulation is highest in 
hernias that have a small neck of rigid tissue, leading first to 
irreducibility and on to strangulation. The term ‘incarcerated’ 
is not clearly defined and used to imply a hernia that is irre -
ducible and developing towards strangulation.
August Gottlieb Richter , 1742–1812, lecturer in Surgery, Göttingen, Germany described this form of hernia in 1777.
In a special circumstance (Richter’s hernia) only part of 
the bowel wall enters the hernia. It may be small and difficult 
or even impossible to detect clinically. Bowel obstruction may 
not be present but the bowel wall may still become necrotic 
and perforate with life-threatening consequences. Femoral 
hernia may present in this way often with diagnostic delay 
and high risk to the patient (Figure 60.4).
An interstitial hernia occurs when the hernia extends 
between the layers of muscle and not directly through them. 
This is typical of a spigelian hernia (see below under Spigelian 
hernia).
An internal hernia is a term used when adhesions form 
within the peritoneal cavity. leading to abnormal pockets 
into which bowel can enter and become trapped. As there 
is no defect within the abdominal wall, the term ‘hernia’ is 
confusing.
Summary box 60.2
Types of hernia by complexity
●● Occult – not detectable clinically; may cause severe pain
●● Reducible – a swelling that appears and disappears
●● Irreducible – a swelling that cannot be replaced in the 
abdomen, high risk of complications
●● Strangulated – painful swelling with vascular compromise, 
requires urgent surgery
●● Infarcted – when contents of the hernia have become 
gangrenous, high mortality
Surgery Fig 62.03
Figure 60.4 Diagrammatic repr esentation of gangrenous Richter’s 
hernia from a case of strangulated femoral hernia.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1024 25/10/2017   09:39Abdominal hernia 1025
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Clinical history and diagnosis in 
hernia cases
Patients are usually aware of a lump on the abdominal wall 
under the skin. Self-diagnosis is common. The hernia is usu-
ally painless but patients may complain of an aching or heavy 
feeling. Sharp, intermittent pains suggest pinching of tissue. 
Severe pain should alert the surgeon to a high risk of stran -
gulation. One should determine whether the hernia reduces 
spontaneously or needs to be helped. The patient should be 
asked about symptoms that might suggest bowel obstruction.
It is important to know if this is a primary hernia or 
whether it is a recurrence after previous surgery. Recurrent 
hernia is more difficult to treat and may require a different 
surgical approach.
General questions about the cardiac and respiratory sys -
tems are necessary to assess a patient’s anaesthetic risk.
In a man with a groin hernia, history of prostatic symp -
toms indicates a high risk of postoperative urinary retention.
Intake of anticoagulants such as warfarin is important 
because this impacts on future surgery. Many hernia opera -
tions can be performed as a day case or single overnight stay, 
so that suitability for such treatment needs to be assessed, 
including home support, distance from the hospital, mobility 
levels, etc.
Examination for hernia
The patient should be examined lying down initially and 
then standing as this will usually increase hernia size. In some 
cases no hernia will be apparent with the patient lying. The 
patient is asked to cough, when an occult hernia may appear. 
Divarification is best seen by asking a supine patient to simply 
lift his head off the pillow.
The overlying skin is usually of normal colour. If bruis -
ing is present this may suggest venous engorgement of the 
content. If there is overlying cellulitis then hernia content is 
strangulating and the case should be treated as an emergency.
In most cases a cough impulse is felt. Gentle pressure is 
applied to the lump and the patient is asked to cough. If an 
impulse is felt this is due to increased abdominal pressure 
being transmitted into the hernia. In cases where the neck 
is tight and the hernia irreducible there may be no cough 
impulse. This can lead to failure of diagnosis and is typical of 
femoral hernia where lack of an impulse leads the clinician to 
misdiagnose a lymph node. Cough impulse can also occur in 
a saphena varix (see Chapter 57), which may be referred to a 
surgeon as a suspected inguinal hernia. It is not unusual for a 
patient to describe an intermittent swelling but the surgeon 
finds nothing on examination. This is due to muscle tighten-
ing in an anxious patient.
surgeon assesses the size, rigidity and number of defects. Mul-
tiple defects may be present in incisional hernia.
Investigations for hernia
For most hernias, no specific investigation is required, the 
diagnosis being made on clinical examination. However, the 
patient may have symptoms suggesting a hernia, but no her -
nia is found, or have a swelling suggestive of hernia but with 
clinical uncertainty. It is important to be certain that any 
symptoms described are due to a hernia and not to coexisting 
pathology. There may also be a requirement for more detailed 
information than can be found by examination alone. A plain 
radiograph of the abdomen is of little value (Figure 60.5) 
although a hiatus hernia and diaphragmatic hernia may be 
seen on a chest radiograph. An ultrasound scan may be help-
ful in cases of irreducible hernia, where the differential diag -
nosis includes a mass or fluid collection, or when the nature 
of the hernia content is in doubt. Ultrasonography is very 
useful in the early postoperative period when a haematoma 
or seroma may develop, and be difficult to distinguish from 
Summary box 60.3
Checks
●● Reducibility
●● Cough impulse
●● Tenderness
●● Overlying skin colour changes
●● Multiple defects/contralateral side
●● Signs of previous repair
●● Scrotal content for groin hernia
●● Associated pathology
Summary box 60.4
Examination
●● A swelling with a cough impulse is not necessarily a hernia
●● A swelling with no cough impulse may still be a hernia
If, on lying, the hernia does not reduce spontaneously, 
the surgeon asks the patient to attempt reduction because he 
may be well practised in this task although the surgeon might 
cause unnecessary discomfort. If neither the patient nor the 
surgeon can reduce the hernia then treatment is more urgent. 
An irreducible hernia may influence the decision between 
open and laparoscopic surgery. With the hernia reduced, the 
Figure 60.5 A radiograph showing spiral tacks causing chronic pain 
after transabdominal preperitoneal repair.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1025 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1026
an early recurrence. Ultrasonography is non-invasive and low 
cost but operator dependent.
Computed tomography is helpful in complex incisional 
hernia, determining the number and size of muscle defects, 
identifying the content, giving some indication of presence 
of adhesions and excluding other intra-abdominal pathology 
such as ascites, occult malignancy and portal hypertension.
Contrast barium radiology is occasionally useful in the 
absence of CT. Contrast may also be injected directly into 
the peritoneum, a herniagram, to identify an occult sac, espe-
cially in occult inguinal hernia. Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) can help in the diagnosis of sportsman’ s groin where 
pain is the presenting feature and the surgeon needs to distin-
guish an occult hernia from an orthopaedic injury.
Laparoscopy itself may be used. In incisional hernia, initial 
laparoscopy may determine that a laparoscopic approach is fea-
sible or not depending on the extent of adhesions. In inguinal 
hernia repair by the transabdominal route, initial laparoscopy 
can determine the presence of an occult contralateral hernia 
which has been described in up to 20% of patients.
In reality, most patients with a hernia should be offered 
repair. In elderly people, if the hernia is asymptomatic, small 
in size, can be reduced easily and is not causing anxiety, then 
observation alone should be sufficient. This policy, called 
‘watchful waiting’, has been studied in asymptomatic ingui-
nal hernia. One study reported such a policy to be safe but a 
second study was abandoned when a small number of patients 
developed strangulation. A truss can be used to control a her-
nia but few surgeons would recommend this approach. Small 
paraumbilical hernias are often seen. They cause few symp -
toms and usually contain fat or omentum with a very low risk 
of complications.
Large incisional hernias, particularly recurrent, present a 
major problem. Surgical repair is a complex procedure with 
significant risk of complications and later recurrence. When 
the neck is wide, the risk of strangulation is low. In obese and 
elderly patients, these risks may outweigh the benefits of sur -
gery and it is common for surgeons to adopt a conservative 
approach.
Any patient who presents with acute pain in a hernia, par-
ticularly if it is irreducible, should be offered surgery. Often, in 
a patient with an irreducible hernia, after admission to hos-
pital and adequate analgesia, the hernia will reduce due to 
muscle relaxation. The likelihood of similar episodes is very 
high and surgery should be recommended at this admission or 
soon after.
Surgical approaches to hernia
All surgical repairs follow the same basic principles:
1 reduction of the hernia content into the abdominal cavity 
with removal of any non-viable tissue and bowel repair if 
necessary;
2 excision and closure of a peritoneal sac if present or replac-
ing it deep to the muscles;
3 reapproximation of the walls of the neck of the hernia if 
possible;
4 permanent reinforcement of the abdominal wall defect 
with sutures or mesh.
Reduction of hernia content is essential for a successful 
repair. It is rare for a surgeon to fail to reduce the hernia but 
extensive dissection can lead to bowel injury , sometimes 
requiring bowel resection with subsequent risks of infection 
and bowel anastomotic complications.
Excision and closure of the peritoneal sac are ideal but 
not essential. During laparoscopic repair of incisional hernia, 
surgeons will often leave the sac in situ  after reducing the 
hernia contents, and simply fix a mesh over the neck to pre -
vent recurrence. There is risk of fluid formation within the 
sac (seroma). This is a common complication in all forms 
of hernia repair. In lateral (indirect) inguinal hernia, most 
surgeons excise the peritoneal sac but some leading experts 
recommend that it be dissected from surrounding tissue and 
simply pushed back through the deep inguinal ring. In lapa-
roscopic repair of inguinal hernias, surgeons simply pull the 
sac back into the abdominal cavity from within and do not 
excise it.
Management principles
An abdominal wall hernia does not necessarily require repair. 
A patient may request surgery for relief of symptoms of dis -
comfort, for cosmesis or to establish the diagnosis when in 
doubt. The surgeon should recommend repair when compli-
cations are likely, the most worrying being strangulation with 
bowel obstruction and bowel infarction. All cases of femoral 
hernia, with high risk of strangulation, should be repaired sur-
gically. Any case of irreducible hernia, especially where there 
is pain and tenderness, should be offered repair unless coex-
isting medical factors place the patient at very high risk from 
surgery or anaesthesia. Increasing difficulty in reduction and 
increasing size are indications for surgery. Surgery should be 
offered to younger adult patients as symptoms and complica-
tions are likely over time.
Summary box 60.5
Investigations
●● Plain radiograph – of little value
●● Ultrasound scan – low cost, operator dependent
●● CT scan – incisional hernia
●● MRI – good in sportsman’s groin with pain
●● Contrast radiology – especially for inguinal hernia
●● Laparoscopy – useful to identify occult inguinal hernia
Summary box 60.6
Management
●● Not all hernias require surgical repair
●● Small hernias can be more dangerous than large
●● Pain, tenderness and skin colour changes imply high risk of 
strangulation
●● Femoral hernia should always be repaired
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1026 25/10/2017   09:39Abdominal hernia 1027
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Closure of the abdominal wall defect is ideal but may not 
be possible when the defect is large or tissues are rigid. Plas -
tic surgical techniques have been developed to ‘borrow’ tissue 
from elsewhere in order to cover large muscle defects, but usu-
ally at the cost of leaving a weak area elsewhere. Over the past 
20–30 years, surgeons have realised that simple closure of a 
hernia defect by sutures alone leads to a high recurrence rate.
Additional reinforcement of the defect with a non- 
absorbable mesh is now widely practised in most hernia 
repairs and evidence has shown that recurrence rates have 
improved but recurrence still remains a problem. There is 
some evidence that mesh repair delays but does not prevent 
recurrence. With improved surgical techniques and new 
meshes it is hoped that recurrence after surgery will fall fur -
ther. Mesh repair has become so important in hernia surgery 
that some understanding of mesh technology is essential for 
the modern surgeon.
Mesh in hernia repair
The term ‘mesh’ refers to prosthetic material, either a net or 
a flat sheet, which is used to strengthen a hernia repair. Mesh 
can be used:
 ● to bridge a defect: the mesh is simply fixed over the defect 
as a tension-free patch;
 ● to plug a defect: a plug of mesh is pushed into the defect;
 ● to augment a repair: the defect is closed with sutures and 
the mesh added for reinforcement.
A well-placed mesh should have good overlap around all 
margins of the defect, at least 2  cm but up to 5 cm if possible. 
Suturing a mesh edge to edge into the defect (inlay), with no 
overlap, is not recommended. Mesh plug repairs have gained 
some popularity in small defects especially where overlap is 
hard to achieve. Plug operations are fast but plugs can form a 
dense ‘meshoma’ of plug and collagen. Other complications 
include migration, erosion into adjacent organs, fistula forma-
tion and chronic pain.
Mesh types
The wide array of meshes available can be classified as follows.
GROSS STRUCTURE
Net meshes are woven or knitted. Flat sheets are not porous 
but can be perforated with multiple holes. Net meshes allow 
fibrous tissue in growth between the strands and becoming 
adherent and integrated into host tissues within a few months. 
Initial fixation of the mesh is by glue, sutures or staples which 
may be absorbable. In laparoscopic inguinal hernia, no fixa -
tion is required at all as friction is sufficient to hold the mesh. 
‘Sheet’ meshes do not allow host tissue in growth but become 
encapsulated by fibrous tissue. They always require strong, 
non-absorbable fixation to prevent mesh migration.
SYNTHETIC MESH
Most meshes used today are synthetic polymers of polypropy-
lene, polyester or polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) (Figure 
60.6). They are non-absorbable and provoke little tissue 
reaction. Polypropylene makes a strong monofilament mesh. 
It does not have any antibacterial properties but its hydropho-
bic nature and monofilament microstructure impede bacterial 
in-growth. Polyester is a braided filament mesh. This struc-
ture may allow infection to take hold, aided by its hydrophilic 
property. However, this property also allows rapid vascular 
and cellular infiltration within the fibrils, aiding host immune 
responses to infection and providing a stronger host–tissue 
interface. PTFE meshes are flat sheets and as a result do not 
allow any tissue in-growth. They are used as a non-adhesive 
barrier between tissue layers.
WEIGHT AND POROSITY
Synthetic meshes are very strong and early meshes were much 
stronger than a human abdominal wall, so they are consid -
ered as ‘over-engineered’. All meshes provoke a fibrous reac -
tion. More dense or heavyweight meshes provoke a greater 
reaction, leading to collagen contraction and stiffening. The 
term ‘mesh shrinkage’ is often used to describe a progressive 
decrease in size of a mesh over time. It is due to natural con -
traction of fibrous tissue embedded in the mesh, reducing the 
Figure 60.6  (a) Polypropylene mesh in totally extraperitoneal 
inguinal hernia repair and (b) polyester mesh in a paraumbilical hernia 
repair.
(a)
(b)
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1027 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1028
area of mesh itself. This can lead to tissue tension and pain, 
a common complication of mesh repair. It can also lead to 
hernia recurrence if the mesh no longer covers the defect. 
Meshes can shrink by up to 50% and, in occasional cases, 
even more. Meshes with thinner strands and larger spaces 
between them, ‘lightweight, large-pore meshes’, are preferred 
because they have better tissue integration, less shrinkage, 
more flexibility and improved comfort.
The terms ‘light’, ‘medium’ and ‘heavy’ are not precisely 
defined but meshes <40 g/m2 are generally referred to as light 
and meshes >80 g/m2 as heavy.
BIOLOGICAL MESH
There are ‘biological meshes’ that are sheets of sterilised, 
decellularised, non-immunogenic connective tissue. They 
derive from human or animal dermis, bovine pericardium 
or porcine intestinal submucosa. They provide a ‘scaffold’ to 
encourage neovascular in-growth and new collagen deposi -
tion. Host enzymes eventually break down the biological 
implant, which is replaced and remodelled with ‘normal’ 
host fibrous tissue. The rates of enzymatic degradation and 
collagen deposition vary between products and also depend 
on the local environment of the mesh. In the presence of 
infection, some biological meshes rapidly break down and 
weaken before remodelling can occur. Others remain strong, 
their laby rinthine microstructure allowing vascular in-growth 
to aid infection resistance. The choice of biological mesh 
depends on the clinical situation for which it is to be used. 
They are expensive.
ABSORBABLE MESHES
There are also synthetic absorbable meshes, such as those 
made from polyglycolic acid fibre. They are used in temporary 
abdominal wall closure and to buttress sutured repairs. They 
have no current role in hernia repair because they absorb and 
induce minimal collagen deposition.
TISSUE-SEPARATING MESHES
Most meshes induce fibrosis and, if placed within the perito -
neal cavity, promote unwanted adhesions. New meshes have 
Positioning the mesh
The strength of a mesh repair depends on host–tissue 
in-growth. Meshes should be placed on a firm, well-  
vascularised tissue bed with generous overlap of the defect. 
The mesh can be placed:
 ● just outside the muscle in the subcutaneous space (onlay);
 ● within the defect (inlay) – only applies to mesh plugs in 
small defects;
 ● between fascial layers in the abdominal wall (intraparietal 
or sublay);
 ● immediately extraperitoneally, against muscle or fascia 
(also sublay);
 ● intraperitoneally.
At open surgery all of these planes are used but laparo -
scopic surgeons currently use only intraperitoneal or extraper-
itoneal planes (Figure 60.8).
Summary box 60.7
Mesh characteristics
●● Woven, knitted or sheet
●● Synthetic or biological – mainly synthetic
●● Light, medium or heavyweight – lightweight becoming more 
popular
●● Large pore, small pore – large pore causes less fibrosis and 
pain
●● Intraperitoneal use or not – non-adhesive mesh on one side
●● Non-absorbable or absorbable – mainly non-absorbable
Figure 60.7 Adhesions to mesh.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 60.8Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Subcutaneous space
Anterior rectus sheath
Linea alba Onlay space
Extraperitoneal
space
Rectus abdominis
muscles
Sublay spaces
Posterior
rectus sheath
Retromuscular
space
Figure 60.8 Diagrammatic representation of the various layers into 
which meshes are placed in ventral hernia repair.
been designed for intraperitoneal use. Most of these have very 
different surfaces, one being sticky and one slippery. Goo d 
adherence and host–tissue in-growth is required on the pari -
etal (muscle) side of the mesh, but the opposite (bowel) side 
needs to prevent adhesions to bowel. Usually one side of the 
mesh is coated by material that prevents adhesions (Figure 
60.7), such as polycellulose, collagen, PTFE. A recent mesh 
made entirely of a sheet of condensed PTFE with multiple 
perforations can be used intraperitoneally because the perito-
neum will grow in through its perforations whereas bowel will 
not adhere to its inside.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1028 25/10/2017   09:39Specific hernia types 1029
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Limitations to the use of mesh
The presence of infection limits the use of mesh, particularly 
heavyweight types. If a mesh becomes infected then it often 
needs to be removed. Some infected meshes can be salvaged 
using a combination of debridement of non-incorporated 
mesh, appropriate antibiotics and mo dern vacuum-assisted 
dressings.
Meshes are expensive, especially those for intraperitoneal 
use, but prices are falling and there are reports of low-cost 
solutions such as mosquito netting!
SPECIFIC HERNIA TYPES
Hernia sites are shown in Figure 60.9.
Inguinal hernia
The inguinal hernia, often referred to as a ‘rupture’ by 
patients, is the most common hernia in men and women but 
much more common in men. There are two basic types that 
are fundamentally different in anatomy, causation and com -
plications. However, they are anatomically very close to each 
other, surgical repair techniques are very similar and ultimate 
reinforcement of the weakened anatomy is identical, so they 
are often referred to together as inguinal hernia.
Basic anatomy of the inguinal canal
As the testis descends from the abdominal cavity to the 
scrotum in males it firsts passes through a defect called the 
deep inguinal ring in the transversalis fascia, just deep to 
the abdominal muscles. This ring lies midway between the 
anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle, approx -
imately 2–3 cm above the femoral artery pulse in the groin. 
The inferior epigastric vessels lie just medial to the deep 
inguinal ring, passing from the iliac vessels to rectus abdom -
inis. Muscle fibres of the innermost two layers of the lateral 
abdominal wall, the transversus muscle and the internal 
oblique muscle, arch over the deep inguinal ring from lateral 
to medial before descending to become attached to the pubic 
tubercle. These two muscles fuse and become tendinous, 
hence this arch is referred to as the conjoint tendon. Below 
this arch there is no muscle but only transversalis fascia and 
external oblique aponeurosis, resulting in weakness (Figure 
60.10).
The testis proceeds medially and downwards along the 
inguinal canal. Anterior to the canal is the aponeurosis of the 
external oblique muscle, the fibres of which run downwards 
and medially. The testis finally emerges through a V-shaped 
defect in the aponeurosis, the superficial inguinal ring, and 
descends into the scrotum. The inguinal canal is roofed by the 
conjoint tendon, its posterior wall is transversalis fascia, an 
anterior wall is the external oblique aponeurosis and a floor, 
which is also the external oblique, that rolls inwards at its 
lower margin and thickens to become the inguinal (Poupart’s) 
ligament. The inguinal canal in males contains the testicu-
lar artery, veins, lymphatics and the vas deferens. In females, 
the round ligament descends through the canal to end in the 
vulva. Three important nerves, the ilioinguinal, the iliohypo-
gastric and the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve, also 
pass through the canal.
As the testis descends, a tube of peritoneum is pulled 
with the testis and wraps around it ultimately to form the 
tunica vaginalis. This peritoneal tube should obliterate, pos -
sibly under hormonal control, but it commonly fails to fuse 
either in part or totally. As a result, bowel within the perito -
neal cavity is able to pass inside the tube down towards the 
scrotum. Inguinal hernia in neonates and young children is 
always of  this congenital type. However, in other patients, 
the  muscles around the deep inguinal ring can prevent a 
Epigastric
Paraumbilical
Umbilical
Spigelian
Inguinal
Femoral
Obturator
Superior
lumbar
Inferior
lumbar
Gluteal
Sciatic
Figure 60.9  Diagram to show the sites of 
abdominal wall hernias, common in red and rare 
in black. Incisional and parastomal hernias can 
be found at various sites.
Summary box 60.8
Inguinal hernia
●● Types – lateral (oblique, indirect); medial (direct), sliding
●● Origin – congenital or acquired
●● Anatomy – inguinal canal
●● Classification – latest European Hernia Society
●● Diagnosis – usually clinical but radiological in special 
circumstances
●● Surgery – open and laparoscopic
The congenital inguinal hernia is known as indirect, 
oblique or lateral whereas the acquired hernia is called direct 
or medial. There is a third ‘sliding’ hernia that is acquired but 
is lateral in position (see below).
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1029 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1030
 hernia from developing until later in life, when, under the 
constant positive abdominal pressure, the deep inguinal ring 
and  muscles are stretched and a hernia becomes apparent. As 
the hernia increases in size, the contents are directed down 
into the scrotum. These hernias can become massive and may 
be referred to as a scrotal hernia (Figure 60.11).
An indirect hernia is lateral because its origin is lateral to 
the inferior epigastric vessels. It is also oblique as the hernia 
passes obliquely from lateral to medial through the abdominal 
muscle layers.
The second type of inguinal hernia, referred to as direct 
or medial, is acquired. It is a result of stretching and weak -
ening of the abdominal wall just medial to the inferior epi-
gastric (IE) vessels. Looked at from within the abdominal 
cavity, there is a triangle referred to as Hasselbach’s triangle, 
the three sides of which are the IE vessels laterally, the lat -
eral edge of rectus abdominis medially and the pubic bone 
below (the iliopubic tract) (Figure 60.12). This area is weak 
because the abdominal wall here consists of only transver -
salis fascia covered by the external oblique aponeurosis. A 
direct, medial hernia is more likely in elderly patients. It 
is broadly based and therefore unlikely to strangulate. The 
medially placed bladder can be pulled into a direct hernia 
(Figure 60.13).
The third type of inguinal hernia is referred to as a slid -
ing hernia. This is also an acquired hernia due to weakening 
of the abdominal wall, but occurs at the deep inguinal ring 
lateral to the IE vessels. Retroperitoneal fatty tissue is pushed 
downwards along the inguinal canal. As more tissue enters 
the hernia, peritoneum is pulled with it, thus creating a sac. 
However, the sac has formed secondarily, distinguishing it 
from a classic indirect hernia. On the left side, sigmoid colon 
may be pulled into a sliding hernia and on the right side the 
caecum. Surgeons need extra caution during repair because 
the wall of the large bowel may not be covered by peritoneum 
and can be damaged.
Occasionally, both lateral and medial hernias are present 
in the same patient (pantaloon hernia).
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 60.10Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Inferior epigastric
vessels
Internal inguinal
ring
External inguinal
ring
Pubic tubercele
Sac of indirect
inguinal hernia
Sac of direct
inguinal hernia
Sac of femoral
hernia
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Iliacus
Figure 60.10  The close relationships of dir ect inguinal, indirect 
inguinal and femoral hernias.
Figure 60.11 A huge scrotal her nia that has descended into the 
scrotum. The overlying skin has become gangrenous and sloughed 
away (courtesy of Dr Anupam Rai, Jabalpur, India).
Figure 60.12  Laparoscopic view of the posterior inguinal r egion 
with hernia defects highlighted: yellow , medial inguinal; blue, lateral 
inguinal; green, femoral.
Figure 60.13  This cystogram shows the urinary bladder , part of 
which has descended into a left direct inguinal hernia (arrows).
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1030 25/10/2017   09:39Specific hernia types 1031
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Classification
Many surgeons over the past 100 years have attempted to 
classify inguinal (and femoral) hernias, including Casten, 
Halverson and McVay, Zollinger, Ponka, Gilbert and Nyhus. 
The European Hernia Society has recently suggested a simpli-
fied system of:
 ● primary or recurrent (P or R);
 ● lateral, medial or femoral (L, M or F);
 ● defect size in fingerbreadths assumed to be 1.5 cm.
A primary, indirect, inguinal hernia with a 3-cm defect 
size would be PL2.
Diagnosis of an inguinal hernia
In most cases, the diagnosis of an inguinal hernia is simple 
and patients often know their diagnosis because they are so 
common. Usually these hernias are reducible presenting as 
intermittent swellings, lying above and lateral to the pubic 
tubercle, with an associated cough impulse. Often the her -
nia will reduce on lying and reappear on standing. With the 
patient lying down, the patient is asked to reduce the her -
nia if it has not spontaneously reduced. If the patient cannot 
then the surgeon gently attempts to reduce the hernia. Once 
reduced, the surgeon identifies the bony landmarks of the 
anterosuperior iliac spine and pubic tubercle to landmark the 
deep inguinal ring at the mid-inguinal point. Gentle pressure 
is applied at this point and the patient asked to cough. If the 
hernia is controlled with pressure on the deep inguinal ring 
then it is likely to be indirect/lateral and if the hernia appears 
medial to this point then it is direct/medial. Other examina -
tion techniques have been suggested but even experienced 
surgeons find it difficult to distinguish lateral and medial her-
nias with certainty (Figure 60.14).
Diagnostic difficulties
Confirmation of the diagnosis may not be possible when the 
patient describes an intermittent swelling but nothing is 
found on examination. Surgeons will often accept the diag-
nosis on history alone but re-examination at a later date or 
investigation by ultrasound scan may be requested.
If an inguinal hernia becomes irreducible and tense 
there may be no cough impulse. Differential diagnosis would 
include a lymph node groin mass or an abdominal mass 
(Figure 60.15). Such cases require urgent investigation by 
either ultrasonography or CT.
Large scrotal hernias may be misdiagnosed as a hydrocele 
or other testicular swelling. The surgeon should be able to 
identify the upper limit of a scrotal swelling but a large scro -
tal hernia has no upper limit because it extends back along 
the inguinal canal to the peritoneal cavity. In cases of doubt, 
ultrasonography should establish the diagnosis.
As inguinal hernia is so common, less-experienced clini-
cians might suggest this diagnosis when referring cases of fem-
oral hernia or spigelian hernia. Also patients with a saphena 
varix may present with a swelling that increases in size on 
standing and with a definite cough impulse and be misdiag-
nosed as a hernia. The same can be true for a varicocele.
It is essential to examine the scrotal contents to exclude 
other pathologies and to check that the patient has two 
testes. It is important to examine the opposite side because 
contralateral hernia is common. Even if the contralateral 
side is weak, then bilateral repair should be recommended 
because the risk of contralateral recurrence is high. Of all 
patients 10% will present with bilateral inguinal hernias 
and up to 20% more will have an occult contralateral 
hernia on laparoscopic evaluation. A patient with a single 
hernia has a lifetime 33% risk of developing a hernia on the 
other side. Some surgeons have suggested that all patients 
should be offered bilateral repair, especially if laparoscopic 
surgery is planned, but this is not widespread practice at 
present.
Figure 60.14  Oblique left inguinal her nia that became appar ent 
when the patient coughed and persisted until it was reduced when 
he lay down.
 Figure 60.15 Malignant mass of nodes.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1031 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1032
Investigations for inguinal hernia
Most cases require no diagnostic tests but ultrasonography, 
CT and MRI are occasionally used. A herniogram involves 
the injection of contrast into the peritoneal cavity followed 
by screening which shows the presence of a sac or asymmetri-
cal bulging of the inguinal anatomy.
Management of inguinal hernia
It is safe to recommend no active treatment in cases of early, 
asymptomatic, direct hernia, particularly in elderly patients 
who do not wish for surgical intervention. These patients 
should be warned to seek early advice if the hernia increases 
in size or becomes symptomatic. Surgical trusses are not rec -
ommended but may be required for occasional patients who 
refuse any form of surgical intervention.
Elective surgery for inguinal hernia is a common and 
simple operation. It can be undertaken under local, regional 
or general anaesthesia with minimal risk, even in high-risk 
patients.
HERNIOTOMY
In children who have lateral hernias with a persistent pro -
cessus, it is sufficient just to remove and close the sac. This is 
called a herniotomy. In adult surgery, herniotomy alone has a 
high recurrence rate and some form of muscle strengthening 
is added (herniorrhaphy).
OPEN SUTURE REPAIR
In 1890, Eduardo Bassini described suture repair for inguinal 
hernia (Figure 60.16). This was a massive leap forward and 
has been the basis of open repair for over 100 years. The sur -
geon enters the inguinal canal by opening its anterior wall, 
the external oblique aponeurosis. The spermatic cord is dis -
sected free and the presence of a lateral or a medial hernia 
is confirmed. The sac of a lateral hernia is separated from 
the cord, opened and any contents reduced. The sac is then 
sutured closed at its neck and excess sac removed. If there is a 
medial hernia then it is inverted and the transversalis fascia is 
suture plicated. Sutures are now placed between the conjoint 
tendon above and the inguinal ligament below, extending 
from the pubic tubercle to the deep inguinal ring. The poste-
rior wall of the inguinal canal is thus strengthened.
Over 150 modifications to Bassini’s operation have been 
described with little or no benefit except for the Shouldice 
modification. In this operation, the transversalis fascia is 
opened by a central incision from the deep inguinal ring to 
the pubic tubercle and then closed to create a double-thick, 
two-layered posterior wall (double breasting). The exter -
nal oblique is closed in similar fashion. Expert centres have 
reported lifetime failure rates of less than 2% after Shouldice 
repair but it is a technically demanding operation which, in 
general hands, gives results identical to Bassini’s repair.
Today, when a Bassini-type operation is done, most sur -
geons use a continuous, non-absorbable nylon or polypropyl -
ene suture which is darned between the conjoint tendon and 
inguinal ligament. This operation was described by Maloney, 
and recently published large randomised trials have reported 
excellent results when compared with mesh techniques. It is 
the most common operation performed in countries where 
mesh is too expensive.
Suture repair is still under development and, recently, 
Desarda has described an operation where a 1- to 2-cm strip 
of external oblique aponeurosis lying over the inguinal canal 
is isolated from the main muscle, but left attached both medi-
ally and laterally. It is then sutured to the conjoint tendon 
and inguinal ligament, reinforcing the posterior wall of the 
inguinal canal. As the abdominal muscles contract, this strip 
of aponeurosis tightens to add further physiological support 
to the posterior wall. This operation is currently being  
evaluated.
OPEN FLAT MESH REPAIR
Synthetic mesh has been used since the 1950s to reinforce 
hernia repair, and in the 1980s Lichtenstein described a 
tension-free, simple, flat, polypropylene mesh repair for 
inguinal hernia (Figure 60.17). The initial part of the oper -
ation is identical to Bassini’s. Once the hernia sac has been 
removed and any medial defect closed, a piece of mesh, 
measuring 8 × 15 cm, is placed over the posterior wall, behind 
the spermatic cord, and is split to wrap around the spermatic 
cord at the deep inguinal ring. Loose sutures hold the mesh 
to the inguinal ligament and conjoint tendon. T wo major 
advantages are claimed: lowered hernia recurrence rates and 
accelerated postoperative recovery. Randomised trials show 
that hernia recurrence within the first 2 years is lowered but 
acute pain scores are similar. Recent research comparing 
Lichtenstein’s repair with laparoscopic surgery has identified 
chronic pain as the most common complication of open flat 
mesh repair with rates reported as high as 20%. Nevertheless, 
today, Lichtenstein’s repair is the most common operation for 
inguinal hernia in resource-rich countries.
Eduardo Bassini , 1844–1924, Professor of Surgery, Padua, Italy, described this method of herniorraphy in 1889.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 60.16Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
A
G
C
B
F
E
A
Figure 60.16  Bassini’s original diagram. A, subcutaneous fat; B, 
external oblique; C, iliac vein; E, spermatic cor d; F , nerves in inguinal 
canal; G, transversalis fascia.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1032 25/10/2017   09:39Specific hernia types 1033
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Surgery Fig 62.10
Figure 60.17 Lichtenstein’s repair.
OPEN PLUG/DEVICE/COMPLEX MESH REPAIR
Surgeons and industry have been highly creative, attempting 
to improve on simple flat mesh repair. A surgeon in Europe 
has over 200 different products and techniques from which 
to choose. Shaped mesh plugs have gained much attention, 
being simple to insert into the defect and requiring little if 
any fixation. However, they can become solid (meshoma) 
and also migrate. Meshes have been designed to be placed 
beneath the transversalis fascia. The surgeon introduces 
a finger through the deep inguinal ring and bluntly (and 
blindly) opens the preperitoneal space deep to the inguinal 
canal into which a mesh is inserted. A two-layered mesh 
(‘hernia system’), in which the inner layer is placed deep 
to transversalis fascia and the outer layer superficial to it, is 
also gaining popularity. To date, there is little evidence to 
show that any of these techniques is superior to Lichten-
stein’s operation.
OPEN PREPERITONEAL REPAIR
This approach was first described by Annandale in 1880, but 
was largely discarded until the 1950s when Stoppa, a French 
surgeon, described it with mesh reconstruction. It is useful 
when multiple attempts at open standard surgery have failed 
and the hernia(s) keeps recurring. It may now be superseded 
by the totally extraperitoneal laparoscopic approach, which 
is modelled on Stoppa’s operation and first described by Ger, 
also French.
LAPAROSCOPIC INGUINAL HERNIA REPAIR
T wo techniques are described and have been extensively 
studied in randomised trials. The totally extraperitoneal 
(TEP) approach is more widely used than the transabdominal 
preperitoneal (TAPP) approach. In both, the aim of surgery 
is to reduce the hernia and hernia sac within the abdomen, 
and then place a 10 × 15 cm mesh just deep to the abdominal 
wall, extending across the midline into the retropubic space 
and 5 cm lateral to the deep inguinal ring. The mesh covers 
Hasselbach’s triangle, the deep inguinal ring and the femoral 
canal. In TEP, the surgeon is able to create a space just deep 
to the abdominal muscles without entering the peritoneal 
cavity whereas, in TAPP , the surgeon enters the peritoneal 
cavity then incises the peritoneum above the hernia defects, 
and reflects it away from the muscles, essentially entering the 
same space as in TEP . Once the hernia has been reduced, an 
identical mesh is inserted and the peritoneum closed over the 
mesh (Figures 60.18 and 60.19).
Over 60 randomised trials have compared laparoscopic 
surgery with Lichtenstein’s repair. They show that, although 
the laparoscopic operation takes longer to perform, proven 
advantages are reduced pain both after surgery and up to 5 
years later, more rapid return to full activity, and the reduced 
incidence of the wound complications of infection, bleeding 
and seroma. Laparoscopic surgery is of particular benefit in 
bilateral cases and in patients with hernia recurrence after 
open surgery. National statistics show that the proportion of 
cases performed laparoscopically is slowly rising, but all agree 
that there is a slow learning curve associated with these tech-
nically demanding operations.
Figure 60.18 Right/medial direct hernia – laparoscopic view. Note 
the medial (direct) defect upper left, the inferior epigastric vessels 
upper right and the structures of the spermatic cord lower right.
Figure 60.19  Right/lateral indirect her nia – laparoscopic view. 
A, arch of pubic bone; B, vas deferens and testicular vessels retracted 
medially; C, inferior epigastric vessels; D, deep inguinal ring (hernia 
defect).
A
B
C
D
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1033 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1034
EMERGENCY INGUINAL HERNIA SURGERY
Of inguinal hernia patients 95% present at clinics and only 
5% as an emergency with a painful irreducible hernia that 
may progress to strangulation and possible bowel infarction. 
The morbidity and mortality of emergency inguinal hernia 
surgery are high and surgery needs to be performed rapidly in 
a well-resuscitated patient with adequate postoperative high 
dependency or intensive care if necessary. The principles of 
surgery are the same as in an elective setting. Open surgery 
is preferred when a hernia is irreducible or if there is any risk 
of bowel resection. Infection may complicate these cases but 
most surgeons would still use a lightweight, synthetic mesh 
repair covered by appropriate antibiotics.
COMPLICATIONS OF INGUINAL HERNIA SURGERY
Despite this being a common procedure and technically 
straightforward, postoperative complications are common. 
Immediate complications include bleeding (which may be due 
to accidental damage to the inferior epigastric or iliac vessels) 
and urinary retention that may require catheterisation. Occa-
sional over-enthusiastic infusion of local anaesthetic may lead 
to femoral nerve blockade, the patient being unable to move 
a leg. This usually resolves over 12 hours but is alarming.
Over the next week, seroma formation and wound infec -
tion may occur. Seroma is due to an excessive inflammatory 
response to sutures or mesh and cannot be prevented. In 
most cases the fluid resolves spontaneously but may require 
aspiration. After laparoscopic surgery, a seroma may be mis -
diagnosed as an early recurrence. Wound infection is not 
uncommon. Many surgeons use routine prophylactic antibi -
otics but recent studies suggest little benefit even when mesh 
is used.
In the longer term, hernia recurrence and chronic pain 
are the main concerns. No operation can be guaranteed to be 
recurrence free. Evidence shows that mesh repairs have lower 
recurrence rates than suture repairs, but there is no difference 
between the various mesh repairs and no difference between 
open and laparoscopic surgery. There is very strong evidence 
Summary box 60.10
Complications
●● Early pain, bleeding, urinary retention, anaesthetic related
●● Medium seroma, wound infection
●● Late chronic pain, testicular atrophy
Sportsman’s hernia
This specific entity is well described and presents as severe pain 
in the groin area, extending into the scrotum and upper thigh. 
It is almost entirely restricted to young men who play contact 
sports such as football and rugby. The pain can be debilitat -
ing and prevent the patient from exercising. On examination 
there may be some tenderness in the region of the inguinal 
canal, over the pubic tubercle, and over the insertion of the 
thigh adductor muscles. Usually no hernia can be felt and only 
occasionally can a true inguinal hernia be found.
In most cases, the pain is due to an orthopaedic injury, 
such as adductor strain or pubic symphasis diastasis. However, 
some believe that it can be due to muscle tearing (Gilmore’s 
groin) or stretching of the posterior wall of the inguinal canal. 
Other causes of pain should be excluded, such as hip, pelvic or 
lumbar spinal disease and bladder/prostate problems. MRI is 
most likely to detect an orthopaedic problem but ultrasonog-
raphy, herniography or even laparoscopy may be used.
There are many anecdotal reports of successful treatment 
using all types of inguinal hernia surgery, suture and mesh, 
open and laparoscopic, but no randomised trials. Hernia sur -
gery should be a last resort and the patient warned of a signif-
icant risk of failure to cure the pain.
Femoral hernia
Basic anatomy
The iliac artery and vein pass below the inguinal ligament 
to become the femoral vessels in the leg. The vein lies 
Summary box 60.9
Operations for inguinal hernia
●● Herniotomy
●● Open suture repair
Bassini
Shouldice
Desarda
●● Open flat mesh repair
Lichtenstein
●● Open complex mesh repair
Plugs
Hernia systems
●● Open preperitoneal repair
Stoppa
●● Laparoscopic repair
TEP
TAPP
that specialist hernia surgeons will have lower recurrence 
rates whatever technique they use.
Chronic pain, defined as pain present 3 months after surgery, 
is common after all forms of surgery. It is less common and less 
severe after laparoscopic surgery. Different types of pain have 
been described but the most severe is neuralgic pain due to nerve 
irritation. This may be the result of nerve injury at the time of 
operation or chronic irritation of nerves by suture material or 
mesh. Careful identification and protection of all three nerves 
passing along the inguinal canal reduces the incidence of neu-
ralgic pain. This type of pain is also very uncommon after lap-
aroscopic surgery that is performed at a deeper level away from 
the nerves. Some contribution to chronic pain may be due to 
the mesh, which can become embedded in a dense collagenous 
reaction with shrinkage. This causes tissue tension and rigidity.
Rarely, damage to the testicular artery can lead to tes -
ticular infarction, perhaps the most serious complication of 
inguinal hernia surgery. There is no good evidence that her -
nia surgery has an effect on male fertility despite extensive 
study in this area.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1034 25/10/2017   09:39Specific hernia types 1035
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
medially and the artery just lateral to the artery with the fem-
oral nerve lateral to the artery. They are enclosed in a fibrous 
sheath. Just medial to the vein is a small space containing fat 
and some lymphatic tissue (node of Cloquet). It is this space 
which is exploited by a femoral hernia. The walls of a femoral 
hernia are the femoral vein laterally, the inguinal ligament 
anteriorly, the pelvic bone covered by the iliopectineal liga-
ment (Astley Cooper’s) posteriorly and the lacunar ligament 
(Gimbernat’s) medially. This is a strong curved ligament with 
a sharp unyielding edge which impedes reduction of a femoral 
hernia (Figure 60.20).
The female pelvis has a different shape to the male, 
increasing the size of the femoral canal and the risk of hernia. 
In old age, the femoral defect increases and femoral hernia 
is commonly seen in low-weight, elderly women. There is a 
substantial risk of developing a femoral hernia after a sutured 
inguinal hernia repair (Denmark Hernia Registry).
Jules Germain Cloquet , 1790–1883, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Paris, France.
Sir Astley Paston Cooper , 1768–1841, surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, received a baronetcy and 1000 guineas for successfully removing an infected wen 
from the head of King George IV at Brighton in 1821.
Manoel Louise Antonio don Gimbernat , 1734–1816, Professor of Anatomy, Barcelona, Spain and later Director of the Royal College of Surgeons in Spain.
Diagnosis of femoral hernia
Diagnostic error is common and often leads to delay in diag -
nosis and treatment. The hernia appears below and lateral 
to the pubic tubercle and lies in the upper leg rather than in 
the lower abdomen. Inadequate exposure of this area during 
routine examination leads to failure to detect the hernia. The 
hernia often rapidly becomes irreducible and loses any cough 
impulse due to the tightness of the neck. It may only be 1–2 cm 
in size and can easily be mistaken for a lymph node. As it 
increases in size, it is reflected superiorly and becomes difficult 
to distinguish from a medial direct hernia, which arises only 
a few centimetres above the femoral canal. A direct inguinal 
hernia leaves the abdominal cavity just above the inguinal 
ligament and a femoral hernia just below (Figure 60.21).
Figure 60.20 Right femoral hernia – lapar oscopic view. The slightly 
oblique inguinal ligament can be seen superolaterally above the 
defect. The exter nal iliac vein is not seen. A, Inguinal ligament;  
B, lacunar ligament; C, arch of pubic bone; D, fatty tissue overlying 
iliac vessels.
Summary box 60.11
Femoral hernia
●● Less common than inguinal hernia
●● It is more common in women than in men
●● Easily missed on examination
●● Of cases 50% present as an emergency with very high risk of 
strangulation
Summary box 60.12
Differential diagnosis
●● Direct inguinal hernia
●● Lymph node
●● Saphena varix
●● Femoral artery aneurysm
●● Psoas abscess
●● Rupture of adductor longus with haematoma
Figure 60.21 The patient has a left femoral and a right inguinal her-
nia.
C
A
B
D
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1035 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1036
Investigations
In routine cases, no specific investigations are required. 
However, if there is uncertainly then ultrasonography or CT 
should be requested. In the emergency patient, bowel obstruc-
tion usually occurs and a plain radiograph is likely to show 
small bowel obstruction. All patients with unexplained small 
bowel obstruction should undergo careful examination for a 
femoral hernia. It is now common to perform CT scanning in 
cases of bowel obstruction primarily to exclude malignancy, 
but it can identify an obstructing femoral hernia missed by 
clinicians.
Surgery for femoral hernia
There is no alternative to surgery for femoral hernia and it is 
wise to treat such cases with some urgency. There are three 
open approaches and appropriate cases can be managed lap-
aroscopically.
LOW APPROACH (LOCKWOOD)
This is the simplest operation for a femoral hernia but suitable 
only when there is no risk of bowel resection. It can easily be 
performed under local anaesthesia. A transverse incision is 
made over the hernia. The sac of the hernia is opened and its 
contents reduced. The sac is also reduced and non- absorbable 
sutures are placed between the inguinal ligament above and 
the fascia overlying the bone below. A small incision can be 
made in the medial lacunar ligament to aid reduction but 
there may be an abnormal branch of the obturator artery just 
deep to it, which can bleed. The femoral vein, lateral to the 
hernia, needs to be protected. Some surgeons place a mesh 
plug into the hernia defect for further reinforcement.
THE INGUINAL APPROACH (LOTHEISSEN)
The initial incision is identical to that of Bassini’s or Lichten-
stein’s operation into the inguinal canal. The spermatic cord 
(or round ligament) is mobilised and the transversalis fascia 
opened from deep inguinal ring to the pubic tubercle. A fem-
oral hernia lies immediately below this incision and can be 
reduced by a combination of pulling from above and pushing 
from below. If necessary, the peritoneum can be opened to 
help with reduction. Once reduced, the neck of the hernia is 
closed with sutures or a mesh plug, protecting the iliac vein 
throughout. The layers are closed as for inguinal hernia and 
the surgeon may place a mesh into the inguinal canal to pro -
tect against development of an inguinal hernia.
Some surgeons believe that exploration of the femoral 
canal to exclude a hernia should be a routine part of inguinal 
hernia surgery but most surgeons do not do this.
HIGH APPROACH (McEVEDY)
This more complex operation is ideal in the emergency situa-
tion where the risk of bowel strangulation is high. It requires 
Umbilical hernia
The umbilical defect is present at birth but closes as the stump 
of the umbilical cord heals, usually within a week of birth. 
This process may be delayed, leading to the development of 
herniation in the neonatal period. The umbilical ring may 
also stretch and reopen in adult life.
Summary box 60.13
Ventral hernias
●● Umbilical–paraumbilical
●● Epigastric
●● Incisional
●● Parastomal
●● Spigelian
●● Lumbar
●● Traumatic
Charles Barrett Lockwood , 1856–1914, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.
George Lotheissen , 1868–1941, surgeon, the Kaiser Franz Joseph Hospital, Vienna, Austria, described this operation in 1898.
Peter George McEvedy , 1890–1951, surgeon, Ancoats Hospital, Manchester, UK.
regional or general anaesthesia. A horizontal incision (classi-
cally vertical) is made in the lower abdomen centred at the 
lateral edge of the rectus muscle. The anterior rectus sheath 
is incised and the rectus muscle displaced medially. The 
surgeon proceeds deep to the muscle in the preperitoneal 
space. The femoral hernia is reduced and the sac opened to 
allow careful inspection of the bowel, and a decision made 
regarding the need for bowel resection. This is performed if 
necessary. In dubious cases, the bowel is replaced into the 
peritoneal cavity for 5 minutes and then re-examined. The 
femoral defect is then closed with sutures, mesh or plug. This 
approach allows a generous incision to be made in the peri -
toneum, which aids inspection of the bowel and facilitates 
bowel resection.
LAPAROSCOPIC APPROACH
Both the TEP and TAPP approaches can be used for a femoral 
hernia and a standard mesh inserted. This is ideal for reduc -
ible femoral hernias presenting electively, but not for emer -
gency cases or irreducible hernia.
VENTRAL HERNIA
This term refers to hernias of the anterior abdominal wall. 
Inguinal and femoral hernias are not included even though 
they are ventral. Lumbar hernia is included despite being dor-
solateral. The European Hernia Society classification (2009) 
distinguished primary ventral from incisional hernia but did 
not include parastomal hernia. We have included parastomal 
hernia and traumatic hernia.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1036 25/10/2017   09:39Ventral hernia 1037
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Summary box 60.14
Umbilical hernia in children
●● Common in infants and most resolve spontaneously
●● Rarely strangulate
Umbilical hernia in adults
Conditions that cause stretching and thinning of the midline 
raphe (linea alba), such as pregnancy, obesity and liver disease 
with cirrhosis, predispose to reopening of the umbilical defect. 
In adults, the defect in the median raphe is immediately adja-
cent to (most often above) the true umbilicus, although at oper-
ation this is indistinguishable. The term ‘paraumbilical hernia’ 
is commonly used. The defect is rounded with a well-defined 
fibrous margin. Small umbilical hernias often contain extra -
peritoneal fat or omentum. Larger hernias can contain small or 
large bowel but, even when very large, the neck of the sac is 
narrow compared with the volume of its contents. As a result, 
in adults, umbilical hernias that include bowel are prone to 
become irreducible, obstructed and strangulated.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients are commonly overweight with a thinned and atten-
uated midline raphe. The bulge is typically slightly to one 
side of the umbilical depression, creating a crescent-shaped 
appearance to the umbilicus (Figure 60.22). Women are 
affected more than men. Most patients complain of pain due 
to tissue tension or symptoms of intermittent bowel obstruc -
tion. In large hernias, the overlying skin may become thinned, 
stretched and develop dermatitis.
TREATMENT
As a result of the high risk of strangulation, surgery should 
be advised in cases where the hernia contains bowel. Small 
hernias may be left alone if they are asymptomatic, but they 
may enlarge and require surgery at a later date. Surgery may 
be performed open or laparoscopically.
OPEN UMBILICAL HERNIA REPAIR
Very small defects less than 1  cm in size may be closed with 
a simple figure-of-eight suture, or repaired by a darn tech-
nique where a non-absorbable, monofilament suture is criss-
crossed across the defect and anchored firmly to the fascia 
all around.
Defects up to 2  cm in diameter may be sutured primar -
ily with minimal tension, although, the larger the defect, 
the more tension and the more likely it is that mesh rein -
forcement will be beneficial. The classic repair was described 
by Mayo. A transverse incision is made and the hernia sac 
dissected, opened and its content reduced. Any non-viable 
tissue is removed, sometimes involving bowel resection. The 
peritoneum is closed. The defect in the anterior rectus sheath 
is extended laterally on both sides and elevated to create an 
upper and lower flap. The lower flap is then inserted beneath 
the upper flap and sutured to it, with the upper flap being 
brought downwards over it so that the tissue is two layered 
(double breasted). Non-absorbable sutures are used. There is 
often a large subcutaneous space. A suction drain is placed 
to reduce the risk of seroma and haematoma. The skin is 
closed but stretched or redundant skin may need to be excised 
(apronectomy) to achieve a better cosmetic result. Today, 
with modern suture materials, surgeons simply close the ante-
rior sheath in a single layer.
Figure 60.22 A small paraumbilical hernia.
William James Mayo , 1861–1939, surgeon, the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA, described this operation in 1901. He and his brother Charles Horace Mayo 
(1865–1939) joined their father’s private practice in Rochester. This practice became the Mayo Clinic. Their father William Worrall Mayo was born in 
Manchester, UK in 1819.
Umbilical hernia in children
This common condition occurs in up to 10% of infants, with 
a higher incidence in premature babies. The hernia appears 
within a few weeks of birth and is often symptomless, but 
increases in size on crying and assumes a classic conical shape. 
Sexes are equally affected but the incidence in black infants 
is up to eight times higher than in white. Obstruction and/
or strangulation is extremely uncommon below the age of 
3 years.
TREATMENT
Conservative treatment is indicated under the age of 2 years 
when the hernia is symptomless. Parental reassurance is all 
that is necessary. Of hernias 95% will resolve spontaneously. 
If the hernia persists beyond the age of 2 years it is unlikely to 
resolve and surgical repair is indicated.
SURGERY
A small curved incision is made immediately below the umbi-
licus. The neck of the sac is defined, opened and any contents 
are returned to the peritoneal cavity. The sac is closed and 
redundant sac excised. The defect in the linea alba is closed 
with interrupted sutures.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1037 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1038
For defects larger than 2  cm in diameter, mesh repair is 
recommended (Figure 60.23). The mesh may be placed in 
one of several anatomical planes:
 ● Within the peritoneal cavity – a tissue separating mesh is 
placed through the defect and spread out on the under -
side of the abdominal wall and fixed to it, ideally with an 
overlap of 5 cm in each direction. This is a quick repair but 
requires the use of expensive mesh.
 ● In the retromuscular space – the linea alba is opened ver -
tically and both left and right posterior rectus sheaths are 
incised 1 cm to the side of the midline exposing the rectus 
muscle. The posterior sheaths are sutured together and the 
muscles elevated away from the sheath to develop the ret-
romuscular space into which a sheet of mesh is placed and 
fixed by sutures. The mesh should overlap the midline by 
5 cm laterally and the umbilicus vertically. It should there-
fore be a minimum diameter of 10  cm. A drain may be 
placed deep to the linea alba. This is a very secure repair 
but requires extensive dissection.
 ● In the extraperitoneal space – it is difficult, but possible, 
to develop the plane below the posterior rectus sheath, 
just outside the peritoneum. Care must be taken to avoid 
‘button-holing’ the peritoneum because it is thin and frag-
ile. Mesh can then be tucked into in this space, ensuring a 
good overlap as before. Ideally, the linea alba is closed over 
the mesh but, if this is not possible, a flap of peritoneal 
sac can be used to cover the mesh. This is a good repair, 
but, if the peritoneum is extensively damaged during the 
dissection, it will have to be abandoned in favour of an 
alternative technique.
 ● In the subcutaneous plane – this is the simplest technique, 
called an onlay mesh. The peritoneal sac and contents are 
dealt with as above. An attempt is made to close linea alba 
vertically with sutures and a disc of mesh is placed on the 
anterior rectus sheath and sutured to it. The mesh is lying 
in the subcutaneous space and is prone to infection.
LAPAROSCOPIC UMBILICAL HERNIA REPAIR
Three ports are placed laterally on the abdominal wall, usu -
ally on the left side unless adhesions from previous surgery 
are likely. The contents of the hernia are reduced by traction 
and external pressure. The falciform ligament above and the 
median umbilical fold below may need to be taken down if 
they interfere with mesh placement. A disc of non-adherent 
mesh, designed for intraperitoneal use, is introduced and posi-
tioned on the under surface of the abdominal wall, centred 
on the defect. It is then fixed to the peritoneum and posterior 
rectus sheaths using staples, tacks or sutures. This is a simple 
and secure repair, which achieves generous overlap without 
surgical damage to umbilicus and surrounding fascia (Fig-
ure 60.24). However, it requires specialised equipment and 
expensive tissue-separating mesh. Intraperitoneal meshes can 
cause severe pain lasting for 24–48 hours after surgery which 
can mimic peritonitis.
EMERGENCY REPAIR OF UMBILICAL HERNIA
Incarceration, bowel obstruction and strangulation are fre -
quent because of the narrow neck and the fibrous edge of 
the defect in the midline raphe. Delay to surgery can lead 
to gangrene of the omentum or bowel. Large hernias are 
often multiloculated and there may be strangulated bowel 
in one component when other areas are clinically soft and a 
non-tender hernia.
SURGERY
In cases of simple incarceration without clinical evidence of 
strangulation, repair may be attempted laparoscopically but 
reduction of the contents can be very difficult if the hernia 
contains bowel. Most emergency repairs are performed by 
open surgery. In the presence of established strangulation it 
is unwise to place mesh at all because of the risk of infection, 
so an open sutured repair should be performed, accepting 
a high risk of later recurrence. Alternatively, a two-stage 
repair could be planned: the hernia contents being dealt 
with initially with little attempt made to close the defect 
and then subsequent definitive mesh repair once sepsis has 
been  controlled.
Figure 60.24 Paraumbilical defect – laparoscopic view.
Figure 60.23 A massive paraumbilical hernia – operative view.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1038 25/10/2017   09:39Ventral hernia 1039
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Epigastric hernia
These hernias arise through the midline raphe (linea alba) 
any where between the xiphoid process and the umbilicus, 
usually midway. When close to the umbilicus they are called 
supraumbilical hernias. Epigastric hernias begin with a trans-
verse split in the midline raphe so, in contrast to umbilical 
hernias, the defect is elliptical. It has been hypothesised that 
the defect occurs at the site where small blood vessels pierce 
the linea alba or, more likely, that it arises at weaknesses due 
to abnormal decussation of aponeurotic fibres related to heavy 
physical activity (Figure 60.25).
Epigastric hernia defects are usually less than 1 cm in max-
imum diameter and commonly contain only extraperitoneal 
fat, which gradually enlarges, spreading in the subcutaneous 
plane to resemble the shape of a mushroom. When very large 
they may contain a peritoneal sac but rarely any bowel. More 
than one hernia may be present. The most common cause of 
‘recurrence’ is failure to identify a second defect at the time 
of original repair.
Clinical features
The patients are often fit, healthy men aged between 25 and 
40 years. These hernias can be very painful even when the 
swelling is the size of a pea, due to the fatty contents becom -
ing nipped sufficiently to produce partial strangulation. The 
pain may mimic that of a peptic ulcer but symptoms should 
not be ascribed to the hernia until gastrointestinal pathology 
has been excluded. A soft midline swelling can often be felt 
more easily than seen. It may be locally tender. It is unlikely 
to be reducible because of the narrow neck. It may resemble a 
lipoma. A cough impulse may or may not be felt.
Treatment
Very small epigastric hernias have been known to disappear 
spontaneously, probably due to infarction of the fat. Small-
to-moderate-sized hernias without a peritoneal sac are not 
inherently dangerous and surgery should be offered only if the 
hernia is sufficiently symptomatic.
Surgery
This may be done by open or laparoscopic surgery. At open 
surgery, a vertical or transverse incision is made over the swell-
ing and down to the linea alba. Protruding extraperitoneal 
fat can simply be pushed back through the defect or excised. 
Often a small vessel is present in the hernia content that can 
cause troublesome bleeding. The defect in the linea alba is 
closed with non-absorbable sutures in adults and absorbable 
sutures in children. In larger hernias and when a peritoneal 
sac is present, the surgical approach is similar to an umbilical 
mesh repair.
Laparoscopic repair is very similar to that for umbilical 
hernia except that the defect is hidden behind the falciform 
ligament which must be taken down from the undersurface of 
the abdominal wall. The margins of the defect must be clearly 
exposed and the fatty contents reduced before the mesh is 
placed. Simply placing a mesh under the linea midline may 
not in fact remove the hernia when its contents are extraper-
itoneal fat.
Incisional hernia
These arise through a defect in the musculofascial layers of 
the abdominal wall in the region of a postoperative scar. Thus 
they may appear anywhere on the abdominal surface.
Incidence and aetiology
Incisional hernias have been reported in 10–50% of laparot -
omy incisions and 1–5% of laparoscopic port-site incisions. 
Factors predisposing to their development are patient factors 
(obesity, general poor healing due to malnutrition, immuno -
suppression or steroid therapy, chronic cough, cancer), wound 
factors (poor quality tissues, wound infection) and surgical 
factors (inappropriate suture material, incorrect suture 
placement).
An incisional hernia usually starts as disruption of the 
musculofascial layers of a wound in the early postoperative 
period. Often the event passes unnoticed if the overlying skin 
wound has healed securely. Many incisional hernias may be 
preventable with the use of good surgical technique. The clas-
sic sign of wound disruption is a serosanguineous discharge.
Clinical features
These hernias commonly appear as a localised swelling 
involving a small portion of the scar but may present as a 
diffuse bulging of the whole length of the incision (Figure 
60.26). There may be several discrete hernias along the 
length of the incision and unsuspected defects are often 
found at surgery (Figure 60.27). Incisional hernias tend to 
increase steadily in size with time. The skin overlying large 
hernias may become thin and atrophic so that peristalsis may 
be seen in the underlying intestine. Vascular damage to skin 
may lead to dermatitis. Attacks of partial intestinal obstruc -
tion are common because there are usually coexisting inter -
nal adhesions. Strangulation is less frequent and most likely 
to occur when the fibrous defect is small and the sac is large. 
Most incisional hernias are broad-necked and carry a low risk 
of strangulation.
Figure 60.25 Epigastric hernia – external view.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1039 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1040
The repair should cover the whole length of the previous 
incision. Approximation of the musculofascial layers should 
be done with minimal tension and prosthetic mesh should be 
used to reduce the risk of recurrence. Mesh may be contrain -
dicated in a contaminated field, e.g. bowel injury during the 
dissection but, in a clean-contaminated field, such as after an 
elective bowel resection, mesh may be used if placed in a dif-
ferent anatomical plane to the contamination, such as in the 
extraperitoneal/retromuscular space. Appropriate systemic 
antibiotics should be used.
OPEN REPAIR 
Simple suture techniques without the use of prosthetic mesh 
for reinforcement, even with layered closure such as in Mayo, 
‘keel’ or da Silva repairs, are not recommended today because 
of the high risk of recurrence. However, they may be the only 
option in the presence of gross contamination such as peri -
tonitis.
The previous incision is opened along its full length to 
reveal any clinically unsuspected defects. The hernial sac, its 
neck and the margins of the defect are fully exposed. The sac 
can be opened, contents reduced, local adhesions divided and 
any redundant sac excised to allow safe reclosure of the peri -
toneum.
Mesh can be placed in one of several planes as for umbil -
ical hernia repair. The simplest approach is an onlay mesh 
but increasingly the retromuscular sublay repair is preferred 
by expert surgeons and is described below.
RETROMUSCULAR SUBLAY MESH REPAIR 
Vertical incisions are made through the fascia surrounding 
the rectus abdominis muscles so that the muscle can be sep -
arated and elevated from the posterior rectus sheath below . 
If possible, the medial edges of the posterior rectus sheath 
edges are sutured together with a continuous suture. In very 
large defects this may not be possible and below the arcuate 
line where the posterior sheath is deficient, being peritoneum 
and transversalis fascia only. In the case of transverse inci-
sion, where the defect extends lateral to the rectus sheath, 
internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles form the 
posterior layer. A sheet of lightweight, large-pore, prosthetic, 
elastic mesh is then laid between this posterior rectus sheath 
and belly/bellies of the rectus muscle. It is fixed to the sheath 
by interrupted sutures. The mesh must be large enough to 
ensure a 5-cm overlap of the underlying fascial defect in all 
directions. Careful haemostasis and meticulous asepsis are 
essential during this operation. The anterior rectus sheaths 
are then sutured together over the mesh so that, ideally, the 
mesh is completely covered by muscle and fascia and is not 
lying in the subcutaneous plane. Redundant skin may need to 
be excised. The risk of postoperative serous fluid collections is 
reduced by suction drainage.
LAPAROSCOPIC REPAIR  
Incisional hernias are increasingly being repaired by laparo-
scopic mesh techniques. Laparoscopy and division of adhe -
sions is initially performed. Hernia contents are reduced and 
the fibrous margins of the hernia defect(s) are exposed. Often 
the falciform ligament and median umbilical fold need to be 
Figure 60.27 Multiple defects seen during laparoscopic operation.
Treatment
Asymptomatic incisional hernias may not require treatment 
at all. The wearing of an abdominal binder or belt may pre-
vent the hernia from increasing in size.
Principles of surgery
For most incisional hernias, surgery is relatively straightfor -
ward and both open and laparoscopic options are available. A 
number of principles apply, irrespective of the technique used.
Summary box 60.15
Incisional hernia
●● Incidence 10–50% after surgery
●● Causation due to patient, wound and surgeon factors
●● Wide variation in size
●● Often multiple defects within the same scar
●● Obstruction is common but strangulation is rare
●● Open and laparoscopic repairs possible
Figure 60.26 A large multilocular incisional hernia.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1040 25/10/2017   09:39Ventral hernia 1041
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
taken down. Some surgeons prefer to suture close the muscle 
defects first and then reinforce with mesh. Others simply fix 
the mesh under the defect with adequate overlap. The use of 
a tissue-separating mesh is essential. Various techniques have 
been described to size and then position the mesh accurately. 
The mesh is fixed to the abdominal wall by staples or trans-
fascial sutures which pass through all muscle layers to hold 
the mesh.
In the presence of dense peritoneal adhesions, the lapa -
roscopic surgeon needs to take great care because injury to 
the bowel is possible and may not be recognised. Diathermy 
is not used. If occult bowel injury does occur it can lead to 
postoperative peritonitis, which is an extremely dangerous 
complication.
Management of the very large incisional 
hernia
Very large incisional hernias often require careful thought 
before treatment begins. If the volume of the sac is more than 
25% of the volume of the abdominal cavity (and this can be 
calculated from CT images), then there are likely to be issues 
of loss of abdominal domain when the hernia is repaired. 
The contents of the hernia, which have been outside the 
 abdominal cavity for a long time, will not fit back inside or, if 
they do, it will result in high tension. High intra-  abdominal 
pressure can lead to visceral compression and pulmonary 
complications due to impaired diaphragmatic movement. A 
tight abdomen can lead to wound breakdown and failure of 
the repair.
Techniques to overcome the potential loss of abdominal 
domain include preoperative abdominal expansion with pro -
gressive preoperative pneumoperitoneum over several weeks, 
resection of the omentum and/or colon at the time of repair, 
the use of prosthetic mesh to span the uncloseable gap in the 
musculofascial layer, or the use of musculofascial advance -
ment or transpositional flaps to achieve closure.
Even if loss of domain is not a concern, large defects can 
still be very difficult to close and the same special techniques 
may need to be used to avoid producing excessive tension in 
the repair. Ramirez’s component separation technique, which 
incorporates relaxing incisions in the external oblique apo -
neurosis and/or the posterior sheath, is very useful because 
this enables either the anterior or the posterior component of 
the rectus sheath to be drawn together. It may then be rein -
forced with a mesh.
Patients with poor quality or redundant skin may benefit 
from a wedge excision of skin and fat (lipectomy) to improve 
the abdominal contour postoperatively. Repair of these very 
large hernias is highly specialised surgery and is best done in 
specialist centres.
Reducing the risk of incisional hernia
The incidence of incisional hernia may be reduced by 
improving the patient’s general condition preoperatively 
where  possible, e.g. weight loss for obesity or improving nutri-
tional state for malnutrition. Closing the fascial layers with 
non- absorbable, or very slowly absorbable, sutures of adequate 
gauge is important. Traditional teaching was that sutures 
should be 1 cm deep and 1 cm apart. Recent work has shown 
that lower incisional hernia rates and reduced infection rates 
are gained when smaller and closer bites are used with a 2/0 
suture rather than traditional heavier materials.
There is no evidence that interrupted sutures are better 
or worse than continuous. However, if continuous suturing 
is used, the tissue bites must not be too near the fascial edge 
or pulled too tight because they may cut out. It has also been 
confirmed that the optimal ratio of suture length to wound 
length is 4:1 (Jenkins’ rule). If less length than this is used, 
the suture bites are too far apart or too tight and the converse 
applies if more length than this is used.
Drains should be brought out through separate incisions 
and not through the wound itself because this leads to hernia 
formation.
Recent reports have suggested that placement of a pro -
phylactic mesh in patients at high risk of hernia formation 
will substantially reduce that risk. This has been reported in 
obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery and also to pre-
vent parastomal herniation, which occurs in up to 50% of 
patients.
Spigelian hernia
These hernias are uncommon although are probably under -
diagnosed. They affect men and women equally and can 
occur at any age, but are most common in elderly people. 
They arise through a defect in the spigelian fascia, which is 
the aponeurosis of transversus abdominis. Often these hernias 
advance through the internal oblique as well and spread out 
deep to the external oblique aponeurosis. The spigelian fascia 
extends between the transversus muscle and the lateral bor -
der of the rectus sheath from the costal margin to the groin, 
where it blends into the conjoint tendon. Most spigelian 
hernias appear below the level of the umbilicus near the 
edge of the rectus sheath, but they can be found anywhere 
along the spigelian line (Figure 60.28). There is a common 
Adrian Van der Spieghel (Spigelius) , 1578–1625, Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy.
Figure 60.28 Spigelian hernia.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1041 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1042
misconception that they protrude below the arcuate line as a 
result of deficiency of the posterior rectus sheath at that level, 
but in fact the defect is almost always above the arcuate line. 
In young patients they usually contain extraperitoneal fat 
only but in older patients there is often a peritoneal sac and 
they can become very large indeed.
They have also been described in infants and may be con-
genital, reflecting incomplete differentiation of the mesen -
chymal layers within the abdominal wall.
Clinical features
Young patients usually present with intermittent pain, due to 
pinching of the fat, similar to an epigastric hernia. A lump may 
or may not be palpable because the fatty hernia is small and 
the overlying external oblique is intact. Older patients gener-
ally present with a reducible swelling at the edge of the rectus 
sheath and may have symptoms of intermittent obstruction. 
The diagnosis should be suspected because of the location of 
the symptoms and is confirmed by CT. Ultrasonography has 
the advantage that it can be performed in the upright patient 
because no defect may be visible with the patient lying down.
Treatment
Surgery is recommended because the narrow and fibrous neck 
predisposes to strangulation. Surgery can be open or laparo-
scopic. At open surgery a skin crease is made over the hernia, 
but no abnormality will be seen until the external oblique is 
opened. The sac and contents are dealt with and the small 
defect in the spigelian fascia is repaired by suture or mesh 
laid deep to the external oblique aponeurosis. The plane of 
the mesh can be extended medially into the posterior rectus 
sheath if required. The external oblique aponeurosis is closed 
over the mesh.
Laparoscopy is useful if no sac is palpable, but, in young 
patients with a hernia containing only extraperitoneal fat, no 
hernia will be seen from within the peritoneum. In such cases, 
the peritoneum can be incised and the extraperitoneal plane 
explored for the small defect, which can then be closed by 
either suture or mesh. When an intraperitoneal sac is present, 
laparoscopic repair can be performed using either the intra-
peritoneal onlay of mesh (IPOM) or TAPP technique.
twelfth rib above, medially by sacrospinalis and laterally by 
the posterior border of the internal oblique muscle. Primary 
lumbar hernias are rare, but may be mimicked by incisional 
hernias arising through flank incisions for renal operations, 
or through incisions for bone grafts harvested from the iliac 
crest.
Differential diagnosis
A lumbar hernia must be distinguished from:
 ● a lipoma;
 ● a cold (tuberculous) abscess pointing to this position;
 ● a pseudo-hernia due to local muscular paralysis. Lumbar 
pseudo-hernia can result from any interference with the 
nerve supply of the affected muscles, the most common 
cause being injury to the subcostal nerve during a kidney 
operation.
Treatment
The natural history is for these hernias to increase in size and 
surgery is recommended. Lumbar hernias can be approached 
by open or laparoscopic surgery. The defects can be difficult to 
close with sutures and mesh is recommended.
The TAPP laparoscopic approach is gaining popularity. 
With the patient in a semilateral position ports are inserted 
well away from the defect. The peritoneum is incised above 
the hernia and dissected back to expose the muscle defect. 
The content, often extraperitoneal fat, is reduced and a mesh 
fixed with ample overlap. The peritoneum can then be resu-
tured or tacked back to cover the mesh.
Jean Louis Petit , 1674–1750, Director of the Academie de Chirurgie, Paris, France.
Lumbar hernia
Most primary lumbar hernias occur through the inferior lum-
bar triangle of Petit bounded below by the crest of the ilium, 
laterally by the external oblique muscle and medially by latis-
simus dorsi (Figure 60.29 ). Less commonly, the sac comes 
through the superior lumbar triangle, which is bounded by the 
Summary box 60.16
Spigelian hernia
●● Rare
●● Often misdiagnosed
●● High risk of complications
Figure 60.29  Inferior lumbar hernia, which contained caecum, 
appendix and small bowel. Note the filarial skin rash on the buttocks 
(courtesy of VJ Hartfield, formerly of south-east Nigeria).
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1042 25/10/2017   09:39Ventral hernia 1043
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Lumbar incisional hernias can be approached in the same 
way but large ones, especially if there is a component of 
neuropathic muscle atrophy causing a diffuse bulge (pseudo-  
hernia), can be very difficult and muscle-flap double breasting 
with mesh reinforcement may be required.
Parastomal hernia
When surgeons create a stoma, such as a colostomy or ileos -
tomy, they are effectively creating a hernia by bringing bowel 
out through the abdominal wall. The muscle defect created 
tends to increase in size over time and can ultimately lead to 
massive herniation around the stoma. The rate of parastomal 
hernia is over 50%. For patients, it is very difficult to manage 
a stoma that is lying adjacent to or atop a large hernia. Stoma 
appliance bags fit poorly leading to leakage.
The ideal surgical solution for the patient is to rejoin 
the bowel and remove the stoma altogether, but this is not 
always possible. The stoma may be re-sited but further recur -
rence is likely. Various open suture and mesh techniques have 
been described to repair parastomal hernia but failure rates 
are high. Meshes are best placed in the retromuscular space. 
Laparoscopic repair is also possible using a large mesh with a 
central hole. It can be positioned around the bowel onto the 
parietal peritoneum.
Recent reports (Millbourne et al.) have described the use 
of prophylactic mesh insertion at the time of formation of the 
stoma. A lightweight, polypropylene mesh is inserted in the 
retromuscular space so that the bowel passes through a hole 
in the mesh centre. Using this technique, parastomal hernia 
rates have been reduced significantly.
Traumatic hernia
These hernias arise through non-anatomical defects caused 
by injury. They can be classified into three types:
1 Hernias through abdominal stab wound sites. These are 
effectively incisional hernias.
2 Hernias protruding through splits or tears in the abdomi-
nal muscles after blunt trauma.
3 Abdominal bulging secondary to muscle atrophy that 
occurs as a result of nerve injury or other traumatic dener-
vation. Akin to the lumbar pseudo-hernia seen after open 
nephrectomy, these can arise after a chest injury with 
damage to the intercostal nerves.
Clinical features
Traumatic hernias present as any other hernia. The key to the 
aetiology is in the history and the non-anatomical location 
of the hernia.
Treatment
Surgery may be justified if the hernia is sufficiently symp -
tomatic, or if investigations suggest a narrow neck and 
hence a risk of obstruction or strangulation. Stab wound 
traumatic hernias are straightforward to repair using open or 
laparoscopic techniques as for other ventral hernias. Diffuse 
abdominal bulges are more difficult to correct and require 
some form of plication of the stretched musculofascial layer 
with mesh reinforcement to prevent further bulging in the 
future. Some bulging may persist, however.
Rare external hernias
Perineal hernia
This type of hernia is very rare and includes:
 ● postoperative hernia through a perineal scar, which may 
occur after excision of the rectum;
 ● median sliding perineal hernia, which is a complete pro -
lapse of the rectum;
 ● anterolateral perineal hernia, which occurs in women and 
presents as a swelling of the labium majus;
 ● posterolateral perineal hernia, which passes through the 
levator ani to enter the ischiorectal fossa.
TREATMENT
A combined abdominoperineal operation is generally the 
most satisfactory for the last two types of hernia. The hernia 
is exposed by an incision directly over it. The sac is opened 
and its contents are reduced. The sac is cleared from sur -
rounding structures and the wound closed. With the patient 
in semi-Trendelenburg position, either laparoscopically or at 
open surgery, the abdomen is opened and the mouth of the 
sac exposed. The sac is inverted, ligated and excised, and the 
pelvic floor repaired by muscle apposition and, if indicated, 
buttressing of the repair with prosthetic mesh.
Obturator hernia
Obturator hernia, which passes through the obturator canal, 
occurs six times more frequently in women than in men. 
Most patients are aged >60 years. The swelling is liable to 
be overlooked because it is covered by pectineus. It seldom 
causes a definite swelling in Scarpa’s triangle, but, if the limb 
is flexed, abducted and rotated outwards, the hernia some -
times becomes apparent. The leg is usually kept in a semi -
flexed position and movement increases the pain. In more 
than 50% of cases of strangulated obturator hernia, pain is 
referred along the obturator nerve by its geniculate branch 
to the knee. On vaginal or rectal examination the hernia can 
sometimes be felt as a tender swelling in the region of the 
obturator foramen.
These hernias have often undergone strangulation, fre -
quently of the Richter type, by the time of presentation.
TREATMENT
Surgery is indicated. The diagnosis is rarely made preoper -
atively and so it is often approached through a laparotomy 
incision. The full Trendelenburg position is adopted. The con-
stricting agent is the obturator fascia, which can be stretched 
by inserting the operator’s index finger, or suitable forceps, 
through the gap in the fascia. Content is reduced. If incision 
Antonio Scarpa , 1747–1832, Professor of Anatomy, Pavia, Italy.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1043 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1044
of the fascia is required, it is made parallel to the obturator 
vessels and nerve. The contents of the sac are dealt with in a 
standard manner. The defect cannot simply be closed because 
one margin is bone and the obturator nerve and vessels run 
through it. It is best closed using a mesh plug. In the absence 
of mesh or in an infected field, the broad ligament can be used 
as a plug.
Laparoscopic TAPP repair may also be performed again 
using a mesh. To avoid nerve injury, glue can be used to fix a 
mesh over the defect.
Gluteal and sciatic hernias
Both of these hernias are very rare. A gluteal hernia passes 
through the greater sciatic foramen, either above or below 
piriformis. A sciatic hernia passes through the lesser sciatic 
foramen. Differential diagnosis must be made between these 
conditions and:
 ● a lipoma or other soft tissue tumour beneath gluteus max-
imus;
 ● a tuberculous abscess;
 ● a gluteal aneurysm.
All doubtful swellings in this situation can be charac -
terised with CT scanning but, if in doubt, they should be 
explored by operation.
UMBILICAL CONDITIONS IN THE 
ADUL T
Chronic infection
Chronic infection occurs in the umbilical area, particularly in 
patients with poor hygiene. It may also occur in obese people 
and when a paraumbilical hernia is present. It can be due to a 
plug of keratin causing chronic irritation. It is often encoun -
tered during elective surgery and may complicate the insertion 
of a laparoscope port at the umbilicus. A range of bacteria and 
fungi can be involved. Occasionally, a rapid- onset, superficial 
cellulitis occurs even after minor surgery in this region. It is 
normally a streptococcus and can be treated with penicillin or 
other appropriate antibiotic. Pre-existing infection should be 
treated before surgery where possible.
Chronic fistula
Patients may present with a persistent discharge from the 
umbilical area. This may be due to simple, superficial infec -
tion or possibly an infected epidermoid cyst within the 
umbilicus. However, it may also be due to a fistulous connec-
tion to deeper structures.
In normal patients, the umbilicus is connected to the 
liver, bladder and gynaecological organs by various ligaments. 
Diseases of these organs, such as infection or malignancy, can 
extend along these ligaments to appear at the umbilicus as a 
mass or fistulous discharge.
Chronic fistula may be a complication of umbilical her -
nia repair due to chronic infection of a mesh or around non-  
absorbable suture material. In most cases this problem arises 
soon after surgery but occasionally a chronic infection can 
occur months or even years after an operation. Antibiotics 
may help but most commonly the synthetic suture or mesh 
will need to be removed with a risk of recurrence of the 
 hernia.
In fetal life the umbilicus was also connected to the gut by 
the vitellointestinal duct. In most patients this duct becomes 
totally obliterated and vanishes. The bowel end of the duct 
may persist as Meckel’s diverticulum. More rarely, the umbil-
ical end persists, leading to chronic discharge. If an abnormal 
connection between bowel and umbilicus persists, then this 
band can act as a cause of adhesional intestinal obstruction.
Patent urachus
A connection between the urinary bladder and umbilicus usu-
ally presents in later life. This is due to increased pressure in 
the bladder as a result of obstruction from conditions such 
as prostatic hypertrophy. The cause of obstruction should be 
dealt with initially, but if the problem persists then surgical 
excision of the patent urachus might be considered.
Malignancy at the umbilicus
Primary squamous carcinoma may occur. If tumour presents 
at the umbilicus it is most probably due to spread from the 
internal organs along internal ligaments, e.g. from the liver 
along the falciform ligament. A malignant mass at the umbi -
licus is called a Sister Joseph’s nodule. It usually indicates very 
advanced malignant disease and surgery probably has little to 
offer (Figure 60.30).
GENERAL INFECTION OF THE 
ABDOMINAL WALL
The skin of the abdominal wall, similar to all skin, is prone 
to develop superficial infection that may be spontaneous, 
due to minor trauma or infection of skin lesions such as an 
epidermoid cyst. Although antibiotics will suffice in most 
Johann Frederick Meckel (the Younger) , 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany, described his diverticulum in 1809.
Alexis Littre , 1658–1726, surgeon and lecturer in anatomy, Paris, France, described Meckel’s diverticulum in a hernial sac in 1700, 81 years before Meckel was 
born.
The neoplastic nodule sited at the umbilicus is known as Sister Joseph’s nodule . Sister Mary Joseph made the observation that her patients with terminal cancer 
sometimes developed a red papular lesion in the umbilicus. She and William Mayo published this observation in 1928. However, it was Hamilton Bailey who 
coined the term ‘Sister Mary Joseph’s nodule’ in 1949.
Sister Mary Joseph (nee Julia Dempsey) , Nursing Superintendent, St Mary’s Hospital, which became the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1044 25/10/2017   09:39General infection of the abdominal wall 1045
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
patients, if an abscess develops then surgical drainage may be 
required.
The close proximity of bowel and bowel organisms opens 
the abdominal wall to attack from a wide range of highly 
virulent bacteria. Most commonly, these are released during 
abdominal surgery such as appendicectomy and hence the 
need for appropriate antibiotic prophylactic cover.
Synergistic gangrene
This rare condition is due to the synergistic action of 
non-haemolytic streptococci and staphylococci causing rapid 
tissue necrosis and overwhelming systemic infection (Figure 
60.31). It requires immediate administration of high-dose, 
broad-spectrum, powerful antibiotics in combination with 
early debridement of any non-viable tissue. Hyperbaric oxy -
gen therapy has been advocated.
Other forms of severe abdominal wall infections occur, 
generally known as necrotising fasciitis (e.g. Fournier’s 
gangrene). All of these conditions have a high associated 
morbidity and mortality. They occur in debilitated and 
immunocompromised patients but can occasionally occur 
in healthy patients. Rapid diagnosis and aggressive surgical 
debridement treatment are the key to success.
Cutaneous fistula
Due to the thickness of the abdominal wall, it is rare for 
abdominal inflammatory conditions to discharge sponta -
neously through the wall to the skin. Chronic intraperitoneal 
abscesses arising after occult bowel perforation, appendicitis, 
diverticulitis and cholecystitis are the most likely sources. CT 
will locate the internal abscess and suggest the likely origin. 
Treatment today is usually by CT- or ultrasound-guided drain-
age but the surgeon may be called on to remove the source 
organ, e.g. gall bladder.
Malignancy in its later stages can occasionally erode 
through the abdominal wall.
Crohn’s disease also has a tendency to fistulate into adja -
cent organs and may develop an enterocutaneous fistula.
Abdominal compartment syndrome
Surgeons are increasingly aware of the harmful effect of high 
intra-abdominal pressures that can occur in severe intra-  
abdominal sepsis, such as pancreatitis and also aortic aneurysm 
rupture. High pressure leads to reduced bloo d flow and tissue 
ischaemia, which contributes to multiorgan failure. Although 
the abdominal wall has elasticity, if intra-abdominal volume 
increases due to fluid, gas, pus, tissue oedema, etc., then max-
imal capacity may be reached and pressure rises to a critical 
level. Tension-releasing incisions, equivalent to a fasciotomy, 
have been suggested, although this is not widely practised.
In some cases, after surgery for severe intraperitoneal 
 sepsis, the surgeon cannot close the abdomen and may leave 
the incision wide open, covering abdominal contents with 
mesh or a saline-soaked dressing, planning to return at a 
future date to close the defect. This is called a laparostomy.
Neoplasms of the abdominal wall
As the abdominal wall is composed of muscle, fascia and 
bone, benign and malignant tumours can arise from each, 
although these are rare.
Desmoid tumour
This is usually considered by pathologists to be a hamartoma 
and is more common in women. Some, however, believe it to 
be a fibroma and possibly the result of repeated trauma. Des-
moids have been reported in familial adenomatous polyposis 
(FAP). Histologically, they contain plasmoidal cell masses 
resembling giant cells. They undergo central myxomatous 
change. Surgical excision with a wide margin is required to 
prevent recurrence, which is a frequent problem.
Fibrosarcoma
These tumours can occur anywhere in the bo dy. They are 
generally highly malignant and respond poorly to both radio- 
and chemotherapy. Wide excision will often require plastic 
surgical reconstruction.
Figure 60.30 Secondary nodule at the umbilicus – Sister Joseph’s 
nodule.
Figure 60.31  Bacterial synergistic gangrene of the chest and 
abdominal wall. The ar ea has become gangr enous and looks like 
suede leather. Beware of amoebiasis cutis.
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1045 25/10/2017   09:39CHAPTER 60  Abdominal wall, hernia and umbilicus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1046
FURTHER READING
Flum DR, Horvath K, Koepsell T. Have outcomes of incisional hernia 
repair improved with time? A population-based study. Ann Surg 
2003; 237: 129–35.
Kingsnorth AN, LeBlanc KA. Management of abdominal hernias, 4th edn. 
London: Edward Arnold, 2013.
Millbourn D, Cengiz Y, Israelsson LA. Effect of stitch length on wound 
complications after closure of midline incisions. Arch Surg 2009; 
144: 1056–9.
WEBSITE ADDRESSES
Classification of groin hernia: www.herniaweb.org/documents/EHS_
groin_hernia_classification.pdf
Guidelines for management of groin hernia: www.herniaweb.org/
documents/EHS_Guidelines.pdf
European classification of primary and incisional abdominal wall her -
nias: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2719726/
NICE guidelines for laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair: guidance.nice.
org.uk/TA83
SIGN guidelines for antibiotics in surgery (including hernia): www.sign.
ac.uk/pdf/sign104.pdf
11_60-B&L27_Pt11_Ch60.indd   1046 25/10/2017   09:39Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To recognise and understand:
 • The causes and complications of localised and 
generalised peritonitis
 • The clinical features of peritonitis and intraperitoneal 
abscess
 • The principles of surgical management in patients with 
peritonitis and intraperitoneal abscess
 • The causes and pathophysiology of ascites
 • The pathophysiology and complications of adhesion 
formation
 • The spectrum of mesenteric and retroperitoneal 
conditions
Chapter
The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery 
and retroperitoneal space
61
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Embryology
The peritoneal cavity, mesenteries and omentum have an 
anatomical complexity that can perhaps be truly understoo d 
only with surgical experience. Nevertheless, an understand -
ing of the geometric alterations occurring during early gas -
trointestinal (GI) morphogenesis (regionalisation, elongation 
and coiling) of the derivatives of the endoderm (E = epithe-
lium) and the visceral mesoderm (M = muscle and most of the 
rest) along with the later fusion of adjacent layers of perito -
neum will give an appreciation of how the adult disposition 
is as it is.
Adult arrangement and functions
The peritoneal cavity is the largest cavity in the body, the 
surface area of its lining membrane (2  m2 in an adult) being 
nearly equal to that of the skin. The peritoneal membrane 
is composed of flattened polyhedral cells (mesothelium), one 
layer thick, resting on a thin layer of fibroelastic tissue. This 
membrane is conveniently divided into two parts – the vis -
ceral peritoneum surrounding the viscera and the parietal 
peritoneum lining the other surfaces of the cavity. Beneath 
the peritoneum, supported by a small amount of areolar tissue, 
lies a network of lymphatic vessels and rich plexus of capillary 
blood vessels from which all absorption and exudation must 
occur. In health, only a few millilitres of peritoneal fluid are 
found in the peritoneal cavity. The fluid is pale yellow, some-
what viscid, and contains lymphocytes and other leukocytes; 
it lubricates the viscera, allowing easy movement and peri -
stalsis. The parietal portion is richly supplied with nerves and, 
Summary box 61.1
Functions of the peritoneum
In health
●● Visceral lubrication
●● Fluid and particulate absorption
In disease
●● Pain perception (mainly parietal)
●● Inflammatory and immune responses
●● Fibrinolytic activity
when irritated, causes severe pain that is accurately localised 
to the affected area. The visceral peritoneum, in contrast, 
is poorly supplied with nerves (these being situated around 
blood vessels) and its irritation causes pain that is usually 
poorly localised to the midline.
The peritoneum has a number of functions.
The peritoneum has the capacity to absorb large volumes 
of fluid: this ability is used during peritoneal dialysis in the 
treatment of renal failure. However, the peritoneum can also 
produce large volumes of fluid (ascites) and an inflamma-
tory exudate when injured (peritonitis). During expiration, 
intra-abdominal pressure is reduced and peritoneal fluid, 
aided by capillary attraction, travels in an upward direction 
towards the diaphragm. Experimental evidence shows that 
particulate matter and bacteria are absorbed within a few 
minutes into the lymphatic network through a number of 
‘pores’ within the diaphragmatic peritoneum. The circulation 
of peritoneal fluids may be responsible for the occurrence of 
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1047 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1048
abscesses distant from primary disease. When parietal perito -
neal defects are created, healing occurs not from the edges but 
by the development of new mesothelial cells throughout the 
surface of the defect. In this way, large defects heal as rapidly 
as small defects.
SCOPE OF DISEASE
The peritoneum, mesentery and omentum may be the site of 
a variety of conditions that reflect their relationship to other 
anatomical structures or, in some instances, their primary 
functions.
circulates, largely directed by the normal peritoneal attach -
ments and gravity . For example, spillage from a perforated 
peptic ulcer may run down the right paracolic gutter, leading 
to presentation with pain in the right iliac fossa (Valentino’s 
syndrome). Even in patients with non-bacterial peritonitis 
(e.g. acute pancreatitis, intraperitoneal rupture of the blad-
der or haemoperitoneum), the peritoneum often becomes 
infected by transmural spread of organisms from the bowel. 
Such translocation is a feature of the systemic inflammatory 
response on the bowel and it is not long (often a matter of 
hours) before a bacterial peritonitis develops. Most duodenal 
and gastric perforations are initially sterile for up to several 
hours before becoming secondarily infected.
Summary box 61.2
Scope of disease
Intraperitoneal disease
●● Peritonitis
Primary
Secondary
●● Abscess
●● Ascites
Transudate
Exudate
●● Tumours
Primary
Secondary
●● Adhesions
Omental disease
●● Hernia
●● Adhesions
●● Torsion
●● Neoplasia
Mesenteric disease
●● Trauma
●● Ischaemia
●● Inflammation
●● Cysts
●● Neoplasia
Retroperitoneal disease
●● Chronic inflammation/fibrosis
●● Abscess
●● Tumours
PERITONITIS
Peritonitis is simply defined as inflammation of the perito-
neum and may be localised or generalised. Most cases of peri-
tonitis are caused by an invasion of the peritoneal cavity by 
bacteria, so that, when the term ‘peritonitis’ is used without 
qualification, acute bacterial peritonitis is often implied. In 
this instance, free fluid spills into the peritoneal cavity and 
Rudolph Valentino , Italian actor, died during surgery for this in New York in 1926, aged 31 years.
Summary box 61.3
Causes of peritoneal inflammation
●● Bacterial, gastrointestinal and non-gastrointestinal
●● Chemical, e.g. bile, barium
●● Allergic, e.g. starch peritonitis
●● Traumatic, e.g. operative handling
●● Ischaemia, e.g. strangulated bowel, vascular occlusion
●● Miscellaneous, e.g. familial Mediterranean fever
Although acute bacterial peritonitis most commonly arises 
from a perforation of a viscus of the alimentary tract, other 
routes of infection can include the female genital tract and 
exogenous contamination. There are also less common forms 
in which the aetiology is a primary ‘spontaneous’ peritonitis, 
in which a pure infection with streptococcal, pneumococcal 
or haemophilus bacteria occurs.
Summary box 61.4
Paths to peritoneal infection
●● Gastrointestinal perforation, e.g. perforated ulcer, appendix, 
diverticulum
●● Transmural translocation (no perforation), e.g. pancreatitis, 
ischaemic bowel, primary bacterial peritonitis
●● Exogenous contamination, e.g. drains, open surgery, trauma, 
peritoneal dialysis
●● Female genital tract infection, e.g. pelvic inflammatory disease
●● Haematogenous spread (rare), e.g. septicaemia
Microbiology
Bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract
The number of bacteria within the lumen of the gastroin -
testinal tract is normally low until the distal small bowel is 
reached. However, disease leading to stasis and overgrowth 
(e.g. obstruction, and chronic and acute motility distur -
bances) may increase proximal colonisation. The biliary 
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1048 25/10/2017   09:41Peritonitis 1049
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
and pancreatic tracts are also normally free from bacteria, 
although they may be infected in disease, e.g. gallstones. Peri-
toneal infection is usually caused by two or more bacterial 
strains. Gram-negative bacteria contain endotoxins (lipo -
polysaccharides) in their cell walls that have multiple toxic 
effects on the host, primarily by causing the release of tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF) from host leukocytes. Systemic absorp-
tion of endotoxin may produce endotoxic shock, with hypo -
tension and impaired tissue perfusion. Other bacteria such as 
Clostridium perfringens produce harmful exotoxins. Bacteroides 
spp. are commonly found in peritonitis. These gram- negative, 
non-sporing organisms, although predominant in the lower 
intestine, often escape detection because they are strictly 
anaerobic and slow to grow on culture media unless there is an 
adequate carbon dioxide tension in the anaerobic apparatus 
(Gillespie). In many laboratories, the culture is discarded if 
there is no growth in 48 hours. These organisms are resistant 
to penicillin and streptomycin but sensitive to metronidazole, 
clindamycin, Augmentin (amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid) 
and cephalosporin compounds. Since the widespread use of 
metronidazole (Flagyl), bacteroides infections have greatly 
diminished.
Non-gastrointestinal causes of peritonitis
Pelvic infection via the fallopian tubes is responsible for a 
high proportion of ‘non-gastrointestinal’ infections. The most 
common offending organisms are Chlamydia spp. and gono-
cocci. These organisms lead to a thinning of cervical mucus 
and allow bacteria from the vagina into the uterus and ovi -
ducts, causing infection and inflammation. A variant of tran-
speritoneal spread of such organisms is perihepatitis which 
can cause scar tissue to form on Glisson’s capsule, a thin 
layer of connective tissue surrounding the liver (Fitz-Hugh–  
Curtis syndrome). Other bacterial variants that are discussed 
 separately include tuberculosis and other mycobacterial 
strains and those causing primary peritonitis (pneumococci, 
staphylococci and streptoccoci). Fungal peritonitis is uncom-
mon but may complicate severely ill patients.
Localised peritonitis
Anatomical and pathological factors may favour the localisa-
tion of peritonitis.
Anatomical
The greater sac of the peritoneum is divided into (1) the sub-
phrenic spaces, (2) the pelvis and (3) the peritoneal cavity 
proper. The last is divided into a supracolic and an infracolic 
compartment by the transverse colon and transverse meso -
colon, which deters the spread of infection from one to the 
other. When the supracolic compartment overflows, as is often 
the case when a peptic ulcer perforates, it does so over the 
colon into the infracolic compartment or by way of the right 
paracolic gutter to the right iliac fossa and hence to the pelvis.
Pathological
The clinical course is determined in part by the manner in 
which adhesions form around the affected organ. Inflamed 
peritoneum loses its glistening appearance and becomes red-
dened and velvety. Flakes of fibrin appear and cause loops of 
intestine to become adherent to each other and to the pari -
etes. There is an outpouring of serous inflammatory exudate 
rich in leukocytes and plasma proteins that soon becomes 
turbid; if localisation occurs, the turbid fluid becomes frank 
pus. Peristalsis is retarded in affected bowel and this helps to 
prevent distribution of the infection. The greater omentum, 
by enveloping and becoming adherent to inflamed structures, 
often forms a substantial barrier to the spread of infection 
(see below).
Diffuse (generalised) peritonitis
A number of factors may favour the development of diffuse 
peritonitis:
 ● Speed of peritoneal contamination is a prime factor. If an 
inflamed appendix or other hollow viscus perforates before 
localisation has taken place, there will be an efflux of con-
tents into the peritoneal cavity, which may spread over a 
large area almost instantaneously. Perforation proximal to 
an obstruction or from sudden anastomotic separation is 
associated with severe generalised peritonitis and a high 
mortality rate.
 ● Stimulation of peristalsis by the ingestion of food or even 
water hinders localisation. V iolent peristalsis occasioned 
by the administration of a purgative or an enema may 
cause the widespread distribution of an infection that 
would otherwise have remained localised.
 ● The virulence of the infecting organism may be so great as 
to render the localisation of infection difficult or impossible.
William Alexander Gillespie , formerly Professor of Clinical Bacteriology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
 Named after the two physicians, Thomas Fitz-Hugh, Jr and Arthur Hale Curtis who first reported this condition in 1934 and 1930, respectively.
Summary box 61.5
Microorganisms in peritonitis
Gastrointestinal source
●● Escherichia coli
●● Streptococci
●● Enterococci
●● Bacteroides spp.
●● Clostridium spp.
●● Klebsiella pneumoniae
Other sources
●● Chlamydia trachomatis
●● Neisseria gonorrhoeae
●● Haemolytic streptococci
●● Staphylococci
●● Streptococcus pneumoniae
●● Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other species
●● Fungal infections
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1049 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1050
 ● Young children have a small omentum, which is less effec-
tive in localising infection.
 ● Disruption of localised collections may occur with inju -
dicious handling, e.g. appendix mass or pericolic abscess.
 ● Deficient natural resistance (‘immune deficiency’) may 
result from use of drugs (e.g. steroids), disease [e.g. acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)] or old age.
With appropriate treatment, localised peritonitis usually 
resolves; in about 20% of cases, an abscess follows. Infre -
quently, localised peritonitis becomes diffuse. Conversely, 
in favourable circumstances, diffuse peritonitis can become 
localised, most frequently in the pelvis or at multiple sites 
within the abdominal cavity.
Clinical features
Localised peritonitis
The initial symptoms and signs of localised peritonitis are 
those of the underlying condition – usually visceral inflam -
mation (hence abdominal pain, specific GI symptoms + mal -
aise, anorexia and nausea). When the peritoneum becomes 
inflamed, abdominal pain will worsen and in general tempera-
ture and pulse rate will rise. The pathognomonic signs are 
localised guarding (involuntary abdominal wall contraction 
to protect the viscus from the examining hand), a positive 
‘release’ sign (rebound tenderness) and sometimes rigidity 
(involuntary constant contraction of the abdominal wall over 
the inflamed parietes). If inflammation arises under the dia -
phragm, shoulder-tip (‘phrenic’) pain may be felt as the pain 
is referred to the C5 dermatome. In cases of pelvic peritonitis 
arising from an inflamed appendix in the pelvic position or 
from salpingitis, the abdominal signs are often slight; there 
may be deep tenderness of one or both lower quadrants alone, 
but a rectal or vaginal examination reveals marked tenderness 
of the pelvic peritoneum.
Diffuse (generalised) peritonitis
EARL Y
Abdominal pain is severe and made worse by moving or 
breathing. It is first experienced at the site of the original 
lesion and spreads outwards from this point. The patient usu-
ally lies still. Tenderness and generalised guarding are found 
on palpation, when the peritonitis affects the anterior abdom-
inal wall. Infrequent bowel sounds may still be heard for a few 
hours but they cease with the onset of paralytic ileus. Pulse 
and temperature rise in accord with degree of inflammation 
and infection.
LATE
If resolution or localisation of generalised peritonitis does not 
occur, the abdomen will become rigid (generalised rigidity). 
Distension is common and bowel sounds are absent. Circu-
latory failure ensues, with cold, clammy extremities, sunken 
eyes, dry tongue, thready (irregular) pulse, and drawn and 
anxious face (hippocratic facies – Figure 61.1). The patient 
finally lapses into unconsciousness. With early diagnosis and 
adequate treatment, this condition is rarely seen in modern 
surgical practice.
Hippocrates of Kos , Greek physician and surgeon, and by common consent ‘the father of medicine’, was born on the island of Kos, off Turkey, 
about 460bc and probably died in 375bc.
Figure 61.1 The hippocratic facies in terminal diffuse peritonitis.
Summary box 61.6
Clinical features of peritonitis
●● Abdominal pain, worse on movement, coughing and deep 
respiration
●● Constitutional upset: anorexia, malaise, fever, lassitude
●● GI upset: nausea ± vomiting
●● Pyrexia (may be absent)
●● Raised pulse rate
●● Tenderness ± guarding/rigidity/rebound of abdominal wall
●● Pain/tenderness on rectal/vaginal examination (pelvic 
peritonitis)
●● Absent or reduced bowel sounds
●● ‘Septic shock’ (systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
[SIRS] and multi-organ dysfunction syndrome [MODS]) in later 
stages
Diagnostic aids
Investigations may elucidate a doubtful diagnosis, but the 
importance of a careful history and repeated examination 
must not be forgotten.
Bedside
 ● Urine dipstix for urinary tract infection.
 ● ECG if diagnostic doubt (as to cause of abdominal pain) 
or cardiac history.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1050 25/10/2017   09:41Peritonitis 1051
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bloods
 ● Baseline urea and electrolytes (U&Es) for treatment.
 ● Full blood count for white cell count (WCC).
 ● Serum amylase estimation may establish the diagnosis of 
acute pancreatitis provided that it is remembered that 
moderately raised values are frequently found following 
other abdominal catastrophes and operations, e.g. perfor -
ated duodenal ulcer.
 ● Group and save may be taken as an adjunct to impending 
surgery.
Imaging
 ● Erect chest radiograph to demonstrate free subdiaphrag -
matic gas (Figure 61.2a).
 ● A supine radiograph of the abdomen may confirm the 
presence of dilated gas-filled loops of bowel (consistent 
with a paralytic ileus), and occasionally show other gas-
filled structures that may aid diagnosis, e.g. biliary tree; the 
faecal pattern may act as a guide to colonic disease (absent 
in sites of significant inflammation, e.g. diverticulitis). In 
the patient who is too ill for an ‘erect’ film, a lateral decu-
bitus film can show gas beneath the abdominal wall (if CT 
unavailable).
 ● Multiplanar computed tomography (CT) is increasingly 
used to identify the cause of peritonitis (Figures 61.2b 
and 61.3) and may also influence management decisions, 
e.g. surgical strategy. There is an abundance of recent 
published evidence to support its use in managing acute 
abdominal pain.
 ● Ultrasonography has undoubted value in certain situa -
tions such as pelvic peritonitis in women and localised 
right upper quadrant peritonism.
Figure 61.2 (a) Gas under the diaphragm in a patient with free per-
foration and peritonitis; (b) representative axial image through the 
pelvis of the same patient showing perforated sigmoid diverticular 
disease.
(a)
(b)
Figure 61.3  Acute pancreatitis seen on computed tomography 
scanning with swelling of the gland and surrounding inflammatory 
changes (courtesy of Dr J Healy, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, 
London, UK).
Invasive
 ● In the era of access to high-quality CT scanning, perito -
neal diagnostic aspiration has little residual value.
Management
General care of the patient
The care of critically ill surgical patients is described in detail 
in Chapters 2, 17 and 20. Nutritional support is covered in 
Chapter 19, and anaesthesia and pain relief in Chapter 18. 
Depending on degree (localised/generalised), duration and 
severity, patients will require some or all of the following.
CORRECTION OF FLUID LOSS AND CIRCULATING 
VOLUME
Patients are frequently hypovolaemic with electrolyte distur -
bances. The plasma volume must be restored and electrolyte 
concentrations corrected. Fluid balance should be monitored 
and pre-existent and ongoing losses corrected. Special mea -
sures may be needed for cardiac, pulmonary and renal support, 
especially if septic shock is present (see Chapter 2), including 
central venous pressure monitoring in patients with concur -
rent disease.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1051 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1052
URINARY CATHETERISATION ± GASTROINTESTINAL 
DECOMPRESSION
A urinary catheter will give a guide to central perfusion 
and will be required if abdominal surgery is to proceed. A 
 nasogastric tube is commonly passed to allow drainage ± 
 aspiration until paralytic ileus has resolved.
ANTIBIOTIC THERAPY
Administration of parenteral broad-spectrum (aerobic and 
anaerobic) antibiotics prevents the multiplication of bacteria 
and the release of endotoxins.
ANALGESIA
The patient should be nursed in the sitting-up position and 
must be relieved of pain before and after the operation. If 
appropriate expertise is available, epidural infusion may 
provide excellent analgesia. Freedom from pain allows early 
mobilisation and adequate physiotherapy in the postoperative 
period, which helps to prevent basal pulmonary collapse, deep 
vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
Specific treatment of the cause
Although difficult to generalise, in patients in whom specific 
treatment has not been guided by CT scanning, early surgi -
cal intervention is to be preferred to a ‘wait and see’ policy , 
assuming that the patient is fit for anaesthesia and that resus-
citation has resulted in a satisfactory restitution of normal 
body physiology. This rule is particularly true for previously 
healthy patients and those with postoperative peritonitis. 
More caution is of course required in patients at high opera-
tive risk because of comorbidity or advanced age.
In those patients with a preoperative diagnosis, if the 
cause of peritonitis is amenable to surgery, an operation must 
be carried out as soon as the patient is fit. This is usually 
within a few hours. In peritonitis caused by pancreatitis or 
salpingitis, or in cases of primary peritonitis of streptococcal 
or pneumococcal origin, non-surgical treatment is preferred, 
provided that the diagnosis can be made with confidence. It 
is beyond the remit of this chapter to cover specific causes of 
peritonitis and their treatment, be it by an open or a laparo -
scopic approach. However, in general, surgery is directed to 
removing (or diverting) the cause and subsequent adequate 
peritoneal lavage ± drainage. In operations for generalised 
peritonitis it is essential that, after the cause has been dealt 
with, the whole peritoneal cavity be explored with the sucker 
and, if necessary, mopped dry until all seropurulent exudate 
has been removed. The use of a large volume of saline (typi -
cally 3 litres) containing dissolved antiseptic or antibiotic has 
been shown to be effective.
Prognosis and complications
With modern treatment, diffuse peritonitis carries a mortal -
ity rate of about 10%, reflecting the degree and duration of 
peritoneal contamination, age and fitness of the patient, and 
the nature of the underlying cause. Paralytic ileus is covered 
in detail in Chapter 71, and abscess formation and adhesions 
are covered below.
Summary box 61.7
Management of peritonitis
General care of patient
●● Correction of fluid and electrolyte imbalance
●● Insertion of nasogastric drainage tube and urinary catheter
●● Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy
●● Analgesia
●● Vital system support
Surgical treatment of cause when appropriate
●● Remove or divert cause
●● Peritoneal lavage ± drainage
Summary box 61.8
Systemic complications of peritonitis
●● Septic shock
●● Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
●● Multi-organ dysfunction syndrome
●● Death
Abdominal complications of peritonitis
●● Paralytic ileus
●● Residual or recurrent abscess/inflammatory mass
●● Portal pyaemia/liver abscess
●● Adhesional small bowel obstruction
SPECIAL FORMS OF 
PERITONITIS
Bile peritonitis
Unless there is reason to suspect that the biliary tract was 
damaged during surgery or the patient has proven acute cho -
lecystitis, it is improbable that bile will be thought of as a 
cause of peritonitis until the abdomen has been opened.
Unless the bile has extravasated slowly and the collection 
becomes shut off from the general peritoneal cavity, there are 
symptoms (often severe pain) and signs of diffuse peritonitis. 
After a few hours a tinge of jaundice is not unusual. Laparot-
omy (or laparoscopy) should be undertaken with evacuation 
of the bile and peritoneal lavage. The source of bile leakage 
should be identified and treated accordingly. Infected bile 
is more lethal than sterile bile. A ‘blown’ duodenal stump 
should be drained because it is too oedematous to repair, but 
sometimes it can be covered by a jejunal patch. The patient 
is often jaundiced from absorption of peritoneal bile, but the 
surgeon must ensure that the abdomen is not closed until any 
obstruction to a major bile duct has been either excluded or 
relieved. Bile leaks after cholecystectomy or liver trauma may 
be dealt with by percutaneous (ultrasound-guided) drainage 
and endoscopic biliary stenting to reduce bile duct pressure. 
The drain is removed when dry and the stent at 4–6 weeks.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1052 25/10/2017   09:41Special forms of peritonitis 1053
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP; sometimes called pri-
mary bacterial peritonitis) is an acute bacterial infection of 
ascitic fluid. It can occur in children and adults and can in 
theory occur as a complication of any disease state that pro-
duces the clinical syndrome of ascites. In practice, it is rare 
except in patients with cirrhosis and ascites, affecting 1.5–
3.5% of outpatients and approximately 10% of inpatients.
Clinical features usually include local symptoms and/or 
signs of peritonitis, GI upset (secondary to ileus, e.g. nausea 
and vomiting), signs of systemic inflammation (hyper- or 
hypothermia, chills, tachycardia and tachypnoea ± signs of 
septic shock), worsening liver and renal function, hepatic 
encephalopathy and GI bleeding. It should, however , be 
noted that evolving infection may be asymptomatic, espe -
cially in outpatients.
The diagnosis is made by paracentesis, and this should be 
considered in patients with cirrhosis and ascites even when 
there is a low index of suspicion. Some guidelines recom -
mend diagnostic paracentesis in all patients with cirrhosis 
and ascites on hospital admission. The diagnosis is made by 
an increased neutrophil of 250/mm3 as determined by count-
ing centrifuged ascitic fluid. Ascites culture is negative in as 
many as 60% of patients with clinical manifestations of SBP 
and increased ascitic neutrophil count. When culture is pos -
itive (40% of cases), the most common pathogens include 
gram-negative bacteria, usually E. coli, and gram-positive 
cocci (mainly streptococci and enterococci).
Empirical treatment of SBP must be initiated immedi -
ately after diagnosis before the results of culture have been 
received. Although the choice of antibiotic may vary inter -
nationally, a third-generation cephalosporin, e.g. cefotaxime, 
is the best investigated, and it avoids the renal toxicity of 
aminoglycosides. Alternatives are amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 
and quinolones such as ciprofloxacin. Complications of SBP , 
e.g. septic shock, GI bleeding and hypoalbuminaemia, should 
be managed accordingly.
When first described, the mortality rate of SBP exceeded 
90%, but it has been reduced to approximately 20% with 
early diagnosis and treatment.
Primary pneumococcal peritonitis
This may complicate nephrotic syndrome or cirrhosis in 
children. Otherwise healthy children, particularly girls aged 
between 3 and 9 years, may also be affected, and it is likely 
that the route of infection is sometimes via the vagina and 
fallopian tubes. At other times, and always in boys, the infec-
tion is blood borne and secondary to respiratory tract or mid-
dle-ear disease. The prevalence of pneumococcal peritonitis 
has declined greatly and the condition is now rare. In brief, 
the clinical onset is sudden, with pain usually localised to the 
lower half of the abdomen. The temperature is raised to 39°C 
or more and there is usually frequent vomiting. After 24–48 
hours, profuse diarrhoea is characteristic. There is usually 
increased frequency of micturition. The last two symptoms 
are caused by severe pelvic peritonitis. On examination, peri-
tonism is usually diffuse but less prominent than in most cases 
of a perforated viscus, leading to peritonitis.
A leukocytosis of ≥30  000/µL, with approximately 90% 
polymorphs, suggests pneumococcal peritonitis rather than 
another cause, e.g. appendicitis. After starting antibiotic 
therapy and correcting dehydration and electrolyte imbal -
ance, early surgery is required unless spontaneous infection 
of pre-existing ascites is strongly suspected, in which case a 
diagnostic peritoneal tap is useful. Laparotomy or laparoscopy 
may be used. Should the exudate be odourless and sticky, the 
diagnosis of pneumococcal peritonitis is practically certain, 
but it is essential to perform a careful exploration to exclude 
other pathology. Assuming that no other cause for the perito-
nitis is discovered, some of the exudate is aspirated and sent 
to the laboratory for microscopy, culture and sensitivity tests. 
Thorough peritoneal lavage is carried out and the incision 
closed. Antibiotics and fluid replacement therapy are contin-
ued and recovery is usual.
Other organisms are now known to cause some cases of 
primary peritonitis in children, including Haemophilus spp., 
group A streptococci and a few gram-negative bacteria. 
Underlying pathology (including an intravaginal foreign body 
in girls) must always be excluded before primary peritonitis 
can be diagnosed with certainty. Idiopathic streptococcal and 
staphylococcal peritonitis can also occur in adults.
Tuberculous peritonitis
Intra-abdominal tuberculosis (TB) is very common in 
resource-poor countries where all general surgeons are familiar 
with its presentation and management. The incidence is, how-
ever, also rising in resource-rich countries as a consequence 
of migration and immunosuppression where Mycobacterium 
 avium-intracellulare is becoming increasingly prevalent with 
the widespread increase in human immuno  deficiency virus 
(HIV) co-infection. The abdomen is involved in 11% of 
patients with extrapulmonary TB and includes intraperito -
neal, GI tract and solid organ disease forms, with TB perito-
nitis being a common site-specific variant (ileocaecal is the 
most common site of involvement). Although still uncom -
mon, TB peritonitis requires some specific mention because it 
is often diagnosed late in the course of the disease, resulting 
in undue patient morbidity and mortality.
Summary box 61.9
Causes of bile peritonitis
●● Perforated gall bladder secondary to inflammation or 
obstruction (especially empyema)
●● Post-cholecystectomy:
Cystic duct stump leakage
Leakage from an accessory duct in the gall-bladder bed
Bile duct injury
T-tube drain dislodgement (or tract rupture on removal)
●● Following other operations/procedures:
Duodenal injury
Leaking duodenal stump post gastrectomy
Leaking biliary–enteric anastomosis
Leakage around percutaneously placed biliary drains
●● Blunt or penetrating hepatobiliary or duodenal trauma
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1053 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1054
Tuberculosis can spread to the peritoneum through the GI 
tract (typically the ileocaecal region) via mesenteric lymph 
nodes or directly from the blood, usually from the ‘miliary’ 
(Figure 61.4a), but occasionally from the ‘cavitating’ form 
of pulmonary TB, lymph and the fallopian tubes; 50–83% of 
patients with abdominal TB can be expected to have perito -
neal involvement. Clinical or subclinical ascites is reported 
in virtually all patients with TB peritonitis and is frequently a 
presenting feature. In the most common form of the disease, 
ascites may be localised or generalised throughout the perito-
neal cavity. Multiple tubercle deposits appear on both layers 
of the peritoneum. Diagnosis is via abdominal ultrasonogra -
phy or CT to detect ascites and lymphadenopathy ± diffuse 
thickening of the peritoneum, mesentery and/or omentum 
(Figure 61.4b, c). Ascitic fluid is typically a straw-coloured 
exudate (protein >25–30  g/L) with white cells >500  mm3 
and lymphocytes >40%. Unfortunately diagnostic smears for 
acid-fast bacilli are diagnostic in less than 3% of patients, and 
culture may take up to 4–8 weeks with no guarantee of a pos-
itive result. Laparoscopy and peritoneal biopsy may thus be 
helpful to couple typical appearances with histology. TB man-
agement is principally supportive (nutrition and hydration) 
and medical (systemic antituberculous therapy, noting that 
multiple-drug resistance may be higher for abdominal than for 
pulmonary TB), although surgery may be required for specific 
complications such as intestinal obstruction.
Figure 61.4  (a) Plain chest radiograph from a 55-year -old man 
showing miliary tuberculosis (TB); (b, c) representative computed 
tomography images from the same patient showing gross ascites, 
nodular stranding in the omentum and mesentery, as well as nodular 
enhancement of the peritoneum – TB peritonitis (courtesy of Dr S 
Burke, Homerton University Foundation Trust, London).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Summary box 61.10
Tuberculous peritonitis
●● Acute (may be clinically indistinguishable from acute bacterial 
peritonitis) and chronic forms
●● Abdominal pain, sweats, malaise and weight loss are frequent
●● Ascites common, may be loculated
●● Caseating peritoneal nodules are common – distinguish from 
metastatic carcinoma and fat necrosis of pancreatitis
●● Intestinal obstruction may respond to anti-tuberculous 
treatment without surgery
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1054 25/10/2017   09:41Intraperitoneal abscess 1055
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Familial Mediterranean fever 
(periodic peritonitis)
Familial Mediterranean fever (periodic peritonitis) is char -
acterised by abdominal pain and tenderness, mild pyrexia, 
polymorphonuclear leukocytosis and, occasionally, pain in 
the thorax and joints. The duration of an attack is 24–72 
hours, when it is followed by complete remission, but exac -
erbations recur at regular intervals. Most of the patients have 
undergone appendicectomy in childhood. This disease, often 
familial, is limited principally to Arab, Armenian and Jewish 
populations; other races are occasionally affected. Mutations 
in the MEFV (Mediterranean fever) gene appear to cause the 
disease. This gene produces a protein called pyrin, which is 
expressed mostly in neutrophils; however, the exact function 
of pyrin is not known.
Usually, children are affected but it is not rare for the dis-
ease to make its first appearance in early adult life, with cases 
in women outnumbering those in men by two to one. Excep-
tionally, the disease becomes manifest in patients aged >40 
years. At surgery, which may be necessary to exclude other 
causes (but should be avoided if possible), the peritoneum is 
inflamed, particularly in the vicinity of the spleen and the gall 
bladder. There is no evidence that the interior of these organs 
is abnormal. Colchicine therapy is used during attacks and to 
prevent recurrent attacks.
INTRAPERITONEAL ABSCESS
Following intraperitoneal sepsis (usually manifest first as local 
or diffuse peritonitis), the anatomy of the peritoneal cavity is 
such that with the influence of gravity (depending on patient 
position – sitting or supine), abscess development usually 
occupies one of a number of specific abdominal or pelvic sites.
In general, the symptoms and signs of a purulent collec -
tion may be vague and consist of nothing more than lassi -
tude, anorexia and malaise, pyrexia (often low grade), mild 
tachycardia and localised tenderness. Certain sites have more 
specific clinical features. Larger abscesses will give rise to the 
picture of swinging pyrexia and pulse and a palpable mass. 
Blood tests will reveal elevated inflammatory markers.
Pelvic abscess
The pelvis is the most common site of abscess formation 
because the vermiform appendix is often pelvic in position 
and the fallopian tubes are also frequent sites of infection. A 
pelvic abscess can also occur as a sequel to any case of diffuse 
peritonitis, and is common after anastomotic leakage follow -
ing colorectal surgery.
Clinical features
The most characteristic symptoms are of pelvic pain, diar -
rhoea and the passage of mucus in the stools. Rectal examina-
tion reveals a bulging of the anterior rectal wall, which, when 
the abscess is ripe, becomes softly cystic.
Investigation and management
Left to nature, a proportion of these abscesses burst into 
the rectum, after which the patient almost always recovers 
rapidly. If this does not occur, the abscess should be drained 
deliberately. In women, vaginal drainage through the poste-
rior fornix is often chosen. In other cases, when the abscess 
is definitely pointing into the rectum, rectal drainage (Figure 
61.5) is employed. If any uncertainty exists, the presence of 
pus should be confirmed by ultrasonography or CT scanning 
(Figure 61.6). Laparotomy is almost never necessary and rec-
tal drainage of a pelvic abscess is far preferable to suprapubic 
drainage, which risks exposing the general peritoneal cavity 
to infection. It is, however, increasingly common to insert 
drainage tubes percutaneously, e.g. via the buttock or via the 
vagina or rectum under CT guidance.
Abdominal abscess
Anatomy
The complicated arrangement of the peritoneum results in 
the formation of four intraperitoneal spaces in which pus may 
commonly collect (Figure 61.7).
LEFT SUBPHRENIC SPACE
This is bounded above by the diaphragm and behind by the 
left triangular ligament and the left lobe of the liver, the gas-
trohepatic omentum and the anterior surface of the stomach. 
Summary box 61.11
Clinical features of an abdominal/pelvic abscess
Symptoms
●● Malaise, lethargy – failure to recover from surgery as expected
●● Anorexia and weight loss
●● Sweats ± rigors
●● Abdominal/pelvic pain
●● Symptoms from local irritation, e.g. shoulder tip/hiccoughs 
(subphrenic), diarrhoea and mucus (pelvic), nausea and 
vomiting (any upper abdominal)
Signs
●● Increased temperature and pulse ± swinging pyrexia
●● Localised abdominal tenderness ± mass (including on pelvic 
exam)
Figure 61.5 Opening a pelvic abscess into the rectum.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1055 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1056
To the right is the falciform ligament and to the left the spleen, 
gastrosplenic omentum and diaphragm. The common cause of 
an abscess here is an operation on the stomach, the tail of the 
pancreas, the spleen or the splenic flexure of the colon.
LEFT SUBHEPATIC SPACE/LESSER SAC
The most common cause of infection here is complicated 
acute pancreatitis. In practice, a perforated gastric ulcer rarely 
causes a collection here because the potential space is oblit-
erated by adhesions.
RIGHT SUBPHRENIC SPACE
This space lies between the right lobe of the liver and the 
diaphragm. It is limited posteriorly by the anterior layer of 
the coronary and the right triangular ligaments, and to the 
left by the falciform ligament. Common causes of abscess 
here are perforating cholecystitis, a perforated duodenal ulcer 
and a duodenal cap ‘blow-out’ following gastrectomy and 
appendicitis.
RIGHT SUBHEPATIC SPACE
This lies transversely beneath the right lobe of the liver in 
Rutherford Morison’s pouch. It is bounded on the right by 
the right lobe of the liver and the diaphragm. To the left is 
situated the foramen of Winslow and below this lies the duo-
denum. In front are the liver and the gall bladder, and behind 
are the upper part of the right kidney and the diaphragm. The 
space is bounded above by the liver and below by the trans -
verse colon and hepatic flexure. It is the deepest space of the 
four and the most common site of a subphrenic abscess, which 
usually arises from appendicitis, cholecystitis, a perforated 
duodenal ulcer or following upper abdominal surgery.
Clinical features
The symptoms and signs of subphrenic infection are fre -
quently non-specific and it is well to remember the follow -
ing aphorism: ‘pus somewhere, pus nowhere, pus under the 
diaphragm’. A common history is that, when some infective 
focus in the abdominal cavity has been dealt with, the condi-
tion of the patient improves temporarily but, after an interval 
of a few days or weeks, symptoms of toxaemia reappear. The 
condition of the patient steadily, and often rapidly, deterio -
rates. Sweating, wasting and anorexia are present. There is 
sometimes epigastric fullness and pain, or pain in the shoulder 
on the affected side, because of irritation of sensory fibres in 
the phrenic nerve, referred along the descending branches of 
the cervical plexus. Persistent hiccoughs may be a presenting 
symptom. A swinging pyrexia is usually present. If the abscess 
is anterior, abdominal examination will reveal some tender -
ness, rigidity or even a palpable swelling. Sometimes the liver 
is displaced downwards but more often it is fixed by adhesions.
Investigation and management
Examination of the chest and plain radiograph are import -
ant because, in most cases, collapse of the lung or evidence 
of basal effusion or even an empyema is evident. The modern 
management of an abscess is by radiological diagnosis using 
ultrasound or CT guidance (Figures 61.8), followed by drain-
age. The same tube can be used to instil antibiotic solutions 
or irrigate the abscess cavity if necessary. In some instances, 
monitoring may be appropriate by either clinically mark -
ing out limits on the abdominal wall (if palpable) with daily 
examination. However, more commonly, repeat ultrasonogra-
phy or CT scanning will be required. Radiolabelled white cell 
Stomach
Pancreas
Spleen
Liver
Adhesions
Kidney
1
23
4
(a)
(b)
Liver
Duodenum
3 1
4
2
Figure 61.7  (a) Intraperitoneal abscesses on transverse section: 
1, the left subphrenic space; 2, left subhepatic space/lesser sac; 3, 
right subphrenic space; 4, right subhepatic space. (b) Intraperitoneal 
abscesses on sagittal section: 1, left subphrenic; 2, left subhepatic/
lesser sac; 3, right subphrenic; 4, right subhepatic.
James Rutherford Morison , 1853–1939, Professor of Surgery, the University of Durham, Durham, UK.
Jacob Benignus Winslow , 1669–1760, Professor of Anatomy, Physic and Surgery, Paris, France.
Figure 61.6 A pelvic abscess seen on CT scanning (courtesy of Dr J 
Healy, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, UK).
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1056 25/10/2017   09:41Ascites 1057
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
scanning may occasionally prove helpful when other imaging 
techniques have failed. In most cases, with the aid of percuta-
neous drainage and antibiotic treatment, the abscess or mass 
gradually reduces in size until, finally, it is undetectable. Open 
drainage of an intraperitoneal collection is thus now uncom-
mon but may be necessary. If a swelling can be detected in the 
subcostal region or in the loin, an incision is made over the 
site of maximum tenderness or over any area where oedema 
or redness is discovered. Cautious blunt finger exploration can 
then be used to avoid dissemination of pus into the peritoneal 
or pleural cavities and minimise the risk of an intestinal fistula. 
When the cavity is reached, all of the fibrinous loculi must be 
broken down with the finger and one or two drainage tubes 
fully inserted. These drains are withdrawn gradually over the 
next 10 days, and the closure of the cavity can be checked by 
sinograms or scanning. Appropriate antibiotics are also given.
ASCITES
Ascites is defined as an accumulation of excess serous fluid 
within the peritoneal cavity.
George Budd , 1808–1882, Professor of Medicine, King’s College Hospital, London, UK, described this syndrome in 1845.
Hans Chiari , 1851–1916, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Strasbourg, Germany (Strasbourg was returned to France in 1918 at the end of the First World War). 
He gave his account of this condition in 1898.
Figure 61.8 Computed tomography scans of a subphrenic abscess 
secondary to gallbladder empyema – (a) coronal and (b) sagittal 
sections (courtesy of Dr Tim Fotheringham, Consultant Interventional 
Radiologist, Bart’s Health NHS Trust, London, UK).
(a) (b)
Pathophysiology
The balanced effects of plasma and peritoneal colloid osmotic 
and hydrostatic pressures determine the exchange of fluid 
between the capillaries and the peritoneal fluid. Protein-rich 
fluid enters the peritoneal cavity when capillary permeability 
is increased, as in peritonitis and carcinomatosis peritonei. 
Capillary pressure may be increased because of generalised 
water retention, cardiac failure, constrictive pericarditis or 
vena cava obstruction. Capillary pressure is raised selectively 
in the portal venous system in the Budd–Chiari syndrome, 
cirrhosis of the liver or extrahepatic portal venous obstruc -
tion. Plasma colloid osmotic pressure may be lowered in 
patients with reduced nutritional intake, diminished intesti -
nal absorption, abnormal protein losses or defective protein 
synthesis, such as occurs in cirrhosis. Peritoneal lymphatic 
drainage may be impaired, resulting in the accumulation of 
protein-rich fluid.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1057 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1058
fluid is dark yellow and frequently blood stained. The spe -
cific gravity, ≥1.020, and the protein content (>25  g/L) are 
high. Microscopic examination often reveals cancer cells, 
especially if large quantities of fluid are ‘spun down’ to pro-
duce a concentrated deposit for sampling. Rarely, ascites and 
pleural effusion are associated with solid fibromas of the ovary 
(Meigs’ syndrome). The effusions disappear when the tumour 
is excised.
Investigation
In addition to relevant investigations to determine the under-
lying cause, e.g. liver function tests (LFTs), cardiac function, 
ultrasonography and/or CT scanning (Figure 61.9) will 
determine much smaller quantities of ascites than possible 
clinically. These will often also diagnose aetiology, e.g. car -
cinomatosis or liver disease. Ascitic aspiration or tap (below) 
is now most commonly performed under imaging guidance 
to minimise the risk of visceral injury. After the bladder has 
been emptied, puncture of the peritoneum is carried out 
under local anaesthetic using a moderately sized trocar and 
cannula. Alternatively, a peritoneal drain may be inserted. 
In cases where the effusion is caused by cardiac failure, the 
fluid must be evacuated slowly. Fluid is sent for microscopy/
cytology, culture, including mycobacteria, and analysis of pro-
tein content and amylase. Unless other measures are taken 
the fluid soon reaccumulates, and repeated tappings remove 
valuable protein.
Joe Vincent Meigs , 1892–1963, Professor of Gynecology, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Friedel Pick , 1867–1926, physician, Prague, the former Czechoslovakia, described this disease in 1896.
Summary box 61.12
Causes of ascites
Transudates (protein <25 g/L)
●● Low plasma protein concentrations:
Malnutrition
Nephrotic syndrome
Protein-losing enteropathy
●● High central venous pressure:
Congestive cardiac failure
●● Portal hypertension
Portal vein thrombosis
Cirrhosis
Exudates (protein >25 g/L)
●● Peritoneal malignancy
●● Tuberculous peritonitis
●● Budd–Chiari syndrome (hepatic vein occlusion or thrombosis)
●● Pancreatic ascites
●● Chylous ascites
●● Meigs’ syndrome
Clinical features
Ascites can usually be recognised clinically only when the 
amount of fluid present exceeds 1.5 L depending on body hab-
itus: in obese individuals a greater quantity than this is neces-
sary before there is clear evidence. The abdomen is distended 
evenly with fullness of the flanks, which are dull to percus -
sion. Usually, shifting dullness is present but, when there is 
a very large accumulation of fluid, this sign is absent. In such 
cases, on flicking the abdominal wall, a characteristic fluid 
thrill is transmitted from one side to the other. In women, 
ascites must be differentiated from an enormous ovarian cyst.
Congestive heart failure results in increased venous pres -
sure in the vena cava and consequent obstruction to the 
venous outflow from the liver. The ascitic fluid is light yellow 
and of low specific gravity, about 1.010, with a low protein 
concentration (<25 g/L). Patients with constrictive pericardi-
tis (Pick’s disease) have both peritoneal and pleural effusions 
because of engorgement of the venae cavae, consequent upon 
the diminished capacity of the right side of the heart. Asci -
tes occurs with low plasma albumin concentrations, e.g. in 
patients with albuminuria or starvation. The ascites in this 
instance is caused by alterations in the osmotic pressure of the 
capillary blood and has a low specific gravity.
In cirrhosis, now the most common cause of ascites inter-
nationally, there is obstruction to the portal venous system, 
which is caused by obliterative fibrosis of the intrahepatic 
venous bed. In the Budd–Chiari syndrome (see Chapter 65), 
thrombosis or obstruction of the hepatic veins is responsible 
for obstruction to venous outflow from the liver. The asci -
tes seen in patients with peritoneal metastases is caused by 
excessive exudation of fluid and lymphatic blockage. The 
Figure 61.9 Computed tomography scan showing gross ascites.
Treatment
Treatment of the specific cause is undertaken whenever pos -
sible, e.g. if portal venous pressure is raised, it may be possi -
ble to lower it by treatment of the primary condition or by 
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt or transjugular 
intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunting (commonly abbre -
viated as TIPS or TIPSS). These procedures have become 
increasingly popular since the 1980s and are performed by 
interventional radiologists under fluoroscopic guidance. 
Access to the liver is gained via the internal jugular vein and 
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1058 25/10/2017   09:41Tumours of the perit oneum 1059
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
a guidewire and introducer sheath facilitate cannulation of 
the hepatic vein. Once the catheter is in the hepatic vein, a 
wedge pressure is obtained to calculate the pressure gradient 
in the liver, and a special needle is advanced through the liver 
parenchyma to connect the hepatic to the portal vein. The 
channel for the shunt is created using an angioplasty balloon 
to dilate the needle tract and thence a stent placed through 
this track. Complications can occur, e.g. bleeding, liver injury 
and encephalopathy; however, in experienced hands the mor-
tality rate is <1%. This procedure is thus, when possible, pref-
erable to older surgical methods.
Dietary sodium restriction to 200 mg/day may be helpful, 
but diuretics are usually required (combination of spironolac-
tone and furosemide). For patients failing to respond to such 
measures, therapeutic needle paracentesis can be performed. 
This is usually performed in the left of the right lower abdomi-
nal quadrant after diagnostic needle aspiration, and using a ‘Z’ 
track approach to ensure that peritoneal and skin puncture do 
not overlie the same point. Serial large volume paracentesis 
(4–6 L/day and up to 8 L in one session) can be performed 
safely with colloid replacement, and it can be performed in 
patients with cirrhosis and deranged clotting. Guidelines rec-
ommend albumin replacement after paracentesis to reduce 
complications. It is now also possible to leave an indwelling 
external drain for smaller-volume home paracentesis. In cases 
in which ascites accumulates rapidly after paracentesis and 
the patient is fit, drainage of the ascitic fluid by surgical peri -
toneovenous shunting (e.g. LeVeen, Denver) was previously 
employed; however, these procedures have been essentially 
abandoned due to their high rate of complications.
Special cases
Chylous ascites
In some patients the ascitic fluid appears milky because of an 
excess of chylomicrons (triglycerides). Most cases are asso-
ciated with malignancy, usually lymphomas; other causes 
are cirrhosis, TB, filariasis, nephrotic syndrome, abdominal 
trauma (including surgery), constrictive pericarditis, sarcoid-
osis and congenital lymphatic abnormality. The prognosis is 
poor unless the underlying condition can be cured. In addi-
tion to other measures used to treat ascites, patients should 
be placed on a fat-free diet with medium-chain triglyceride 
supplements.
TUMOURS OF THE PERITONEUM
Primary tumours
Primary tumours of the peritoneum are rare and in most cases 
take their origin not from the serous layer but from some 
adjacent structure, e.g. lipoma from appendices epiploicae, 
fibroma from connective tissue. Mesothelioma of the perito -
neum is less frequent than in the pleural cavity but equally 
lethal. Asbestos is a recognised cause. It has a predilection 
for the pelvic peritoneum. Chemocytotoxic agents are the 
mainstay of treatment. Desmoid tumours which have a 
relationship to the peritoneum are considered under familial 
adenomatous polyposis (see Chapter 70).
Secondary tumours
Carcinomatosis peritonei
This is a common terminal event in many cases of carcinoma 
of the stomach, colon, ovary or other abdominal organs, 
and also of the breast and bronchus. The peritoneum, both 
parietal and visceral, is studded with secondary growths and 
the peritoneal cavity becomes filled with clear, straw-coloured 
or blood-stained ascitic fluid.
The main forms of peritoneal metastases are:
 ● discrete nodules – by far the most common variety;
 ● plaques varying in size and colour;
 ● diffuse adhesions – this form occurs at a late stage of the 
disease and gives rise, sometimes, to a ‘frozen pelvis’.
Gravity probably determines the distribution of free malig-
nant cells within the peritoneal cavity. Cells not caught in  
peritoneal folds gravitate into the pelvic pouches or into a 
hernial sac, the enlargement of which is occasionally the first 
indication of the condition. Implantation occurs also on the 
greater omentum, the appendices epiploicae and the inferior 
surface of the diaphragm. The main differential diagnosis is 
from tuberculous peritonitis (tubercles are greyish and trans -
lucent and closely resemble the discrete nodules of peritoneal 
carcinomatosis). Investigation and treatment are as for under-
lying malignancy; however, newer treatment options such 
as cytoreductive surgery, intraperitoneal chemotherapy and 
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) are now 
offered in specialist centres. The last, a highly concentrated, 
heated (41–42°C) chemotherapy treatment is delivered 
directly into the abdomen for 90 minutes after cytoreductive 
surgery, and is progressing to a standard of care in some coun-
tries for patients without disease outside the abdomen.
Pseudomyxoma peritonei
This rare condition occurs more frequently in women. The 
abdomen is filled with a yellow jelly, large quantities of which 
are often encysted. The condition is associated with muci -
nous cystic tumours of the ovary and appendix. Recent stud -
ies suggest that most cases arise from a primary appendiceal 
tumour with secondary implantation on to one or both ova -
ries. It is often painless and there is frequently no impairment 
of general health. Pseudomyxoma peritonei does not give 
rise to extraperitoneal metastases but causes symptoms and 
complications due to tumour bulk. Although an abdomen 
distended with what seems to be fluid that cannot be made 
to shift should raise the possibility, the diagnosis is more often 
suggested by ultrasonography and CT scanning, or made at 
operation. At laparotomy, masses of jelly are scooped out. 
The appendix, if present, should be excised together with any 
ovarian tumour. More definitive treatment can be achieved 
by ‘complete cytoreduction’ (Sugarbaker technique) in which 
Harry LeVeen , Professor of Surgery, the University of South Carolina, SC, USA.
Paul Sugarbaker , Director of Surgical Oncology at the Cancer Institute at Washington Hospital Center, Washington DC, USA.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1059 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1060
the right hemicolon, spleen, gall bladder, and greater and 
lesser omentum are excised, along with stripping of the peri-
toneum from the pelvis and diaphragm, and stripping of the 
tumour from the surface of the liver (the uterus and ovaries 
are also removed in women). Intraoperative heated chemo -
therapy (using mitomycin C) follows and the whole proce -
dure takes about 10 hours. There is international controversy 
about the effectiveness of this procedure although some large 
series report good 5-year survival.
Peritoneal inclusion cysts
These are usually caused by accumulation of ovarian fluid 
that is contained by peritoneal adhesions. The develop -
ment of a peritoneal inclusion cyst thus depends on the 
presence of an active ovary and peritoneal adhesions. The 
normal peritoneum absorbs fluid easily. However, the absorp-
tive capacity of the peritoneum is greatly diminished in the 
presence of mechanical injury, inflammation and peritoneal 
adhesions.
Peritoneal inclusion cysts occur only in premenopausal 
women with a history of pelvic or abdominal surgery. They 
range in size from several millimetres in diameter to bulky 
masses that may fill the entire pelvis and abdomen. Patholog-
ically, the cyst results from non-neoplastic, reactive mesothe-
lial proliferation.
Investigation includes the exclusion of ovarian tumour by 
blood tests and appropriate imaging (usually ultrasonography 
and magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]). Cysts may be man -
aged expectantly or by hormonal modulation, e.g. oral contra-
ceptives. Radiological drainage will give transient relief and 
may help diagnosis using cytology. Surgery can be performed 
to remove adhesions but the risk of recurrence is 30–50%.
Peritoneal loose bodies (peritoneal mice)
Peritoneal loose bodies (peritoneal mice) may be confused 
with a small tumour but almost never cause symptoms. One 
or more may be found in a hernial sac or in the pouch of 
Douglas. The loose body may come from an appendix epiplo-
ica that has undergone axial rotation followed by necrosis of 
its pedicle and detachment, but they are also found in those 
who have subacute attacks of pancreatitis. These hyaline 
bodies attain the size of a pea or bean and contain saponified 
fat surrounded by fibrin.
ADHESIONS
Pathophysiology
Adhesions are strands of fibrous tissue that form, usually as 
a result of surgery , between surgically injured tissues. After 
injury, there is bleeding and an increase in vascular permeabil-
ity with extravasation of fibrinogen-rich fluid from the injured 
surfaces forming a temporary fibrin matrix. An inflammatory 
response ensues with cell migration, release of cytokines and 
activation of the coagulation cascade. The activation of the 
coagulation system results in thrombin formation, which is 
necessary for the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. In the 
absence of fibrinolysis, adhesions will form within 5–7 days as 
the matrix gradually becomes more organised with collagen 
secretion by fibroblasts. Fibrinolysis is therefore the key factor 
in determining whether an adhesion persists. This is governed 
by several cascades and activators that may account for inter-
individual differences (see Chapter 3). Of great importance 
to the surgeon, however, is the fact that ischaemic tissue loses 
its ability to break down fibrin and inhibits fibrinolysis in 
adjacent tissues.
Complications
The most common adhesion-related problem is small bowel 
obstruction (SBO). Adhesions are the most frequent cause 
of SBO in resource-rich countries and are responsible for 
60–70% of SBOs (see Chapter 71). Adhesions are also 
implicated as a major cause of secondary infertility (beyond 
the remit of this text). The relationship of adhesions to 
chronic abdominal and pelvic pain is contentious. Unguided 
division of adhesions has not been shown to reduce chronic 
abdominal pain in definitive RCTs although conscious pain 
mapping (laparoscopy under local anaesthesia) to direct lysis 
may improve success rates.
Prevention
As a result of the scale of the problem there has been signifi-
cant research into ways of preventing postoperative adhesion 
formation. Minimising the production of ischaemic tissue by 
careful surgical technique, including meticulous control of 
bleeding, remain, however, the most critical concepts. The 
evolution of laparoscopic bowel surgery has been shown by 
collective review data to result in reduced adhesion-related 
readmissions for a number of abdominal and pelvic proce -
dures, e.g. cholecystectomy, hysterectomy and colectomy. 
It should be noted, however, that only one randomised con -
trolled trial (after Crohn’s resection) has ever shown a defin -
itive effect, and this was not confirmed by evidence synthesis 
at Cochrane review.
The effect of a number of drugs including anti-  
inflammatory drugs such as aspirin and steroids, some hor -
mones, anti clotting agents, antibiotics, vitamin E and even 
methylene blue have been investigated in adhesion preven -
tion but have not achieved widespread use, because of either 
side effects or lack of consistent evidence of effectiveness. 
Many barrier methods of reducing adhesions have also been 
trialled. Adept® (4% icodextrin solution) is a solution applied 
inside the abdomen at the time of surgery; it has been shown 
to reduce the extent and severity of adhesion formation in 
animal models. It has also been used widely as a peritoneal 
dialysis solution for many years. Interceed TC7 ® is a mesh-
like product (oxidised regenerated cellulose) which quickly 
forms a soft gelatinous mass around healing tissues and is 
absorbed within 2 weeks. It has been shown to significantly 
reduce the number of adhesions at the site where it is used. 
However, it is worth noting that a reduction in the number 
of adhesions in such studies does not necessarily equate to 
a reduction in adhesion-related problems in the future. In a  
review of seven randomised trials looking at a similar  
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1060 25/10/2017   09:41The mesentery 1061
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
barrier-type pro duct (hyaluronic acid/carboxymethyl mem -
brane), there was a significant reduction in the incidence, 
extent and severity of adhesions but no reduction in the 
incidence of intestinal obstruction or surgical interven -
tion. Such barriers, when placed around bowel anasto -
mosis, also led to a significant increase in the anastomotic 
leaks. For these reasons barrier approaches have not gained  
popularity.
Special forms of intraperitoneal 
fibrosis
Sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis
Also known as abdominal cocoon syndrome, sclerosing 
encapsulating peritonitis (SEP) is described in patients as 
a complication of long-term peritoneal dialysis or portove -
nous shunting. The peritoneal cavity becomes obliterated 
as a result of gross subserosal thickening by fibrosis, leading 
to bowel obstruction and other sequelae. Surgery should be 
undertaken with trepidation and avoided if possible.
Diffuse fibromatosis
This is a variant of intra-abdominal fibromatosis (IAF) and 
is actually a rare tumour characterised by an abnormal prolif-
eration of myofibroblasts. Although non-metastasising, and 
said to be benign, it can nevertheless prove widely invasive, 
compressing and infiltrating surrounding tissues such as the 
bowel and mesentery with complications thereof. IAF is very 
rare within the general population but has a recognised asso -
ciation with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
THE OMENTUM
Rutherford Morison called the greater omentum ‘the abdom-
inal policeman’. The greater omentum attempts, often suc-
cessfully, to limit intraperitoneal infective and other noxious 
processes (Figure 61.10). For instance, an acutely inflamed 
appendix is often found wrapped in omentum, and this saves 
many patients from developing diffuse peritonitis. Some suf -
ferers of herniae are also greatly indebted to this structure, 
because it often plugs the neck of a hernial sac and prevents a 
coil of intestine from entering and becoming strangulated. It 
can of course also be a cause of obstruction (acting as a large 
adhesion). The omentum is usually involved in tuberculous 
peritonitis and carcinomatosis of the peritoneum.
Torsion of the omentum
Torsion of the omentum is a rare emergency and consequently 
is seldom diagnosed correctly. It is usually mistaken for appen-
dicitis with somewhat abnormal signs. It may be primary or 
secondary to adhesion of the omentum to an old focus of infec-
tion or hernia. The patient is most frequently a middle-aged, 
obese man. A tender lump may be present in the abdomen. 
The blood supply having been jeopardised, the twisted mass 
sometimes becomes gangrenous, in which case bacterial peri-
tonitis may follow. Treatment is surgical; the pedicle above 
the twist is ligated securely and the mass removed.
THE MESENTERY
Mesenteric injury
A wound of the mesentery can follow severe abdominal con -
tusion and is a cause of haemoperitoneum. More commonly, 
it is injured by a torsional force, so-called seatbelt syndrome. 
This occurs during a vehicular collision when a seatbelt is 
being worn with sudden deceleration resulting in a torn mes-
entery. This possibility should be borne in mind, particularly 
as multiple injuries may distract attention from this injury 
(the management of abdominal trauma is covered in Chapter 
27). Aside from control of any ongoing haemorrhage, associ -
ated ischaemic or ruptured gut will require resection.
Ischaemia
Torsion of the mesentery is covered under midgut volvulus 
and volvulus of the small intestine (see Chapter 69). Embo-
lism and thrombosis of mesenteric vessels leading to intestinal 
ischaemia are also covered in Chapter 69.
Inflammation
A number of somewhat miscellaneous conditions are best 
described under this umbrella term.
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 61.10 The greater omentum: (a) normal; (b) in appendicitis; 
(c) in a (comparatively small) laceration of the spleen.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1061 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1062
Acute, non-specific, ileocaecal, mesenteric 
adenitis
Non-specific mesenteric adenitis was so named to distinguish 
it from specific (tuberculous) mesenteric adenitis. It is now 
much more common than the tuberculous variety. The aeti -
ology often remains unknown, although some cases are asso -
ciated with yersinia infection of the ileum. In other cases, an 
unidentified virus is blamed. In about 25% of cases, a respira-
tory infection precedes an attack of non-specific mesenteric 
adenitis. This self-limiting disease is never fatal but may be 
recurrent. Its significance thus mainly lies in its differential 
diagnosis with appendicitis in children.
DIAGNOSIS
During childhood, acute, non-specific mesenteric adenitis 
is a common condition. The typical history is one of short 
attacks of central abdominal pain lasting from 10 min to 30 
min, commonly associated with vomiting. The patient sel -
dom looks ill. In more than half the cases the temperature is 
elevated. Abdominal tenderness is poorly localised and, when 
present, shifting tenderness is a valuable sign for differenti-
ating the condition from appendicitis. The neck, axillae and 
groins should be palpated for enlarged lymph nodes. There 
is often a leukocytosis of 10 000–12 000/µL (10–12 × 10 9/L) 
or more on the first day of the attack, but this falls on the 
second day.
TREATMENT
When the diagnosis can be made with assurance, bed rest and 
simple analgesia are the only treatment necessary. If, at a sec-
ond examination a few hours later, acute appendicitis cannot 
be excluded, it is safer to perform either appendicectomy or 
diagnostic laparoscopy. If surgery is mistakenly undertaken, 
there is a small increase in the amount of peritoneal fluid. 
The ileocaecal mesenteric lymph nodes are enlarged, and 
can be seen and felt between the leaves of the mesentery. In 
very acute cases they are distinctly red, and many of them 
are the size of a walnut. The nodes nearest the attachment of 
the mesentery are the largest. They are not adherent to their 
peritoneal coats and, if a small incision is made through the 
overlying peritoneum, a node is extruded easily.
Tuberculosis of the mesenteric lymph nodes
Tuberculous mesenteric lymphadenitis is considerably less 
common than acute non-specific lymphadenitis. Tubercle 
bacilli, usually, but not necessarily, bovine, are ingested and 
enter the mesenteric lymph nodes by way of Peyer’s patches.
Sometimes only one lymph node is infected; usually there are 
several and occasionally massive involvement occurs. The 
presentation may be with abdominal pain (a rare differential 
for appendicitis) or with general constitutional symptoms 
(pyrexia, weight loss, etc.). Calcified lymph nodes may be 
demonstrated on a plain radiograph of the abdomen where 
they must be distinguished from other calcified lesions, e.g. 
renal or ureteric stones.
Misty mesentery
The term ‘misty mesentery’ indicates a pathological increase 
in mesenteric fat attenuation at CT (Figure 61.11). It is fre-
quently observed on multidetector CT (MDCT) scans per -
formed during daily clinical practice, and may be caused by 
various pathological conditions, including oedema, inflam -
mation (especially in association with pancreatitis), haem -
orrhage, neoplastic infiltration (especially otherwise occult 
lymphoma) or sclerosing mesenteritis. In patients with acute 
abdominal disease, misty mesentery may be considered a fea -
ture of the underlying disease. Otherwise, it may represent 
an incidental finding on MDCT performed for other reasons. 
Follow-up scans may be required to dictate whether further 
investigation is required depending on progression or resolu -
tion. It should be noted that the term ‘mesenteric panniculitis’ 
is frequently used synonymously with ‘misty mesentery’. Cor-
rectly this term should be reserved for the mesenteric mani-
festation of Weber–Christian disease; isolated lipo dystrophy 
and mesenteric lipogranuloma. It is a very rare (200–300 cases 
reported worldwide) benign inflammatory or fibrotic change 
in the mesentery of the bowel.
Johann Conrad Peyer , 1653–1712, Professor of Logic, Rhetoric and Medicine, Schaffhausen, Switzerland, described the lymph follicles in the intestine in 1677.
Figure 61.11  Computed tomography scan showing ‘misty 
mesentery’ in a patient with probable peritoneal inflammation 
secondary to acute pancr eatitis (courtesy of Dr K Patel, Homerton 
University Foundation Trust, London).
Mesenteric cysts
Cysts may occur in the mesentery of either the small intes -
tine (60%) or the colon (40%) and can be classified as the 
following:
 ● Chylolymphatic
 ● Enterogenous
 ● Urogenital remnant (actually retroperitoneal but project 
into peritoneum)
 ● Dermoid.
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1062 25/10/2017   09:41The mesentery 1063
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Pathology
CHYLOLYMPHATIC CYST
Although all mesenteric cysts are rare, this is the most com-
mon variety, probably arising in congenitally misplaced lym -
phatic tissue that has no efferent communication with the 
lymphatic system (most frequently in the mesentery of the 
ileum). The thin wall of the cyst, which is composed of con -
nective tissue lined by flat endothelium, is filled with clear 
lymph or, less frequently, with chyle, varying in consistency 
from watered milk to cream. Occasionally, the cyst attains 
a great size. More often unilocular than multilocular, a chy -
lolymphatic cyst is almost invariably solitary, although there 
is an extremely rare variety in which myriads of cysts are found 
in the various mesenteries of the abdomen. A chylolymphatic 
cyst has a blood supply that is independent from that of the 
adjacent intestine and, thus, enucleation is possible without 
the need for resection of gut.
ENTEROGENOUS CYSTS
These are believed to be derived either from a diverticulum 
of the mesenteric border of the intestine that has become 
sequestrated from the intestinal canal during embryonic life, 
or from a duplication of the intestine (see Chapter 9). An 
enterogenous cyst has a thicker wall than a chylolymphatic 
cyst and it is lined by mucous membrane, which is sometimes 
ciliated. The content is mucinous and either colourless or yel-
lowish brown as a result of past haemorrhage. The muscle in 
the wall of an enteric duplication cyst and the bowel with 
which it is in contact have a common blood supply; conse -
quently, removal of the cyst always entails resection of the 
related portion of intestine.
UROGENITAL REMNANT
A cyst developing in the retroperitoneal space (see below) 
often attains very large dimensions and has first to be distin -
guished from a large hydronephrosis. Even after the latter 
condition has been eliminated by scanning or urography, a 
retroperitoneal cyst can seldom be distinguished with cer -
tainty from a retroperitoneal tumour until displayed at oper -
ation. The cyst may be unilocular or multilocular. Many of 
these cysts are believed to be derived from a remnant of the 
wolffian duct, in which case they are filled with clear fluid.
Clinical features
These are shown for mesenteric cysts in general in Summary 
box 61.13.
Investigation and treatment
Ultrasonography and CT scanning will demonstrate the lesion 
and may allow diagnosis of cyst type (Figure 61.13a and b). 
There are no suitable medical therapies. The goal of surgi -
cal therapy is complete excision of the mass. The preferred 
treatment of mesenteric cysts is enucleation, although bowel 
resection is frequently required to ensure that the remaining 
bowel is viable. Bowel resection may be required in 50–60% 
of children with mesenteric cysts, whereas resection is nec -
essary in about a third of adults (Figure 61.13c). If enucle-
ation or resection is not possible because of either the size of 
the cyst or its location deep within the root of the mesentery, 
the third option is partial excision with marsupialisation of 
Kaspar Friedrich Wolff , 1733–1794, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, St Petersburg, Russia, described the mesonephric duct and body in 1759.
Paul Jules Tillaux , 1834–1904, surgeon, Paris, France.
Summary box 61.13
Mesenteric cysts: clinical features
●● Cysts occur most commonly in adults with a mean age of 45 
years
●● Twice as common in women as in me
●● Rare: incidence around 1 per 140 000
●● Approximately a third of cases occur in children younger than 
15 years
●● The mean age of children affected is 4.9 years
●● The most common presentation is of a painless abdominal 
swelling with characteristic physical signs
there is a fluctuant swelling near the umbilicus
the swelling moves freely in a plane at right angles to the 
attachment of the mesentery (Tillaux’s sign) (Figure 61.12)
there is a zone of resonance around the cyst
●● Other presentations are with recurrent attacks of abdominal 
pain with or without vomiting (pain resulting from recurring 
temporary impaction of a food bolus in a segment of 
bowel narrowed by the cyst or possibly from torsion of the 
mesentery) and acute abdominal catastrophe, due to:
torsion of that portion of the mesentery containing the cyst
rupture of the cyst, often as a result of a comparatively 
trivial accident
haemorrhage into the cyst
infection
Attachment
of the
mesentery
Figure 61.12  A mesenteric cyst moves freely in the direction of 
the arrows, i.e. at right angles to the attachment of the mesentery 
(Tillaux’s sign).
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1063 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1064
the remaining cyst into the abdominal cavity. Approximately 
10% of patients require this form of therapy. If marsupiali -
sation is performed, the cyst lining should be sclerosed with 
10% glucose solution, diathermy or tincture of iodine to min-
imise recurrence. Recurrence rates vary from 0% to 13%.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The following, although not being mesenteric cysts in the 
true meaning of the term, give rise to the same physical signs:
 ● peritoneal inclusion cyst (see above);
 ● serosanguineous cyst, probably traumatic in origin 
although a history of an accident is seldom obtained;
 ● tuberculous abscess of the mesentery;
 ● hydatid cyst of the mesentery.
Neoplasms of the mesentery
The mesentery is necessarily affected by local lymphatic 
spread of carcinoma arising from the peritoneal viscera. Other 
benign and malignant tumours are less common.
Figure 61.13  A mesenteric enter ogenous cyst in a 37-year-old 
woman presenting with an asymptomatic palpable abdominal mass: 
(a) ultrasound findings; (b) computed tomography findings; and 
(c) intraoperative findings requiring en masse small bowel resection 
(courtesy of Mr F Olagbaiye, Homerton University Foundation Trust, 
London).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Summary box 61.14
Mesenteric tumours
Benign
●● Lipoma
●● Fibroma
●● Fibromyxoma
Malignant
●● Lymphoma
●● Secondary carcinoma
Tumours situated in the mesentery give rise to physical 
signs that are similar to those of a mesenteric cyst, the sole 
exception being that they sometimes feel solid. If indicated, 
a benign tumour of the mesentery is excised in the same 
way as an enterogenous mesenteric cyst, i.e. with resection 
of the adjacent intestine. A malignant tumour of the mes -
entery requires biopsy confirmation and specific, usually non- 
surgical, treatment, e.g. chemotherapy for lymphoma.
THE RETROPERITONEAL SPACE
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
This is a relatively rare diagnosis characterised by the devel -
opment of a flat grey/white plaque of tissue, which is found 
first in the low lumbar region but then spreads laterally and 
upwards to encase the common iliac vessels, ureters and aorta. 
Histological appearances vary from active inflammation with 
a high cellular content interspersed with bundles of collagen 
through to one of acellularity and mature fibrosis/calcification. 
Its aetiology is obscure in most cases (idiopathic) being allied 
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1064 25/10/2017   09:41The retroperitoneal space 1065
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
to other fibromatoses (others being Dupuytren’s contracture 
and Peyronie’ s disease). In other patients the cause  
is known.
The clinical presentation may be one of ill-defined 
chronic backache or occur as a result of compromise to 
involved structures, e.g. lower limb or scrotal oedema second-
ary to venous occlusion, or chronic renal failure secondary to 
ureteric obstruction. Treatment will be directed to the cause, 
the modification of disease activity when appropriate, e.g. 
immunomodulation with steroids, tamoxifen and restoration 
of flow in affected structures, e.g. ureteric stenting.
Retroperitoneal (psoas) abscess
The retroperitoneal space can also be a site for abscess 
formation, which for practical purposes is almost synonymous 
with psoas abscess. Psoas abscess is a relatively uncommon 
diagnosis, the true incidence of which is not well described. 
At the start of the twentieth century, psoas abscess was mainly 
caused by TB of the spine (Pott’s disease). With the decline of 
M. tuberculosis as a major pathogen in resource-rich countries, 
a psoas abscess was mostly found secondary to direct spread of 
infection from the inflamed ± perforated digestive or urinary 
tract. In recent years a primary psoas abscess due to haema -
togenous spread from an occult source is more common, 
especially in immunocompromised and older patients, as well 
as in association with intravenous drug misuse.
Clinical presentation is with back pain, lassitude and 
fever. A swelling may point to the groin as it tracks along 
iliopsoas. Pain may be elicited by passive extension of the hip 
or a fixed flexion of the hip evident on inspection.
Radiological investigation is via CT scanning (Figure 
61.14) and treatment usually by percutaneous CT-guided 
drainage and appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Retroperitoneal tumours
Although swellings in the retroperitoneum may include 
abscess, haematoma, cysts (see above) and spread of malig-
nancy from retroperitoneal organs (kidney, ureter, adrenal), 
the term retroperitoneal tumour is usually confined to primary 
tumours arising in other tissues in this region e.g. muscles, fat, 
lymph nodes and nerves. The management of such tumours 
is now frequently by referral to a specialist centre and this 
should be done before biopsy which may compromise subse -
quent surgical cure. The two commonest are briefly described.
Retroperitoneal lipoma
The patient may seek advice on account of a swelling or 
because of indefinite abdominal pain. Women are more often 
affected. These swellings sometimes reach an immense size. 
Diagnosis is usually by ultrasonography and CT scanning. 
A retroperitoneal lipoma sometimes undergoes myxomatous 
degeneration, a complication that does not occur in a lipoma 
in any other part of the body. Moreover, a retroperitoneal 
lipoma is often malignant (liposarcoma) (see below) and may 
increase rapidly in size.
Retroperitoneal sarcoma
Retroperitoneal sarcomas are rare tumours accounting for 
only 1–2% of all solid malignancies (10–20% of all sarco -
mas are retroperitoneal). The peak incidence is in the fifth 
decade of life, although they can occur at almost any age. The 
most common types of retroperitoneal soft-tissue sarcomas in 
adults vary from study to study. However, in most studies, the 
most frequently encountered cell types are:
 ● liposarcoma;
 ● leiomyosarcoma;
 ● malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH).
Summary box 61.15
Causes of retroperitoneal fibrosis
Benign
●● Idiopathic (Ormond’s disease)
●● Chronic inflammation
●● Extravasation of urine
●● Retroperitoneal irritation by leakage of blood or intestinal 
content
●● Aortic aneurysm (inflammatory type)
●● Trauma
●● Drugs (chemotherapeutic agents and previously 
methysergide)
Malignant
●● Lymphoma
●● Carcinoid tumours
●● Secondary deposits (especially from carcinoma of stomach, 
colon, breast and prostate)
JK Ormond , American urologist.
Baron Guillaume Dupuytren , 1777–1835, Surgeon in Chief, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France, described this condition in 1831. 
François de la Peyronie , 1678–1747, Surgeon to King Louis XIV of France, and Founder of the Royal Academy of Surgery, Paris, France. 
Figure 61.14 Representative sagittal computed tomography recon-
struction of a right-sided psoas abscess (courtesy of Dr K Patel, 
Homerton University Foundation Trust, London).
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1065 25/10/2017   09:41CHAPTER 61  The peritoneum, omentum, mesentery and retroperitoneal space
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1066
CLINICAL FEATURES
Patients with sarcomas present late, because these tumours 
arise in the large potential spaces of the retroperitoneum 
and can grow very large without producing symptoms. More -
over, when symptoms do occur, they are non-specific, such 
as abdominal pain and fullness, and are easily dismissed as 
being caused by other less serious processes. Retroperitoneal 
sarcomas are, therefore, usually very large at the time of pre-
sentation.
INVESTIGATION
Detailed multiplanar imaging (CT + MRI) with reconstruc-
tions is required not only for tumour detection, staging and 
surgical planning, but also for guiding percutaneous or surgi -
cal biopsy of these tumours. Such biopsies have a greater role 
than for other sarcomas.
TREATMENT
The definitive treatment of primary retroperitoneal sarco -
mas is surgical resection. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy 
without surgical debulking have rarely been beneficial, when 
used alone or in combination A multidisciplinary treatment 
approach with imaging review will be required when assessing 
operability (based on adjacency or involvement of vital struc-
tures) and approach. Up to 75% of retroperitoneal sarcoma 
resections involve resection of at least one adjoining intra-  
abdominal visceral organ (commonly large or small bowel or 
kidney). The most common types of vascular involvement 
precluding resection are involvement of the proximal superior 
mesenteric vessels or involvement of bilateral renal vessels.
PROGNOSIS
In the vast majority of sarcomas, cell type has no impact on 
treatment and long-term survival. Survival rates are in gen -
eral poor, even after complete resection, being in the order of 
35–50% (excluding low-grade liposarcomas, which may fre -
quently be cured by resection).
FURTHER READING
Ahmad G, Mackie FL, Iles DA et al. Fluid and pharmacological agents 
for adhesion prevention after gynaecological surgery. Cochrane Data-
base Syst Rev 2014; 9(7): CD001298.
French FMF Consortium. A candidate gene for familial Mediterranean 
fever. Nat Genet 1997; 17(1): 25–31.
The International FMF Consortium. Ancient missense mutations in a 
new member of the RoRet gene family are likely to cause familial 
Mediterranean fever. Cell 1997; 90(4): 797–807.
Klaver CE, Musters GD, Bemelman WA et al. Adjuvant hyperthermic 
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) in patients with colon 
cancer at high risk of peritoneal carcinomatosis; the COLOPEC 
randomized multicentre trial. BMC Cancer 2015; 24;15: 428.
Lubner MG, Hinshaw JL, Pickhardt PJ. Primary malignant tumors of 
peritoneal and retroperitoneal origin: clinical and imaging features. 
Surg Oncol Clin N Am 2014; 23: 821–45
Moore KP , Aithal GP . Guidelines on the management of ascites in cir-
rhosis. Gut 2006; 55(Suppl 6): vi1–12.
Rasheed S, Zinicola R, Watson D, Bajwa A, McDonald PJ. Intra-  
abdominal and gastrointestinal tuberculosis. Colorectal Dis 2007; 9: 
773–83.
Rudloff U, Langan RC, Mullinax JE et al. Impact of maximal cytore -
ductive surgery plus regional heated intraperitoneal chemotherapy 
(HIPEC) on outcome of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis 
of gastric origin: results of the GYMSSA trial. J Surg Oncol  2014; 
110(3): 275–84.
Sadler TW (2010). Langman’s medical embryology (with CD-ROM), 11th 
edn. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Schnüriger B, Barmparas G, Branco BC, Lustenberger T, Inaba K, Deme-
triades D. Prevention of postoperative peritoneal adhesions: a review 
of the literature. Am J Surg 2011; 201: 111–21.
Sugarbaker PH, Jablonski KA. Prognostic features of 51 colorectal and 
130 appendiceal cancer patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis 
treated by cytoreductive surgery and intraperitoneal chemotherapy. 
Ann Surg 1995; 221(2): 124–32
11_61-B&L27_Pt11_Ch61.indd   1066 25/10/2017   09:41Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy and physiology of the oesophagus and 
their relationship to disease
 • The clinical features, investigations and treatment of 
benign and malignant disease with particular reference 
to the common adult disorders
Chapter
The oesophagus
62
BACKGROUND
Surgical anatomy
The oesophagus is a muscular tube, approximately 25 cm long, 
mainly occupying the posterior mediastinum and extending 
from the upper oesophageal sphincter (the cricopharyngeus 
muscle) in the neck to the junction with the cardia of the 
stomach. The musculature of the upper oesophagus, including 
the upper sphincter, is striated. This is followed by a transi -
tional zone of both striated and smooth muscle with the pro-
portion of the latter progressively increasing so that, in the 
lower half of the oesophagus, there is only smooth muscle. It 
is lined throughout with squamous epithelium. The parasym-
pathetic nerve supply is mediated by branches of the vagus 
nerve that has synaptic connections to the myenteric (Auer-
bach’s) plexus. Meissner’s submucosal plexus is sparse in the 
oesophagus.
The upper sphincter consists of powerful striated muscle. 
The lower sphincter is more subtle and created by the asym-
metrical arrangement of muscle fibres in the distal oesoph-
ageal wall just above the oesophagogastric junction. It is 
helpful to remember the distances 15, 25 and 40 cm for ana -
tomical location during endoscopy (Figure 62.1).
Physiology
The main function of the oesophagus is to transfer food from 
the mouth to the stomach in a coordinated fashion. The ini -
tial movement from the mouth is voluntary. The pharyngeal 
phase of swallowing involves sequential contraction of the 
oropharyngeal musculature, closure of the nasal and respi -
ratory passages, cessation of breathing and opening of the 
upper oesophageal sphincter. Beyond this level, swallowing 
is involuntary. The body of the oesophagus propels the bolus 
through a relaxed lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) into 
the stomach, taking air with it (Figure 62.2). This coordi-
nated oesophageal wave which follows a conscious swallow is 
called primary peristalsis. It is under vagal control, although 
there are specific neurotransmitters that control the LOS.
The upper oesophageal sphincter is normally closed at 
rest and serves as a protective mechanism against regurgita-
tion of oesophageal contents into the respiratory passages. It 
also serves to stop air entering the oesophagus other than the 
small amount that enters during swallowing.
Leopold Auerbach , 1828–1897, Professor of Neuropathology, Breslau, Germany, (now Wroclaw, Poland), described the myenteric plexus in 1862.
Georg Meissner , 1829–1905, Professor of Physiology, Göttingen, Germany, described the submucosal plexus in 1852.
Incisor teeth0 cm
Cricopharyngeal
constriction
Aortic and bronchial
constriction
Diaphragmatic and
‘sphincter’ constriction
15 cm
25 cm
40 cm
Figure 62.1 Endoscopic landmarks. Distances are given fr om the 
incisor teeth. They vary slightly with the build of the individual. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1067 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1068
The LOS is a zone of relatively high pressure that pre -
vents gastric contents from refluxing into the lower oesoph-
agus (Figure 62.3). In addition to opening in response to a 
primary peristaltic wave, the sphincter also relaxes to allow 
air to escape from the stomach and at the time of vomiting. 
A variety of factors influences sphincter tone, notably food, 
gastric distension, gastrointestinal (GI) hormones, drugs 
and smoking. The arrangement of muscle fibres, their differ -
ential responses to specific neurotransmitters and the rela-
tionship to diaphragmatic contraction all contribute to the 
action of the LOS. The presence of the physiological sphinc-
ter was first demonstrated by Code using manometry with 
small balloons. Until recently LOS pressure was measured 
by water-perfused tubes, but the introduction of catheters 
containing multiple microtransducers has meant that this 
approach has been superseded by high-resolution manome -
try. The normal LOS is 3–4 cm in length and has a pressure 
of 10–25 mmHg.
Manometry is also used to assess the speed and amplitude 
of oesophageal body contractions and ensure that peristalsis is 
propagated down the entire length of the oesophagus (Figure 
62.4). Secondary peristalsis is the normal reflex preceded by 
a conscious swallow. It is worth remembering that most clear-
ance swallows to neutralise refluxed gastric acid are, however, 
achieved by primary peristalsis, which carries saliva with its 
high bicarbonate content down to the lower oesophagus. 
Tertiary contractions are non-peristaltic waves that are infre-
quent (<10%) during laboratory-based manometry, although 
readily detected if manometry is undertaken while the patient 
eats a meal.
Figure 62.2 A bolus of barium or food usually takes air with it into 
the stomach. 
Radiology Closed
1 cm
Anatomy of the sphincter
Open
pH
Stomach
Oesophagus
Oesophagus
PD
Pressure
Stomach Oesophagus
Figure 62.3 Correlation between the radiological appearances of a barium column and the lower oesophageal sphincter open and closed. The 
three curves on the right, set up vertically, show the pH gradient, the mucosal potential difference (PD), marking the junction of squamous and 
columnar epithelium, and the high-pressure zone of the sphincter. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1068 25/10/2017   09:43Background 1069
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Dysphagia
Dysphagia is used to describe difficulty with swallowing. 
When there is a problem with swallowing in the voluntary 
(oral or pharyngeal) phases, patients will usually say that 
they cannot swallow properly, but they do not characteris -
tically describe ‘food sticking’. Instead, when they try to ini -
tiate a conscious swallow, food fails to enter the oesophagus, 
stays in the mouth or enters the airway, causing coughing or 
spluttering. Virtually all causes of this type of dysphagia are 
chronic neurological or muscular diseases. Oesophageal dys -
phagia occurs in the involuntary phase and is characterised 
by a sensation of food sticking. The nature of this type of 
dysphagia is often informative with regard to a likely diagno -
sis. Dysphagia may occur acutely or in a chronic fashion, can 
affect solids and/or fluids, and be intermittent or progressive. 
Although many patients point to a site of impaction, this is 
unreliable.
Odynophagia
Odynophagia refers to pain on swallowing. Patients with 
reflux oesophagitis often feel retrosternal discomfort within a 
few seconds of swallowing hot beverages, citrus drinks or alco-
hol. Odynophagia is also a feature of infective oesophagitis 
and may be particularly severe in chemical injury.
Regurgitation and reflux
Regurgitation and reflux are often used synonymously. It 
is helpful to differentiate between them, although it is not 
always possible. Regurgitation should strictly refer to the 
return of oesophageal contents from above a functional or 
mechanical obstruction. Reflux is the passive return of gas -
troduodenal contents to the mouth as part of the symptom-
atology of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD). Loss of 
weight, anaemia, cachexia, change of voice due to refluxed 
material irritating the vocal folds, and cough or dyspnoea due 
to tracheal aspiration may all accompany regurgitation and/
or reflux.
Chest pain
Chest pain similar in character to angina pectoris may arise 
from an oesophageal cause, especially gastro-oesophageal 
reflux and motility disorders. Exercise-induced chest pain can 
be due to reflux.
Symptoms
Summary box 62.1
Symptoms of oesophageal disease
●● Difficulty in swallowing described as food or fluid sticking 
(oesophageal dysphagia): must rule out malignancy
●● Pain on swallowing (odynophagia): suggests inflammation and 
ulceration
●● Regurgitation or reflux (heartburn): common in gastro-
oesophageal reflux disease
●● Chest pain: difficult to distinguish from cardiac pain
Line plotsSpatiotemporal plot
Figure 62.4 High-resolution manometry depicts oesophageal function fr om the pharynx to the stomach. The spatiotemporal plot presents 
the same information as presented in the ‘conventional’ line plots. Time is on the x-axis and distance from the nares is on the y-axis. Pressure 
is assigned a colour (legend right). The segmental anatomy of oesophagus is easy to appreciate (not seen on conventional manometry). The 
coordinated relaxation of the upper (UOS) and lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) is obvious, as is the increasing pressure and duration of the 
peristaltic wave as it passes distally. The intrabolus pressure (IBP) between the peristaltic wave and oesophagogastric junction, and the pressure 
gradient across the gastro-oesophageal junction are visualized. These represent the force that drives bolus through the oesophagus and into 
the stomach. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1069 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1070
Investigations
Radiography
Contrast radiography has been somewhat overshadowed by 
endoscopy but remains a useful investigation to demonstrate 
changes in oesophageal diameter, anatomical distortion or 
abnormal motility. An adequate barium swallow should be 
tailored to the problem under investigation. It may be help -
ful to give a solid bolus (bread or marshmallow) if a motility 
disorder is suspected. Video recording is useful to allow subse-
quent replay and detailed analysis. Barium radiology is, how -
ever, inaccurate in the diagnosis of gastro-oesophageal reflux, 
unless reflux is gross, and should not be used for this purpose. 
Plain radiographs will show some foreign bodies.
Cross-sectional imaging by computed tomography (CT) is 
now an essential investigation in the assessment of neoplasms 
of the oesophagus and can be used in place of a contrast swal-
low to demonstrate perforation. The role of CT and other 
cancer-specific tests is described later.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy is necessary for the investigation of most oesoph -
ageal conditions. It is required to view the inside of the 
oesophagus and the oesophagogastric junction, to obtain a 
biopsy or cytology specimen, for the removal of foreign bodies 
and to dilate strictures. Traditionally, there are two types of 
instrument available, the rigid oesophagoscope and the flexi-
ble video endoscope, but the rigid instrument is now virtually 
obsolete.
For flexible video gastroduodenoscopy, general anaesthe-
sia is not required; most examinations can be done on an out-
patient basis, and the quality of the magnified image is superb. 
The technology associated with video endoscopy continues 
to improve. Magnification is a standard feature of the mod -
ern endoscope and widely used in conjunction with agents 
that can be sprayed on to the mucosa, such as acetic acid to 
enhance mucosal detail. Novel techniques that rely on fluo -
rescence and narrow band imaging to enhance visual contrast 
are becoming increasingly used for the identification of muco-
sal abnormalities that are not easily seen with white light, e.g. 
in patients with Barrett’s oesophagus undergoing endoscopic 
surveillance.
As a matter of routine, the stomach and duodenum are 
examined as well as the oesophagus. If a stricture is encoun -
tered, it may be helpful to dilate it to allow a complete inspec-
tion of the upper GI tract, but this decision should be dictated 
by clinical circumstances and an appreciation of the perfora -
tion risk, especially if the visual appearances are thought to 
indicate neoplasia.
Endosonography
Endoscopic ultrasonography relies on a high-frequency 
(5–30 MHz) transducer located at the tip of the endoscope 
to provide highly detailed images of the layers of the oesoph-
ageal wall and mediastinal structures close to the oesopha-
gus. Radial echoendoscopes have a rotating transducer that 
creates a circular image with the endoscope in the centre, 
and this type of scanner is widely used to create diagnostic 
transverse sectional images at right angles to the long axis 
of the oesophagus (Figure 62.5). Linear echoendoscopes 
produce a sectoral image in the line of the endoscope and 
are used to biopsy submucosal oesophageal lesions, mediasti -
nal masses such as lymph nodes (Figure 62.6) or suspicious 
lesions that might lie outside a proposed surgical field. Radial 
scanners without optical components are available for pas -
sage through narrow strictures over a guidewire, and catheter 
probes are available that can be passed down the endoscope 
biopsy channel.
Oesophageal manometry
Manometry is now widely used to diagnose oesophageal 
motility disorders. Electronic microtransducers that are not 
influenced by changes in patient position during the test 
have gradually supplanted perfusion systems. High-resolution 
Histology
Mucosa
Deep
mucosa
Muscularis
mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis
propia
Serosa
Eus
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 62.5 Radial endosonography indicating wall layers as alter -
nating hyper- and hypoechoic bands. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1070 25/10/2017   09:43Foreign bodies in the oesophagus 1071
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
manometry uses a multiple (up to 36) microtransducer cathe-
ter with the results displayed as spatiotemporal plots, and this 
has now largely supplanted earlier manometry systems. This 
system provides comprehensive information about oesopha-
geal body function and associated behaviour of the LOS.
Twenty-four-hour pH and combined pH-
impedance recording
Prolonged measurement of pH is now accepted as the most 
accurate method for the diagnosis of gastro-oesophageal 
reflux. It is particularly useful in patients with atypical reflux 
symptoms, those without endoscopic oesophagitis and when 
patients respond poorly to intensive medical therapy . A 
small pH probe is passed into the distal oesophagus and posi -
tioned 5 cm above the upper margin of the LOS, as defined 
by manometry. The probe is connected to a miniature digital 
recorder that is worn on a belt and allows most normal activ-
ities. Patients mark symptomatic events such as heartburn. 
A 24-hour recording period is usual, and the pH record is 
analysed by an automated computer program. An oesopha -
geal pH <4 at the level of the pH electrode is conventionally 
considered the cut-off value and, in most oesophageal labo -
ratories, the total time when pH is <4 in a 24-hour period 
does not exceed 4% in a healthy adult. Patterns of reflux 
and the correlation between symptoms and oesophageal pH 
<4 can be calculated. Most laboratories use a scoring system 
(Johnson–DeMeester) to create a numerical value, above 
which reflux is considered pathological. Radiotelemetry pH 
probes are also available that can be fixed to the oesophageal 
wall endoscopically without the need for a transnasal cathe -
ter. The introduction of catheter assemblies that incorporate 
multiple electrodes along the length of the catheter, as well as 
a pH probe, has resulted in combined measurement of pH and 
electrical impedance. Impedance measurement differentiates 
anterograde from retrograde bolus transit and gas from liquid, 
and provides a reliable measure of non-acidic or weakly acidic 
events that cause symptoms. This may be important in the 
identification of patients with non-erosive reflux disease on 
endoscopy.
Therapeutic procedures
Dilatation of strictures
Stricture dilatation is essentially undertaken for benign con -
ditions and should be used with caution in the context of 
malignant disease. The risks associated with dilatation for 
malignant disease are discussed later. The advent of guide -
wire-directed dilatation of the oesophagus in the 1970s was a 
major advance over earlier blind dilatation systems. Their use 
is now considered standard practice. There are many differ -
ent designs, but essentially they are solid dilators of increas -
ing diameter or inflatable balloons with rigid walls. To restore 
normal swallowing, a stricture should be dilated to at least 
16 mm in diameter, although this may need to be achieved 
over a series of procedures, depending on the perceived nature 
of the stricture. A guidewire is passed down the biopsy chan-
nel of an endoscope and through the stricture under vision. 
If the stricture is long or tortuous, this should be undertaken 
under radiological guidance to ensure that the guidewire 
passes easily into the stomach. The endoscope is withdrawn, 
leaving the guidewire in place, and graduated dilators or a 
balloon dilator are passed over the guidewire, sometimes with 
radiographic screening for safety purposes. The dilatation 
of reflux-induced strictures is usually straightforward. These 
strictures are nearly always short and at the oesophagogastric 
junction, so that the stomach is visible through the narrowed 
segment. Radiological control is rarely needed. Conversely, 
distal oesophageal adenocarcinomas extending into the stom-
ach are often soft, friable and tortuous to negotiate. Caustic 
strictures often occur high in the thorax and may be very long.
Balloons for oesophageal use tend to have inflation diam-
eters of 25–40 mm and may also be used for dilatation. Pneu-
matic dilatation is widely used to disrupt the non-relaxing 
LOS in achalasia.
Thermal recanalisation
Various types of laser (mainly Nd–Y AG), bipolar diathermy, 
injection of absolute alcohol or argon-beam plasma coagula -
tion have all been used successfully to ablate tissue in order to 
recanalise the oesophagus.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
See Chapter 9.
FOREIGN BODIES IN THE 
OESOPHAGUS
All manner of foreign bodies have become arrested in the 
oesophagus (Figure 62.7). Button batteries may be a trouble-
some problem in children. The most common impacted 
Lawrence F Johnson , gastroenterologist, Birmingham, AL, USA.
Tom R DeMeester , Professor of Surgery, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Figure 62.6 Linear endosonography with the needle traversing an 
ultrasound plane for guided biopsy. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1071 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1072
material is food, and this usually occurs above a significant 
pathological lesion (Figure 62.8). Plain radiographs are often 
useful for foreign bodies, but modern denture materials are 
not always radiopaque. A contrast examination is not usually 
required and only makes endoscopy more difficult.
Foreign bodies that have become stuck in the oesophagus 
should be removed by flexible endoscopy using suitable grasp-
ing forceps, a snare or a basket. If the object may injure the 
oesophagus on withdrawal, an overtube can be used, and the 
endoscope and object can be withdrawn into the overtube 
before removal. Button batteries can be a particular worry 
because they are difficult to grasp, and it is tempting to push 
them on into the stomach. However, an exhausted battery 
may rapidly corrode in the GI tract and is best extracted. A 
multiwire basket of the type used for gallstone retrieval nearly 
always works. An impacted food bolus will often break up and 
pass on if the patient is given fizzy drinks and confined to flu-
ids for a short time. The cause of the impaction must then 
be investigated. If symptoms are severe or the bolus does not 
pass, it can be extracted or broken up at endoscopy.
PERFORATION
Perforation of the oesophagus is usually iatrogenic (at thera -
peutic endoscopy) or due to ‘barotrauma’ (spontaneous 
perforation). Many instrumental perforations can be man -
aged conservatively, but spontaneous perforation is often a 
life-threatening condition that regularly requires surgical 
intervention.
Figure 62.7 False teeth impacted in the oesophagus. (Note: modern 
dentures are usually radiolucent.) 
Figure 62.8 An impacted meat bolus at the lower end of the oesoph-
agus. This may be the first presentation of a benign strictur e or a 
malignant tumour. 
Summary box 62.2
Foreign bodies
●● The most common is a food bolus, which usually signifies 
underlying disease
●● It is usually possible to remove foreign bodies by flexible 
endoscopy
●● Beware of button batteries in the oesophagus
Hermann Boerhaave , 1668–1738, Professor of Medicine and Botany, the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, creator of the modern method of clinical teaching.
Barotrauma (spontaneous 
perforation, Boerhaave’s syndrome)
This occurs classically when a person vomits against a closed 
glottis. The pressure in the oesophagus increases rapidly, and 
the oesophagus bursts at its weakest point in the lower third, 
sending a stream of material into the mediastinum and often 
the pleural cavity as well. The condition was first identified 
by Boerhaave, who reported the case of a grand admiral of 
Summary box 62.3
Perforation of the oesophagus
●● Potentially lethal complication due to mediastinitis and septic 
shock
●● Numerous causes, but may be iatrogenic
●● Surgical emphysema is virtually pathognomonic
●● Treatment is urgent; it may be conservative or surgical, but 
requires specialised care
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1072 25/10/2017   09:43Perforation 1073
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
the Dutch fleet who was a glutton and practised autoemesis. 
Boerhaave’s syndrome is the most serious type of perforation 
because of the large volume of material that is released under 
pressure. This causes rapid chemical irritation in the medi -
astinum and pleura followed by infection if untreated. Baro -
trauma has also been described in relation to other pressure 
events when the patient strains against a closed glottis (e.g. 
defecation, labour, weight-lifting).
Diagnosis of spontaneous perforation
The clinical history is usually of severe pain in the chest or 
upper abdomen after a meal or a bout of drinking. Associated 
shortness of breath is common. Many cases are misdiagnosed 
as myocardial infarction, perforated peptic ulcer or pancrea -
titis if the pain is confined to the upper abdomen. There 
may be a surprising amount of rigidity on examination of 
the upper abdomen, even in the absence of any peritoneal 
contamination.
The diagnosis can usually be suspected from the history 
and associated clinical features. A chest radiograph is often 
confirmatory with air in the mediastinum, pleura or peri -
toneum. Pleural effusion occurs rapidly either as a result of 
free communication with the pleural space or as a reaction 
to adjacent inflammation in the mediastinum. A contrast 
swallow or CT is nearly always required to guide management 
(Figure 62.9).
Pathological perforation
Free perforation of ulcers or tumours of the oesophagus into 
the pleural space is rare. Erosion into an adjacent structure 
with fistula formation is more common. Aerodigestive fis -
tula is most common and usually encountered in primary 
malignant disease of the oesophagus or bronchus. Coughing 
on eating and signs of aspiration pneumonitis may allow the 
problem to be recognised at a time when intervention may be 
appropriate and feasible. Covering the communication with a 
self-expanding metal stent is the usual solution. Erosion into 
a major vascular structure is invariably fatal.
Penetrating injury
Perforation by knives and bullets is uncommon, even in war, 
because the oesophagus is a relatively small target surrounded 
by other vital organs.
Foreign bodies
The oesophagus may be perforated during removal of a for -
eign body but, occasionally, an object that has been left in the 
oesophagus for several days will erode through the wall.
Instrumental perforation
Instrumentation is by far the most common cause of perfor -
ation. Modern instrumentation is remarkably safe, but perfor-
ation remains a risk that should never be forgotten.
Figure 62.9 Computed tomography scan showing the site of perfor-
ation in the lower oesophagus. 
Perforation related to diagnostic upper GI endoscopy is 
unusual with an estimated frequency of about 1:4000 exam -
inations. Perforation can occur in the pharynx or oesopha -
gus, usually at sites of pathology or when the endoscope is 
passed blindly. A number of patient-related factors are asso -
ciated with increased risk, including large anterior cervical 
osteophytes, the presence of a pharyngeal pouch and mechan-
ical causes of obstruction. Perforation may follow biopsy of a 
malignant tumour.
Patients undergoing therapeutic endoscopy have a perfor-
ation risk that is at least 10 times greater than those undergo-
ing diagnostic endoscopy. The oesophagus may be perforated 
by guidewires, graduated dilators or balloons, or during the 
placement of self-expanding stents. The risk is considerably 
higher in patients with malignancy.
Diagnosis of instrumental perforation
In most cases, a combination of technical difficulties and an 
interventional procedure should lead to a high index of suspi-
cion. History and physical signs may be useful pointers to the 
site of perforation.
Cervical perforation may result in pain localised to the 
neck, hoarseness, painful neck movements and subcutaneous 
emphysema. Intrathoracic and intra-abdominal perforations, 
which are more common, can give rise to immediate symp-
toms and signs either during or at the end of the procedure, 
including chest pain, haemodynamic instability, oxygen desat-
uration or visual evidence of perforation. Within the first 24 
hours, patients may additionally complain of abdominal pain 
or respiratory difficulties. There may be evidence of subcuta -
neous emphysema, pneumothorax or hydropneumothorax. In 
some patients, the diagnosis may be missed and recognised 
only at a late stage beyond 24 hours, as unexplained pyrexia, 
systemic sepsis or the development of a clinical fistula.
Summary box 62.4
Instrumental perforation
●● Prevention of perforation is better than cure
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1073 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1074
Prompt and thorough investigation is the key to manage -
ment. Careful endoscopic assessment at the end of any pro -
cedure combined with a chest radiograph will identify many 
cases of perforation immediately. If not recognised immedi -
ately, then early and late suspected perforations should be 
assessed by CT. A pre-contrast scan easily demonstrates air 
outside the GI tract, while oral contrast localises the site of 
the oesophageal defect and accurately delineates specific fluid 
collections. Where CT is not available, a water-soluble con -
trast swallow should be performed although this is not always 
reliable in disclosing a small contained leak. If a water-soluble 
study is negative and clinical suspicion is high, a dilute bar -
ium swallow should be considered.
Treatment of oesophageal 
perforations
Perforation of the oesophagus usually leads to mediastinitis. 
The loose areolar tissues of the posterior mediastinum allow 
a rapid spread of GI contents. The aim of treatment is to 
limit mediastinal contamination and prevent or deal with 
infection. Operative repair deals with the injury directly, but 
imposes risks of its own; non-operative treatment aims to 
limit the effects of mediastinitis and provide an environment 
in which healing can take place.
The decision between surgical and non-surgical manage-
ment rests on four factors. These are:
1 the site of the perforation (cervical vs thoracoabdominal 
oesophagus);
2 the event causing the perforation (spontaneous vs instru -
mental);
3 underlying pathology (benign or malignant);
4 the status of the oesophagus before the perforation (fasted 
and empty vs obstructed with a stagnant residue).
It follows that most perforations that can be managed 
non-surgically occur in the context of small instrumental per-
forations of a clean oesophagus without obstruction, where 
leakage is likely to be confined to the nearby mediastinum at 
worst (Table 62.1).
Instrumental perforations in the cervical oesophagus are 
usually small and can nearly always be managed conserva -
tively. The development of a local abscess is an indication for 
cervical drainage, preventing the extension of sepsis into the 
mediastinum.
The conservative management of an instrumental perfor-
ation in the thoracoabdominal parts of the oesophagus can 
be undertaken when the perforation is detected early and 
before oral alimentation. General guidelines for non-surgical 
management include:
 ● pain that is readily controlled with opiates;
 ● absence of crepitus, diffuse mediastinal gas, hydropneu-
mothorax or pneumoperitoneum;
 ● mediastinal containment of the perforation with no evi -
dence of widespread extravasation of contrast material;
 ● no evidence of on-going luminal obstruction or a retained 
foreign body.
In addition, conservative management might be appropri-
ate in patients who have remained clinically stable despite 
diagnostic delay. The principles of non-interventional man -
agement involve hyperalimentation, preferably by an enteral 
route, nasogastric suction and broad-spectrum intravenous 
antibiotics.
Surgical management is required whenever patients:
 ● are unstable with sepsis or shock;
 ● have evidence of a heavily contaminated mediastinum, 
pleural space or peritoneum;
 ● have widespread intrapleural or intraperitoneal extravasa-
tion of contrast material.
Ongoing luminal obstruction (often related to malig -
nancy) in a frail patient considered unfit for major surgery 
can be dealt with by placement of a covered self-expanding 
stent. Expanding metal stents should be used with caution 
in patients with benign disease because they cause significant 
tissue reaction and some designs are impossible to remove at 
a later date. Biodegradable and removable stents may be used 
alone or as a bridge to later definitive treatment where perfor-
ation accompanies obstruction.
For patients requiring surgery, the choice is from direct 
repair, the deliberate creation of an external fistula or, rarely, 
oesophageal resection with a view to delayed reconstruction. 
Direct repair is preferred by many surgeons if the perforation 
is recognised early (within the first 4–6 hours), and the extent 
of mediastinal and pleural contamination is small. After 12 
hours, the tissues become swollen and friable and less suitable 
for direct suture. The hole in the mucosa is always bigger than 
the hole in the muscle, and the muscle should be incised to 
see the mucosal edges clearly. It is essential that there should 
be no obstruction distal to the repair. A variety of local tissues 
(gastric fundus, pericardium, intercostal muscle) have been 
used to buttress such repairs.
Primary repair is inadvisable with late presentation and in 
the presence of widespread mediastinal and pleural contamina-
tion. These patients tend to be more ill as a result of the delay, 
and the aim of treatment should be to achieve wide drainage 
with the creation of a controlled fistula and distal enteral feed-
ing. This can usually be achieved by placing a T-tube into the 
oesophagus along with appropriately located drains and a feed-
ing jejunostomy. In unusual circumstances, e.g. with extensive 
necrosis after corrosive ingestion, emergency oesophagectomy 
may be necessary. Oesophagostomy and gastrostomy should be 
performed with a view to delayed reconstruction.
TABLE 62.1 Management options in perforation of the 
oesophagus.
Factors that favour non-surgical 
management
Factors that favour 
surgical repair
Small septic load Large septic load
Minimal cardiovascular upset Septic shock
Perforation confined to mediastinum Pleura breached
Perforation by flexible endoscope Boerhaave’s syndrome
Perforation of cervical oesophagus Perforation of abdominal 
oesophagus
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1074 25/10/2017   09:43Corrosive injury 1075
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
MALLORY–WEISS SYNDROME
Forceful vomiting may produce a mucosal tear at the cardia 
rather than a full perforation. The mechanism of injury is 
different. In Boerhaave’s syndrome, vomiting occurs against 
a closed glottis and pressure builds up in the oesophagus. In 
Mallory–Weiss syndrome, vigorous vomiting produces a ver -
tical split in the gastric mucosa, immediately below the squa-
mocolumnar junction at the cardia in 90% of cases. In only 
10% is the tear in the oesophagus (Figure 62.10). The con-
dition presents with haematemesis. Usually, the bleeding is 
not severe, but endoscopic injection therapy may be required 
for the occasional, severe case. Surgery is rarely required. 
There are two other injuries to the oesophagus that lie within 
the spectrum of the mucosal tear of Mallory–Weiss and the 
full-thickness tear of Boerhaave. Intramural rupture produces 
a dissection within the oesophageal wall that causes severe 
chest pain, often with odynophagia. It is best diagnosed by 
contrast radiology. Intramural haematoma is seen most often 
in elderly patients on anticoagulants or patients with coagu -
lation disorders, and usually follows an episode of vomiting. 
Large haematomas causing dysphagia can occur, extending 
from the cardia up to the carina. The diagnosis is readily made 
on endoscopy. Both intramural rupture and intramural hae -
matoma can be managed conservatively. Symptoms usually 
resolve in 7–14 days, and oral intake can be reinstituted as 
soon as symptoms allow.
CORROSIVE INJURY
Corrosives such as sodium hydroxide (lye, caustic soda) or sul-
phuric acid may be taken in an attempted suicide. Accidental 
ingestion occurs in children and when corrosives are stored 
in bottles labelled as beverages. All can cause severe dam -
age to the mouth, pharynx, larynx, oesophagus and stomach. 
The type of agent, its concentration and the volume ingested 
largely determine the extent of damage. In general, alkalis are 
relatively odourless and tasteless, making them more likely 
to be ingested in large volume. Alkalis cause liquefaction, 
saponification of fats, dehydration and thrombosis of blood 
vessels which usually leads to fibrous scarring. Acids cause 
coagulative necrosis with eschar formation, and this coagu -
lant may limit penetration to deeper layers of the oesopha -
geal wall. Acids also cause more gastric damage than alkalis 
because of the induction of intense pylorospasm with pooling 
in the antrum.
Symptoms and signs are notoriously unreliable in predict-
ing the severity of injury. The key to management is early 
endoscopy by an experienced endoscopist to inspect the 
whole of the oesophagus and stomach (Figure 62.11). Deep 
ulcers and the recognition of a grey or black eschar signify 
the most severe lesions with the greatest risk of perforation. 
Minor injuries with only oedema of the mucosa resolve rap -
idly with no late sequelae. These patients can safely be fed. 
With more severe injuries, a feeding jejunostomy may be 
appropriate until the patient can swallow saliva satisfactorily. 
The widespread use of broad-spectrum antibiotics and ste -
roids is not supported by evidence.
Regular endoscopic examinations are the best way to 
assess stricture development (Figure 62.12). Significant stric-
ture formation occurs in about 50% of patients with exten -
sive mucosal damage (Figure 62.13). The role and timing of 
repeat endoscopies with or without dilatation in such patients 
George Kenneth Mallory , b.1926, Professor of Pathology, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
Soma Weiss , 1898–1942, Professor of Medicine, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Figure 62.10 The endoscopic appearance of a mucosal tear at the 
cardia (Mallory–Weiss). 
Figure 62.11 Acute caustic burn in the haemorrhagic phase. 
Figure 62.12 The late result of a caustic alkali burn with a high 
oesophageal stricture. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1075 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1076
remain controversial. Other than the need for emergency sur-
gery for bleeding or perforation, elective oesophageal resec -
tion should be deferred for at least 3 months until the fibrotic 
phase has been established. Oesophageal replacement is usu -
ally required for very long or multiple strictures. Resection 
can be difficult because of perioesophageal inflammation in 
these patients. Because of associated gastric damage, colon 
may have to be used as the replacement conduit.
There is also controversy with regard to the risk of devel-
oping carcinoma in the damaged oesophagus and stomach and 
how this might influence management. The lifetime risk is 
certainly less than 5%. Some surgeons advocate resection and 
replacement, whereas others believe that oesophageal bypass 
and endoscopic surveillance are preferable, because removal 
of the badly damaged oesophagus from a scarred mediastinum 
can be hazardous.
an adequate drink. Acute injury presents with dysphagia and 
odynophagia, which may be severe. The inflammation usu -
ally resolves within 2–3 weeks, and no specific treatment is 
required apart from appropriate nutritional support. A stric -
ture may follow.
GASTRO-OESOPHAGEAL 
REFLUX DISEASE
Aetiology
Normal competence of the gastro-oesophageal junction 
is maintained by the LOS. This is influenced by both its 
physiological function and its anatomical location relative to 
the diaphragm and the oesophageal hiatus. In normal circum-
stances, the LOS transiently relaxes as a coordinated part of 
swallowing, as a means of allowing vomiting to occur and in 
response to stretching of the gastric fundus, particularly after 
a meal to allow swallowed air to be vented. Most episodes of 
physiological reflux occur during postprandial transient LOS 
relaxations (TLOSRs). In the early stages of GO RD, most 
pathological reflux occurs as a result of an increased number 
of TLOSRs rather than a persistent fall in overall sphincter 
pressure. In more severe GORD, LOS pressure tends to be 
generally low, and this loss of sphincter function seems to 
be made worse if there is loss of an adequate length of intra-  
abdominal oesophagus.
The absence of an intra-abdominal length of oesoph-
agus results in a sliding hiatus hernia. The normal conden -
sation of peritoneal fascia over the lower oesophagus (the 
phreno-oesophageal ligament) is weak, and the crural open-
ing widens, allowing the upper stomach to slide up through 
the hiatus. The loss of the normal anatomical configura -
tion exacerbates reflux, although sliding hiatus hernia alone 
should not be viewed as the cause of reflux. Sliding hiatus 
hernia is associated with GORD and may make it worse but, 
as long as the LOS remains competent, pathological GORD 
does not occur. Many GORD sufferers do not have a her -
nia, and many of those with a hernia do not have GORD. It 
should be noted that rolling or paraoesophageal hiatus her -
nia is a quite different and potentially dangerous condition 
(see below). A proportion of patients have a rolling hernia 
and symptomatic GORD or a mixed hernia with both sliding 
and rolling components. Reflux oesophagitis that is visible 
endoscopically is a complication of GORD and occurs in a 
minority of sufferers overall, but in around 40% of patients 
referred to hospital.
In western societies, GORD is the most common con -
dition affecting the upper GI tract. This is partly due to 
the declining incidence of peptic ulcer as the incidence of 
infection with Helicobacter pylori has reduced as a result of 
improved socioeconomic conditions, along with a rising inci-
dence of GORD in the last 30 years. The cause of the increase 
is unclear, but may be due in part to increasing obesity. The 
strong association between GORD, obesity and the paral -
lel rise in the incidence of adenocarcinoma of the oesoph-
agus represents a major health challenge for most western 
 countries.
Figure 62.13 Caustic or lye stricture with marked stenosis high in 
the body of the oesophagus. The strictures are frequently multiple and 
difficult to dilate unless treated energetically at an early stage. 
Summary box 62.5
Corrosive injury
●● Skilled early endoscopy is mandatory
DRUG-INDUCED INJURY
Many medications, such as antibiotics and potassium prepar -
ations, are potentially damaging to the oesophagus, because 
tablets may remain for a long time, especially if taken without 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1076 25/10/2017   09:43Gastro-oesophageal r eflux disease 1077
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Clinical features
The classic triad of symptoms is retrosternal burning pain 
(heartburn), epigastric pain (sometimes radiating through to 
the back) and regurgitation. Most patients do not experience 
all three. Symptoms are often provoked by food, particularly 
those that delay gastric emptying (e.g. fats, spicy foods). As 
the condition becomes more severe, gastric juice may reflux to 
the mouth and produce an unpleasant taste, often described as 
‘acid’ or ‘bitter’. Heartburn and regurgitation can be brought 
on by stooping or exercise. A proportion of patients have 
odynophagia with hot beverages, citrus drinks or alcohol. 
Patients with nocturnal reflux and those who reflux food to 
the mouth nearly always have severe GORD. Some patients 
present with less typical symptoms such as angina-like chest 
pain, pulmonary or laryngeal symptoms. Dysphagia is usually 
a sign that a stricture has occurred, but may be caused by an 
associated motility disorder.
As GORD is such a common disorder, it should always be 
the first thought when a patient presents with oesophageal 
symptoms that are unusual or that defy diagnosis after a series 
of investigations.
Diagnosis
In most cases, the diagnosis is assumed rather than proven, and 
treatment is empirical. Investigation is required only when 
the diagnosis is in doubt, when the patient does not respond 
to a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) or if dysphagia is present. 
The most appropriate examination is endoscopy with biopsy. 
If the typical appearance of reflux oesophagitis, peptic stric -
ture or Barrett’s oesophagus is seen, the diagnosis is clinched, 
but visible oesophagitis is not always present, even in patients 
selected as above. This is compounded in clinical practice by 
the widespread use of PPIs, which cause rapid healing of early 
mucosal lesions. Many patients will have received such treat-
ment before referral. The endoscopic appearances of the nor-
mal oesophagus, hiatus hernia, oesophagitis and stricture are 
shown in Figures 62.14–62.20. It is worth remembering that 
the correlation between symptoms and endoscopic appear -
ances is poor. On the other hand, there is a strong correlation 
between worsening endoscopic appearances and the duration 
of oesophageal acidification on pH testing.
In patients with atypical or persistent symptoms despite 
therapy, oesophageal manometry and 24-hour oesophageal 
pH recording (ideally with impedance measurement) may be 
justified to establish the diagnosis and guide management.
Norman Rupert Barrett , 1903–1979, surgeon, St Thomas’ Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 62.14 The endoscopic appearance of the normal squamous 
mucosa in the body of the oesophagus. 
Figure 62.15 The normal lower oesophageal sphincter: (a) open; 
(b) closed. 
Summary box 62.6
Diagnostic measurement in GORD
●● 24-hour pH recording is the ‘gold standard’ for diagnosis of 
GORD
●● Length and pressure of the LOS are important
(a)
(b)
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1077 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1078
As a matter of routine, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are 
stopped 1 week before oesophageal pH recording, but acid 
secretion is sometimes reduced for 2 weeks or more, and this 
can necessitate repeat examination after a prolonged interval 
without a PPI. Manometry and pH recording are essential in 
patients being considered for antireflux surgery. Although the 
main purpose of the test is objectively to quantify the extent 
of reflux disease, it is also used to rule out a diagnosis of acha-
lasia. In the early stages of achalasia, chest pain can dominate 
the clinical picture and, when associated with intermittent 
swallowing problems and non-specific symptoms, it is easy 
to see how a clinical diagnosis of GORD might be made. 
Patients with achalasia can also have an abnormal pH study 
as a result of fermentation of food residue in a dilated oesoph-
agus. Usually, the form of the pH trace is different from that of 
GORD, with slow undulations of pH rather than rapid bursts 
of reflux, but the complete absence of peristalsis on manome-
try is pathognomonic of achalasia.
A CT scan gives the best appreciation of gastro-oesoph-
ageal anatomy. This may be important in the context of sur -
gery for rolling or mixed hiatus hernias, but it is unimportant 
in most patients with GORD.
Management of uncomplicated 
GORD
Medical management
Most sufferers from GORD do not consult a doctor and do 
not need to do so. They self-medicate with over -the-counter 
medicines such as simple antacids, antacid–alginate prepara -
tions, H2-receptor antagonists or PPIs. Consultation is more 
likely when symptoms are severe, prolonged and unrespon-
sive to the above treatments. Simple measures that are often 
neglected include advice about weight loss, smoking, exces-
sive consumption of alcohol, tea or coffee, the avoidance of 
large meals late at night and a modest degree of head-up tilt of 
the bed. Tilting the bed has been shown to have an effect that 
is similar to taking an H 2-receptor antagonist. The common 
practice of using additional pillows has no significant effect.
PPIs are the most effective drug treatment for GORD. 
Indeed, they are so effective that, once started, patients are 
Figure 62.16 The squamocolumnar junction is clearly seen in the 
lower oesophagus with a normal sharp demarcation. 
Figure 62.17 Sliding hiatus hernia. The diaphragm can be seen con-
stricting the upper stomach. 
Figure 62.18 Reflux oesophagitis. 
Figure 62.19  Benign stricture with active oesophagitis (left) and 
healed with columnar epithelium (right). 
Figure 62.20 Ulceration associated with a benign peptic stricture. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1078 25/10/2017   09:43Gastro-oesophageal r eflux disease 1079
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
very reluctant to stop taking them. Given an adequate dose 
for 8 weeks, most patients have a rapid improvement in symp-
toms (within a few days), and more than 90% can expect full 
mucosal healing at the end of this time. For this reason, a 
policy of ‘step-down’ medical treatment is advocated based 
on the general advice outlined above and a standard dose of a 
PPI given for 8 weeks. At the end of that time, the dose of PPI 
is reduced to that which keeps the patient free of symptoms, 
and this might even mean the cessation of PPI treatment. As 
most patients do not make major lifestyle changes and as PPIs 
are so effective, many remain on long-term treatment. For the 
minority who do not respond adequately to a standard dose, 
a trial at an increased dose or the addition of an H 2-receptor 
antagonist is recommended. If unsuccessful, these patients 
should be formally investigated.
PPI therapy is also important in patients with reflux-  
induced strictures, resulting in significant prolongation of the 
intervals between endoscopic dilatation. As yet, fears that 
chronic acid suppression might have serious long-term side 
effects including the risk of gastric cancer seem unwarranted.
Surgery
Strictly speaking, the need for surgery should have been 
reduced as medication has improved so much. Paradoxically, 
the number of antireflux operations has remained relatively 
constant and may even be increasing. This is probably due 
partly to increased patient expectations and partly to the 
advent of minimal access surgery, which has improved the 
acceptability of procedures.
Endoscopic treatments
A number of endoscopic treatments have been tried in the 
last 10 years that attempt to augment a failing LOS. These 
involve endoscopic suturing devices that plicate gastric 
mucosa just below the cardia to accentuate the angle of His, 
radiofrequency ablation (RFA) to the level of the sphinc-
ter and the injection of submucosal polymers into the lower 
oesophagus. The procedures have generally been applied 
to patients with only small hiatus hernias or none at all, so 
only a small proportion of patients who present to hospitals 
are suitable. Although most methods produce some tempo -
rary improvement in symptoms and objective assessments of 
reflux, failure rates at 1 year are high and can be over 50%. 
There are few large series that have reported long-term out -
comes. Only RFA has been shown to be effective for as long 
as 10 years when around two-thirds patients remain off PPI 
medication.
Surgical treatments
The indication for surgery in uncomplicated GORD is 
essentially patient choice. The risks and possible benefits 
need to be discussed in detail. Risks include a small mortality 
rate (0.1–0.5%, depending on patient selection), failed 
operation (5–10%) and side effects such as dysphagia, 
gas bloat or abdominal discomfort (10%). With current 
surgical techniques, 85–90% of patients should be satisfied 
with the result of an antireflux operation. Patients who are 
asymptomatic on a PPI need a careful discussion of the risk side 
of the equation. Those who are symptomatic on a PPI need a 
careful clinical review to make sure that they will benefit from 
an operation. Reasons for failure on a PPI include ‘volume’ 
reflux (a good indication for surgery), a ‘hermit’ lifestyle in 
which the least deviation from lifestyle rules leads to symptoms 
(a good indication), psychological distress with intolerance of 
minor symptoms (a poor indication; these patients are likely 
to be dissatisfied with surgery), poor compliance (a good 
indication if the reason for poor compliance is the side effects 
of treatment, otherwise a bad indication) and misdiagnosis of 
GORD.
WHICH SURGERY?
There are many operations for GORD, but they are virtu -
ally all based on the creation of an intra-abdominal segment 
of oesophagus, crural repair and some form of wrap of the 
upper stomach (fundoplication) around the intra-abdominal 
oesophagus. The contribution of each component to opera-
tive success is widely debated, but it is clear that operations 
that fail to address all three components have inferior suc -
cess rates. The major types of anti-reflux operation were all 
developed in the 1950s (Figure 62.21). When performed 
correctly, nearly all are effective. Most randomised trials do 
not show a clear advantage for any one operation over the 
Philip Rowland Allison , 1907–1974, Professor of Surgery, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.
Rudolph Nissen , 1896–1981, Professor of Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey, and later at Basle, Switzerland.
Lucius Davis Hill , surgeon, the Mason Clinic, Seattle, MN, USA.
Ronald Herbert Robert Belsey , d.2007, thoracic surgeon, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, UK.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 62.21  Various operations for the surgical correction of 
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. (a) The original Allison repair of 
hiatus hernia (this is ineffective and is no longer done); (b) Nissen 
fundoplication; (c) Hill procedure; (d) Belsey mark IV operation. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1079 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1080
others, although one meta-analysis has come down in favour 
of posterior partial fundoplication over total fundoplication 
when performed laparoscopically.
Total fundoplication (Nissen) tends to be associated with 
slightly more short-term dysphagia but is the most durable 
repair in terms of long-term reflux control. Partial fundopli -
cation, whether performed posteriorly (Toupet) or anteriorly 
(Dor, Watson), has fewer short-term side effects, although this 
is sometimes at the expense of a slightly higher long-term fail-
ure rate. One disadvantage of total fundoplication is the cre -
ation of an overcompetent cardia, resulting in the ‘gas bloat’ 
syndrome in which belching is impossible. The stomach fills 
with air, the patient feels very full after small meals and passes 
excessive flatus. This does not seem to occur with partial fun-
doplication. The problem has been largely overcome by the 
‘floppy’ Nissen technique in which the fundoplication is loose 
around the oesophagus and is kept short in length. Although 
the other short-term side effects of fundoplication usually 
resolve within 3 months of surgery, this is rarely the case for 
gas bloat. The problem is best remedied by conversion to a 
partial fundoplication.
As with primary surgery, various revisional procedures have 
been described, usually for recurrent reflux or persistent dyspha-
gia. For most patients, recurrent reflux relates to anatomical fail-
ure, so the solution is a revisional fundoplication. The results of 
surgery for recurrent reflux tend to be better than those for dys-
phagia, because the latter problem has many causes (too tight 
a wrap, slipping of the wrap, hiatal fibrosis) A very small pro-
portion of patients may undergo more than two operations to 
correct recurrent reflux or unacceptable side effects. Revisional 
surgery carries a lower chance of success and, in some patients, 
local revision becomes technically impossible. The final resort 
is antrectomy with a Roux-en-Y reconstruction. This reduces 
gastric acid secretion and diverts bile and pancreatic secretions 
away from the stomach. Thus, the volume of potential refluxate 
in the stomach is reduced and, because of its changed composi-
tion, it is less damaging to the oesophagus.
For many years, the relative merits of thoracic and abdom-
inal approaches were hotly debated. The introduction of mini-
mal access surgery has made this debate obsolete. Most antireflux 
operations are now done with a laparoscopic approach.
LAPAROSCOPIC FUNDOPLICATION
Five cannulae are inserted in the upper abdomen (Figure 
62.22). The cardia and lower oesophagus are separated from 
the diaphragmatic hiatus. An appropriate length of oesoph-
agus is mobilised in the mediastinum. The fundus may be 
mobilised by dividing the short gastric vessels that tether the 
fundus to the spleen, although some surgeons feel that this is 
unnecessary. The hiatus is narrowed by sutures placed behind 
the oesophagus. In total (Nissen) fundoplication, the fundus 
is drawn behind the oesophagus and then sutured to itself in 
front of the oesophagus (Figure 62.23a). In partial fundopli-
cation, the fundus is drawn either behind or in front of the 
oesophagus and sutured to it on each side, leaving a strip of 
exposed oesophagus either at the front (Figure 62.23b) or 
at the back. Robotic fundoplication has been described but 
comparisons with laparoscopic surgery do not indicate any 
clear clinical benefits.
Complications of GORD
Stricture
Reflux-induced strictures (see Figure 62.20) occur mainly in 
late middle-aged and elderly people, but they may present in  
children. It is important to distinguish a benign reflux-induced 
stricture from a carcinoma. This is not usually difficult on the 
basis of location (immediately above the oesophagogastric 
junction), length (only about 1–2 cm) and smooth mucosa, 
but sometimes a cancer spreads under the oesophageal mucosa 
at its upper margin, producing a benign-looking stricture.
Peptic strictures generally respond well to dilatation and 
long-term treatment with a PPI. As most patients are elderly, 
antireflux surgery is not usually considered. However, it is an 
alternative to long-term PPI treatment, just as in uncompli -
cated GORD in younger and fitter patients. Most patients do 
not require anything other than a standard operation.
AM Toupet , French surgeon.
Cesar Roux , 1857–1934, Professor of Surgery and Gynaecology, Lausanne, Switzerland, described this method of forming a jejunal conduit in 1908.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 62.24Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 62.22  Laparoscope cannula sites for lapar oscopic fundo -
plication. 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 62.25aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a) 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 62.25bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b) 
Figure 62.23 (a) Total (Nissen) fundoplication; (b) partial fundopli-
cation (Toupet). 
Summary box 62.7
Peptic stricture
●● Day-case dilatation and PPI for peptic stricture
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1080 25/10/2017   09:43Gastro-oesophageal r eflux disease 1081
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Oesophageal shortening
The issue of oesophageal shortening continues to provoke 
debate. There can be no doubt that, in the presence of a large 
sliding hiatus hernia, the oesophagus is short, but this does 
not necessarily mean that, with mobilisation from the medi -
astinum, it cannot easily be restored to its normal length. 
The extent to which severe inflammation in the wall of the 
oesophagus causes fibrosis and real shortening is less clear. 
If a good segment of intra-abdominal oesophagus cannot 
be restored without tension, a Collis gastroplasty should be 
performed (Figure 62.24). This produces a neo-oesophagus 
around which a fundoplication can be done (Collis–Nissen 
operation).
have the most abnormal pH profiles. This adaptive response 
involves a mosaic of cell types, probably beginning as a sim -
ple columnar epithelium which becomes ‘specialised’ with 
time. The hallmark of ‘specialised’ Barrett’s epithelium is the 
presence of mucus-secreting goblet cells (intestinal metapla-
sia). One of the great mysteries of GORD is why some people 
develop oesophagitis and others develop Barrett’s oesophagus, 
often without significant oesophagitis. In Barrett’s oesopha -
gus, the junction between squamous oesophageal mucosa and 
gastric mucosa moves proximally. It may be difficult to distin-
guish a Barrett’s oesophagus from a tubular, sliding hiatus her-
nia during endoscopy, as the two often coexist (Figure 62.26) 
or where the visible Barrett’s segment is very short. The key 
John Leigh Collis , 1911–2003, Professor of Thoracic Surgery, the University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 62.26Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 62.24  Collis gastroplasty to pr oduce a neo-oesophagus 
around which a Nissen fundoplication is done. The operation may be 
performed by a laparoscopic as well as an open approach, using cir-
cular and linear staplers. 
Summary box 62.8
GORD
●● Is due to loss of competence of the LOS and is extremely 
common
●● May be associated with a hiatus hernia, which may be sliding 
or, less commonly, rolling (paraoesophageal)
●● The most common symptoms are heartburn, epigastric 
discomfort and regurgitation, often made worse by stooping 
and lying
●● Achalasia and GORD are diagnostically easily confused
Dysphagia may occur, but a neoplasm must be excluded
Diagnosis and treatment can be instituted on clinical 
grounds
●● Endoscopy may be required and 24-hour pH is the ‘gold 
standard’
Management is primarily medical (PPIs being the most 
effective), but surgery may be required; laparoscopic 
fundoplication is the most popular technique
Stricture may develop in time
Barrett’s oesophagus (columnar-
lined lower oesophagus)
Barrett’s oesophagus is a metaplastic change in the lining 
mucosa of the oesophagus in response to chronic gastro-  
oesophageal reflux (Figure 62.25). Many of these patients 
do not have particularly severe symptoms, although they do 
Figure 62.25 Barrett’s oesophagus with (a) proximal migration of 
the squamocolumnar junction and (b) a view of the distal oesoph -
agus. 
(b)
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 62.28aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 62.28bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
Figure 62.26  (a) The interrelationship of the lower oesophageal 
sphincter, the squamocolumnar junction and the diaphragm in sliding 
hiatus hernia. (b) Barrett’s oesophagus and sliding hernia. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1081 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1082
is where the gastric mucosal folds end along with recognition 
of the mucosal vascular pattern. The mucosa in the body of 
the stomach has longitudinal folds; the columnar lining of 
Barrett’s oesophagus is smooth. The lower oesophagus is char-
acterised by palisade vessels that run longitudinally and are 
easily seen through the lower oesophageal mucosa. Strictures 
can occur in Barrett’s oesophagus and nearly always appear at 
the new squamocolumnar junction (Figure 62.27). Rarely, a 
stricture may occur in the columnar segment after healing of a 
Barrett’s ulcer (Figure 62.28). Although intestinal metapla-
sia and length of the Barrett’s segment are important risk fac-
tors for the development of carcinoma, neither represents an 
essential feature for cancer development. The risk of transfor-
mation to cancer is probably no more than 0.5% per patient 
per year, which is about 25 times that of the general popula -
tion (Figures 62.29 and 62.30).
Figure 62.27  The radiological appearance of a midoesophageal 
stricture in (a), a patient with Barrett’s oesophagus and in (b) a normal 
lumen after dilatation. 
(a)
(b)
Figure 62.28 Barrett’s ulcer in the columnar cell-lined oesophagus. 
Summary box 62.9
Barrett’s oesophagus
●● Intestinal metaplasia is a risk factor for the development of 
adenocarcinoma
●● Do not confuse Barrett’s ulcer with oesophagitis
Patients who are found to have Barrett’s oesophagus may 
be submitted to regular surveillance endoscopy with multi -
ple biopsies in the hope of finding dysplasia or in situ cancer , 
rather than allowing invasive cancer to develop and cause 
symptoms. There is no general agreement about the bene-
fits of surveillance endoscopy, or its ideal frequency. Endos -
copy at 2-year intervals is probably adequate, provided that 
no dysplasia has been detected. A significant problem is that 
the incidence of Barrett’s oesophagus in the community is 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1082 25/10/2017   09:43Paraoesophageal (‘rolling’) hiatus hernia 1083
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
estimated to be at least 10 times the incidence discovered in 
dyspeptic patients referred for endoscopy. Thus, adenocar -
cinoma in Barrett’s oesophagus often presents with invasive 
cancer without any preceding reflux symptoms.
Until recently, Barrett’s oesophagus was not diagnosed 
until there was at least 3  cm of columnar epithelium in the 
distal oesophagus. With the better appreciation of the impor-
tance of intestinal metaplasia, Barrett’ s oesophagus may be 
diagnosed if there is any intestinal metaplasia in the oesopha-
gus. The relative risk of cancer rises with increasing length of 
abnormal mucosa. The following terms are widely used:
 ● classic Barrett’s (≥3 cm columnar epithelium);
 ● short-segment Barrett’s (<3 cm of columnar epithelium);
 ● cardia metaplasia (intestinal metaplasia at the oesoph-
agogastric junction without any macroscopic change at 
endoscopy).
When Barrett’s oesophagus is discovered, the treatment 
is that of the underlying GORD. There has been consider -
able interest in recent years in endoscopic methods of treating 
Barrett’s mucosa in the hope of eliminating the risk of can -
cer development. Laser, photodynamic therapy, argon-beam 
plasma coagulation, RFA and endoscopic mucosal resection 
(EMR) have all been used. Until recently, it was felt that 
intervention should only be offered in patients with high-
grade dysplasia, but recent evidence suggests that patients 
with low-grade dysplasia also have a substantial risk of pro -
gressing to high-grade dysplasia of around 9% per year. For 
this reason endoscopic treatment is considered appropriate 
for patients with low-grade dysplasia when confirmed by a 
second independent histopathologist. EMR of dysplastic areas 
followed by RFA seems to be the most popular approach and, 
together with PPI treatment, these endoscopic methods can 
result in a neosquamous lining. Fears of buried glands that 
might give rise to cancer seem unfounded.
PARAOESOPHAGEAL 
(‘ROLLING’) HIATUS HERNIA
True paraoesophageal hernias in which the cardia remains in 
its normal anatomical position are rare. The vast majority of 
rolling hernias are mixed hernias in which the cardia is dis -
placed into the chest and the greater curve of the stomach 
rolls into the mediastinum (Figure 62.31). Sometimes, the 
whole of the stomach lies in the chest (Figure 62.32). Colon 
or small intestine may sometimes lie in the hernia sac. The 
hernia is most common in elderly people, but may occur in 
young fit people. As the stomach rolls up into the chest, there 
is always an element of rotation (volvulus).
Figure 62.29 The macroscopic appearances of an adenocarcinoma 
in Barrett’s oesophagus. 
Figure 62.30 Endoscopic view of carcinoma in Barr ett’s oesopha-
gus. 
Figure 62.31  A paraoesophageal her nia showing the gastr o- 
oesophageal junction just above the diaphragm and the fundus along-
side the oesophagus, compressing the lumen. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1083 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1084
The symptoms of rolling hernia are mostly due to twist -
ing and distortion of the oesophagus and stomach. Dyspha -
gia is common. Chest pain may occur from distension of an 
obstructed stomach. Classically, the pain is relieved by a loud 
belch. Symptoms of GORD are variable. Strangulation, gas-
tric perforation and gangrene can occur. Emergency presenta-
tion with any of these complications carries high mortality on 
account of a combination of late diagnosis, generally elderly 
patients with comorbid diseases and the complexity of surgery 
involved.
The hernia may be visible on a plain radiograph of the 
chest as a gas bubble, often with a fluid level behind the heart 
(Figure 62.33). A CT scan with oral contrast is the best 
method of diagnosis, highlighting the gastric anatomy but 
also identifying other structures involved in the hernia. The 
endoscopic appearances may be confusing, especially in large 
hernias when it is easy to become disoriented.
Symptomatic rolling hernias nearly always require surgi -
cal repair because they are potentially dangerous. The risk 
of an asymptomatic patient developing a significant problem 
when a rolling hiatus hernia is discovered incidentally has 
probably been underestimated in the past. The annual risk is 
probably greater than the historical estimate of 1%. Patients 
who present as an emergency with acute chest pain may be 
treated initially by nasogastric tube, to relieve the distension 
that causes the pain, followed by surgical repair. Endoscopy is 
useful if nasogastric intubation is unsuccessful. If the pain is 
not relieved or perforation is suspected, immediate operation 
is mandatory.
Emergency surgery needs to be tailored to the problem 
encountered and the fitness of the patient. Elective surgery 
involves reduction of the hernia, excision of the sac, reduction 
of the crural defect and some form of retention of the stom -
ach in the abdomen. Some surgeons perform a fundoplication, 
arguing that this is a very effective means of maintaining reduc-
tion and that it deals with the associated GORD. Others argue 
that fundoplication should be done only if reflux can be con-
clusively demonstrated beforehand. Surprisingly, both philos-
ophies achieve good results. Laparoscopic repair has recently 
become popular. Full anatomical repair of a large rolling hernia 
can be difficult using this approach and requires considerable 
expertise. Secure closure of the hiatal defect can be a problem, 
and some surgeons advocate mesh to reinforce the repair.
NEOPLASMS OF THE 
OESOPHAGUS
Benign tumours
Benign tumours of the oesophagus are relatively rare. True 
papillomas, adenomas and hyperplastic polyps do occur, 
but most ‘benign’ tumours are not epithelial in origin and 
arise from other layers of the oesophageal wall (GI stromal 
tumour [GIST], lipoma, granular cell tumour). Most benign 
oesophageal tumours are small and asymptomatic, and even a 
large benign tumour may cause only mild symptoms (Figure 
62.34). The most important point in their management is 
usually to carry out an adequate number of biopsies to prove 
beyond reasonable doubt that the lesion is not malignant 
(Figure 62.35).
Malignant tumours
Non-epithelial primary malignancies are also rare, as is malig-
nant melanoma. Secondary malignancies rarely involve the 
oesophagus, with the exception of bronchogenic carcinoma 
Figure 62.32 A huge paraoesophageal hernia with an upside-down 
stomach and the pylorus just below the hiatus. 
Figure 62.33 A gas bubble seen on a plain chest radiograph, show-
ing the fundus of the stomach in the chest (courtesy of Dr Stephen 
Ellis, Bart’s and the London NHS Trust). 
Summary box 62.10
‘Rolling’ hiatus hernia
●● Potentially dangerous, because of volvulus
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1084 25/10/2017   09:43Neoplasms of the oesophagus 1085
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
by direct invasion of either the primary and/or contiguous 
lymph nodes.
Carcinoma of the oesophagus
Cancer of the oesophagus is the sixth most common cancer in 
the world. In general, it is a disease of mid to late adulthood, 
with a poor survival rate. Only 5–10% of those diagnosed will 
survive for 5 years.
Figure 62.34 Classic appearance of a large oesophageal gastr o-
intestinal stromal tumour on barium swallow. 
Figure 62.35 An intraluminal polyp that pr oved to be a leiomyosar-
coma. 
Pathology and aetiology
Squamous cell cancer (Figures 62.36 and 62.37) and adeno-
carcinoma (Figures 62.38 and 62.39) are the most common 
types. Squamous cell carcinoma generally affects the upper 
Summary box 62.11
Carcinoma of the oesophagus
●● Squamous cell usually affects the upper two-thirds; 
adenocarcinoma usually affects the lower third
●● Common aetiological factors are tobacco and alcohol 
(squamous cell), GORD and obesity (adenocarcinoma)
●● The incidence of adenocarcinoma is increasing
●● Lymph node involvement is a bad prognostic factor
●● Dysphagia is the most common presenting symptom, but is a 
late feature
●● Accurate pretreatment staging is essential in patients thought 
to be fit to undergo ‘curative’ treatment
Figure 62.36 The classic appearances of a midoesophageal pr olif-
erative squamous cell carcinoma. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1085 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1086
two-thirds of the oesophagus and adenocarcinoma the lower 
third. Worldwide, squamous cell cancer is most common, but 
adenocarcinoma predominates in the west and is increasing 
in incidence.
Geographical variation in oesophageal 
cancer
The incidence of oesophageal cancer varies more than that 
of any other cancer. Squamous cell cancer is endemic in the 
Transkei region of South Africa and in the Asian ‘cancer 
belt’, which extends across the middle of Asia from the shores 
of the Caspian Sea (in northern Iran) to China. The highest 
incidence in the world is in Linxian in Henan province in 
China, where it is the most common single cause of death, 
with more than 100 cases per 100 000 population per annum. 
The cause of the disease in the endemic areas is not known. 
Although there is evidence of genetic susceptibility across 
much of central Asia, a variety of environmental factors along 
with nutritional deficiencies are probably involved. In Linx -
ian, supplementation of the diet with β-carotene, vitamin E 
and selenium has been shown to reduce the incidence.
Away from the endemic areas, tobacco and alcohol are 
major factors in the occurrence of squamous cancer. Incidence 
rates vary from less than 5:100  000 in white people in the 
USA to 26.5:100 000 in some regions of France.
In many western countries, the incidence of squamous 
cell cancer has fallen or remained static, but the incidence 
of adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus has increased dramat -
ically since the mid-1970s at a rate of 5–10% per annum. 
Figure 62.37 Squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus produc-
ing an irregular stricture with shouldered margins. 
Figure 62.38 Adenocarcinoma of the lower oesophagus, spreading 
upwards from the cardia. 
Figure 62.39  Computed tomography scan showing a primary 
tumour of the lower oesophagus. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1086 25/10/2017   09:43Neoplasms of the oesophagus 1087
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
The change is greater than that of any other neoplasm in 
this time. Adenocarcinoma now accounts for 60–75% of all 
oesophageal cancers in several countries. The reason for this 
change is not understood. A similar rate of increase in GORD 
over the same period, which mirrors an increase in obesity 
in the west, is likely to be an important factor, particularly 
through the link to Barrett’s oesophagus. Obese, white men 
in their 60s represent the highest-risk group. There has also 
been an increase in the incidence of carcinoma of the cardia 
of the stomach, which suggests that cancer of the cardia and 
adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus may share common aeti -
ological factors. With a falling incidence of cancer in the rest 
of the stomach, more than 60% of all upper GI cancers in the 
west involve the cardia or distal oesophagus.
Both adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas tend 
to disseminate early. Sadly, the classic presenting symptoms of 
dysphagia, regurgitation and weight loss are often absent until 
the primary tumour has become advanced, and so the tumour 
is often well established before the diagnosis is made. Tumours 
can spread in three ways: invasion directly through the 
oesophageal wall, via the lymphatics or in the bloodstream. 
Direct spread occurs both laterally, through the component 
layers of the oesophageal wall, and longitudinally within the 
oesophageal wall. Longitudinal spread is mainly via the sub -
mucosal lymphatic channels of the oesophagus. The pattern 
of lymphatic drainage is therefore not segmental, as in other 
parts of the GI tract. Consequently, the length of oesophagus 
involved by tumour is frequently much longer than the mac -
roscopic length of the malignancy at the epithelial surface. 
Lymph node spread occurs commonly. Although the direc -
tion of spread to regional lymphatics is predominantly caudal, 
the involvement of lymph nodes is potentially widespread 
and can also occur in a cranial direction. Any regional lymph 
node from the superior mediastinum to the coeliac axis and 
lesser curve of the stomach may be involved, regardless of the 
location of the primary lesion within the oesophagus. Hae -
matogenous spread may involve a variety of different organs 
including the liver, lungs, brain and bones. Tumours arising 
from the intra-abdominal portion of the oesophagus may also 
disseminate transperitoneally.
Clinical features
Most oesophageal neoplasms present with mechanical symp-
toms, principally dysphagia, but sometimes also regurgitation, 
vomiting, odynophagia and weight loss. Clinical findings 
suggestive of advanced malignancy include recurrent laryn -
geal nerve palsy, Horner’s syndrome, chronic spinal pain and 
diaphragmatic paralysis. Other factors making surgical cure 
unlikely include weight loss of more than 20% and loss of 
appetite. Cutaneous tumour metastases or enlarged supracla -
vicular lymph nodes may be seen on clinical examination and 
indicate disseminated disease. Hoarseness due to recurrent 
laryngeal nerve palsy is a sign of advanced and incurable dis -
ease. Palpable lymphadenopathy in the neck is likewise a sign 
of advanced disease.
Patients with early disease may have non-specific dyspep-
tic symptoms or a vague feeling of ‘something that is not quite 
right’ during swallowing. Some are diagnosed during endo-
scopic surveillance of patients with Barrett’s oesophagus and, 
although this does identify patients with the earliest stages of 
disease, such programmes have little overall impact, because 
most patients with Barrett’s oesophagus are unknown to the 
medical profession and make their first presentation with a 
symptomatic, and therefore usually locally advanced, oesoph-
ageal cancer. The widespread use of endoscopy as a diagnostic 
tool does, nevertheless, provide an opportunity for early diag-
nosis (Figure 62.40). Biopsies should be taken of all lesions 
in the oesophagus (Figures 62.41 and 62.42), no matter how 
trivial they appear and irrespective of the indication for the 
examination.
Johann Friedrich Horner , 1831–1886, Professor of Ophthalmology, Zurich, Switzerland, described this syndrome in 1869.
Figure 62.40 Carcinoma in situ showing the varied presentations: 
(a) occult form; (b) erythroplakia; (c) leukoplakia. The right-hand pic-
tures in (a) and (b) demonstrate the use of vital staining with methy-
lene blue. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1087 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1088
Investigation
Endoscopy is the first-line investigation for most patients. It 
provides an unrivalled direct view of the oesophageal mucosa 
and any lesion allowing its site and size to be documented. 
Cytology and/or histology specimens taken via the endoscope 
are crucial for accurate diagnosis. The combination of histol-
ogy and cytology increases the diagnostic accuracy to more 
than 95%. The chief limitation of conventional endoscopy 
is that only the mucosal surface can be studied and biopsied. 
Other investigations are therefore usually required to define 
the extent of local or distant spread. The improved image res-
olution of modern endoscopes and novel techniques involv-
ing magnification and the use of dyes to enhance surface 
detail may lead to more early lesions being recognised.
GENERAL ASSESSMENT AND STAGING
Once the initial diagnosis of a malignant oesophageal neo -
plasm has been made, patients should be assessed first in terms 
of their general health and fitness for potential therapies. 
Their preferences should also be considered. Most potentially 
curative therapies include radical surgery, although definitive 
chemoradiotherapy is an alternative in squamous cell car -
cinoma. Patients who are unfit for, or who do not wish to 
contemplate, radical treatments should not be investigated 
further, but should be diverted to appropriate palliative ther -
apies, depending on the symptoms and current quality of life. 
Only those patients suitable for potentially curative therapies 
should proceed to staging investigations to rule out haematog-
enous spread (CT scan) and then to assess locoregional stage 
(endoscopic ultrasonography [EUS] ± laparoscopy). This 
will distinguish between early (T1/T2, N0) and advanced 
lesions (T3/T4, N1) and indicate whether surgery alone or 
multimodal therapy is most appropriate. Where attempted 
cure is deemed possible, the aim should be to provide the best 
chance of cure while minimising procedural risks. In general, 
surgery alone should be reserved for patients with early dis -
ease, and multimodal therapy should be used in patients with 
locally advanced disease, in whom the chance of cure by sur -
gery alone is small (generally <20%).
The most widely used pathological staging system is that 
of the World Health Organization (tumour–nodes–metastasis 
TNM).
Table 62.2 shows the TNM system for oesophageal can -
cer. Similar to all pathological systems, it relies on the nature 
and extent of the surgery performed, e.g. performing more 
Figure 62.41 Endoscopic appearances of a midoesophageal squa-
mous cell carcinoma. 
Figure 62.42 Beware the differential diagnosis of infection, for what 
appears to be a tumour. This midoesophageal mass was actually 
tuberculosis. 
TABLE 62.2 TNM staging scheme for oesophageal cancer.
Tis High-grade dysplasia
T1 Tumour invading lamina propria or submucosa
T2 Tumour invading muscularis propria
T3 Tumour invading beyond muscularis propria
T4a Tumour invading adjacent structures (pleura, pericardium, 
diaphragm)
T4b Tumour invading adjacent structures (trachea, bone, aorta)
N0 No lymph node metastases
N1 Lymph node metastases in 1–2 nodes
N2 Lymph nodes metastases in 3–6 nodes
N3 Lymph node metastases in 7 or more lymph nodes
M0 No distant metastases
M1 All other distant metastases
Stage 1A: T1N0M0; 1B: T2N0M0; 2A: T3N0M0; 2B: T1/2N0M0; 
3A: T4aN0M0, T3N1M0, T1/2N2M0
Stage 3B: T3N2M0; 3C: T4aN1/2M0, T4bN0–3M0, T1–4N3M0; 
4T:1–4N1–3M1
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1088 25/10/2017   09:43Neoplasms of the oesophagus 1089
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
extensive radical surgical lymphadenectomy provides a more 
accurate assessment of the ‘N’ stage. There is evidence that 
many patients described as N0 in the past were probably N1, 
a phenomenon described as stage migration.
Staging information may be gathered before the com-
mencement of therapy, during therapy (e.g. at open operation) 
or following treatment (histology or postmortem examina -
tion). The techniques commonly used to provide preopera -
tive staging data are described in Figure 62.43, along with a 
suggested algorithm.
BLOOD TESTS
These are of limited value. Blood tests reveal nothing about 
local invasion or regional lymph node spread and, to date, 
no reliable tumour marker for oesophageal cancer has been 
isolated from peripheral blood. The presence of abnormal 
liver function tests (LFTs) may suggest the presence of liver 
metastases, but this is generally too insensitive to be diagnos-
tic. Many patients with known liver metastases have normal 
LFTs. At best, abnormal LFTs only reinforce the clinical sus-
picion of spread to the liver, and further imaging is usually 
required to confirm the diagnosis.
TRANSCUTANEOUS UL TRASONOGRAPHY
It is difficult to visualise mediastinal structures with transcu -
taneous ultrasonography. With the relatively low-frequency 
sound waves used, good depth of tissue penetration is achieved 
at the expense of poor image resolution. In addition, the medi-
astinal organs are surrounded by bone and air, which renders 
them largely inaccessible to external ultrasound. The technique 
is therefore used mainly to assess spread to the liver, the whole 
of which can be clearly visualised by standard transcutaneous 
ultrasonography. Haematogenous spread can be more fully 
assessed by combining ultrasonography with chest radiography, 
although this combination is less accurate than CT scanning.
BRONCHOSCOPY
Many middle- and upper-third oesophageal carcinomas 
(and therefore usually squamous carcinomas) are sufficiently 
advanced at the time of diagnosis that the trachea or bron-
chi are already involved (Figure 62.44). Bronchoscopy may 
reveal either impingement or invasion of the main airways in 
over 30% of new patients with cancers in the upper third of 
the oesophagus. In some cases, therefore, bronchoscopy alone 
can confirm that the tumour is locally unresectable.
LAPAROSCOPY
This is a useful technique for the diagnosis of intra-abdominal 
and hepatic metastases. It has the advantage of enabling tissue 
samples or peritoneal cytology to be obtained and is the only 
modality reliably able to detect peritoneal tumour seedlings 
(Figure 62.45). This is particularly important for tumours 
arising from the intra-abdominal portion of the oesophagus, 
Palliation
Palliation
Is the patient ﬁt for surgery?
Haematogenous metastases?
Contiguous organ invasion
Peritoneal spread?
Lymph node metastases?
Multimodal therapyEndoscopy for
mucosal disease
or surgery alone
Palliation
PalliationYes
YesN o
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Figure 62.43 Algorithm for the management of oesophageal cancer. 
Figure 62.44 Invasion into the posterior wall of the trachea from an 
oesophageal carcinoma. 
Figure 62.45 Adenocarcinoma of the cardia. Transcoelomic spread 
may occur with this type of lesion. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1089 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1090
cardia and where there is a potential communication between 
a full-thickness tumour and the peritoneal cavity, for instance 
where there is a hiatus hernia.
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Computed tomography (CT) from the neck to the pelvis with 
intravenous contrast is the modality most used to identify 
haematogenous metastases (Figure 62.46). Distant organs 
are easily seen and metastases within them visualised with 
high accuracy (94–100%). The normal thoracic oesophagus 
is easily demonstrated by CT scanning. The mediastinal fat 
planes are usually clearly imaged in healthy individuals, and 
any blurring or distortion of these images is a fairly reliable 
indicator of abnormality. In cachectic patients with dysphagia 
and malnutrition, the mediastinal fat plane may be virtually 
absent, making local invasion difficult to assess. Thin-slice 
CT permits structures such as lymph nodes to be adequately 
imaged, down to a minimum diameter of about 5 mm. Smaller 
nodes cannot be reliably visualised, and it is not possible to 
distinguish between enlarged lymph nodes that have reactive 
changes only and metastatic nodes. Similarly, micrometasta -
ses within normal-sized nodes cannot be detected.
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) does not expose the 
patient to ionising radiation and needs no intravascular 
contrast medium, although intraoesophageal air or contrast 
media may help to assess wall thickness. Distant metastases 
to organs such as the liver are usually reliably identified by 
MRI but, at the moment, there do not seem to be additional 
benefits over CT.
ENDOSCOPIC UL TRASONOGRAPHY
After haematogenous spread, the two principal prognostic 
factors for oesophageal cancer are the depth of tumour pene -
tration through the oesophageal wall and regional lymph 
node spread. Although CT will detect distant metastasis, its 
limited axial resolution precludes a reliable assessment of both 
the depth of wall penetration and lymph node involvement. 
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) can determine the depth 
of spread of a malignant tumour through the oesophageal wall 
(T1–3), the invasion of adjacent organs (T4) and metastasis 
to lymph nodes (N0 or N1) (Figures 62.47–62.49). It can 
also detect contiguous spread downward into the cardia and 
more distant metastases to the left lobe of the liver.
EUS visualises the oesophageal wall as a multilayered 
structure. The layers represent ultrasound interfaces rather 
than true anatomical layers, but there is close enough cor -
relation to allow accurate assessment of the depth of invasion 
through the oesophageal wall. Structures smaller than 5  mm 
can be clearly seen, enabling very small nodes to be imaged. 
The EUS image morphology of such structures provides an 
additional means of distinguishing malignant from reactive 
or benign lymph nodes. For submucosal lesions, EUS can 
demonstrate the wall layer of origin of a lesion, suggesting the 
likely histological type.
Figure 62.46 Computed tomography scan demonstrating liver 
metastases. 
Figure 62.47  Endosonography demonstrating an ‘early’ tumour. 
Note the preservation of the outer dark wall layer that r epresents the 
muscle coat. 
Figure 62.48 Endosonography demonstrating an ‘advanced’ local 
tumour. Note the br each of the outer white line that represents the 
interface between the oesophageal wall and the mediastinum. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1090 25/10/2017   09:43Neoplasms of the oesophagus 1091
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Narrow EUS instruments are available for insertion over 
a guidewire to minimise the risk of technical failure, and lin -
ear array echoendoscopes can be used to biopsy lesions that 
might signify incurability outside the wall of the GI tract 
which might be considered to lie outside the proposed field 
of resection (usually lymph nodes outside a standard field).
Positron emission tomography 
with CT
Positron emission tomography (PET) with CT (PET-CT) 
in the context of cancer staging relies on the generally high 
metabolic activity (particularly in the glycolytic pathway) of 
tumours compared with normal tissues. The patient is given 
a small dose of the radiopharmaceutical agent [ 18F]fluorode-
oxyglucose (FDG). This enters cells and is phosphorylated. 
FDG 6-phosphate cannot be metabolised further and, as it 
is a highly polar molecule, it cannot easily diffuse back out 
of the cell. After intravenous injection of FDG, it contin -
uously accumulates in metabolically active cells. Primary 
oesophageal cancers are usually sufficiently active to be 
easily visible, and spatial resolution of positive PET areas 
occurs down to about 5–8  mm. When used in isolation, 
there are problems with the anatomical location of these 
areas. This has been significantly improved by combin -
ing PET with CT (Figure 62.50), which covers the whole 
body. The main value of PET-CT is the identification of 
distant metastatic disease not seen on CT alone. Although 
there are wide variations between centres, a change in stage 
is frequently reported in around 15% of patients, but the 
timing of the scan in relation to the last date of treatment 
is important and probably accounts for differences in per -
ceived effect. It has also been suggested that a reduction in 
PET activity after chemotherapy might be a way of predict -
ing ‘responders’ to this approach, although the persistence 
of PET activity after a neoadjuvant treatment seems to be a 
poor prognostic sign.
Treatment of malignant tumours
PRINCIPLES
At the time of diagnosis, around two-thirds of all patients 
with oesophageal cancer will already have incurable disease. 
The aim of palliative treatment is to overcome debilitating 
or distressing symptoms while maintaining the best quality of 
life possible for the patient. Some patients do not require spe-
cific therapeutic interventions, but do need supportive care 
and appropriate liaison with community nursing and hospice 
care services.
As dysphagia is the predominant symptom in advanced 
oesophageal cancer, the principal aim of palliation is to 
restore adequate swallowing. A variety of methods is avail-
able and, given the short life expectancy of most patients, it is 
important that the choice of treatment should be tailored to 
each individual. Tumour location and endoscopic appearance 
are important in this regard, as is the general condition of the 
patient.
Once oesophageal neoplasms reach the submucosal layer 
of the oesophagus, the tumour has access to the lymphatic 
system, meaning that, even at this early local stage, there is 
an incidence of nodal positivity for both squamous cell car -
cinoma and adenocarcinomas of about 20%. The principle of 
oesophagectomy is to deal adequately with the local tumour 
in order to minimise the risk of local recurrence and achieve 
an adequate lymphadenectomy to reduce the risk of staging 
error. Although studies in Japan would indicate that more 
extensive lymphadenectomy is associated with better survival, 
this may simply reflect more accurate staging. A number of 
studies support the view that the proximal extent of resection 
should ideally be 10  cm above the macroscopic tumour and 
5 cm distal. When such a margin cannot be achieved prox -
imally, particularly with squamous cell carcinoma, there is 
evidence that postoperative radiotherapy can minimise local 
recurrence, although this does not improve survival.
Adenocarcinoma commonly involves the gastric cardia 
and may therefore extend into the fundus or down the lesser 
curve. Some degree of gastric excision is essential in order to 
achieve adequate local clearance and accomplish an appro-
priate lymphadenectomy. Excision of contiguous structures, 
such as the crura, diaphragm and mediastinal pleura, needs 
to be considered as a method of creating negative resection 
margins.
Figure 62.49  Endosonography demonstrating malignant nodes. 
These are usually large, hypoechoic and round compared with normal 
nodes. 
Figure 62.50  Positron emission tomography/computed tomogra -
phy demonstrating a primary tumour and a distant metastatic node. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1091 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1092
The rarity of intramucosal cancer in symptomatic patients 
means that there are no randomised studies to compare dif-
ferent approaches to this type of very early disease. EMR for 
these apparently early (T1a) lesions has become increasingly 
popular, providing either a cure or at least sufficient histo-
logical information on which to base a further management 
strategy.
Surgery alone is best suited to patients with disease con-
fined to the oesophagus (T1b, T2) without nodal metastasis 
(N0). The problem here is ensuring that patients are truly 
node negative. Despite careful preoperative investigation, 
these patients are not easily identified and so there is an argu-
ment for neoadjuvant therapy followed by surgery. A cure 
rate for the patient who is truly node negative having surgery 
alone of between 50% and 80% needs to be balanced against 
adverse events related to neoadjuvant therapy, the likelihood 
of response and the potential impact on survival. Patients 
with more advanced stages of disease require either multi -
modal approaches or entry into appropriate trials.
It is essential that oesophagectomy should be performed 
with a low hospital mortality and complication rate. Patient 
selection, volume and experience of the surgical team are all 
important. Preoperative risk analysis has shown that this can 
play a major part in reducing hospital mortality. There are 
really no circumstances in the western world in which surgery 
should be undertaken if it is not part of an overall treatment 
plan aimed at cure.
(Figure 62.51), with an initial laparotomy and construction 
of a gastric tube, followed by a right thoracotomy to excise 
the tumour and create an oesophagogastric anastomosis. The 
closer this is placed to the apex of the thoracic cavity, the 
fewer problems there are with reflux disease. Three-phase 
oesophagectomy (McKeown) may be more appropriate for 
more proximal tumours in order to achieve better longitudi-
nal clearance, although the additional distance gained is less 
than many surgeons believe. A third cervical incision also 
permits lymphadenectomy in this region.
The extent of lymphadenectomy is highly controversial. 
For squamous cell carcinoma, because a higher proportion 
of patients will have middle- and upper-third tumours in the 
thoracic oesophagus, the rationale behind a three-phase oper-
ation with three-field lymphadenectomy is more understand-
able, even though this approach has not been widely adopted 
in the west. For adenocarcinoma, the incidence of metastases 
in the neck is relatively low in the context of patients who 
would otherwise be curable. For this reason, two-phase oper -
ations with two-field lymphadenectomy seem the most log -
ical operations. Although two-field lymphadenectomy does 
not substantially increase surgical morbidity or mortality, the 
same cannot be said for more extended operations.
Minimal access techniques, pioneered in Australia by 
Gotley and Smithers and in North America by Luketich, have 
enjoyed increasing popularity, often combined with enhanced 
recovery programmes after surgery (ERAS). Hybrid (where at 
least one phase is performed as open surgery), total minimally 
invasive and robotic oesophagectomy all have their advocates, 
although there are no high-quality comparative studies and 
little evidence to indicate clear superiority of one approach 
Treatments with curative intent
SURGERY
Histological tumour type, location and the extent of the pro-
posed lymphadenectomy all influence the surgical approach. 
This is largely an issue of surgical preference, although it 
should be recognised that a left thoracoabdominal approach 
is limited proximally by the aortic arch and should be avoided 
when the primary tumour is at or above this level. Similarly, 
transhiatal oesophagectomy is unsuitable for most patients 
with squamous cell carcinoma because a complete mediasti -
nal lymphadenectomy is not easily achieved by this approach. 
The most widely practised approach in the west is the two-
phase Ivor Lewis (sometimes called Lewis–Tanner) operation 
Summary box 62.12
Treatment of carcinoma of the oesophagus
●● Radical oesophagectomy is the most important aspect of 
curative treatment
●● Neoadjuvant treatments before surgery may improve survival 
in a proportion of patients
●● Chemoradiotherapy alone may cure selected patients, 
particularly those with squamous cell cancers
●● Useful palliation may be achieved by chemo-/radiotherapy or 
endoscopic treatments
(a)
(b)
Figure 62.51 The two usual approaches for surgery of the oesoph -
agus are (a) the thoracoabdominal, which opens the abdominal and 
thoracic cavities together, and (b) the two-stage Ivor Lewis approach, 
in which the abdomen is opened first, closed and then the thoracot -
omy is performed. In the McKeown operation, a third incision in the 
neck is made to complete the cervical anastomosis. 
Ivor Lewis , 1895–1982, surgeon, the North Middlesex Hospital, London, UK, and later at Rhyl, North Wales, UK.
Norman Cecil Tanner , 1906–1982, surgeon, Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK.
Kenneth Charles McKeown , 1912–1995, surgeon, Darlington Memorial Hospital, Darlington, County Durham, UK.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1092 25/10/2017   09:43Neoplasms of the oesophagus 1093
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
over the others. In experienced hands, the open operation 
can be reproduced by less invasive approaches, without signif-
icant compromise. Many groups have reported similar lymph 
node yields and rates of resection margin positivity with open 
and minimal access approaches. As yet, benefits seem to be 
confined to reduced wound pain and the absence of specific 
complications associated with long incisions.
Although many centres have reduced hospital mortality 
to low single figures after oesophagectomy, the complication 
rate remains high. At least a third of all patients will develop 
some significant complication after surgery. The most com -
mon of these is respiratory, followed by anastomotic leakage, 
chylothorax and injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerves. The 
most common late problem is benign anastomotic stricture, 
which seems to be higher with cervical rather than with 
intrathoracic anastomoses, although the problem is usually 
easily dealt with by endoscopic dilatation.
Lesions of the cardia that do not involve the oesophagus 
to any significant extent may be dealt with by extended total 
gastrectomy to include the distal oesophagus, or by proximal 
gastrectomy and distal oesophagectomy.
adequate proximal clearance of at least 5  cm. Carcinomas of 
the upper thoracic oesophagus are almost always incurable at 
the time of diagnosis, and invasion of the trachea is common. 
If one of these lesions is resectable, it is essential to use an 
incision in the neck (McKeown or three-phase operation) 
and to resect more of the oesophagus than is customary in the 
operation of subtotal oesophagectomy.
Oesophagogastric anastomosis may be performed equally 
well by hand or stapler . Both methods require attention to 
detail. In experienced hands, clinical anastomotic leakage 
should be less than 10%. Most surgeons still prefer to keep 
patients nil by mouth for 5–7 days. Most centres have aban -
doned the use of routine contrast swallows in patients who are 
clinically well. Conversely, aggressive investigation of a sus -
pected leak is mandatory for any unexplained fever or clinical 
event. This should involve early endoscopy, which has been 
shown to be safe and is the most reliable method for identify-
ing necrosis in any part of the replacement conduit and/or CT 
scan to resolve the situation adequately.
Postoperative nutritional support remains controversial. 
There is general agreement that parenteral feeding is associ -
ated with more nosocomial infection, including pneumonia, 
than enteral feeding. It is also expensive. The simplicity of 
placing a modern feeding jejunostomy device at the time of 
resection means that this is in routine use in many centres.
TRANSHIATAL OESOPHAGECTOMY (WITHOUT 
THORACOTOMY)
This approach was popularised for cancer by Orringer, adapt-
ing a technique developed in Brazil by Pinotti for the removal 
of chagasic megaoesophagus (see the section on achalasia, 
p. 1095). The stomach is mobilised through a midline abdom-
inal incision or by laparoscopy, and the cervical oesophagus 
is mobilised through an incision in the neck. The diaphragm 
is then opened from the abdomen, and the posterior medi -
astinum is entered. The lower oesophagus and the tumour 
are mobilised under direct vision, and the upper oesophagus 
is mobilised by blunt dissection. This approach can provide 
an adequate removal of the tumour and lymph nodes in the 
lower mediastinum, but it is not possible to remove the nodes 
in the middle or upper mediastinum. It may be a useful proce-
dure for lesions of the lower oesophagus, but is hazardous for a 
middle third lesion that may be adherent to the bronchus or 
to the azygos vein.
NEOADJUVANT TREATMENTS WITH SURGERY
Apart from the earliest stages of disease, surgery alone pro -
duces relatively few cures in either squamous cell carcinoma 
or adenocarcinoma patients. This led to a number of trials 
throughout the 1980s and 1990s to investigate the value of 
chemotherapy and surgery or chemoradiotherapy and sur -
gery compared with surgery alone. Some studies relate only 
to squamous cell cancer, and many are open to criticism on 
the grounds of trial design or patient numbers. Nevertheless,  
Summary box 62.13
Oesophagogastric surgery
●● Beware of satellite nodules proximal to the primary lesion
●● Carefully preserve the blood supply of the stomach, both 
venous and arterial
●● Right thoracic approach gives easy access to the oesophagus
TWO-PHASE OESOPHAGECTOMY (ABDOMEN AND 
RIGHT CHEST, IVOR LEWIS)
Mobilisation of the stomach must be done with care because 
it is essential to have a tension-free, well-vascularised stom -
ach for transposition. The left gastric, short gastric and left 
gastroepiploic arteries are all divided. The viability of the 
transposed stomach mainly depends on the right gastroepip -
loic and, to a lesser extent, the right gastric vessels. It should 
be noted that venous drainage is as important as arterial sup-
ply, and it is essential to perform an accurate anatomical dis -
section that preserves the right gastroepiploic vein as well as 
the artery. The stomach is divided to remove the cardia and 
the upper part of the lesser curve, including the whole of the 
left gastric artery and its associated lymph nodes.
The approach to the oesophagus through the right chest 
is straightforward, providing excellent access to the medias -
tinum, the thoracic inlet and the hiatus. The azygos vein is 
divided, and the whole of the intrathoracic oesophagus can 
be mobilised along with the thoracic duct (which is ligated 
by most surgeons) and the mediastinal lymph nodes. The 
oesophagus is divided just below the thoracic inlet. As most 
lesions are in the lower or middle third, this usually gives 
Mark Burton Orringer , surgeon, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Walter Pinotti , Professor of Surgery, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Carlos Justiniano Ribeiro Chagas , 1879–1934, Director of the Oswaldo Cruz Institute and Professor of Tropical Medicine, the University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1093 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1094
positive results in favour of neoadjuvant therapy for 
adenocarcin oma in two large studies as well as a limited 
meta-analysis indicated that it was no longer appropriate to 
consider surgery alone as the ‘gold standard’ treatment for 
most patients who are surgical candidates with adenocarci -
noma. The Dutch trial (CROSS) that compared chemora-
diotherapy and surgery versus surgery alone has provided the 
most convincing evidence so far of survival benefit for squa -
mous cell carcinoma. The same study was initially unable to 
show a survival benefit for adenocarcinomas, although subse-
quent analyses again suggested survival benefit of similar mag-
nitude to that seen with chemotherapy and surgery.
GASTRO-OESOPHAGEAL REFLUX FOLLOWING 
OESOPHAGOGASTRIC RESECTION
Gastro-oesophageal reflux may be a major problem after any 
operation that involves resecting the cardia. Reflux may pres-
ent with the typical symptoms of GORD or with a peptic 
stricture at the site of the anastomosis. However, the presen-
tation may be different with a miserable patient who fails to 
thrive after the operation and who is then suspected of hav -
ing recurrent cancer. This atypical presentation is particularly 
common after total gastrectomy with an inadequate recon -
struction that allows bile reflux.
chemoradiotherapy and surgical resection, and it is therefore 
impossible to make dogmatic statements about the relative 
merits of each form of treatment.
Summary box 62.14
Postoesophagectomy
●● Reflux may be a problem after resection
●● Symptoms may be atypical
●● Reflux may be limited or avoided by subtotal 
oesophagectomy and gastric transposition high in the chest
Summary box 62.15
Alternative therapeutic approaches
●● Chemoradiotherapy may be a useful alternative to surgery, 
especially in unfit patients
Summary box 62.16
Palliation
●● Palliation should be simple and effective
Non-surgical treatments
Radiotherapy alone was widely used as a single-modality treat-
ment for squamous cell carcinoma of the oesophagus until 
the late 1970s. The 5-year survival overall rate was 6%. As a 
result, multimodal approaches were adopted throughout the 
1980s, initial trials indicating that similar long-term survival 
rates could be obtained with surgery. Subsequent randomised 
studies, essentially confined to patients with squamous cell 
carcinoma, have indicated significant survival advantages 
with chemoradiotherapy over radiotherapy alone. Although 
it is clear that chemoradiotherapy does offer a prospect of 
cure for patients who may not be fit for surgery, particularly 
in squamous cell carcinoma, the high rate of locoregional fail-
ure has meant that surgery remains the mainstay of attempted 
curative treatments for both adenocarcinoma and squamous 
cell carcinoma in patients who have potentially resectable 
disease and are fit for oesophagectomy. In most western series, 
this represents about a third of patients with adenocarcinoma 
and a slightly lower percentage of patients with squamous 
cell carcinoma. There has been no high-quality randomised 
comparison of the results of definitive radiotherapy versus 
Palliative treatment
Surgical resection and external beam radiotherapy may be 
used for palliation, but are not suitable when the expected 
survival is short, because most of the remainder of life will 
be spent recovering from the ‘treatment’. Surgical bypass is 
likewise too major a procedure for use in a patient with lim -
ited life expectancy. A variety of relatively simple methods of 
palliation is now available that will produce worthwhile relief 
of dysphagia with minimal disturbance to the patient.
Intubation has been used for many years after the inven -
tion of the Souttar tube, which was made of coiled silver wire. 
A variety of rigid plastic or rubber tubes had been developed 
for placement under endoscopic and/or radiological control. 
The technology of intubation has now moved on with the 
development of various types of expanding metal stent (Fig-
ure 62.52). These are also inserted under radiographic or 
endoscopic control. The stent is collapsed during insertion 
and released when it is in the correct position. Expanding 
stents produce a wider lumen for swallowing than rigid tubes. 
More importantly, it is not necessary to dilate the oesophagus 
to beyond 8 mm to insert the unexpanded stent through the 
tumour, so there is a lower risk of injury to the oesophagus.
Endoscopic laser treatment may be used to core a channel 
through the tumour. It is based on thermal tumour destruc -
tion. It produces a worthwhile improvement in swallowing, 
but has the disadvantage that it has to be repeated every few 
weeks. Lasers may also be used to unblock a stent that has 
become occluded by tumour overgrowth. Other endoscopic 
Sir Henry Sessions Souttar , 1875–1964, surgeon, the London Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 62.52 Expanding metal stents, covered and uncovered. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1094 25/10/2017   09:43Motility disorders and div erticula 1095
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
methods include bipolar diathermy, argon-beam plasma coag-
ulation and alcohol injection.
Brachytherapy is a method of delivering intraluminal 
radiation with a short penetration distance (hence the pre -
fix ‘brachy’) to a tumour. An introduction system is inserted 
through the tumour, and the treatment is then delivered in a 
single session lasting approximately 20 minutes. The equip-
ment is expensive to purchase, but running costs are low.
Although the above methods are suitable for patients 
with very advanced disease, elderly people and those with 
significant comorbidities that would make more aggressive 
strategies inappropriate, an increasing proportion of patients 
(particularly with adenocarcinoma) are being treated with 
platinum-based chemotherapy. In general, this leads to only 
a modest prolongation of survival but a better quality of life 
than in those receiving an endoscopic treatment alone.
Malignant tracheo-oesophageal 
fistula
Malignant tracheo-oesophageal fistula is a sign of incurable 
disease. Some have advocated surgical bypass and oesopha-
geal exclusion, but this is a major procedure. An expanding 
metal stent is probably the best treatment.
Post-cricoid carcinoma
Post-cricoid carcinoma is considered in Chapter 47.
MOTILITY DISORDERS AND 
DIVERTICULA
Oesophageal motility disorders
A motility disorder can be readily understood when a patient 
has dysphagia in the absence of a stricture, and a barium-  
impregnated food bolus is seen to stick in the oesophagus. 
If this can be correlated with a specific abnormality on 
oesophageal manometry, accepting that this is the cause of the 
patient’s symptoms may be straightforward. Unfortunately, 
this is often not the case. Pain, with or without a swallowing 
problem, is frequently the dominant symptom, and patients 
often undergo extensive hospital investigation before the 
oesophagus is considered as a source of symptoms. Symptoms 
are often intermittent, and the correlation between symptoms 
and test ‘abnormalities’ is poor. Confirmation of a specific 
motility disturbance is made by high-resolution manometry. 
Much harm may be done by inappropriate enthusiastic surgery 
for ill-defined conditions. It should also be remembered that 
oesophageal dysmotility may be only a feature of a general 
disturbance in GI function.
Oesophageal motility disorders are currently best classified 
by incorporation of the Chicago classification developed for 
use with high-resolution manometry as shown in Tables 62.3 
and 62.4.
Functional pain and the oesophagus
Pain that is assumed to arise from dysfunction of the GI 
tract may reflect abnormal motor activity, abnormal percep -
tion or a combination of the two. There is evidence that all 
three exist. V ery high-pressure uncoordinated contractions 
(‘spasm’) have been shown to correlate with pain. Distension 
of a balloon in the oesophagus indicates that some patients 
have a low threshold for the sensation of pain (visceral hyper-
sensitivity), and this itself may reflect local or central neuro-
nal dysfunction. In practice, the difficulty is in understanding 
the relative contributions of these elements, so that a logical 
treatment might follow.
Achalasia
Pathology and aetiology
Achalasia (Greek ‘failure to relax’) is uncommon, but mer -
its prominence because it is reasonably understood and 
responds to treatment. It is due to loss of the ganglion cells 
in the myenteric (Auerbach’ s) plexus, the cause of which 
is unknown. In South America, chronic infection with the 
parasite Trypanosoma cruzi  causes Chagas’ disease, which 
has marked clinical similarities to achalasia. Achalasia differs 
Summary box 62.17
Oesophageal motility disorders
●● May be part of a more diffuse GI motility problem
●● May be associated with GORD
TABLE 62.3 General classification of oesophageal motility 
disorders. 
Disorders of the pharyngo-oesophageal junction
Neurological – stroke, motor neuron disease, multiple sclerosis, 
Parkinson’s disease
Myogenic – myasthenia, muscular dystrophy
Pharyngo-oesophageal (Zenker’s) diverticulum
Disorders of the body of the oesophagus
Diffuse oesophageal spasm
Nutcracker oesophagus
Autoimmune disorders – especially systemic sclerosis (CREST)
Reflux associated
Idiopathic
Allergic
Eosinophilic oesophagitis
Non-specific oesophageal dysmotility
Disorders of the lower oesophageal sphincter
Achalasia
Incompetent lower sphincter (i.e. GORD)
CREST, calcinosis, Raynaud’s syndrome, (o)esophageal motility disorders, 
sclerodactyly and telangiectasia.
GORD, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1095 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1096
from Hirschsprung’s disease of the colon because the dilated 
oesophagus usually contains few ganglion cells, whereas the 
dilated colon contains normal ganglion cells proximal to a 
constricted, aganglionic segment. Histology of muscle speci-
mens generally shows a reduction in the number of ganglion 
cells (and mainly inhibitory neurons) with a variable degree 
of chronic inflammation. When powerful non-peristaltic con-
tractions are still present, perhaps representing an early stage 
of the disease, inflammation and neural fibrosis may be seen 
with normal numbers of ganglion cells.
The classic physiological abnormalities are a non-relax -
ing LOS and absent peristalsis in the body of the oesophagus. 
The Chicago classification identifies three variants. Although 
most patients have almost no recognisable contractions (type 
I), some patients continue to exhibit pressurisation through -
out the oesophagus (type 2), whereas in others the oesopha-
gus is of normal calibre and exhibits high-pressure contractile 
(although non-peristaltic) activity (spastic oesophagus, vig -
orous achalasia). In some patients, these uncoordinated con -
tractions result in pain as much as a sense of food sticking. 
High-resolution manometry recognises these contraction 
patterns, which may be important in predicting the outcome 
of treatment. With time, the oesophagus dilates and contrac-
tions disappear, so that the oesophagus empties mainly by 
the hydrostatic pressure of its contents. This is nearly always 
incomplete, leaving residual food and fluid. The gas bub -
ble in the stomach is frequently absent, as no bolus with its 
accompanying normal gas passes through the sphincter. The 
‘megaoesophagus’ becomes tortuous with a persistent reten -
tion oesophagitis due to fermentation of food residues (Figure 
62.53), and this may account for the increased incidence of 
carcinoma of the oesophagus
TABLE 62.4 The Chicago Classification of oesophageal motility v3.0.
Achalasia and EGJ outflow obstruction Criteria
Type I achalasia (classic achalasia) Elevated median IRP (>15 mmHg), 100% failed peristalsis (DCI <100 mmHg·s·cm)
Premature contractions with DCI values <450 mmHg·s·cm satisfy criteria for failed 
peristalsis
Type II achalasia (with oesophageal compression) Elevated median IRP (>15 mmHg), 100% failed peristalsis, panoesophageal 
pressurisation with ≥20% of swallows
Contractions may be masked by oesophageal pressurisation and DCI should not be 
calculated
Type III achalasia (spastic achalasia) Elevated median IRP (>15 mmHg), no normal peristalsis, premature (spastic) 
contractions with DCI >450 mmHg·s·cm with ≥20% of swallows
May be mixed with panoesophageal pressurisation
EGJ outflow obstruction Elevated median IRP (>15 mmHg), sufficient evidence of peristalsis such that criteria 
for types I–III achalasia are not met
Major disorders of peristalsis (Not encountered in normal individuals)
Absent contractility Normal median IRP , 100% failed peristalsis
Achalasia should be considered when IRP values are borderline and when there is 
evidence of oesophageal pressurisation
Premature contractions with DCI values <450 mmHg·s·cm meet criteria for failed 
peristalsis
Distal oesophageal spasm Normal median IRP , ≥20% premature contractions with DCI >450 mmHg·s·cm. Some 
normal peristalsis may be present
Hypercontractile oesophagus (jackhammer) At least two swallows with DCI >8000 mmHg·s·cm
Hypercontractility may involve, or even be localised to, the LES
Minor disorders of peristalsis (Characterised by contractile vigour and contraction pattern)
Ineffective oesophageal motility (IEM) ≥50% ineffective swallows
Ineffective swallows can be failed or weak (DCI <450 mmHg·s·cm) 
Multiple repetitive swallow assessment may be helpful in determining peristaltic reserve
Fragmented peristalsis ≥50% fragmented contractions with DCI >450 mmHg·s·cm
Normal oesophageal motility Not fulfilling any of the above classifications
DCI, distal contractile integral (mmHg·s·cm); EGJ, o(e)sophaogastric junction; IRP , integrated relaxation pressure (mmHg); LES, lower o(e)sophageal sphincter. 
(From Kahrilas PJ et al. The Chicago Classification of esophageal motility disorders v3.0. Neurogastroenterology and Motility 2015; 27(2): 160–74, with kind 
permission, John Wiley & Sons.)
Harald Hirschsprung , 1831–1916, physician, the Queen Louise Hospital for Children, and Professor of Paediatrics, Copenhagen, Denmark, described congenital 
megacolon in 1888.
Summary box 62.18
Achalasia
●● Is uncommon
●● Is due to selective loss of inhibitory neurons in the lower 
oesophagus
●● The causes dysphagia and carcinoma must be excluded
●● Treatment is by either endoscopic dilatation, or endoscopic or 
surgical myotomy
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1096 25/10/2017   09:43Motility disorders and div erticula 1097
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Pseudoachalasia is an achalasia-like disorder that is 
usually produced by adenocarcinoma of the cardia (Figure 
62.54), but has also been described in relation to benign 
tumours at this level. It has been presumed that the inability 
of the sphincter to relax is linked to the loss of body peristal-
sis, although other cancers outside the oesophagus (bronchus, 
pancreas) have also been associated with pseudoachalasia.
Clinical features
The disease is most common in middle life, but can occur at 
any age. It typically presents with dysphagia, although pain 
(often mistaken for reflux) is common in the early stages. 
Patients often present late and, having had relatively mild 
symptoms, remain untreated for many years. Regurgitation is 
frequent, and there may be overspill into the trachea, espe -
cially at night.
Diagnosis
Achalasia may be suspected at endoscopy by finding a tight 
cardia and food residue in the oesophagus. Barium radiology 
may show hold-up in the distal oesophagus, abnormal con -
tractions in the oesophageal bo dy and a tapering stricture in 
the distal oesophagus, often described as a ‘bird’s beak’ (see 
Summary box 62.19
Lower oesophageal stricture
●● Beware pseudoachalasia; look for tumour
Figure 62.53 Achalasia of the oesophagus. (a) Barium swallow showing the smooth outline of the stricture, which narr ows to a point at its 
lower end. (b) Tortuosity and sigmoid appearance of the lower oesophagus. (c) Mediastinal shadow due to a large, fluid-filled oesophagus. 
Figure 62.54 Almost achalasia, but note the irregularity of the taper, 
which indicates carcinoma of the cardia. 
(a) (b) (c)
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1097 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1098
Figure 62.53). The gastric gas bubble is usually absent. These 
typical features of well-developed achalasia are often absent, 
and endoscopy and radiology can be normal. A firm diagno -
sis is established by high-resolution oesophageal manometry. 
Classically, the LOS does not relax completely on swallowing, 
there is no peristalsis and there is a raised resting pressure in 
the oesophagus (Figure 62.55). The LOS pressure may be 
elevated, but is often normal.
Treatment
Alone among motility disorders, achalasia responds well to 
treatment. The two main methods are forceful dilatation of 
the cardia and laparoscopic cardiomyotomy (conventionally 
performed together with a partial fundoplication), although 
in recent years there has been growing interest in the use of 
peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM). Comparative studies 
between pneumatic dilatation and surgical myotomy suggest 
equivalence in terms of safety , effectiveness and cost when 
considered over a number of years.
PNEUMATIC DILATATION
This involves stretching the cardia with a balloon to disrupt 
the muscle and render it less competent. The treatment was 
first described by Plummer. Many varieties of balloon have 
been used but, nowadays, plastic balloons with a precisely 
controlled external diameter are used. If the pressure in the 
balloon is too high, the balloon is designed to split along its 
length rather than expanding further. Balloons of 30–40 mm 
in diameter are available and are inserted over a guidewire 
(Figure 62.56). Perforation is the major complication. With 
a 30-mm balloon, the incidence of perforation should be less 
than 0.5%. The risk of perforation increases with bigger bal-
loons, and they should be used cautiously for progressive dil-
atation over a period of weeks. Forceful dilatation is curative 
in 75–85% of cases. The results are best in patients aged over 
45 years.
Swallow Swallow
No LOS relaxation Common cavity
pressure rise
No LOS relaxation on e-sleeve
(bold brown line plot)
UOS relaxation
Figure 62.55 High-resolution oesophageal manometry from a patient presenting with dysphagia and regurgitation. The swallow is followed by 
a common cavity rise in oesophageal pressure indicating filling. Lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) relaxation is absent and there is a positive 
oesophagogastric pressure gradient. Upper oesophageal sphincter (UOS) relaxation shortly after the swallow was related to regurgitation of 
oeso phageal contents. 
Figure 62.56 Balloon dilator for the treatment of achalasia by force-
ful dilatation. 
Henry Stanley Plummer , 1874–1937, physician, the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Ernst Heller , 1877–1964, surgeon, St George’s Krankenhaus, Leipzig, Germany.
Summary box 62.20
Achalasia
●● Beware perforation due to dilatation of achalasia
●● Beware postoperative reflux
HELLER’S MYOTOMY
This involves cutting the muscle of the lower oesopha -
gus and cardia (Figure 62.57). The major complication is 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1098 25/10/2017   09:43Motility disorders and div erticula 1099
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
 gastro-oesophageal reflux, and most surgeons therefore add a 
partial anterior fundoplication (Heller–Dor operation). The 
procedure is ideally suited to a minimal access laparoscopic 
approach, and most surgeons use intraoperative endoscopy to 
judge the extent of the myotomy and to ensure that the nar -
row segment is abolished.
It is successful in more than 90% of cases and may be used 
after failed dilatation.
ENDOSCOPIC MYOTOMY
This was introduced in Japan in 2009. It involves the creation 
of a submucosal tunnel in the midoesophagus that can be 
developed distally, allowing a long myotomy to be performed. 
The oesophageal mucosal defect is clipped shut at the end. 
Many cohort studies indicate that the procedure can be per -
formed safely and early clinical results imply equivalence to 
other approaches.
BOTULINUM TOXIN
This is done by endoscopic injection into the LOS. It acts by 
interfering with cholinergic excitatory neural activity at the 
LOS. The effect is not permanent, and the injection usually 
has to be repeated after a few months. For this reason, its use 
is restricted to elderly patients with other comorbidities.
DRUGS
Drugs such as calcium channel antagonists have been used 
but are ineffective for long-term use. However, sublingual 
nifedipine may be useful for transient relief of symptoms if 
definitive treatment is postponed.
Other oesophageal motility 
disorders
Disorders of the pharyngo-oesophageal 
junction
With the exception of Zenker’s diverticulum (see below), most 
patients with oropharyngeal dysphagia have generalised neu-
rological or muscular disorders with pharyngeal involvement. 
A small number of patients who have sustained a cerebro -
vascular accident benefit from myotomy of cricopharyngeus 
to alleviate pooling of saliva and nocturnal aspiration, but 
they should have good deglutition and phonation before this 
is performed. The operation is also effective in patients with 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy.
Disorders of the body of the oesophagus
The older terms, ‘diffuse oesophageal spasm’ and ‘jackhammer 
(nutcracker) oesophagus’, have been replaced in the Chicago 
classification. There are, nevertheless, patients with incoordi-
nate contractions of the oesophagus who experience dyspha -
gia and/or chest pain. The condition may be dramatic, with 
spastic pressures on manometry of 400–500  mmHg, marked 
hypertrophy of the circular muscle and a corkscrew oesoph -
agus on barium swallow (Figure 62.58). These abnormal 
contractions are more common in the distal two-thirds of the 
oesophageal body (Figure 62.59) and this may have some 
relevance to treatment. Making the diagnosis when chest 
pain is the only symptom may be difficult. Prolonged oesoph-
ageal manometry that correlates episodes of chest pain with 
manometric abnormalities may establish the diagnosis.
There is no proven pharmacological or endoscopic treat -
ment. Calcium channel antagonists, vasodilators and endo -
scopic dilatation have only transient effects. Although the 
severity and frequency of symptoms may be tolerated by most 
Figure 62.57 Heller’s myotomy: the incision should not go too far 
on to the stomach. The lateral extent must enable the mucosa to pout 
out, to prevent the edges healing together. 
Friedrich Albert Zenker , 1825–1898, Professor of Pathology, Dresden, Germany.
Figure 62.58 Corkscrew oesophagus in diffuse oesophageal spasm. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1099 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1100
patients, sometimes the combination of chest pain and dys -
phagia is sufficiently severe that malnutrition begins. In these 
patients, extended oesophageal myotomy up to the aortic 
arch may be required. Surgical treatment is more successful in 
improving dysphagia than chest pain, and caution should be 
exercised in patients in whom chest pain is the only symptom.
Jackhammer or nutcracker oesophagus is a condition with 
characteristic high-pressure manometric features (see Table 
62.4). The correlation of manometric abnormalities with 
symptoms remains poor.
OESOPHAGEAL INVOL VEMENT IN AUTOIMMUNE 
DISEASE
Oesophageal involvement is mainly seen in systemic scle -
rosis, but may be a feature of polymyositis, dermatomyosi -
tis, systemic lupus erythematosus, polyarteritis nodosa and 
rheumatoid disease. Although most involve weak peristalsis, 
swallowing difficulties may be compounded by pharyngeal 
problems in the disorders that primarily affect skeletal mus-
cle (e.g. polymyositis) or extraoesophageal problems such as 
involvement of the cricoarytenoid joint in rheumatoid dis-
ease or dry mouth in Sjögren’s syndrome. In systemic scle-
rosis, smooth muscle atrophy causes hypoperistalsis (Figure 
62.60). The LOS is involved, leading to a loss of the antire -
flux barrier. A wide range of symptoms can follow from mild 
to severe dysphagia accompanied by regurgitation and aspir -
ation. Reflux can be severe and is exacerbated by weak acid 
clearance so that strictures can occur. There are no drugs that 
specifically correct the motor disorder, and medical treatment 
is mainly directed at minimising reflux-induced damage with 
PPIs. A small number of patients may require anti-reflux sur -
gery.
Eosinophilic oesophagitis is a disorder that occurs in 
children and adults either alone or as a manifestation of 
Swallow Swallow
LOS relaxation Repetitive
segmental spasm
LOS relaxation
Figure 62.59 High-resolution oesophageal manometry from a patient presenting with dysphagia and chest pain. The swallow is followed by 
simultaneous, repetitive contractions in the mid-distal smooth muscle oesophagus. Lower oesophageal sphincter (LOS) relaxation is preserved. 
Note the sequential simultaneous contractions first in the mid- and distal segments of the oesophagus and then in the LOS make it appear as if 
there is progressive peristalsis on the conventional line plots (dotted arrow). Repetitive contractions are seen clearly on both. 
Figure 62.60  Advanced scleroderma of the oesophagus. The 
oesophagus dilates, and the lower oesophageal sphincter is widely 
incompetent. 
Henrik Samuel Conrad Sjögren , 1899–1986, Professor of Ophthalmology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1100 25/10/2017   09:43Motility disorders and div erticula 1101
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
eosinophilic gastroenteritis. It is characterised by eosinophilic 
infiltration of the oesophageal wall, presumably of allergic or 
idiopathic origin. The most common presenting symptom is 
dysphagia, and more than half have some history of atopy. 
The oesophagus often seems narrow and friable on endoscopy 
and may include mucosal rings. The most important feature is 
the development of deep ulcers, leading to stricture develop -
ment, especially in the proximal oesophagus. The diagnosis is 
established by endoscopic biopsy.
Elimination diets, and topical and systemic steroids all 
seem to be helpful in the short term, but there is scant infor -
mation on the long-term impact of any particular approach. 
Immunotherapy directed against interleukin (IL)-5, which 
has a major role in eosinophil recruitment, seems to be a 
promising innovative approach. Although endoscopic dil -
atation has been recommended, this can create deep ulcers 
and further scarring, so should be used with caution and only 
when the above therapies fail.
Pharyngeal and oesophageal diverticula
Most oesophageal diverticula are pulsion diverticula that 
develop at a site of weakness as a result of chronic pressure 
against an obstruction. Symptoms are mostly caused by the 
underlying disorder unless the diverticulum is particularly 
large. T raction diverticula (Figure 62.61) are much less 
common. They are mostly a consequence of chronic granu -
lomatous disease affecting the tracheobronchial lymph nodes 
due to tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria or histoplasmosis. 
Fibrotic healing of the lymph nodes exerts traction on the 
oesophageal wall and produces a focal outpouching which 
is usually small and has a conical shape. There may be asso -
ciated broncholithiasis, and additional complications may 
occur, such as aerodigestive fistulation (Figure 62.62) and 
bleeding.
Zenker’s diverticulum (pharyngeal pouch)  is not really 
an oesophageal diverticulum as it protrudes posteriorly above 
the cricopharyngeal sphincter through the natural weak 
point (the dehiscence of Killian) between the oblique and 
horizontal (cricopharyngeus) fibres of the inferior pharyngeal 
constrictor (Figures 62.63 and 62.64). The exact mecha -
nism that leads to its formation is unknown, but it involves 
loss of the coordination between pharyngeal contraction and 
opening of the upper sphincter. When the diverticulum is 
small, symptoms largely reflect this incoordination with pre-
dominantly pharyngeal dysphagia. As the pouch enlarges, 
it tends to fill with food on eating, and the fundus descends 
into the mediastinum. This leads to halitosis and oesopha-
geal dysphagia. Treatment can be undertaken endoscopically 
with a linear cutting stapler to divide the septum between 
the diverticulum and the upper oesophagus, producing a 
Figure 62.61 Midoesophageal traction diverticulum with the mouth 
facing downwards. 
Gustav Killian , 1860–1921, Professor of Laryngology at Freiburg, and later at Berlin, Germany.
Figure 62.62  Midoesophageal diverticulum with a trachea-oeso -
phageal fistula. 
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1101 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1102
Midoesophageal diverticula are usually small pulsion 
diverticula of no particular consequence. The underlying 
motility disorder does not usually require treatment. Some 
pulsion diverticula may fistulate into the trachea (see Figure 
62.62), but this is more common with traction diverticula in 
granulomatous disease.
Epiphrenic diverticula are pulsion diverticula situated in 
the lower oesophagus above the diaphragm (Figure 62.65). 
They may be quite large, but cause surprisingly few symptoms. 
They again probably reflect some loss of coordination between 
an incoming pressure wave and appropriate relaxation of the 
LOS. This needs to be acknowledged in the surgical manage-
ment of the patient. The diverticulum, in isolation, should 
not be assumed to account for a patient’s illness just because 
it looks dramatic on a radiograph. Large diverticula may be 
excised, and this should be combined with a myotomy from 
the site of the diverticulum down to the cardia to relieve 
functional obstruction.
Figure 62.63 The typical appearances of: (a) a small pharyngeal 
pouch with a pr ominent cricopharyngeal impression and ‘stream -
ing’ of barium, indicating partial obstruction; and (b) a large pouch 
extending behind the oesophagus towards the thoracic inlet. 
Figure 62.64 The endoscopic appearance of the mouth of a pharyn-
geal pouch posterior to the normal opening (left) of the oesophagus. 
(a)
(b)
Diffuse intramural pseudodiverticulosis is a rare condi-
tion in which there are multiple tiny outpouchings from the 
lumen of the oesophagus. The pseudodiverticula are dilated 
excretory ducts of oesophageal sebaceous glands. It is ques -
tionable whether the condition produces any symptoms in its 
own right.
OTHER NON-NEOPLASTIC 
CONDITIONS
Schatzki’s ring
Schatzki’s ring is a circular ring in the distal oesophagus 
(Figure 62.66), usually at the squamocolumnar junction. The 
Summary box 62.21
Oesophageal diverticula
●● Diverticula are indicators of a motor disorder and not 
necessarily the cause of symptoms
Richard Schatzki , 1901–1992, American radiologist.
diverticulo-oesophagostomy, or can be done by open sur -
gery involving pouch excision, pouch suspension (diverticu -
lopexy) and/or myotomy of cricopharyngeus. All techniques 
have good results.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1102 25/10/2017   09:43Other non-neoplastic conditions 1103
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
cause is obscure, but there is a strong association with reflux 
disease. The core of the ring consists of variable amounts of 
fibrous tissue and cellular infiltrate. Most rings are incidental 
findings. Some are associated with dysphagia and respond to 
dilatation in conjunction with medical antireflux therapy.
Oesophageal infections
Bacterial infection of the oesophagus is rare, but fungal and 
viral infections do occur. They are particularly important in 
immunocompromised patients.
Oesophagitis due to Candida albicans is relatively common 
in patients taking steroids (especially transplant recipients) 
or those undergoing cancer chemotherapy. It may present 
with dysphagia or odynophagia. There may be visible thrush 
in the throat. Endoscopy shows numerous white plaques 
that cannot be moved, unlike food residues (Figure 62.67). 
Biopsies are diagnostic. In severe cases, a barium swallow 
may show dramatic mucosal ulceration and irregularity that 
is surprisingly similar to the appearance of oesophageal vari -
ces (Figures 62.68 and 62.69) . Treatment is with a topical 
antifungal agent.
Figure 62.66  Schatzki’s ring, a thin submucosal web completely 
encircling the whole of the lumen, usually situated at the squamo -
columnar junction. 
(a)
Figure 62.65  Epiphrenic diverticulum pr oximal to the gastro-  
oesophageal sphincter. (a) Small and asymptomatic; (b) large, symp-
tomatic and appearing as a gas-filled bubble on the chest radiograph. 
(b)
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1103 25/10/2017   09:43CHAPTER 62  The oesophagus
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1104
Dysphagia and odynophagia can also be caused by herpes 
simplex virus and cytomegalovirus (CMV). With the former, 
there may be a history of a herpetic lesion on the lip some days 
earlier, and endoscopy may reveal vesicles or small ulcers with 
raised margins, usually in the upper half of the oesophagus. 
CMV infection may be apparent in graft-versus-host disease 
following bone marrow transplantation. It has a characteristic 
endoscopic appearance with a geographical, serpiginous bor -
der. In both cases, endoscopic biopsy is diagnostic.
Chagas’ disease
This condition is confined to South American countries, 
but is of interest because oesophageal symptoms occur that 
are similar to severe achalasia. It is caused by a protozoan, 
Trypanosoma cruzi, transmitted by an insect vector. Para-
sites reach the bloodstream and, after a long latent period, 
there is damage particularly to cardiac and smooth muscle. 
Destruction of both Auerbach’s and Meissner’s plexus leads to 
acquired megaoesophagus.
Crohn’s disease
The oesophagus is not commonly affected by symptomatic 
Crohn’s disease. However, pathological studies indicate that it 
may be present in 20% of patients without symptoms. Symp -
toms are often severe, and a diagnosis of reflux oesophagitis is 
usually made on the basis of retrosternal pain and dysphagia. 
Figure 62.67 Endoscopic appearance of oesophageal candidiasis. 
Figure 62.68 Oesophageal candidiasis with shaggy appearance of 
mucosal defects. 
Figure 62.69 Oesophageal varices with smooth outline of the filling 
defects. 
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described regional ileitis in 1932.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1104 25/10/2017   09:43Further reading 1105
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Endoscopy shows extensive oesophagitis that extends much 
further proximally than reflux oesophagitis. Biopsies may be 
diagnostic, but may show only non-specific inflammation. 
In severe cases, deep sinuses occur, and fistulation has been 
described. Crohn’s oesophagitis is said to respond poorly to 
medical treatment and, although balloon dilatation of stric -
tures and surgical resection for multiple internal fistulae have 
both been described, these interventions should be used with 
great caution.
Plummer–Vinson syndrome
This is also called the Paterson–Kelly (or Paterson–Brown 
Kelly) syndrome or sideropenic dysphagia. The original 
descriptions are vague and poorly supported by evidence of 
a coherent syndrome. Dysphagia is said to occur because of 
the presence of a postcricoid web that is associated with iron 
deficiency anaemia, glossitis and koilonychia. The classic 
syndrome is rarely complete. Some patients may have oro -
pharyngeal leukoplakia, and this may account for an alleged 
increased risk of developing hypopharyngeal cancer.
Webs certainly occur in the upper and middle oesophagus, 
usually without any kind of associated syndrome. They are 
nearly always thin diaphanous membranes identified coinci -
dentally by contrast radiology. Even symptomatic webs that 
cause a degree of obstruction may be inadvertently ruptured 
at endoscopy. Few require formal endoscopic dilatation.
Vascular abnormalities affecting the 
oesophagus
Several congenital vascular anomalies may produce dyspha -
gia by compression of the oesophagus. Classically, this results 
from an aberrant right subclavian artery (arteria lusoria). 
However, the oesophagus is more commonly compressed by 
vascular rings, such as a double aortic arch. Dysphagia occurs 
in only a minority of cases and usually presents early in child-
hood, although it can occur in the late teens. Treatment 
is usually by division of the non-dominant component of  
 the ring.
In adults, acquired causes include aneurysm of the aorta, 
diffuse cardiac enlargement and pressure from the left com-
mon carotid or vertebral arteries. It is rare that symptom 
severity justifies surgical intervention.
Mediastinal fibrosis
This rare condition can occur alone or together with retro -
peritoneal fibrosis. The cause is unknown and, although the 
major consequences are usually cardiovascular as a result of 
caval compression, dysphagia can occur. The existence of 
irreparable cardiovascular problems usually precludes surgical 
intervention on the oesophagus.
FURTHER READING
Castell DO, Richter JE. The esophagus, 5th edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2011.
Griffin SM, Raimes SA, Shenfine J. Oesophago-gastric surgery, 5th edn. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Ltd, 2013.
Luketich JD. Master techniques in surgery: esophageal surgery. Philadelphia, 
PA: Wolters Kluwer, 2014.
Pleskow D, Erim T. Barrett’s esophagus: emerging evidence for improved 
clinical practice. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, 2016.
Sharma P , Sampliner RE, Ilson D. Esophageal cancer and Barrett’s 
oesophagus, 3rd edn. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
Takubo K. Pathology of the esophagus. New York: Springer, 2010.
Henry Stanley Plummer , 1874–1936, American internist and endocrinologist.
Porter Paisley Vinson , 1890–1959, Physician, the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, who later practised in Richmond, VA, USA.
Adam Brown Kelly , 1865–1941, surgeon, Ear, Nose and Throat Department, the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Glasgow, UK.
Donald Rose Paterson , 1863–1939, surgeon, Ear, Nose and Throat Department, the Royal Infirmary, Cardiff, UK.
Vinson, Kelly and Paterson  all described this syndrome independently in 1919.
11_62-B&L27_Pt11_Ch62.indd   1105 25/10/2017   09:43Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Stomach and duodenum
Learning objectives
 • To understand the gross and microscopic anatomy and 
pathophysiology of the stomach in relation to disease
 • To be able to decide on the most appropriate 
techniques to use in the investigation of patients with 
complaints relating to the stomach and duodenum
 • To understand the critical importance of gastritis and 
Helicobacter pylori in upper gastrointestinal disease
 • To be able to investigate and treat peptic ulcer disease 
and its complications
 • To be able to recognise the presentation of gastric 
cancer and understand the principles involved in its 
treatment
 • To know about the causes of duodenal obstruction and 
the presentation of duodenal tumours
INTRODUCTION
The function of the stomach is to act as a reservoir for ingested 
food. It also serves to break down foodstuffs mechanically and 
commence the processes of digestion before these products 
are passed on into the duodenum.
GROSS ANATOMY OF THE 
STOMACH AND DUODENUM
Blood supply
Arteries
The stomach has an arterial supply on both lesser and greater 
curves (Figure 63.1 ). On the lesser curve, the left gastric 
artery, a branch of the coeliac axis, forms an anastomotic 
arcade with the right gastric artery, which arises from the 
common hepatic artery. Branches of the left gastric artery pass 
up towards the cardia. The gastroduodenal artery, which is 
also a branch of the hepatic artery, passes behind the first part 
of the duodenum, highly relevant with respect to the bleed-
ing duodenal ulcer. Here it divides into the superior pancre -
aticoduodenal artery and the right gastroepiploic artery. The 
superior pancreaticoduodenal artery supplies the duodenum 
and pancreatic head, and forms an anastomosis with the 
inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, a branch of the superior 
mesenteric artery. The right gastroepiploic artery runs along 
the greater curvature of the stomach, eventually forming an 
anastomosis with the left gastroepiploic artery, a branch of 
the splenic artery. This vascular arcade, important for the 
construction of the gastric conduit in oesophageal resection, 
is often variably incomplete. The fundus of the stomach is 
 supplied by the vasa brevia (or short gastric arteries), which 
arise from near the termination of the splenic artery.
Veins
In general, the veins are equivalent to the arteries, those 
along the lesser curve ending in the portal vein and those on 
the greater curve joining via the splenic vein. On the lesser 
curve, the coronary vein is particularly important. It runs up 
the lesser curve towards the oesophagus and then passes left 
to right to join the portal vein. This vein becomes markedly 
dilated in portal hypertension.
Vasa breviaSplenic artery
Left gastric artery
Right gastric artery
Hepatic artery
Duodenal cap
Gastroduodenal
artery
Superior
pancreatico-
duodenal artery
Right gastroepiploic
artery
Splenic
artery
Left gastro-
epiploic
artery
Gastrocolic
(greater) omentum
Figure 63.1 The arterial blood supply of the stomach.
63
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1106 25/10/2017   09:45Microscopic anat omy of the stomach and duodenum 1107
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Lymphatics
The lymphatics of the stomach are of considerable importance 
in the surgery of gastric cancer and are therefore described in 
detail in that section.
Nerves
As with the entire gastrointestinal tract, the stomach and 
duodenum possess both intrinsic and extrinsic nerve supplies. 
The intrinsic nerves exist principally in two plexuses, the 
myenteric plexus of Auerbach and the submucosal plexus of 
Meissner. Compared with the rest of the gut, the submucosal 
plexus of the stomach contains relatively few ganglionic cells, 
as does the myenteric plexus in the fundus. However, in the 
antrum the ganglia of the myenteric plexus are well devel -
oped. The extrinsic supply is derived mainly from the vagus 
nerves (CN XI), fibres of which originate in the brainstem. 
The vagal plexus around the oesophagus condenses into bun-
dles that pass through the oesophageal hiatus (Figure 63.2), 
the posterior bundle being usually identifiable as a large nerve 
trunk. Vagal fibres are both afferent (sensory) and efferent. 
The efferent fibres are involved in the receptive relaxation of 
the stomach and the stimulation of gastric motility, as well as 
having the well-known secretory function. The sympathetic 
supply is derived mainly from the coeliac ganglia.
MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY 
OF THE STOMACH AND 
DUODENUM
The gastric epithelial cells are mucus producing and are 
turned over rapidly. In the pyloric part of the stomach, and 
also the duodenum, mucus-secreting glands are found. Most 
of the specialised cells of the stomach (parietal and chief 
cells) are found in the gastric crypts (Figure 63.3). The stom-
ach also has numerous endocrine cells.
Parietal cells
These are in the body (acid-secreting portion) of the stomach 
and line the gastric crypts, being more abundant distally. They 
are responsible for the production of hydrogen ions to form 
hydrochloric acid. The hydrogen ions are actively secreted 
by the proton pump, a hydrogen–potassium-ATPase (Sachs), 
which exchanges intraluminal potassium for hydrogen ions. 
The potassium ions enter the lumen of the crypts passively, 
but the hydrogen ions are pumped against an immense con -
centration gradient (1 000 000:1).
Chief cells
These lie principally proximally in the gastric crypts and 
produce pepsinogen. Two forms of pepsinogen are described: 
pepsinogen I and pepsinogen II. Both are produced by the 
chief cell, but pepsinogen I is produced only in the stomach. 
The ratio between pepsinogens I and II in the serum decreases 
with gastric atrophy. Pepsinogen is activated in the stomach 
to produce the digestive protease, pepsin.
Endocrine cells
The stomach has numerous endocrine cells, which are critical 
to its function. In the gastric antrum, the mucosa contains 
G cells, which produce gastrin. Throughout the body of the 
stomach, enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells are abundant and 
produce histamine, a key factor in driving gastric acid secre -
tion. In addition, there are large numbers of somatostatin-  
Leopold Auerbach , 1828–1897, Professor of Neuropathology, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland), described the myenteric plexus in 1862.
George Meissner , 1829–1905, Professor of Physiology, Gottingen, Germany.
George Sachs , Professor of Medicine, CURE, Los Angeles, CA, USA, discoverer of the proton pump.
Hepatic
branches
Anterior nerve
of Latarjet
Crow’s foot
Gastric
branch
Coelia
Crow’s foot
Gastric
branch
‘Criminal’ nerve
of Grassi
Anterior Posterior
Posterior 
nerve
Figure 63.2 The anatomy of the anterior and posterior vagus nerves in relation to the stomach.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1107 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1108
producing D cells throughout the stomach, and somatostatin 
has a negative regulatory role. The peptides and neuropep -
tides produced in the stomach are discussed later.
Duodenum
The duodenum is lined by a mucus-secreting columnar epi -
thelium. In addition, Brunner’s glands lie beneath the mucosa 
and are similar to the pyloric glands in the pyloric part of the 
stomach. Endocrine cells in the duodenum produce cholecys-
tokinin and secretin.
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE STOMACH 
AND DUODENUM
The stomach mechanically breaks up ingested food and, 
together with the actions of acid and pepsin, forms chyme 
that passes into the duo denum. In contrast with the acidic 
environment of the stomach, the environment of the duo -
denum is alkaline, due to the secretion of bicarbonate ions 
from both the pancreas and the duodenum. This neutra-
lises the acid chyme and adjusts the luminal osmolarity to 
 approximately that of plasma. Endocrine cells in the duode -
num produce cholecystokinin, which stimulates the pancreas 
to produce trypsin and the gall bladder to contract. Secretin 
is also produced by the endocrine cells of the duodenum. This 
hormone inhibits gastric acid secretion and promotes produc-
tion of bicarbonate by the pancreas.
Johann Conrad Brunner  , 1653–1729, Professor of Anatomy, Heidelberg, Germany, and later at Strasbourg, France.
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov , 1849–1936, Professor of Physiology, The Medico-Chirurgical Academy, St Petersburg, Russia.
Figure 63.3  The histological appearance of a gastric gland. The 
mucus-secreting cells are seen at the mucosal surface, the eosino-
philic parietal cells superficially in the glands and the basophilic chief 
cells in the deepest layer.
Summary box 63.1
The anatomy and physiology of the stomach
●● The stomach acts as a reservoir for food and commences the 
process of digestion
●● Gastric acid is produced by a proton pump in the parietal 
cells, which in turn is controlled by histamine acting on the 
H2-receptors
●● The histamine is produced by the endocrine gastric ECL cells 
in response to a number of factors, particularly gastrin and the 
vagus
●● Proton pump inhibitors abolish gastric acid production, 
whereas H2-receptor antagonists only markedly reduce it
●● The gastric mucous layer is essential to the integrity of the 
gastric mucosa
Gastric acid secretion
The secretion of gastric acid and pepsin tends to run in parallel, 
although the understanding of the mechanisms of gastric acid 
secretion is considerably greater than that of pepsin. Numer -
ous factors are involved to some degree in the production of 
gastric acid. These include neurotransmitters, neuropeptides 
and peptide hormones. This complexity need not detract from 
the fact that there are basic principles that are relatively easily 
understood (Figure 63.4). Hydrogen ions are produced by the 
parietal cell by the proton pump. Although numerous factors 
can act on the parietal cell, the most important of these is his-
tamine, which acts via the H2-receptor. Histamine is produced, 
in turn, by the ECL cells of the stomach and acts in a para-
crine (local) fashion on the parietal cells. These relationships 
explain why proton pump inhibitors can abolish gastric acid 
secretion, as they act on the final common pathway – hydrogen 
ion secretion. H 2-receptor antagonists have profound effects 
on gastric acid secretion, but this is not insurmountable (Fig-
ure 63.4). The ECL cell produces histamine in response to a 
number of stimuli that include the vagus nerve and gastrin. 
Gastrin is released by the G cells in response to the presence 
of the food in the stomach. The production of gastrin is inhib-
ited by acid, creating a negative feedback loop. Various other 
peptides, including secretin, inhibit gastric acid secretion.
Classically, three phases of gastric secretion are described. 
The cephalic phase is mediated by vagal activity, secondary 
to sensory arousal as first demonstrated by Pavlov. The gas -
tric phase is a response to food within the stomach, which is 
mediated principally, but not exclusively, by gastrin. In the 
intestinal phase, the presence of chyme in the duodenum and 
small bowel inhibits gastric emptying, and the acidification 
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1108 25/10/2017   09:45Physiology of the stomach and duodenum 1109
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
of the duodenum leads to the pro duction of secretin, which 
inhibits gastric acid secretion, along with numerous other 
peptides originating from the gut. The stomach also possesses 
somatostatin-containing D cells. Somatostatin is released in 
response to a number of factors including acidification. This 
peptide acts probably on the G cell, the ECL cell and the 
parietal cell itself to inhibit the production of acid.
Gastric mucus and the gastric 
mucosal barrier
The gastric mucous layer is essential to the integrity of the gas-
tric mucosa. It is a viscid layer of mucopolysaccharides pro -
duced by the mucus-producing cells of the stomach and the 
pyloric glands. Gastric mucus is an important physiological 
barrier to protect the gastric mucosa from mechanical damage, 
and also the effects of acid and pepsin. Its considerable buffer-
ing capacity is enhanced by the presence of bicarbonate ions 
within the mucus. Many factors can lead to the breakdown of 
this gastric mucous barrier. These include bile, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), alcohol, trauma and 
shock. Tonometry studies have shown that, of the entire gas-
trointestinal tract, the stomach is the most sensitive to isch -
aemia following a hypovolaemic insult and also the slowest to 
recover. This may explain the high incidence of stress ulcer -
ation in the stomach.
Peptides and neuropeptides in the 
stomach and duodenum
As with most of the gastrointestinal tract, the endocrine 
cells of the stomach produce peptide hormones and neuro -
transmitters. Previously , nerves and endocrine cells were 
considered distinct in terms of their pro ducts. However, it is 
increasingly realised that there is enormous overlap within 
these systems. Many peptides recognised as hormones may also 
be produced by neurones, hence the term neuropeptides. The 
term ‘messenger’ can be used to describe all such products. 
There are three conventional modes of action that overlap.
1 Endocrine. The messenger is secreted into the circulation, 
where it affects tissues that may be remote from the site of 
origin (Bayliss and Starling).
2 Paracrine. Messengers are produced locally and have local 
effects on tissues. Neurones and endocrine cells both act 
in this way.
3 Neurocrine (classical neurotransmitter). Messengers are 
produced by the neurone via the synaptic knob and pass 
across the synaptic cleft to the target.
Many peptide hormones act on the intrinsic nerve plexus 
of the gut (see later) and influence motility. Similarly, neuro-
peptides may influence the structure and function of the 
mucosa. Some of these peptides, neuropeptides and neuro -
transmitters are shown in Table 63.1. The stomach is vital 
in the regulation of appetite and weight control via a com -
bination of mechanical and hormonal mechanisms; these are 
discussed further in following chapters.
Gastroduodenal motor activity
The motility of the entire gastrointestinal tract is modulated 
to a large degree by its intrinsic nervous system. Critical in 
this process is the migrating motor complex (MMC). In the 
fasted state, and after food has cleared, in the small bowel 
there is a period of quiescence lasting in the region of 40 min-
utes (phase I). There follows a series of waves of electrical and 
motor activity, also lasting for about 40 minutes, propagated 
from the fundus of the stomach in a caudal direction at a rate 
of about three per minute (phase II). These pass as far the 
pylorus, but not beyond. Duodenal slow waves are generated 
in the duodenum at a rate of about 10 per minute, which carry 
down the small bowel. The amplitude of these contractions 
increases to a maximum in phase III, which lasts for about 10 
minutes. This 90-minute cycle of activity is then repeated. 
From the duodenum, the MMC moves distally at 5–10 cm/
min, reaching the terminal ileum after 1.5 hours.
Following a meal, the stomach exhibits receptive relax-
ation, which lasts for a few seconds. Following this, adaptive 
relaxation occurs, which allows the proximal stomach to act as 
a reservoir. Most of the peristaltic activity is found in the distal 
stomach (the antral mill) and the proximal stomach demon-
strates only tonic activity. The pylorus, which is most com -
monly open, contracts with the peristaltic wave and allows 
only a few millilitres of chyme through at a time. The antral 
contraction against the closed sphincter is important in the 
milling activity of the stomach. Although the duodenum is 
capable of generating 10 waves per minute, after a meal it only 
contracts after an antral wave reaches the pylorus. The coor -
dination of the motility of the antrum, pylorus and duodenum 
Distension of stomach
Release of
acetylcholine
Release of
histamine
Gastric ECL cell
M1
H1
M3G
HCI
Chemical in
food
Release of gastrin
G cell
Figure 63.4 The parietal cell in relation to the mechanism of gastric 
acid secretion. ECL, enterochromaffin-like; G, gastrin receptor; H, his-
tamine receptor; HCl, hydrochloric acid; M, muscarinic receptor.
Sir William Maddock Bayliss , 1860–1924, physiologist, University College, London, UK.
Ernest Henry Starling , 1866–1927, physiologist, University College, London, UK.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1109 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1110
means that only small quantities of food reach the small bowel 
at a time. It is important to consider that this control of gas-
tric emptying can be abolished after gastric surgery leading to 
significant symptoms (discussed in later sections). Motility is 
influenced by numerous factors, including mechanical stim -
ulation and neuronal and endocrine influences (Table 63.1).
INVESTIGATION OF THE 
STOMACH AND DUODENUM
Flexible endoscopy
Flexible endoscopy is the ‘gold standard’ investigation of the 
upper gastrointestinal tract. The original flexible endoscopes 
were fibreoptic (Hirschowitz), but now most use a solid-state 
camera mounted at the instrument’ s tip (Figures 63.5 and 
63.6). Other members of the endoscopy team see the image 
and this is useful when taking biopsies or performing interven-
tional techniques, and it also facilitates teaching and training.
TABLE 63.1 Function and source of peptides and 
neuropeptides in the stomach.
Function Source
Stimulate secretion
Gastrin G cells
Histamine ECL cells
Acetylcholine Neurones
Gastrin-releasing peptide Neurones and mucosa
Cholecystokinin (CCK) Duodenal endocrine cells
Inhibit secretion
Somatostatin D cells and neurones
Secretin Duodenal endocrine cells
Enteroglucagon Small intestinal endocrine cells
Prostaglandins Mucosa
Neurotensin Neurones
GIP Duodenal and jejunal endocrine cells
PYY Small intestinal endocrine cells
Stimulate motility
Acetylcholine Neurones
5-HT Neurones
Histamine ECL cell
Substance P Neurones
Substance K Neurones
Motilin Neurones
Gastrin G cells
Angiotensin
Inhibit motility
Somatostatin D cells and neurones
VIP Neurones
Nitric oxide Neurones and smooth muscle
Noradrenaline Neurones
Encephalin Neurones
Dopamine Neurones
ECL, enterochromaffin-like cells; GIP , gastric inhibitory polypeptide; PYY , 
peptide YY; VIP , vasoactive intestinal peptide.
Basil I Hirschowitz , Professor of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
Summary box 63.2
The investigation of gastric disorders
●● Flexible endoscopy is the most commonly used and sensitive 
technique for investigating the stomach and duodenum
●● Great care needs to be exercised in performing endoscopy to 
avoid complications and missing important pathology
●● Axial imaging, particularly multislice CT, is useful in the 
staging of gastric cancer, although it may be less sensitive in 
the detection of liver metastases than other modalities
●● Endoscopic ultrasound is the most sensitive technique in 
the evaluation of the ‘T’ stage of gastric cancer and in the 
assessment of duodenal tumours
●● Laparoscopy is very sensitive in detecting peritoneal 
metastases, and laparoscopic ultrasound provides an 
accurate evaluation of lymph node and liver metastases
Figure 63.5 A video-gastroscope (courtesy of Keymed (Medical and 
Industrial Equipment Ltd)). (a) The camera stack; (b) the gastroscope 
and biopsy forceps in the working channel.
(a)
(b)
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1110 25/10/2017   09:45Investigation of the st omach and duodenum 1111
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Flexible endoscopy is more sensitive than conventional 
radiology in the assessment of the majority of gastroduodenal 
conditions. This is particularly the case for peptic ulceration, 
gastritis and duodenitis. In upper gastrointestinal bleeding, 
endoscopy is far superior to any other investigation and offers 
the possibility of endoscopic therapy. In most circumstances 
it is the only investigation required.
Fibreoptic endoscopy is generally a safe investigation, but 
it is important that all personnel undertaking these proce -
dures are adequately trained. Careless and rough handling of 
the endoscope during intubation of a patient may result in 
perforations of the pharynx and oesophagus. Any other part 
of the upper gastrointestinal tract may also be perforated. An 
inadequately performed endoscopy is also dangerous as a seri-
ous condition may be overlooked. This is particularly the case 
in respect of early and curable gastric cancer, the appearances 
of which may often be extremely subtle and may be missed 
by inexperienced endoscopists. A more experienced endos -
copist will have a higher index of suspicion for any muco-
sal abnormalities and will take more biopsies. Spraying the 
mucosa with dye endoscopically may allow better discrimi -
nation between normal and abnormal mucosa, so allowing a 
small cancer to be more easily seen. In the future, advances in 
technology may allow ‘optical biopsy’ to determine the nature 
of mucosal abnormalities in real time.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy can be performed with-
out sedation, but when sedation is required incremental doses 
of a benzodiazepine are usually administered. Sedation is of 
particular concern in the case of gastrointestinal bleeding 
as it may have a more profound effect on the patient’s car -
diovascular stability. It has now become the standard to use 
pulse oximetry to monitor patients during upper gastrointes -
tinal endoscopy, and nasal oxygen is often also administered. 
Buscopan is useful to abolish duodenal motility for examina -
tions of the second and third parts of the duodenum. Exam-
inations of this type are best carried out using a side-viewing 
endoscope such as is used for endoscopic retrograde cholan -
giopancreatography (ERCP).
Some patients are relatively resistant to sedation with 
benzodiazepines, particularly those who are accustomed to 
drinking alcohol. Increasing the dose of benzodiazepines 
in these patients may not result in any useful sedation, but 
merely make the patient more restless and confused. Such 
patients are sometimes better endoscoped fully awake using a 
local anaesthetic throat spray and a narrow-gauge endoscope. 
Whatever the circumstances, it is important that resuscita -
tion facilities are available including agents that reverse the 
effects of benzodiazepines, such as flumazenil.
The technology associated with upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy is continuing to advance. Instruments which allow 
both endoscopy and endoluminal ultrasound to be performed 
simultaneously (see later) are used routinely. Bleeding from 
the stomach and duodenum can be treated with a number of 
haemostatic measures. These include injection with various 
substances, diathermy, heater probes, lasers and clips. These 
approaches appear to be useful in the treatment of bleeding 
ulcers, although there are few good controlled trials in this 
area. There is no good evidence that such interventional 
procedures at the moment work in patients who are bleeding 
from very large vessels, such as the gastroduodenal artery or 
splenic artery, although technology may overcome this prob-
lem in the future.
Contrast radiology
Upper gastrointestinal radiology is not used as much as in 
previous years, as endoscopy is a more sensitive investigation 
for most gastric problems. Computed tomography (CT) imag-
ing with oral contrast has also replaced contrast radiology in 
many of the areas where anatomical information is sought, 
eg large hiatus hernias of the rolling type and chronic gastric 
volvulus. In these conditions it may be difficult for the endos-
copist to determine exactly the anatomy or, indeed, negotiate 
the deformity to see the distal stomach.
Ultrasonography
Standard ultrasound imaging can be used to investigate the 
stomach, but used conventionally it is less sensitive than other 
modalities. In contrast, endoluminal ultrasound and laparo -
scopic ultrasound are probably the most sensitive techniques 
available in the preoperative local staging of gastric cancer. In 
endoluminal ultrasound, the transducer is usually attached to 
the distal tip of the instrument. However, devices have been 
developed which may be passed down the biopsy channel, 
albeit with poorer image quality. Five layers (Figure 63.7) 
of the gastric wall may be identified on endoluminal ultra-
sound and the depth of invasion of a tumour can be assessed 
with exquisite accuracy (90% accuracy for the ‘T’ component 
of the staging). Enlarged lymph nodes can also be identified 
and the technique’s accuracy in this situation is about 80%. 
Figure 63.6 A view of the normal stomach during endoscopy (cour-
tesy of GNJ Tytgat, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1111 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1112
Finally, it may be possible to identify liver metastases not 
seen on axial imaging. Laparoscopic ultrasound is also a very 
sensitive imaging modality to a large measure because of the 
laparoscopy itself (see below). It is one of the most sensitive 
methods of detecting liver metastases from gastric cancer.
An additional use of ultrasound is in the assessment of 
gastric emptying. Swallowed contrast is utilised, which is 
designed to be easily seen using an ultrasound transducer. The 
emptying of this contrast is then followed directly. The accu-
racy of the technique is similar to that of radioisotope gastric 
emptying studies (see below).
CT scanning and magnetic 
resonance imaging
The resolution of CT scanners is continuing to improve, and 
multislice CT is of increasing value in the investigation of the 
stomach, especially gastric malignancies (Figure 63.8). The 
presence of gastric wall thickening associated with a carci-
noma of any reasonable size can be easily detected by CT, but 
the investigation lacks sensitivity in detecting smaller lesions. 
It is much less accurate in ‘T’ staging than endoluminal ultra-
sound. Lymph node enlargement can be detected and, based 
on the size and shape of the nodes, it is possible to be reason-
ably accurate in detecting nodal involvement with tumour. 
However, as with all imaging techniques, it is limited. Micro-
scopic tumour deposits in lymph nodes cannot be detected 
when the node is not enlarged and, in contrast, lymph nodes 
may undergo reactive enlargement but not contain tumour. 
These problems apply to all imaging techniques.
The detection of small liver metastases is improving, 
although in general terms metastases from gastric cancer are 
less easy to detect using CT than those, for instance, from 
colorectal cancer. This is because metastases from gastric can-
cer may be of the same density as liver and may not handle 
the intravenous contrast any differently. At present, magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) scanning does not offer any specific 
advantage in assessing the stomach, although it has a higher 
sensitivity for the detection of gastric cancer liver metastases 
than conventional CT imaging.
CT/positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a functional imaging 
technique which relies on the uptake of a tracer in most cases 
by metabolically active tumour tissue. Fluorodeoxyglucose 
(FDG) is the most commonly used tracer . This tracer has a 
short half-life hence manufacture and use have to be care -
fully coordinated. To be of value, anatomical and functional 
information need to be linked, hence PET/CT is now used 
universally. It is increasingly being used in the preoperative 
staging of gastro-oesophageal cancer as it will demonstrate 
occult spread which renders the patient surgically incurable 
in up to 10% of patients who would otherwise have under -
gone major resections (Figure 63.9). PET/CT may also be 
used to determine the response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy 
in oesophagogastric malignancies although this is the subject 
of ongoing studies.
Laparoscopy
This technique is routine in the assessment of patients with 
gastric cancer. Its particular value is in the detection of perito-
neal disease, which is difficult by any other technique, unless 
the patient has ascites or bulky intraperitoneal deposits. Its 
main limitation is in the evaluation of posterior extension but 
other techniques are available to evaluate posterior invasion, 
especially CT and endoluminal ultrasound. Usually laparos -
copy is combined with peritoneal cytology unless laparotomy 
follows immediately.
Gastric emptying studies
These are useful in the study of gastric dysmotility problems, 
particularly those that follow gastric surgery. The principle 
of the examination is that radioisotope-labelled liquid and 
solid meals are ingested by the patient and the emptying of 
the stomach is followed on a gamma camera. This allows the 
Figure 63.7 Endoscopic ultrasound of the stomach. Five layers can 
be identified in the normal stomach. A gastric cancer is shown invad-
ing the muscle of the gastric wall (courtesy of KeyMed (Medical and 
Industrial Equipment Ltd)).
Figure 63.8 A computed tomography scan of the abdomen, show -
ing a gastric cancer arising in the body of the stomach.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1112 25/10/2017   09:45Helicobacter pylori 1113
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
proportion of activity in the remaining stomach to be assessed 
numerically, and it is possible to follow liquid and solid gastric 
emptying independently (Figure 63.10).
Angiography
Angiography is used most commonly in the investigation of 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding that is not identified using 
endoscopy. Therapeutic embolisation may also be of value 
in the treatment of bleeding in patients in whom surgery is 
difficult or inadvisable. In expert centres embolisation now 
replaces surgery in the majority of cases.
HELICOBACTER PYLORI
Over the last 30 years, this organism has proved to be of over-
whelming importance in the aetiology of a number of com -
mon gastroduodenal diseases such as chronic gastritis, peptic 
ulceration and gastric cancer. The organism had unquestion-
ably been observed by a number of workers since Bircher’s first 
description in 1874, but it was not until 1980 that Warren 
and Marshall, with enthusiasm but perhaps a lack of caution, 
ingested the organism to confirm that Koch’s postulates could 
be fulfilled with respect to the gastritis that they succeeded 
in causing in themselves. Eradication therapy was then 
employed with mixed success, but both received the Nobel 
Figure 63.9 Computed tomography/positron emission tomography of a patient with gastric cancer . The middle pair of images shows the 
primary tumour. The two images on the left show unsuspected liver metastases, whereas the two on the right show a left cervical node positive 
for metastases.
C.S. Warren , Perth, Australia, now Chicago, IL, USA, credited with awakening the current interest in Helicobacter.
Barry Marshall , Perth, Australia, now Charlottesville, VA, USA, credited with awakening the current interest in Helicobacter.
Robert Koch , 1843–1910, Professor of Hygiene and Bacteriology, Berlin, Germany. Stated his ‘postulates’ in 1882. The postulates define the conditions that must 
be met before an organism can be shown to be the causal agent for a particular disease.
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
20 30
Proportion remaining
Liquid
Solid
40 50 6010 0
Time (min)
(b)
Figure 63.10  Dual-phase solid and liquid gastric emptying. The 
use of two isotopic labels allows the liquid and solid phases of the 
emptying to be followed separately. (a) Image acquisition. (b) Gastric 
emptying curves in a normal individual showing typical lag period in 
the solid phase before linear emptying (courtesy of Dr V Lewington, 
Southampton, UK).
(a)
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1113 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1114
Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 2005. The organism is 
spiral shaped and is fastidious in its requirements, being diffi -
cult to culture outside the mucous layer of the stomach.
One of the characteristics of the organism is its ability 
to hydrolyse urea, resulting in the production of ammonia, 
a strong alkali. The effect of ammonia on the antral G cells 
is to cause the release of gastrin via the previously described 
negative-feedback loop. This is probably responsible for the 
modest, but inappropriate, hypergastrinaemia in patients with 
peptic ulcer disease, which, in turn, may result in gastric acid 
hypersecretion. The organism’s obligate urease activity is uti-
lised by various tests used to detect the presence of the organ-
ism, including the 13C and 14C breath tests and the CLO test 
(a commercially available urease test kit), which is performed 
on gastric biopsies. The organism can also be detected histo-
logically (Figure 63.11), using the Giemsa or the Warthin–
Starry stains, and cultured using appropriate media. Previous 
or current infection with the organism may also be detected 
serologically. Breath tests or faecal antigen tests are recom -
mended for the pre-treatment diagnosis of H. pylori infection 
in the community. Less accurate, hospital-based serology tests 
have a place within the non-invasive test-and-treat strategy.
Infection with H. pylori leads to the disruption of the gas-
tric mucous barrier by the enzymes produced by the organ -
ism, and the inflammation induced in the gastric epithelium 
is the basis of many of the associated disease processes. The 
association of the organism with chronic (type B) gastritis is 
not in doubt. Some strains of H. pylori produce cytotoxins, 
notably the Cag A and Vac A products, and the production 
of cytotoxins seems to be associated with the ability of the 
organism to cause gastritis, peptic ulceration and cancer. The 
effect of the organism on the gastric epithelium is to incite a 
classical inflammatory response that involves the migration 
and degranulation of acute inflammatory cells, such as neu -
trophils, and also the accumulation of chronic inflammatory 
cells, such as macrophages and lymphocytes.
It is evident how H. pylori infection results in chronic 
gastritis and also how this may progress to gastric ulceration, 
but for a while it remained an enigma as to how the organism 
could be involved in duodenal ulceration, as the normal 
duodenum is not colonised. As mentioned above, the 
production of ammonia does increase the level of circulating 
gastrin and it has been shown subsequently that eradication 
of the organism in patients with duodenal ulcer disease will 
reduce the acid levels to normal. However, the overlap in 
gastric acid secretion between normal subjects and those with 
duodenal ulcers is considerable and the modestly increased 
acid levels in patients with Helicobacter-associated antral 
gastritis are insufficient to explain the aetiology of duodenal 
ulceration.
The explanation can probably be found in the phenome -
non of duodenal gastric metaplasia. Gastric metaplasia is the 
normal response of the duodenal mucosa to excess acidity. It 
can be thought of in the same way as any other metaplasia in 
the gastrointestinal tract: an attempt by the mucosa to resist 
an injurious stimulus. Although normal duodenal mucosa 
cannot be infected with H. pylori, gastric metaplasia in the 
duodenum is commonly infected and this infection results in 
the same inflammatory process that is observed in the gastric 
mucosa. The result is duodenitis, which is almost certainly 
the precursor of duodenal ulceration.
Infection with H. pylori may be the most common human 
infection. The incidence of infection within a population 
increases with age, and in many populations infection rates 
of 80–90% are not unusual. Up to 50% of the world’s popu -
lation may be infected with Helicobacter. It appears that most 
infection is acquired in childhood and the possibility of infec-
tion is inversely related to socioeconomic group. The means 
of spread has not been identified, but the organism can occur 
in the faeces and faecal–oral spread seems most likely. The 
organism is not normally found in saliva or dental plaque. 
There is evidence in different environments and in different 
population groups that the manifestations of the infection 
may be different. Predominantly antral gastritis, which is 
commonly seen in resource-rich countries, results initially in 
increased levels of acid production and peptic ulcer disease, 
whereas gastritis affecting the body, common in resource-poor 
countries, may lead to hypochlorhydria and gastric neoplasia.
It has been known since 1984 that Helicobacter infec-
tion is amenable to treatment with antibiotics. The pro -
found hypochlorhydria produced by proton pump inhibitors 
combined with antibiotics is also effective in eradicating 
the organism. Commonly used eradication regimes include 
a proton pump inhibitor and two antibiotics, such as met -
ronidazole and amoxycillin. Very high eradication rates, in 
the region of 90%, can be achieved with combinations that 
include the antibiotic clarithromycin, although it may be 
that in the future antibiotic resistance will become a prob -
lem. Reinfection following successful eradication appears 
rare (<0.5%) but incomplete eradication is a more important 
clinical problem.
Gustav Giemsa , 1867–1948, bacteriologist who became Privatdozent in Chemotherapy at the University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
Aldred Scott Warthin , 1866–1931, pathologist, the University of Michigan, USA.
Allen Chronister Starry , 1890–1973, pathologist, the University of Michigan, USA.
Figure 63.11 Antral mucosa showing colonisation with Helicobacter 
pylori (modified Giemsa stain).
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1114 25/10/2017   09:45Gastritis 1115
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
At present, eradication therapy is recommended for 
patients with duodenal ulcer disease, but not for patients 
with non-ulcer dyspepsia or in asymptomatic patients who 
are infected. However, recent data show that a proportion of 
patients with non-ulcer dyspepsia do respond to treatment. 
H. pylori is now classed by the World Health Organisation as 
a class 1 carcinogen and it may be that further epidemiolog -
ical studies on the risk of gastric cancer change the current 
advice on treatment.
GASTRITIS
The great variety of names and classification systems used in 
gastritis is confusing. Thankfully, the understanding of gastri-
tis has increased markedly following elucidation of the role of 
H. pylori in chronic gastritis and there is broad agreement that 
gastritis should be classified according to the underlying aeti-
ology. Gastritis describes any histologically confirmed inflam-
mation of the gastric mucosa. In most modern classification 
systems the amount of inflammatory infiltrate and the degree 
of gastric atrophy will be included.
H. pylori gastritis
Previously described as type B gastritis, this affects the antrum, 
and it is these patients who are prone to peptic ulcer disease. 
Helicobacter-associated pangastritis is also a very common 
manifestation of infection, but gastritis affecting the corpus 
alone does not seem to be associated. However, there are 
some data to suggest that Helicobacter may be involved in the 
initiation of the process. Patients with pangastritis seem to be 
most prone to the development of gastric cancer.
Intestinal metaplasia is associated with chronic pangas-
tritis with atrophy. Although intestinal metaplasia per se is 
common, intestinal metaplasia associated with dysplasia has 
significant malignant potential and, if this condition is iden -
tified, endoscopic screening may be appropriate.
Reflux gastritis
This is caused by enterogastric reflux and is particularly com-
mon after gastric surgery. Its histological features are distinct 
from other types of gastritis. Although commonly seen after 
gastric surgery, it is occasionally found in patients with no 
previous surgical intervention or who have had a cholecys -
tectomy. Bile chelating or prokinetic agents may be useful in 
treatment and as a temporising measure to avoid consider -
ation of revisional surgery. Operation for the condition should 
be reserved for the most severe cases.
Erosive gastritis
This is caused by agents that disturb the gastric muco -
sal barrier; NSAIDs and alcohol are common causes. The 
NSAID-induced gastric lesion is associated with inhibition of 
the cyclo-oxygenase type 1 (COX-1) receptor enzyme, hence 
reducing the production of cytoprotective prostaglandins 
in the stomach. Many of the beneficial anti-inflammatory 
activities of NSAIDs are mediated by COX-2, and the use of 
specific COX-2 inhibitors reduces the incidence of these side 
effects. However, taken in the long term COX-2 inhibitors 
are associated with cardiovascular complications in common 
with many NSAIDs.
Stress gastritis
This is a common sequel of serious illness or injury and is 
characterised by a reduction in the blood supply to superficial 
mucosa of the stomach. Although common, this is not usually 
recognised unless stress ulceration and bleeding supervene, 
in which case treatment can be extremely difficult. The 
condition also sometimes follows cardiopulmonary bypass. 
Prevention of the stress bleeding from the stomach is much 
easier than treating it, and hence the routine use of H 2 
antagonists with or without barrier agents, such as sucralfate, 
in patients who are on intensive care. These measures have 
been shown to reduce the incidence of bleeding from stress 
ulceration.
Summary box 63.3
Gastritis
●● The spiral bacterium Helicobacter pylori is critical in the 
development of gastritis, peptic ulceration and gastric cancer
●● Infection appears to be acquired mainly in childhood and 
the infection rate is inversely associated with socioeconomic 
status
●● Eradication, recommended specifically in patients with peptic 
ulcer disease, can be achieved in up to 90% of patients with 
a combination of a proton pump inhibitor and antibiotics, and 
reinfection is uncommon (<0.5%)
●● Erosive gastritis is usually related to the use of NSAIDs
●● Autoimmune gastritis is associated with the development of 
pernicious anaemia and gastric cancer
Autoimmune gastritis
This is an autoimmune condition in which there are circulat-
ing antibodies to the parietal cell. This results in the atrophy 
of the parietal cell mass, hence hypochlorhydria and ulti -
mately achlorhydria. As intrinsic factor is also produced by 
the parietal cell there is malabsorption of vitamin B12, which, 
if untreated, may result in pernicious anaemia. The antrum is 
not affected and the hypochlorhydria leads to the production 
of high levels of gastrin from the antral G cells. This results 
in chronic hypergastrinaemia. This, in turn, results in hyper -
trophy of the ECL cells in the body of the stomach, which 
are not affected by the autoimmune damage. Over time it is 
apparent that microadenomas develop in the ECL cells of the 
stomach, sometimes becoming identifiable tumour nodules. 
Very rarely, these tumours can become malignant. Patients 
with autoimmune gastritis are predisposed to the develop -
ment of gastric cancer, and screening such patients endoscop-
ically may be appropriate.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1115 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1116
Ménétrier’s disease
This is an unusual condition characterised by gross hyper -
trophy of the gastric mucosal folds, mucus production and 
hypochlorhydria. The condition is premalignant and may 
present with hypoproteinaemia and anaemia. There is no 
treatment other than a gastrectomy. The disease seems to be 
caused by overexpression of transforming growth factor alpha 
(TGF-α). Like epidermal growth factor (EGF), this peptide 
also binds to the EGF receptor. The histological features of 
Ménétrier’s disease may be reproduced in transgenic mice 
overexpressing TGF-α.
Lymphocytic gastritis
This type of gastritis is seen rarely. It is characterised by the 
infiltration of the gastric mucosa by T cells and is probably 
associated with H. pylori infection. The pattern of inflam-
mation resembles that seen in coeliac disease or lymphocytic 
colitis.
Other forms of gastritis
Eosinophilic gastritis appears to have an allergic basis, and is 
treated with steroids and cromoglycate. Granulomatous gas -
tritis is seen rarely in Crohn’s disease and also may be associ -
ated with tuberculosis. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) gastritis is secondary to infection with cryptospiridio-
sis. Phlegmonous gastritis is a rare bacterial infection of the 
stomach found in patients with severe intercurrent illness. It 
is usually an agonal event.
PEPTIC ULCER
Although the name ‘peptic’ ulcer suggests an association with 
pepsin, this is essentially unimportant as in the absence of 
acid, peptic ulcers do not occur. Nearly all peptic ulcers can 
be healed by using proton pump inhibitors, which can render 
a patient virtually achlorhydric.
Common sites for peptic ulcers are the first part of the 
duodenum and the lesser curve of the stomach, but they also 
occur on the stoma following gastric surgery, the oesophagus 
and even in a Meckel’s diverticulum, which contains ectopic 
gastric epithelium. In general, the ulcer occurs at a junction 
between different types of epithelia, the ulcer occurring in the 
epithelium least resistant to acid damage.
In the past, much distinction has been made between 
acute and chronic peptic ulcers, but this difference can 
sometimes be difficult to determine clinically. It is probably 
best to consider that there is a spectrum of disease from the 
superficial gastric and duodenal ulceration, frequently seen 
at endoscopy, to deep chronic penetrating ulcers. This does 
not minimise the importance of acute stress ulceration. These 
ulcers can both perforate and bleed.
For many years, the cause of peptic ulceration remained 
an enigma. When comparing groups of patients with duode -
nal and pre-pyloric peptic ulcers with normal subjects, gastric 
acid levels are higher, but the overlap is very considerable. 
Patients with gastric ulceration have relatively normal levels 
of gastric acid secretion. As peptic ulceration will occur in 
the presence of very high acid levels, such as those found in 
patients with a gastrinoma (Zollinger–Ellison syndrome), and 
as all ulcers can be healed in the absence of acid, it is clear 
that acid is important. In patients with a gastrinoma it may 
be the only aetiological factor, but this is not the case in the 
majority of patients. As with many diseases, genetic factors 
may be involved to a limited degree and social stress has also 
been falsely implicated (Asher).
It is now widely accepted that infection with H. pylori and 
the consumption of NSAIDs are the most important factors 
in the development of peptic ulceration. In combination H. 
pylori and NSAIDs act synergistically to promote ulcer devel-
opment and ulcer bleeding. Cigarette smoking predisposes to 
peptic ulceration and increases the relapse rate after treat -
ment, with either gastric antisecretory agents or, in the past, 
elective surgery. Multiple other factors may be involved in 
transition between the superficial and the deep penetrating 
chronic ulcer, but they are of lesser importance.
Summary box 63.4
Peptic ulceration
●● Most peptic ulcers are caused by H. pylori or NSAIDs and 
changes in epidemiology mirror changes in these principal 
aetiological factors
●● Duodenal ulcers are more common than gastric ulcers, but 
the symptoms are indistinguishable
●● Gastric ulcers may become malignant and an ulcerated 
gastric cancer may mimic a benign ulcer
●● Gastric antisecretory agents and H. pylori eradication therapy 
are the mainstay of treatment, and elective surgery is very 
rarely performed
●● The long-term complications of peptic ulcer surgery may be 
difficult to treat
●● The common complications of peptic ulcers are perforation, 
bleeding and stenosis
●● The treatment of the perforated peptic ulcer is primarily 
surgical, although some patients may be managed 
conservatively
Pierre Ménétrier , 1859–1935, French physician.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1956, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA. Described regional ileitis in 1932.
Johann Friedrich Meckel (The Younger) , 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany. Described the diverticulum in 1809.
Robert Milton Zollinger , 1903–1992, Professor of Surgery, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Edwin Homer Ellison , 1918–1970, Professor of Surgery, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI, USA. Zollinger and Ellison described this condition in a joint 
paper in 1955 when they were both working at the Ohio State University.
Richard Asher , 1912–1969, physician, the Central Middlesex Hospital, London, UK. Ridiculed the concept that the stress of modern living caused peptic ulcer-
ation by pointing out that the same claim was made for syphilis! It is an interesting coincidence that both diseases have strong aetiological associations with spiral 
organisms.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1116 25/10/2017   09:45Peptic ulcer 1117
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Duodenal ulceration
Incidence
There have been marked changes in the last two decades in the 
demography of patients presenting with duo denal ulceration 
in resource-rich countries. First, even before the introduction 
of H2-receptor antagonists, the incidence of duodenal ulcer -
ation and the frequency of elective surgery for the con  dition 
were falling. This trend has continued and now, dyspeptic 
patients presenting with a duodenal ulcer at gastroscopy are 
uncommon. In part, this may relate to the widespread use of 
gastric antisecretory agents and H. pylori eradication therapy 
for patients with dyspepsia. Second, the peak incidence is now 
in a much older age group than previously and, although it 
is still more common in men, the difference is less marked. 
These changes mirror the changes, at least in part, in the epi-
demiology of H. pylori infection. In Eastern Europe, the disease 
remains common and, from having been uncommon in some 
resource-poor nations, it is now observed more frequently. 
Again, the relationship with H. pylori appears convincing.
Pathology
Most occur in the first part of the duodenum (Figures 63.12 
and 63.13). A chronic ulcer penetrates the mucosa and 
into the muscle coat, leading to fibrosis. The fibrosis causes 
deformities such as pyloric stenosis. When an ulcer heals, a 
scar can be observed in the mucosa. Sometimes there may be 
more than one duodenal ulcer. The situation in which there 
is both a posterior and an anterior duodenal ulcer is referred 
to as ‘kissing ulcers’. Anteriorly placed ulcers tend to perfor -
ate and, in contrast, posterior duodenal ulcers tend to bleed, 
sometimes by ero ding into the gastroduodenal artery. Occa-
sionally, the ulceration may be so extensive that the entire 
duodenal cap is ulcerated and devoid of mucosa. With respect 
to the giant duodenal ulcer, malignancy in this region is so 
uncommon that under normal circumstances surgeons can 
be confident that they are dealing with benign disease, even 
though from external palpation it may not appear so. In the 
stomach the situation is different.
Histopathology
Microscopically, destruction of the muscular coat is observed 
and the base of the ulcer is covered with granulation tissue, 
the arteries in this region showing the typical changes of end-
arteritis obliterans. Sometimes the terminations of nerves can 
be seen among the fibrosis. The pathological appearances of 
the healing ulcer must be carefully interpreted as some of the 
epithelial downgrowths can be misinterpreted as invasion. 
This is unlikely to be important in duo denal ulcers when 
malignancy rarely, if ever, occurs, but it is much more import-
ant with gastric ulcers.
Gastric ulcers
Incidence
As with duodenal ulceration, H. pylori and NSAIDs are the 
important aetiological factors. Gastric ulceration is also asso-
ciated with smoking; other factors are of lesser importance.
There are marked differences between the populations 
afflicted by chronic gastric ulceration compared with duodenal 
ulceration. First, gastric ulceration is substantially less com -
mon than duodenal ulceration. The sex incidence is equal and 
the population with gastric ulcers tends to be older. It is more 
prevalent in low socioeconomic groups and is considerably 
more common in resource-poor countries than in richer ones.
Pathology
This is essentially similar to that of a duodenal ulcer , except 
that gastric ulcers tend to be larger. Fibrosis, when it occurs, 
Figure 63.12 Duodenal ulcer at gastr oduodenoscopy (courtesy of 
Dr GNJ Tytgat, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
Figure 63.13 Duodenal ulcer shown by barium meal.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1117 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1118
may result in the now rarely seen hourglass contraction of the 
stomach. Large chronic ulcers may erode posteriorly into the 
pancreas and, on other occasions, into major vessels such as 
the splenic artery. Less commonly, they may erode into other 
organs such as the transverse colon. Chronic gastric ulcers 
are much more common on the lesser curve (especially at the 
incisura angularis; Figures 63.14 and 63.15 ) than on the 
greater curve and, even when high on the lesser curve, they 
tend to be at the boundary between the acid-secreting and 
the non-acid-secreting epithelia. With atrophy of parietal 
cell mass, non-acid-secreting epithelium migrates up the 
lesser curvature.
Malignancy in gastric ulcers
Chronic duodenal ulcers are not associated with malignancy 
and, in contrast, gastric ulcers are. W idely varying estimates 
are made of the incidence of gastric malignancy in gastric 
ulcers. The reason for this is that the authors reporting such 
diverse incidences are describing different clinical situations. 
T wo clinical extremes must be distinguished to understand 
this problem properly. First, there is the situation in which a 
benign chronic gastric ulcer undergoes malignant transforma-
tion. This is known to happen, albeit rarely. The contrasting 
clinical extreme is the patient identified as having an ulcer in 
the stomach, either endoscopically or on contrast radiology, 
which is assessed as benign but biopsies reveal malignancy. In 
this situation the patient does not have, and probably never 
has had, chronic peptic ulceration in the stomach but has pre-
sented with an ulcerated cancer. This situation is common, 
although whether a lesion found in the stomach is described 
as being benign or malignant on clinical grounds depends 
very much on the skill and experience of the endoscopist or 
radiologist.
It is fundamental that any gastric ulcer should be regarded 
as being malignant, no matter how classical the features of a 
benign gastric ulcer. Multiple biopsies should always be taken, 
perhaps as many as 10 well-targeted biopsies, before an ulcer 
can be tentatively accepted as being benign. Even then it is 
important that further biopsies are taken while the ulcer is 
healing and when healed. Modern antisecretory agents can 
frequently heal the ulceration associated with gastric cancer 
but, clearly, are ineffective in treating the malignancy itself. 
At operation, even experienced surgeons may have difficulty 
distinguishing between the gastric cancer and a benign ulcer. 
Operative strategies differ so radically that it is essential, if at 
all possible, that a confident diagnosis is made before opera -
tion. If, at operation for perforation, it is determined that the 
ulcer is probably benign it should, nonetheless, be excised, in 
totality if possible, and submitted for histological examina -
tion. It is not known whether a patient’s survival is compro-
mised by this approach if the ulcer turns out to be malignant 
on biopsy, as convincing data are not available.
Other peptic ulcers
The pre-pyloric gastric ulcer was in the past difficult to treat, 
a problem overcome with the introduction of proton pump 
inhibitors. Pyloric channel ulcers are similar to duodenal 
ulcers. Both pre-pyloric and pyloric ulcers may be malignant, 
and biopsy is essential. Stomal ulcers occur after a gastroen -
terostomy (now most commonly after bariatric surgery; see 
later) or a gastrectomy of the Billroth II type. The ulcer is 
usually found on the jejunal side of the stoma.
Clinical features of peptic ulcers
Although many textbooks try to create differences in the 
clinical feature of gastric and duodenal ulceration, detailed 
analysis has shown that they cannot be differentiated on the 
Christian Albert Theodor Billroth , 1829–1894, Professor of Surgery, Vienna, Austria.
Figure 63.14 Benign incisural gastric ulcer shown at gastroscopy 
(courtesy of Dr GNJ Tytgat, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
Large gastric
ulcer
Figure 63.15  Benign gastric ulcer shown on barium meal.  
(a) Radiograph; (b) diagrammatic outline.
(a) (b)
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1118 25/10/2017   09:45Peptic ulcer 1119
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
basis of symptoms. The demographic characteristics of groups 
of patients with gastric and duodenal ulceration do differ but 
this does not allow discrimination.
Pain
The pain is epigastric, often described as gnawing and may 
radiate to the back. Eating may sometimes relieve the dis -
comfort. The pain is normally intermittent rather than 
intractable.
Periodicity
One of the classical features of untreated peptic ulceration is 
periodicity. Symptoms may disappear for weeks or months to 
return again. This periodicity may be related to the sponta-
neous healing of the ulcer.
Vomiting
While this occurs, it is not a notable feature unless stenosis 
has occurred.
Alteration in weight
Weight loss or, sometimes, weight gain may occur. Patients 
with gastric ulceration are often underweight but this may 
precede the occurrence of the ulcer.
Bleeding
All peptic ulcers may bleed. The bleeding may be chronic and 
presentation with microcytic anaemia is not uncommon. All 
such patients should be investigated with endoscopy. Acute 
presentation with haematemesis and melaena is discussed later.
Clinical examination
Examination of the patient may reveal epigastric tender -
ness but, except in extreme cases (for instance, gastric outlet 
obstruction), there is unlikely to be much else to find.
Investigation of the patient with 
suspected peptic ulcer
Gastroduodenoscopy
This is the investigation of choice in the management of sus-
pected peptic ulceration and in the hands of a well-trained 
operator is highly sensitive and specific.
In the stomach, any abnormal lesion should be multiply 
biopsied, and in the case of a suspected benign gastric ulcer 
numerous biopsies must be taken in order to exclude, as far as 
possible, the presence of a malignancy. Commonly, biopsies of 
the antrum will be taken to see whether there is histological 
evidence of gastritis and a CLO test performed to determine 
the presence of H. pylori. A ‘U’ manoeuvre should be per -
formed to exclude ulcers around the gastro-oesophageal junc-
tion. This is important as the increasing incidence of cancer 
at the gastro-oesophageal junction requires that all mucosal 
abnormalities in this region should undergo multiple biopsy. 
Similarly, if a stoma is present, for instance after gastroen -
terostomy or Billroth II gastrectomy, it is important to enter 
both afferent and efferent loops. Almost all stomal ulcers will 
be very close to the junction between the jejunal and gas -
tric mucosa. Attention should be given to the pylorus to note 
whether there is any pre-pyloric or pyloric channel ulceration, 
and also whether it is deformed, which is often the case with 
chronic duodenal ulceration. In the duodenum, care must be 
taken to view all of the first part. It is not infrequent for an ulcer 
to be just beyond the pylorus and easily overlooked.
Treatment of peptic ulceration
The vast majority of uncomplicated peptic ulcers are treated 
medically. Surgical treatment of uncomplicated peptic ulcer -
ation has decreased markedly since the 1960s and is now 
seldom performed in resource-rich countries. Surgical treat-
ment was aimed principally at reducing gastric acid secretion 
and, in the case of gastric ulceration, removing the diseased 
mucosa. When originally devised, medical treatment also 
aimed to reduce gastric acid secretion, initially using the 
highly successful H 2-receptor antagonist and, subsequently, 
proton pump inhibitors. This has now largely given way to 
eradication therapy.
Medical treatment
It is reasonable that a doctor managing a patient with an 
uncomplicated peptic ulcer should suggest modifications to 
the patient’s lifestyle, particularly the cessation of cigarette 
smoking. This advice is rarely followed and pharmacological 
measures form the mainstay of treatment.
H2-receptor antagonists and proton pump 
inhibitors
H2-antagonists (Black) revolutionised the management of 
peptic ulceration. Most duodenal ulcers and gastric ulcers 
can be healed by a few weeks of treatment with these drugs 
provided that they are taken and absorbed. There remained, 
however, a group of patients who were relatively refractory to 
conventional doses of H2-receptor antagonists. This is largely 
now irrelevant as proton pump inhibitors can effectively ren-
der a patient achlorhydric and all benign ulcers will heal using 
these drugs, the majority within 2 weeks. Symptom relief is 
impressively rapid, most patients being asymptomatic within 
a few days. Like H 2-antagonists, proton pump inhibitors are 
safe and relatively devoid of serious side effects. The problem 
with all gastric antisecretory agents is that following cessation 
of therapy relapse is almost universal.
Eradication therapy
Eradication therapy is now routinely given to patients with 
peptic ulceration, and this is described earlier in this chap -
ter. Evidence suggests that if a patient has a peptic ulcer and 
H. pylori is the principal aetiological factor (essentially the 
patient not taking NSAIDs) then complete eradication of the 
organism will cure the disease and reinfection as an adult is 
Sir James Black  , 1924–2002, Professor of Pharmacology , King’s College Hospital Medical School, London, UK, introduced beta-blockers and H 2-receptor 
antagonists. He received the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1988.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1119 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1120
uncommon. Eradication therapy is therefore the mainstay of 
treatment for peptic ulceration. It is extremely economical by 
comparison with prolonged courses of antisecretory agents or 
surgery. It is also considerably safer than surgical treatment.
There are some patients with peptic ulcers in whom erad-
ication therapy may not be appropriate and this includes 
patients with NSAID-associated ulcers. Such patients should 
avoid these drugs if possible and, if not, they should be co-  
prescribed with a potent antisecretory agent. Similarly, 
patients with stomal ulceration are not effectively treated 
with eradication therapy and require prolonged prescription 
of antisecretory agents. Patients with Zollinger–Ellison syn-
drome should be treated in the long term with proton pump 
inhibitors unless the tumour can be adequately managed 
by surgery.
Ulcers that fail to heal
The introduction of antisecretory agents and effective treat -
ments for H. pylori have revolutionised the management of 
peptic ulcers. Despite these advances peptic ulceration fails to 
heal in a small minority of patients. Endoscopic re-evaluation 
should be regarded as mandatory to confirm healing of all gas-
tric ulcers. Furthermore, endoscopy permits the differentiation 
between a refractory ulcer and persistent symptoms despite 
ulcer healing. The most common cause of failed healing is per-
sistent H. pylori infection. Biopsies should be repeated at the 
time of endoscopy as false-negative results with breath tests may 
be expected soon after eradication therapy and serum antibody 
titres may not fall for 6 months after successful eradication. 
Failure of eradication is usually due to poor compliance or bac-
terial resistance and bacteriological culture will guide further 
attempts at H. pylori eradication. The ingestion of NSAIDs 
should once again be addressed. A diagnosis of Zollinger-   
Ellison syndrome (described in detail later) should be suspected 
in H. pylori negative, non-NSAID-related peptic ulceration 
and serum gastrin levels should be measured. Very rarely, a 
recently described autoimmune IgG4-related phenomenon is 
the cause of resistant and recurrent gastric ulceration.
Surgical treatment of uncomplicated 
peptic ulceration
From its peak in the 1960s, the incidence of surgery for uncom-
plicated peptic ulceration has fallen markedly, to the extent 
that peptic ulcer surgery is now of little more than historical 
interest. A description of operations used in the treatment of 
peptic ulcers is still necessary because surgery is occasionally 
employed for the complicated ulcer and, in addition, many 
patients are left suffering from the consequences of the more 
destructive operations.
Operations for duodenal ulceration
Duodenal ulcer surgery (rationale)
Procedures devised for the treatment of duodenal ulcers have 
the common aim of excluding the damaging effects of acid 
from the duo denum. This has been achieved by diversion 
of the acid away from the duodenum, reducing the secre -
tory potential of the stomach, or both. All of the operations 
devised achieved their aim to some extent, but with varying 
degrees of morbidity, mortality and postoperative side effects. 
There is now no role for acid-reducing operations in the rou-
tine management of peptic ulcer disease but occasionally 
operations which involve gastrectomy have to be performed 
in the emergency situation. In addition many patients have 
had such operations performed and suffer from the sequelae. 
Hence it is important for the clinician to understand the ana-
tomical and physiological consequences of surgery. The oper-
ations are described in historical sequence.
Billroth II gastrectomy
The first successful gastrectomy was performed by Billroth 
in January 1881, and Wolfler performed the first gastroen -
terostomy in the same year . The original Billroth operations 
consisted of a gastric resection with gastroduodenal anasto -
mosis (Billroth I technique) (Figure 63.16). The Billroth II 
operation was devised more by accident than design (Figure 
63.17). A gastroenterostomy (Figure 63.18) was performed 
on a gravely ill patient with a pyloric cancer, who was not 
expected to survive. Contrary to expectations, the patient 
improved and the stomach distal to the anastomosis was 
resected. It soon became evident that the use of gastrojeju -
nal anastomosis after gastric resection could be safer and eas -
ier than the Billroth I procedure, and it became popular and 
effective in the surgical treatment of duodenal ulcer. Because 
of its disadvantages, such as higher operative mortality and 
morbidity, it has not been used for many years in the patient 
with an uncomplicated ulcer, but it is still used occasionally  
Anton Wolfler , 1850–1917, Professor of Surgery, Prague, Czechoslovakia.
Surgery Fig 51.18Figure 63.16 Billroth I gastrectomy. The lower half of the stomach 
is removed and the cut stomach anastomosed to the first part of the 
duodenum.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1120 25/10/2017   09:45Peptic ulcer 1121
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
in the treatment of a complicated ulcer with a ‘difficult’ duo -
denum. In Billroth II gastrectomy, or its close relation Pólya 
gastrectomy, the antrum and distal body of the stomach are 
mobilised by opening the greater and lesser omentum and 
dividing the gastroepiploic arteries, right gastric artery and 
the left gastric artery arcade at the limit of the resection. 
The duodenum is closed off either by suture or using staples, 
sometimes with difficulty in patients with a very deformed 
duodenum. Various techniques are available to close the 
difficult duodenum and, in extremis, a catheter may be placed 
in the duodenal stump, the duodenum closed around it and 
a  catheter brought out through the abdominal wall. Follow -
ing resection, the distal end of the stomach is narrowed by 
the closure of the lesser curve aspect of the remnant. The 
greater curve aspect is then anastomosed, usually in a retro -
colic fashion, to the jejunum, leaving as short an afferent loop 
as feasible (Figure 63.17). Even when well performed, this 
procedure has an operative mortality rate of a few per cent 
and morbidity is not unusual. A common cause of morbidity 
is leakage from the duodenal stump, which is particularly 
associated with kinking of the afferent loop. Leakage from the 
gastrojejunal anastomosis is unusual unless it is under tension 
or the stomach has been devascularised during the mobilisa -
tion. The incidence of side effects following gastrectomy is 
considerable, as shown in Table 63.2. Recurrence of the ulcer 
at the stoma is uncommon but can occur, especially as this 
procedure is traditionally not combined with the vagotomy. 
In the majority of expert centres a Roux-en-Y reconstruction 
rather than the Billroth II procedure is performed because 
postoperative function is better.
Eugen (Jeno) Alexander Pólya , 1876–1944, surgeon, St Stephen’s Hospital, Budapest, Hungary.
César Roux , 1857–1934, Professor of Surgery and Gynaecology, Lausanne, Switzerland. Described this method of forming a jejunal conduit in 1908.
Lester Reynold Dragstedt , 1893–1975, Professor of Surgery, Chicago, IL, USA.
Surgery Fig 51.19
Figure 63.17 Billroth II. Two-thirds of the stomach is removed, the 
duodenal stump is closed and the stomach anastomosed to the jeju-
num.
Surgery Fig 51.20
Figure 63.18 Gastroenterostomy. The jejunum is anastomosed to 
the posterior, dependent, wall of the stomach.
TABLE 63.2 Operative mortality, side effects and 
incidence of recurrence following duodenal ulcer 
operations.
Operation Operative 
mortality (%)
Significant 
side effects 
(%)
Recurrent 
ulceration 
(%)
Gastrectomy <1–2 <20–40 1–4
Gastroenterostomy 
alone 
<1 <10–20 50
Truncal vagotomy 
and drainage 
<1 <10–20 2–7
Selective vagotomy 
and drainage 
<1 <10–20 5–10
Highly selective 
vagotomy 
<0.2 <5 2–10
Truncal vagotomy 
and antrectomy 
<1 <10–20 1
Gastrojejunostomy
Because of the potential for mortality after gastrectomy, the 
use of gastrojejunostomy alone in the treatment of duo denal 
ulceration was developed (Figure 63.18). Reflux of alkali 
from the small bowel into the stomach reduced duodenal acid 
exposure and was often successful in healing the ulcer. How -
ever, because the jejunal loop was exposed directly to gastric 
acid, stomal ulceration was extremely common, hence the 
procedure in isolation was ineffective.
Truncal vagotomy and drainage
Truncal vagotomy was first intro duced in 1943 by Dragstedt 
and, for many years, combined with drainage, was the main-
stay of treatment of duodenal ulceration (Figure 63.19). The 
principle of the operation is that section of the vagus nerves, 
which are critically involved in the secretion of gastric acid, 
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1121 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1122
reduces the maximal acid output by approximately 50%. 
Because the vagal nerves are motor to the stomach, dener -
vation of the antropyloroduo denal segment results in gastric 
stasis in a substantial proportion of patients on whom truncal 
vagotomy alone is performed. This was first noted by Dragst-
edt, who did not perform a drainage procedure when he first 
introduced the operation. The most popular drainage proce-
dure is the Heineke–Mikulicz pyloroplasty (Figure 63.20). 
It is simple to perform and involves the longitudinal section 
of the pyloric ring. The incision is closed transversely. Gas-
trojejunostomy (Figure 63.18) was the alternative drainage 
procedure to pyloroplasty. This is performed through open -
ing the lesser sac and performing an anastomosis between the 
most dependent part of the antrum and the first jejunal loop. 
An isoperistaltic anastomosis was most commonly performed. 
The operation of truncal vagotomy and drainage is substan-
tially safer than gastrectomy (Table 63.2). However, the side 
effects of surgery are, in fact, little different from those that 
follow gastrectomy.
Highly selective vagotomy
In 1968 Johnston and Amdrup independently devised the 
operation of highly selective vagotomy in which only the parie-
tal cell mass of the stomach was denervated (Figure 63.21). 
This proved to be the most satisfactory operation for duodenal 
ulceration, with a low incidence of side effects and acceptable 
recurrence rates when performed to a high technical stan -
dard. This operation became the gold standard for operations 
on duodenal ulceration in the 1970s. The operative mortal-
ity was lower than any other definitive operation for duode -
nal ulceration, in all probability because the gastrointestinal 
tract was not opened during this procedure. The unpleasant 
effects of peptic ulcer surgery were largely avoided, although 
loss of receptive relaxation of the stomach did occur, leading 
to epigastric fullness and sometimes mild dumping. However, 
the severe symptoms that occur after other more destructive 
gastric operations did not occur. It is often said that recurrent 
ulceration is the Achilles’ heel of this operation although, 
when performed well, recurrence was no more common than 
after truncal vagotomy. The operation disappeared from rou -
tine use with the advent of antisecretory agents and eradica -
tion therapy.
Walther Hermann Heineke , 1834–1901, surgeon, Erlangen, Germany.
Johann von Mikulicz-Radecki , 1850–1905, Professor of Surgery, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
David Johnston , contemporary, Professor of Surgery, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
Eric Amdrup , 1923–1998, Professor of Surgery, Aarhus, Denmark.
(a) (b) (c)
Surgery Fig 51.21
Figure 63.19 Truncal vagotomy: (a) division of the anterior vagus; (b) mobilisation of the oesophagus; (c) division of the posterior vagus.
Surgery Fig 51.22
Figure 63.20 Pyroplasty.
7 cm
6–8 cm
Figure 63.21 Highly selective vagotomy. The anterior and posterior 
vagus nerves are preserved but all branches to the fundus and body 
of the stomach are divided.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1122 25/10/2017   09:45Peptic ulcer 1123
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Truncal vagotomy and antrectomy
For completeness, this operation should be mentioned as at 
one stage it was popular in the USA. In addition to a trun -
cal vagotomy, the antrum of the stomach is removed, thus 
removing the source of gastrin, and the gastric remnant is 
joined to the duodenum. The recurrence rates after this pro-
cedure are exceedingly low. However, the operative mortality 
is higher than after vagotomy and drainage (Table 63.2) and 
the incidence of unpleasant side effects is similar.
Operations for gastric ulcer
In contrast with duodenal ulcer surgery , when the principal 
objective was to reduce duodenal acid exposure, in gastric 
ulceration the diseased tissue is usually removed as well. This 
has the advantage that malignancy can then be confidently 
excluded. As with duodenal ulceration such surgery is not 
now performed except for complications of gastric ulcer.
Billroth I gastrectomy
This was the standard operation (Figure 63.16 ) for gastric 
ulceration until medical treatments became prevalent. The 
distal stomach is mobilised and resected in the same way as in 
the Billroth II gastrectomy. This resection should include the 
ulcer that is usually situated on the lesser curve. The cut edge 
of the remnant is then partially closed from the lesser curve 
aspect, leaving a stoma at the greater curve aspect, which 
should be similar in size to the duodenum. Reconstruction 
may be facilitated by mobilising the duodenum using Kocher’s 
manoeuvre. The incidence of recurrent ulceration after this 
operation is low, but it carries with it the morbidity and mor-
tality associated with any gastric resection. This operation is 
virtually never performed now.
Sequelae of peptic ulcer surgery
There are a number of sequelae of peptic ulcer surgery, which 
include recurrent ulceration, small stomach syndrome, bilious 
vomiting, early and late dumping, diarrhoea and malignant 
transformation. These sequelae principally follow from the 
more destructive operations that are now seldom performed. 
However, a substantial number of patients suffer from side 
effects from operations undertaken in the past. Approxi -
mately 30% of patients can expect to suffer a degree of dys -
function following peptic ulcer surgery (Table 63.2) and, in 
about 5% of such patients, the symptoms will be intractable.
Recurrent ulceration
Although mentioned first, this is by far the easiest problem to 
treat. Just as all peptic ulcers will heal with potent antisecre -
tory agents, so will ulcers that are recurrent after ulcer surgery.
As with other peptic ulcers, recurrent ulcers may pres -
ent with complications, particularly bleeding and perfora -
tion. In this respect, the complication of gastrojejunal colic 
fistula requires a particular mention. In this rare condition, 
the anastomotic ulcer penetrates into the transverse colon. 
Patients suffer from diarrhoea that is severe and follows every 
meal. They have foul breath and may vomit formed faeces. 
Severe weight loss and dehydration are rapid in onset, and for 
this reason the condition may be mistaken for malignancy. 
The major factor producing the nutritional disturbance is the 
severe contamination of the jejunum with colonic bacteria. 
A number of imaging techniques can be used to detect the 
fistula, most commonly CT with oral contrast or indeed a bar-
ium enema. Endoscopy may not convincingly demonstrate 
the fistula and, in about one-half of such cases, the barium 
meal will not reveal the problem. The treatment of gastro -
colic fistula consists of first correcting the dehydration and 
malnutrition and then performing revisional surgery.
Small stomach syndrome
Early satiety follows most ulcer operations to some degree, 
including highly selective vagotomy. In this latter circum -
stance, although there is no anatomical disturbance of the 
stomach there is loss of receptive relaxation. Fortunately, this 
problem does tend to get better with time and revisional sur -
gery is not necessary.
Bile vomiting
Bile vomiting can occur after any form of vagotomy with 
drainage or gastrectomy. Commonly , the patient presents 
with vomiting a mixture of food and bile or sometimes some 
bile alone after a meal. Often eating will precipitate abdom -
inal pain and reflux symptoms are common. Bile chelating 
agents can be tried but are usually ineffective. In intractable 
cases, revisional surgery may be indicated. The nature of that 
revisional surgery depends very much on the original opera-
tion. Following gastrectomy, Roux-en-Y diversion is probably 
the best treatment. In patients with a gastroenterostomy, this 
can be taken down and, in most circumstances a small pylo -
roplasty can be performed. In patients with a pyloroplasty, 
reconstruction of the pylorus has been attempted but, in gen-
eral terms, the results of this operation have been rather poor. 
Antrectomy and Roux-en-Y reconstruction may be the better 
option.
Early and late dumping
Although considered together because the symptoms are sim-
ilar, early and late dumping have different aetiologies. A com-
mon feature, however, is early rapid gastric emptying. Many 
patients have both early and late dumping.
EARL Y DUMPING
Early dumping consists of abdominal and vasomotor symp-
toms that are found in about 10% of patients following gas-
trectomy or vagotomy and drainage. It also affects a small 
percentage of patients following highly selective vagotomy 
due to the loss of receptive relaxation of the stomach. The 
small bowel is filled with foodstuffs from the stomach, which 
have a high osmotic load, and this leads to the sequestration 
of fluid from the circulation into the gastrointestinal tract. 
This can be observed by the rise in the packed cell volume 
Emil Theodor Kocher , 1841–1917, Professor of Surgery, Berne, Switzerland.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1123 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1124
while the symptoms are present. All of the symptoms shown 
in Table 63.3 can be related to this effect on the gut and the 
circulation.
The principal treatment is dietary manipulation. Small, 
regular meals based on fat and protein are best, and avoid -
ing fluids with a high carbohydrate content also helps. Fortu-
nately, following operation, the syndrome tends to improve 
with time. For some reason, however, there is a group of 
patients who suffer intractable dumping regardless of any of 
these measures. The somatostatin analogue octreotide given 
before meals has been shown to be useful in some individuals 
and the long-acting preparation may also be useful. However, 
this treatment can lead to the development of gallstones and 
it does not help the diarrhoea from which many patients with 
dumping also suffer.
Revisional surgery may be occasionally required. In 
patients with a gastroenterostomy, the drainage may be taken 
down or, in the case of a pyloroplasty, repaired. Alternatively, 
antrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction is often effective, 
although the procedure is of greater magnitude; following gas-
trectomy, it is the revisional procedure of choice.
also important. Exaggerated gastrointestinal peptide responses 
may also aggravate the condition.
The diarrhoea in post-vagotomy patients may take several 
forms. It may be severe and explosive, the patient experienc -
ing a considerable degree of urgency. The patients sometimes 
describe the diarrhoea as feeling like passing boiling water. At 
the other extreme, some patients only have minor episodes of 
diarrhoea, which are not as directly related to food.
Many authors regard diarrhoea and dumping as being 
essentially the same problem. However, many patients with 
severe diarrhoea do not have any of the other symptoms of 
dumping and likewise some patients with dumping do not 
experience any significant diarrhoea.
The condition is difficult to treat. The patient should be 
managed as for early dumping and antidiarrhoeal preparations 
may be of some value. Octreotide is not effective in this con-
dition and the results of revisional surgery are too unpredict -
able to make this an attractive treatment option.
Malignant transformation
Many large studies now confirm that operations such as gas -
trectomy or vagotomy and drainage are independent risk fac-
tors for the development of gastric cancer. The increased risk 
appears to be approximately four times that of the control 
population.
It is not difficult to understand the increased incidence 
of gastric cancer, as bile reflux gastritis, intestinal metaplasia 
and gastric cancer are linked. The lag phase between opera-
tion and the development of malignancy is at least 10 years. 
Highly selective vagotomy does not seem to be associated 
with an increased incidence of gastric cancer in the long term.
Nutritional consequences
Nutritional disorders are more common after gastrectomy 
than after vagotomy and drainage. Weight loss is common 
after gastrectomy and the patient may, in fact, never return to 
their original weight. Nutritional advice advising the taking 
of small meals is often more useful. Anaemia may be due to 
either iron or vitamin B12 deficiency.
Iron-deficiency anaemia occurs after both gastrectomy 
and vagotomy and drainage and is probably multifactorial in 
origin. Reduced iron absorption is probably the most import -
ant factor, although the loss of blood from the gastric mucosa 
may also be important. Vitamin B12 deficiency is prone to 
occur after total gastrectomy. However, because of the very 
large vitamin B12 stores that most patients have, this may 
be very late in occurring. Vitamin B12 supplementation after 
total gastrectomy is essential. Rarely, vitamin B12 deficiency 
may occur after lesser forms of gastrectomy. In such patients 
the cause is probably a combination of reduced intrinsic factor 
production and also the fact that some patients have bacterial 
colonisation, which results in the destruction of the vitamin 
B12 in the gut.
Bone disease is seen principally after gastrectomy and 
mainly in women. The condition is essentially indistinguish -
able from the osteoporosis commonly seen in post-meno -
pausal women. It is only the frequency and magnitude of the 
disorder that distinguish it. Treatment is with dietary supple-
mentation, calcium and vitamin D, and exercise.
TABLE 63.3 Features of early and late dumping.
Early Late
Incidence 5–10% 5%
Relation to meals Almost immediate Second hour after 
meal
Durations of attack 30–40 minutes 30–40 minutes
Relief Lying down Food
Aggravated by More food Exercise
Precipitating factor Food, especially 
carbohydrate-rich 
and wet
As early dumping
Major symptoms Epigastric fullness, 
sweating, light-
headedness, 
tachycardia, 
colic, sometimes 
diarrhoea
Tremor, faintness, 
prostration
LATE DUMPING
This is reactive hypoglycaemia. The carbohydrate load in the 
small bowel causes a rise in the plasma glucose, which, in turn, 
causes insulin levels to rise, causing a secondary hypoglycae -
mia. This can be easily demonstrated by serial measurements 
of blood glucose in a patient following a test meal. The treat-
ment is essentially the same as for early dumping. Octreotide 
is very effective in dealing with this problem.
Post-vagotomy diarrhoea
This can be the most devastating symptom to afflict patients 
having peptic ulcer surgery. Most patients will suffer some 
looseness of bowel action to some degree (with the exception 
of highly selective vagotomy) but, in about 5%, it may be 
intractable. Despite much investigation, the precise aetiology 
of the problem is uncertain. It is related, to some degree, to 
rapid gastric emptying. In all probability, the denervation of 
the upper gastrointestinal tract as a result of the vagotomy is 
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1124 25/10/2017   09:45Peptic ulcer 1125
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Gallstones
The development of gallstones is strongly associated with 
truncal vagotomy. Following truncal vagotomy , the biliary 
tree, as well as the stomach, is denervated, leading to stasis 
and hence stone formation. Patients developing symptomatic 
gallstones will require cholecystectomy. However, this may 
induce or worsen other postpeptic ulcer surgery syndromes 
such as bilious vomiting and postvagotomy diarrhoea.
The complications of peptic 
ulceration
The common complications of peptic ulcer are perforation, 
bleeding and stenosis. Bleeding and stenosis are considered 
below in the relevant sections.
Perforated peptic ulcer
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Despite the widespread use of gastric antisecretory agents 
and eradication therapy, the incidence of perforated peptic 
ulcer has changed little. However, there has been a con -
siderable change in the epidemiology of perforated peptic 
ulcer in resource-rich countries over the last two decades. 
Previously, most patients were middle aged, with a ratio of 2:1 
of male:female. With time there has been a steady increase 
in the age of the patients suffering this complication and an 
increase in the numbers of females, such that perforations now 
occur most commonly in elderly female patients. NSAIDs 
appear to be responsible for most of these perforations.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The classical presentation of perforated duodenal ulcer is 
instantly recognisable (Figure 63.22). The patient, who may 
have a history of peptic ulceration, develops sudden-onset 
severe generalised abdominal pain due to the irritant effect 
of gastric acid on the peritoneum. Although the contents 
of an acid-producing stomach are relatively low in bacterial 
load, bacterial peritonitis supervenes over a few hours, usually 
accompanied by a deterioration in the patient’s condition. 
Initially, the patient may be shocked with a tachycardia but 
a pyrexia is not usually observed until some hours after the 
event. The abdomen exhibits a board-like rigidity and the 
patient is disinclined to move because of the pain. The abdo-
men does not move with respiration. Patients with this form 
of presentation need an operation, without which the patient 
will deteriorate with a septic peritonitis.
This classical presentation of the perforated peptic ulcer 
is observed less commonly than in the past. Very frequently 
the elderly patient who is taking NSAIDs will have a less 
dramatic presentation, perhaps because of the use of potent 
anti-inflammatory drugs (steroids). The board-like rigidity 
seen in the abdomen of younger patients may also not be 
observed and a higher index of suspicion is necessary to make 
the correct diagnosis. In other patients, the leak from the 
ulcer may not be massive. They may present only with pain 
in the epigastrium and right iliac fossa as the fluid may track 
down the right paracolic gutter. Sometimes perforations will 
seal owing to the inflammatory response and adhesion within 
the abdominal cavity, and so the perforation may be self-  
limiting. All of these factors may combine to make the 
diagnosis of perforated peptic ulcer difficult.
By far the most common site of perforation is the anterior 
aspect of the duodenum. However, the anterior or incisural 
gastric ulcer may perforate and, in addition, gastric ulcers may 
perforate into the lesser sac, which can be particularly difficult 
to diagnose. These patients may not have obvious peritonitis.
INVESTIGATIONS
An erect plain chest radiograph will reveal free gas under the 
diaphragm in excess of 50% of cases with perforated peptic 
ulcer (Figure 63.23) but CT imaging is more accurate (see 
below). All patients should have serum amylase performed, as 
distinguishing between peptic ulcer, perforation and pancre-
atitis can be difficult. Measuring the serum amylase, however, 
may not remove the diagnostic difficulty. It can be elevated 
following perforation of a peptic ulcer although, fortunately, 
the levels are not usually as high as the levels commonly seen 
Figure 63.22 A sketch of Mr Hamilton Bailey watching for abdom -
inal movement on respiration. In the case of a classically pr esenting 
perforated ulcer, the abdominal movement is restricted or absent.
Figure 63.23  Plain abdominal radiograph of a perforated ulcer, 
showing air under the diaphragm.
Henry Hamilton Bailey , 1894–1961, surgeon, The Royal Northern Hospital, London, UK.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1125 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1126
in acute pancreatitis. Several other investigations are useful 
if doubt remains. A CT scan will normally be diagnostic in 
both conditions.
TREATMENT
The initial priorities are resuscitation and analgesia. Analge -
sia should not be withheld for fear of removing the signs of 
an intra-abdominal catastrophe. In fact, adequate analgesia 
makes the clinical signs more obvious. It is important, how -
ever, to titrate the analgesic dose. Following resuscitation, the 
treatment is principally surgical. Laparotomy is performed, 
usually through an upper midline incision if the diagnosis of 
perforated peptic ulcer can be made with confidence. This 
is not always possible and hence it may be better to place a 
small incision around the umbilicus to localise the perfora -
tion with more certainty. Alternatively, laparoscopy may be 
used. The most important component of the operation is a 
thorough peritoneal toilet to remove all of the fluid and food 
debris. If the perforation is in the duodenum it can usually be 
closed by several well-placed sutures, closing the ulcer in a 
transverse direction as with a pyloroplasty. It is important that 
sufficient tissue is taken in the suture to allow the edges to be 
approximated, and the sutures should not be tied so tight that 
they tear out. It is common to place an omental patch over 
the perforation in the hope of enhancing the chances of the 
leak sealing. If the perforation is difficult to close primarily it 
is frequently possible to seal the leak with an omental patch 
alone, and many surgeons now employ this strategy for all per-
forations. When securing the omental patch it is important 
not to tie the sutures too tight so as to obliterate the omental 
blood supply. Gastric ulcers should, if possible, be excised and 
closed, so that malignancy can be excluded. Occasionally a 
patient is seen who has a massive duodenal or gastric perfor -
ation such that simple closure is impossible; in these patients 
a distal gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction is the 
procedure of choice.
All patients should be treated with systemic antibiotics in 
addition to a thorough peritoneal lavage. In the past, many 
surgeons performed definitive procedures such as either trun-
cal vagotomy and pyloroplasty or, more recently and proba-
bly more successfully, highly selective vagotomy during the 
course of an operation for a perforation. Studies show that in 
well-selected patients and in expert hands this is a very safe 
strategy. However, nowadays, surgery is confined to first-aid 
measures most commonly, and the peptic ulcer is treated med-
ically as described earlier in this chapter. Following operation, 
gastric antisecretory agents should be started immediately. H. 
pylori eradication is mandatory.
Perforated peptic ulcers can often be managed by mini-
mally invasive techniques if the expertise is available. The 
principles of operation are, however, the same; thorough 
peritoneal toilet is performed and the perforation is closed 
by intracorporeal suturing. Whatever technique is used, it is 
important that the stomach is kept empty postoperatively by 
nasogastric suction, and that gastric antisecretory agents are 
commenced to promote healing in the residual ulcer.
A great deal has been written about the conservative man-
agement of perforated ulcer. Some writers say that virtually all 
patients can be managed conservatively, whereas most sur -
geons have difficulty in understanding how a patient who is 
ill with widespread peritonitis and who has food debris widely 
distributed through the abdominal cavity will improve with -
out an operation. However, undoubtedly, there are patients 
who have small leaks from a perforated peptic ulcer and rela-
tively mild peritoneal contamination, who may be managed 
with intravenous fluids, nasogastric suction and antibiotics. 
These patients are in the minority. A number of factors have 
been associated with poor outcome after perforated peptic 
ulcer, including:
 ● delay in diagnosis (>24 hours);
 ● medical comorbidities;
 ● shock;
 ● increasing age (>75).
There is little evidence to advocate the conservative man-
agement of patients who exhibit any of these characteristics.
Patients who have suffered one perforation may suffer 
another one. Therefore, they should be managed aggressively 
to ensure that this does not happen. Lifelong treatment with 
proton pump inhibitors is a reasonable option especially in 
those who have to continue with NSAID treatment.
HAEMATEMESIS AND MELAENA
Upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage remains a major medical 
problem with an incidence over 100/100 000 per year in west-
ern practice that increases with increasing age. Haemorrhage 
is strongly associated with NSAID use. Despite improvements 
in diagnosis and the proliferation in treatment modalities over 
the last few decades, an in-hospital mortality of 5–10% can be 
expected. This rises to 33% when bleeding is first observed in 
patients who are hospitalised for other reasons. In patients 
in whom the cause of bleeding can be found, the most com -
mon causes are peptic ulcer, erosions, Mallory–Weiss tear and 
bleeding oesophageal varices (Table 63.4).
Whatever the cause, the principles of management are 
identical. First, the patient should be adequately resusci-
tated and, following this, the patient should be investigated 
urgently to determine the cause of the bleeding. Only then 
should treatment of a definitive nature be instituted. For any 
significant gastrointestinal bleed, intravenous access should 
be established and, for those with severe bleeding, central 
venous pressure monitoring should be set up and bladder cath-
eterisation performed. Blood should be cross-matched and the 
patient transfused as clinically indicated, usually when >30% 
of blood volume has been lost. There is no evidence for the 
use of intravenous proton pump inhibitors prior to endoscopy. 
As a general rule, most gastrointestinal bleeding will stop, 
albeit temporarily, but there are sometimes instances when 
this is not the case. In these circumstances, resuscitation, 
diagnosis and treatment should be carried out simultaneously. 
There are occasions when life-saving manoeuvres have to 
George Kenneth Mallory , b.1926, Professor of Pathology, Boston, MA, USA.
Soma Weiss , 1899–1942, Professor of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1126 25/10/2017   09:45Haematemesis and mel aena 1127
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
be undertaken without the benefit of an absolute diagnosis. 
For instance, in patients with known oesophageal varices 
and uncontrollable bleeding, a Sengstaken–Blakemore tube 
may be inserted before an endoscopy has been carried out. 
This practice is not to be encouraged, except in extremis. In 
some patients, bleeding is secondary to a coagulopathy. The 
most important current causes of this are liver disease and 
inadequately controlled warfarin therapy. In these circum -
stances the coagulopathy should be corrected, if possible, with 
fresh-frozen plasma or concentrated clotting factors.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy should be carried out 
by an experienced operator as soon as practicable after the 
patient has been stabilised. In patients in whom the bleed-
ing is relatively mild, endoscopy may be carried out on the 
morning after admission; this is usually guided by local policy. 
In all cases of severe bleeding it should be carried out imme-
diately. A number of scoring systems have been advocated for 
the assessment of rebleeding and death after upper gastroin -
testinal haemorrhage. Perhaps the most useful of these is the 
Rockall score. This can be used in a pre-endoscopy format to 
stratify patients to safe early discharge and postendoscopy it 
can relatively accurately predict rebleeding and death.
Bleeding peptic ulcers
The epidemiology of bleeding peptic ulcers exactly mirrors 
that of perforated ulcers. In recent years, the population 
affected has become much older and the bleeding is com -
monly associated with the ingestion of NSAIDs. Diagnosis 
can normally be made endoscopically, although occasionally 
the nature of the blood loss precludes accurately identifying 
the lesion. However, the more experienced the endoscopist, 
the less likely this is to be a problem.
Medical and minimally interventional 
treatments
Medical treatment has limited efficacy. All patients are com-
monly started on either an H 2-antagonist or a proton pump 
antagonist, and recent evidence confirms the benefit of pro -
ton pump inhibitor administration to prevent rebleeding after 
endoscopy. Furthermore, meta-analysis of studies suggests 
that tranexamic acid, an inhibitor of fibrinolysis, may reduce 
overall mortality.
Therapeutic endoscopy can achieve haemostasis in 
approximately 70% of cases, with the best evidence support -
ing a combination of adrenaline injection with heater probe 
and/or clips. Therapeutic endoscopy will probably never be 
effective in patients who are bleeding from large vessels and 
with which the majority of the mortality is associated.
In patients where the source of bleeding cannot be iden -
tified or in those who rebleed after endoscopy, angiography 
with transcatheter embolisation may offer a valuable alter -
native to surgery in expert centres. The risk of significant 
ischaemia following embolisation is low because of the rich 
collateral blood supply of the stomach and duodenum. The 
surgeon should be mindful that rescue surgery after failed 
embolisation is associated with poor outcome and it may be 
advantageous to proceed directly to surgery.
Surgical treatment
Criteria for surgery are well worked out. A patient who 
continues to bleed requires surgical treatment. The same 
applies to a significant rebleed. The only exception applies 
in expert centres with 24-hour interventional radiology and 
experience of angiographic embolisation where attempts may 
be made to arrest bleeding and avoid surgery. The surgical 
team should care for these patients and an operation should 
not be delayed if any concerns remain. Patients with a visible 
vessel in the ulcer base, a spurting vessel or an ulcer with 
a clot in the base are statistically likely to require surgical 
treatment to stop the bleeding. Elderly and unfit patients are 
more likely to die as a result of bleeding than younger patients. 
Ironically, they should have early surgery. A patient who has 
required more than six units of blood in general needs surgical 
treatment.
The aim of the operation is to stop the bleeding. The 
advent of endoscopy has greatly helped in the management 
of upper gastrointestinal bleeding as a surgeon can usually 
be confident about the site of bleeding prior to operation. 
The most common site of bleeding from a peptic ulcer is the 
duodenum. In tackling this, it is essential that the duodenum 
is fully mobilised. This should be done before the duodenum 
is opened as it makes the ulcer much more accessible and 
also allows the surgeon’s hand to be placed behind the 
gastroduodenal artery, which is commonly the source of 
major bleeding. Following mobilisation, the duodenum, 
and usually the pylorus, is opened longitudinally as in a 
TABLE 63.4 Causes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
Condition %
Ulcers 60
Oesophageal 6
Gastric 21
Duodenal 33
Erosions 26
Oesophageal 13
Gastric 9
Duodenal 4
Mallory–Weiss tear 4
Oesophageal varices 4
Tumour 0.5
Vascular lesions, e.g. Dieulafoy’s disease 0.5
Others 5
Robert William Sengstaken , b.1923, surgeon, Garden City, NY, USA.
Arthur Hendley Blakemore , 1897–1970, Associate Professor of Surgery, the Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA. Sengstaken and 
Blakemore originally described the tube in 1950.
Timothy A Rockall , contemporary, Professor of Surgery, University of Surrey, UK.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1127 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1128
pyloroplasty. This allows goo d access to the ulcer, which is 
usually found posteriorly or superiorly. Accurate haemostasis 
is important and can be achieved initially by direct pressure. 
It is the vessel within the ulcer that is bleeding and this 
should be controlled using well-placed sutures on a small 
round-bodied needle that under-run the vessel. The placing 
of more and more inaccurately positioned sutures is counter-
productive. Following under-running, it is often possible to 
close the mucosa over the ulcer. The pyloroplasty is then 
closed with interrupted sutures in a transverse direction 
as in the usual fashion. In a giant ulcer the first part of 
the duodenum may be destroyed making primary closure 
impossible. In this circumstance one should proceed to distal 
gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The duodenal 
stump may then be closed using the Nissen technique with 
T-tube drainage.
The principles of management of bleeding gastric ulcers 
are essentially the same. The stomach is opened at an 
appropriate position anteriorly and the vessel in the ulcer 
under-run. If the ulcer is not excised then a biopsy of the 
edge needs to be taken to exclude malignant transformation. 
Sometimes the bleeding is from the splenic artery and if 
there is a lot of fibrosis present then the operation may be 
challenging. However, most patients can be managed by 
conservative surgery. Gastrectomy for bleeding has been 
widely practised in the past, but is associated with a high 
perioperative mortality even if the incidence of recurrent 
bleeding is less.
Bearing in mind that most patients nowadays are elderly 
and unfit, the minimum surgery that stops the bleeding 
is probably optimal (damage control surgery). Acid can 
be inhibited by pharmacological means and appropriate 
eradication therapy will prevent ulcer recurrence. Definitive 
acid-lowering surgery is not now required. Patients on long-
term NSAIDs can be managed as outlined earlier.
Stress ulceration
This commonly occurs in patients with major injury or ill-
ness, who have undergone major surgery or who have major 
comorbidity. Many such patients are found in intensive care 
units. There seems little doubt that the incidence of this 
problem has reduced in recent years due to the widespread 
use of prophylaxis. Acid inhibition and the nasogastric or oral 
administration of sucralfate has been shown to reduce the 
incidence of stress ulceration. There is no doubt that it is far 
better to prevent this condition than to try to treat it once it 
occurs. Endoscopic means of treating stress ulceration may be 
ineffective and operation may be required. The principles of 
management are the same as for the chronic ulcer.
Gastric erosions
Erosive gastritis has a variety of causes, especially NSAIDs. 
Fortunately, most such bleeding settles spontaneously, but 
when it does not it can be a major problem to treat. In  general 
terms, although there is a diffuse erosive gastritis, there is one 
(or more) specific lesion that has a significant-sized vessel 
within it. This should be dealt with appropriately, preferably 
endoscopically, but sometimes surgery is necessary.
Mallory–Weiss tear
This is a longitudinal tear at the gastro-oesophageal junc -
tion, which is induced by repetitive and strenuous vomiting. 
Doubtless, many such lesions occur and do not cause bleed -
ing. When it is a cause of haematemesis, the lesion may often 
be missed as it can be difficult to see as it is just below the 
gastro-oesophageal junction, a position that can be difficult 
for the inexperienced endoscopist. Occasionally these lesions 
continue to bleed and require surgical treatment. Often the 
situation arises in which the surgeon does not have guidance 
from the endoscopists as regards the site of bleeding, and a 
high index of suspicion in such circumstances is important. 
The experienced surgeon will perform on-table endoscopy 
prior to embarking on surgery. The stomach is opened by 
longitudinal gastrotomy and the upper section is carefully 
inspected. It is normally possible to palpate the longitudinal 
mucosal tear with a little induration at the edges, which gives 
a clue to the lesion’s location. Under-running is all that is 
required.
Dieulafoy’s disease
This is essentially a gastric arterial venous malformation that 
has a characteristic histological appearance. Bleeding due to 
this malformation is one of the most difficult causes of upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding to treat. The lesion itself is covered 
by normal mucosa and, when not bleeding, it may be invis-
ible. If it can be seen while bleeding, all that may be visible 
is profuse bleeding coming from an area of apparently normal 
mucosa. If this occurs, the cause is instantly recognisable. If 
the lesion can be identified endoscopically there are various 
means of dealing with it, including injection of sclerosant and 
endoscopic clips. If it is identified at operation then only a 
local excision is necessary. Occasionally, a lesion is only rec -
ognised after gastrectomy and sometimes not even then. The 
pathologist, as well as the endoscopist, may have difficulty in 
finding it.
Tumours
All of the gastric tumours described below may present with 
chronic or acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Bleeding is 
not normally torrential but can be unremitting. Gastric stro -
mal tumours commonly present with bleeding and have a 
characteristic appearance, as the mucosa breaks down over 
the tumour in the gastric wall (Figure 63.24). Whatever the 
nature, the tumours should be dealt with as appropriate.
Rudolph Nissen , 1896–1981, Professor of Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey, and later at Basle, Switzerland.
Georges Dieulafoy , 1839–1911, physician, Paris, France.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1128 25/10/2017   09:45Gastric outlet obstruction 1129
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Portal hypertension and portal 
gastropathy
The management of bleeding gastric varices is very challeng-
ing. Fortunately, most bleeding from varices is oesophageal 
and this is much more amenable to sclerotherapy, banding 
and balloon tamponade. Gastric varices may also be injected, 
although this is technically more difficult. Banding can also 
be used, again with difficulty. The gastric balloon of the 
 Sengstaken–Blakemore tube can be used to arrest the hae -
morrhage if it is occurring from the fundus of the stomach 
or gastro-oesophageal junction. Octreotide is a somatostatin 
analogue that reduces portal pressure in patients with varices, 
and trials suggest that it is of value in arresting haemorrhage 
in these patients, although its overall effect on mortality 
remains in doubt. Glypressin is also said to be of use.
Most surgeons prefer to avoid acute surgery on bleeding 
varices as, in contrast with elective operations for portal 
hypertension, acute shunts are attended by considerable oper-
ative mortality. For this reason the acute TIPSS procedure 
(transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt), which is 
described in Chapter 65, can be an extremely useful, although 
technically demanding, procedure.
Portal gastropathy
Portal gastropathy is essentially the same disease process as 
described above. The mucosa is affected by the increased 
portal pressure and may exude blood, even in the absence of 
well-developed visible varices. The treatment is as above.
Aortic enteric fistula
This diagnosis should be considered in any patient with hae -
matemesis and melaena that cannot be otherwise explained. 
Contrary to expectation, the bleeding from such patients is 
not always massive, although it can be. Very often there is 
nothing much to distinguish between the bleeding from the 
aortic enteric fistula and any other recurrent upper gastroin -
testinal bleeding. The vast majority of patients will have had 
an aortic graft and, in the absence of this, the diagnosis is 
unlikely. However, it is occasionally seen in patients with an 
untreated aortic aneurysm. A well-performed CT scan will 
commonly allow the diagnosis to be made with certainty. The 
condition should be managed by an expert vascular surgeon 
as, whether secondary or primary, the morbidity and mortality 
are high.
GASTRIC OUTLET 
OBSTRUCTION
The two common causes of gastric outlet obstruction are 
gastric cancer (see below) and pyloric stenosis secondary to 
peptic ulceration. Previously, the latter was more common. 
Now, with the decrease in the incidence of peptic ulceration 
and the advent of potent medical treatments, gastric outlet 
obstruction should be considered malignant until proven 
otherwise, at least in resource-rich countries.
The term ‘pyloric stenosis’ is normally a misnomer. The 
stenosis is seldom at the pylorus. Commonly, when the con -
dition is due to underlying peptic ulcer disease, the stenosis 
is found in the first part of the duodenum, the most common 
site for a peptic ulcer. True pyloric stenosis can occur due to 
fibrosis around a pyloric channel ulcer. However, in recent 
years the most common cause of gastric outlet obstruction has 
been gastric cancer. In this circumstance the metabolic con-
sequences may be somewhat different from those of benign 
pyloric stenosis because of the relative hypochlorhydria found 
in patients with gastric cancer.
Figure 63.24 Smooth muscle tumour of the stomach, with ulcer -
ation.
Summary box 63.5
Gastric outlet obstruction
●● Gastric outlet obstruction is most commonly associated with 
longstanding peptic ulcer disease and gastric cancer
●● The metabolic abnormality of hypochloraemic alkalosis is 
usually only seen with peptic ulcer disease and should be 
treated with isotonic saline with potassium
●● Endoscopic biopsy is essential to determine whether the 
cause of the problem is malignancy
●● Aggressive medical therapy for peptic ulcer disease often 
leads to resolution
●● Endoscopic dilatation of the gastric outlet may be effective in 
less severe cases of benign stenosis
●● Operation is frequently required, with a drainage procedure 
being performed for benign disease and appropriate 
resectional surgery if malignant
Clinical features
In benign gastric outlet obstruction there is usually a long 
history of peptic ulcer disease. Nowadays, as most patients 
with peptic ulcer symptoms are treated medically, it is easy 
to understand why the condition is becoming much less 
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1129 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1130
common. In some patients the pain may become unremitting 
and in other cases it may largely disappear. The vomitus is 
characteristically unpleasant in nature and is totally lacking 
in bile. Very often it is possible to recognise foodstuff taken 
several days previously. The patient commonly complains of 
losing weight, and appears unwell and dehydrated. When 
examining the patient, it may be possible to see the distended 
stomach and a succussion splash may be audible on shaking 
the patient’s abdomen.
Metabolic effects
These are most interesting, as the metabolic consequences of 
benign pyloric stenosis are unique. The vomiting of hydro -
chloric acid results in hypochloraemic alkalosis. Initially the 
sodium and potassium may be relatively normal. However, 
as dehydration progresses, more profound metabolic abnor -
malities arise, partly related to renal dysfunction. Initially, 
the urine has a low chloride and high bicarbonate content, 
reflecting the primary metabolic abnormality. This bicarbon-
ate is excreted along with sodium, and so with time the patient 
becomes progressively hyponatraemic and more profoundly 
dehydrated. Because of the dehydration, a phase of sodium 
retention follows and potassium and hydrogen are excreted in 
preference. This results in the urine becoming paradoxically 
acidic and hypokalaemia ensues. Alkalosis leads to a lowering 
in the circulating ionised calcium, and tetany can occur.
Management
Treating the patient involves correcting the metabolic abnor-
mality and dealing with the mechanical problem. The patient 
should be rehydrated with intravenous isotonic saline with 
potassium supplementation. Replacing the sodium chloride 
and water allows the kidney to correct the acid–base abnor -
mality. Following rehydration, it may become obvious that 
the patient is also anaemic, the haemoglobin being spuriously 
high on presentation.
It is notable that the metabolic abnormalities may be less 
if the obstruction is due to malignancy, as the acid–base dis -
turbance is less pronounced.
The stomach should be emptied using a wide-bore gastric 
tube. A large nasogastric tube may not be sufficiently large to 
deal with the contents of the stomach, and it may be neces-
sary to pass an orogastric tube and lavage the stomach until it 
is completely emptied. This then allows investigation of the 
patient with endoscopy and contrast radiology. Biopsy of the 
area around the pylorus is essential to exclude malignancy. 
The patient should also have a gastric antisecretory agent, 
initially given intravenously to ensure absorption.
Early cases may settle with conservative treatment, pre -
sumably as the oedema around the ulcer diminishes as the 
ulcer is healed. Traditionally, severe cases are treated surgi-
cally, usually with a gastroenterostomy rather than a pyloro -
plasty. Endoscopic treatment with balloon dilatation has been 
practised and may be most useful in early cases. However, this 
treatment is not devoid of problems. Dilating the duodenal 
stenosis may result in perforation. The dilatation may have 
to be performed several times and may not be successful in 
the long term. Occasionally duodenal stent insertion will be 
considered in specialist centres.
Other causes of gastric outlet 
obstruction
Adult pyloric stenosis
This is a rare condition and its relationship to the childhood 
condition is unclear, although some patients have a long his-
tory of problems with gastric emptying. It is commonly treated 
by pyloroplasty rather than pyloromyotomy.
Pyloric mucosal diaphragm
The origin of this rare condition is unknown. It usually does 
not become apparent until middle life. When found, simple 
excision of the mucosal diaphragm is all that is required.
GASTRIC POL YPS
A number of conditions manifest as gastric polyps. Their 
main importance is that they may actually represent early 
gastric cancer. Biopsy is essential.
The most common type of gastric polyp is metaplastic. 
These are associated with H. pylori  infection and regress 
following eradication therapy. Inflammatory polyps are also 
common. Fundic gland polyps deserve particular attention. 
They seem to be associated with the use of proton pump 
inhibitors and are also found in patients with familial polyp -
osis. None of the above polypoid lesions has proven malig -
nant potential. True adenomas have malignant potential and 
should be removed, but they account for only 10% of polyp -
oid lesions. Gastric carcinoids arising from the ECL cells are 
seen in patients with pernicious anaemia and usually appear 
as small polyps.
GASTRIC CANCER
Carcinoma of the stomach is a major cause of cancer mortal -
ity worldwide. Its prognosis tends to be poor, with cure rates 
little better than 5–10%, although better results are obtained 
in Japan, where the disease is common. Gastric cancer is actu-
ally an eminently curable disease provided that it is detected 
at an appropriate stage and treated adequately . It rarely dis -
seminates widely before it has involved the lymph nodes and, 
therefore, there is an opportunity to cure the disease prior 
to dissemination. Early diagnosis is therefore the key to suc -
cess with this disease. Unfortunately, the late presentation of 
many cases is the cause of the poor overall survival figures. 
The only treatment modality able to cure the disease is resec-
tional surgery.
Incidence
There are marked variations in the incidence of gastric cancer 
worldwide. In the UK it is approximately 15 per 100  000 per 
year, in the USA 10 per 100  000 per year and in Eastern 
Europe 40 per 100 000 per year. In Japan, the disease is much 
more common, with an incidence of approximately 70 per 
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1130 25/10/2017   09:45Gastric cancer 1131
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
100 000 per year, and there are small geographical areas in 
China where the incidence is double that in Japan. These 
underlying epidemiological data make it clear that this is an 
environmental disease. In general, men are more affected 
by the disease than women and, as with most solid organ 
malignancies, the incidence increases with age.
At present, marked changes are being observed in 
resource-rich countries in terms of the incidence and site of 
gastric cancer and the population affected, changes that to 
date have not been observed in Japan. First, the incidence 
of gastric cancer is continuing to fall at about 1% per year. 
This reduction exclusively affects carcinoma arising in the 
body and distal stomach. In contrast, there appears to be 
an increase in the incidence of carcinoma in the proximal 
stomach, particularly the oesophagogastric junction. Carci-
noma of the distal stomach and body of the stomach is most 
common in low socioeconomic groups, whereas the increase 
in proximal gastric cancer seems to affect principally higher 
socioeconomic groups. Proximal gastric cancer does not seem 
to be associated with H. pylori infection, in contrast with car-
cinoma of the body and distal stomach.
Aetiology
Gastric cancer is a multifactorial disease (Correa). Epidemi -
ological studies point to a role for H. pylori, although there is 
argument about how important this factor is. Studies reveal a 
correlation between the incidence of gastric cancer in various 
populations and the prevalence of H. pylori infection, but 
other factors are also important. There is insufficient evi-
dence at the moment to support eradication programmes in 
asymptomatic patients who are infected with Helicobacter, 
with a view to reducing the population incidence of gastric 
cancer. However, clinical trials may subsequently change this 
view. As mentioned above, Helicobacter seems to be princi -
pally associated with carcinoma of the body, stomach and 
distal stomach rather than the proximal stomach. As Heli-
cobacter is associated with gastritis, gastric atrophy and intes -
tinal metaplasia, the association with malignancy is perhaps 
not surprising.
Several other risk factors have been identified as being 
important in the aetiology of gastric cancer. Patients with 
pernicious anaemia and gastric atrophy are at increased risk, 
as are those with gastric polyps. Patients who have had pep -
tic ulcer surgery, particularly those who have had drainage 
procedures such as Billroth II or Polya gastrectomy, gastroen-
terostomy or pyloroplasty, are at approximately four times the 
average risk. Presumably duodenogastric reflux and reflux gas-
tritis are related to the increased risk of malignancy in these 
patients. Intestinal metaplasia is a risk factor. Carcinoma is 
associated with cigarette smoking and dust ingestion from a 
variety of industrial processes. Diet appears to be important, 
as illustrated by the often quoted example of the change in 
the incidence of gastric cancer in Japanese families living 
in the USA. The high incidence of gastric cancer in some 
pockets in China is probably environmental and probably 
diet related. The ingestion of substances such as spirits may 
induce gastritis and, in the long term, cancer. Excessive salt 
intake, deficiency of antioxidants and exposure to N-nitroso 
compounds are also related. The aetiology of proximal gastric 
cancer remains an enigma. It is not associated with Helico-
bacter but is associated with obesity and higher socioeconomic 
status. Genetic factors are also important but imperfectly elu-
cidated (see below).
Clinical features
The features of advanced gastric cancer are usually obvious. 
However, curable gastric cancer has no specific features to dis-
tinguish it symptomatically from benign dyspepsia. The key 
to improving the outcome of gastric cancer is early diagnosis 
and, although in Japan there is a screening programme, most 
curable cases are picked up by the liberal use of gastroscopy 
in patients with dyspepsia. In western resource-rich countries 
it is much more difficult as the population incidence is much 
lower. Hence the cost effectiveness of performing gastroscopy 
for mild dyspeptic symptoms is low. However a high index 
of suspicion is necessary as only endoscoping patients with 
symptoms of advanced cancer is unlikely to be beneficial as 
such patients are not surgically curable. It is important to note 
that gastric antisecretory agents will improve the symptoms 
of gastric cancer so the disease should be excluded, preferably 
before therapy is started.
Summary box 63.6
Gastric cancer
●● Gastric cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer 
death in the world
●● The outlook is generally poor, owing to the advanced stage of 
the tumour at presentation
●● Better results are obtained in Japan, which has a high 
population incidence, screening programmes and a high-
quality surgical treatment
●● The aetiology of gastric cancer is multifactorial, but H. pylori is 
an important factor for distal but not proximal gastric cancer
●● Early gastric cancer is associated with very high cure rates
●● Gastric cancer can be classified into intestinal and diffuse 
types, the latter having a worse prognosis
●● In western resource-rich countries, proximal gastric cancer 
is now more common than distal cancer and is usually of the 
diffuse type
●● Spread may be by lymphatics, blood, transcoelomic or direct, 
but distant metastases are uncommon in the absence of 
lymph node involvement
●● The treatment of curable cases is by radical surgery and 
removal of the second tier of nodes (around the principal 
arterial trunks) may be advantageous
●● Gastric cancer is chemosensitive and chemotherapy improves 
survival in patients having surgery for the condition and in 
advanced disease
P. Correa , contemporary, pathologist, New Orleans, LA, USA. Produced a cogent hypothesis to explain the development of the intestinal type of gastric cancer.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1131 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1132
In advanced cancer, early satiety, bloating, distension and 
vomiting may occur. The tumour frequently bleeds, resulting 
in iron deficiency anaemia. Obstruction leads to dysphagia, 
epigastric fullness or vomiting. Weight loss can be profound. 
With pyloric involvement the presentation may be of gastric 
outlet obstruction, although the alkalosis is usually less pro -
nounced or absent compared with when duodenal ulceration 
leads to obstruction. In recent years, gastric outlet obstruction 
is more commonly associated with malignancy than benign 
disease. Non-metastatic effects of malignancy are seen, par -
ticularly thrombophlebitis (Trousseau’s sign) and deep venous 
thrombosis. These features result from the effects of the 
tumour on thrombotic and haemostatic mechanisms.
Site
The proximal stomach is now the most common site for gastric 
cancer in resource-rich western countries. Because so many 
malignancies occur at the oesophageal–gastric junction, and 
because the lower oesophagus is also a very common site of 
adenocarcinoma, it is artificial to separate the stomach from 
the oesophagus. Therefore, it is best to consider the whole of 
the upper gastrointestinal tract from the cricopharyngeus to 
the pylorus. The incidence of cancer at these various sites is 
shown in Figure 63.25. It can be seen that just under 60% 
of all of the malignancies occurring in the oesophagus and 
stomach occur in proximity to the oesophagogastric junction. 
Adenocarcinoma at this site has doubled in incidence in the 
UK over the last 30 years. This high prevalence of proximal 
gastric cancer is not seen in Japan, where distal cancer still 
predominates, as it does in most of the rest of the world.
Pathology
The most useful clinicopathological classification of gastric 
cancer is the Lauren classification. In this system there are 
principally two forms of gastric cancer: intestinal gastric can-
cer and diffuse gastric cancer (often with signet ring cells). In 
intestinal gastric cancer, the tumour resembles a carcinoma 
elsewhere in the tubular gastrointestinal tract and forms poly-
poid tumours or ulcers. It probably arises in areas of intestinal 
metaplasia. In contrast, diffuse gastric cancer infiltrates deeply 
into the stomach without forming obvious mass lesions, but 
spreads widely in the gastric wall. Not surprisingly, this has a 
much worse prognosis. A small proportion of gastric cancers 
are of mixed morphology.
Gastric cancer can be divided into early gastric cancer 
and advanced gastric cancer. Early gastric cancer is defined as 
cancer limited to the mucosa and submucosa with or without 
lymph node involvement (T1, any N). The classification is 
shown in Figures 63.26 and 63.27 . This can be either pro -
truding, superficial or excavated in the Japanese classification. 
This type of cancer is eminently curable, and even early gas -
tric cancers associated with lymph node involvement have 
5-year survival rates in the region of 90%. In Japan, approxi -
mately one-third of gastric cancers diagnosed are in this stage. 
However, in the UK it is uncommon to detect gastric cancers 
at this stage. A number of reasons probably still account for 
this. First, because gastric cancer is less common in the UK, 
dyspeptic patients are not always referred for endoscopy at an 
appropriate stage. Second, endoscopists are unfamiliar with 
the appearances of early gastric cancer and in all probability 
many such cases are missed.
Advanced gastric cancer involves the muscularis. Its mac-
roscopic appearances have been classified by Bormann into 
four types (Figures 63.28 and 63.29). Types III and IV are 
commonly incurable.
Armand Trousseau , 1801–1867, physician, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France. This sign led him to suspect himself of having gastric cancer. He actually had pancreatic 
cancer, which was diagnosed at postmortem.
Pekka A. Lauren , contemporary, pathologist, University of Turku, Finland.
Upper oesophagus 2%
Mid-oesophagus 6%
Lower oesophagus 22%
OG junction 18%
Cardia 17%
Body 15%
Approximately 60%
Antrum 13%Pylorus 7%
Figure 63.25 The incidence of cancer in the various parts of the 
upper gastrointestinal tract in the UK. OG, oesophagogastric.
Type I
Type IIb
Type III
Type IIa
Type IIc
Type III
and IIc
Cancer
Figure 63.26 Early gastric cancer, Japanese classification.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1132 25/10/2017   09:45Gastric cancer 1133
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
The molecular pathology of gastric 
cancer
Our understanding of the molecular pathology of gastric 
cancer has been revolutionised by the application of next-  
generation sequencing platforms to the disease. In a recent 
landmark paper The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) group 
described four molecular subtypes of gastric cancer: Epstein–
Barr virus positive, microsatellite instable, genomically stable 
and chromosomal instability. Recognition of these sub-groups 
and their underlying common gene mutations and driver 
events is leading to the development of targeted therapies 
including immunotherapies. Similar genetic classifications are 
now available for other tumours of the gastrointestinal tract 
meaning that novel treatments can be applied across tumour 
types. A range of mutations in genes related to genome integ-
rity (e.g. BRCA2, TP53, ARID1A ), chromatin remodelling 
(e.g. SMARCA1, CHD3&4) and cell–cell adhesion and 
Figure 63.27 Early gastric cancer: (a) type I; (b) type IIa; (c) type III 
(courtesy of Dr GNJ Tytgat, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).
(a) (b)
(c)
Type I Type II
Type III Type IV
Cancer
Figure 63.28 Bormann classification of advanced gastric cancer.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1133 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1134
motility (e.g. RHOA, CDH1) have been described in gas -
tric cancer. In addition, cell signalling pathways commonly 
mutated in other solid organ tumours are commonly found 
perturbed in gastric cancer . For example, the Wnt path-
way may be amen  able to specific small molecule inhibitors. 
Unsurprisingly,  gastric cancer exhibits a range of mutations in 
receptor tyrosine kinases and PI3K/MAPK signalling.
The rapid development of sequencing technologies, includ-
ing single-cell platforms and the development of real-time 
sequencing, offers the promise of precision therapy for gastric 
cancer in the future, but currently treatment is still based on 
surgery with or without conventional chemo/radiotherapy.
Staging
The International Union Against Cancer (UICC) staging 
system is shown in Table 63.5. Important changes have been 
made in the seventh edition of the TNM staging system that 
are worthy of discussion. In an attempt to reflect the current 
Figure 63.29 Advanced gastric cancer: (a) type I; (b) type II; (c) type III; (d) type IV (linitus plastica) (courtesy of Dr GNJ Tytgat, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands).
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1134 25/10/2017   09:45Gastric cancer 1135
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
evidence base and to improve outcome prediction for individ-
ual patients, all gastric tumours whose epicentre is within 5 cm 
of the gastro-oesophageal junction and which extend into the 
oesophagus are now classified according to the oesophageal  
system. Tumours whose epicentre is within 5  cm of the 
gastro-oesophageal junction but which do not extend into the 
oesophagus, and all other gastric cancers, are staged using the 
revised gastric staging system. In addition, any tumour that 
perforates the serosa is now classified as T4 disease.
Spread of carcinoma of the stomach
No better example of the various modes by which carcinoma 
spreads can be given than the case of stomach cancer . It is 
important to note that this distant spread is unusual before 
the disease spreads locally, and distant metastases are uncom-
mon in the absence of lymph node metastases. The intestinal 
and diffuse types of gastric cancer spread differently. The dif-
fuse type spreads via the submucosal and subserosal lymphatic 
plexus and it penetrates the gastric wall at an early stage.
Direct spread
The tumour penetrates the muscularis, serosa and ultimately 
adjacent organs such as the pancreas, colon and liver.
Lymphatic spread
This is by both permeation and emboli to the affected tiers 
(see below) of nodes. This may be extensive, the tumour 
even appearing in the supraclavicular nodes (Troisier’s sign). 
Unlike malignancies such as breast cancer, nodal involve-
ment does not imply systemic dissemination.
Blood-borne metastases
These occur first to the liver and subsequently to other organs, 
including lung and bone. This is uncommon in the absence 
of nodal disease.
Transperitoneal spread
This is a common mode of spread once the tumour has reached 
the serosa of the stomach and indicates incurability. Tumours 
can manifest anywhere in the peritoneal cavity and com -
monly give rise to ascites. Advanced peritoneal disease may 
be palpated either abdominally or rectally as a tumour ‘shelf’. 
The ovaries may sometimes be the sole site of transcoelomic 
spread (Krukenberg’s tumours). Tumour may spread via the 
abdominal cavity to the umbilicus (Sister Joseph’s nodule). 
Transperitoneal spread of gastric cancer can be detected most 
effectively by laparoscopy and cytology.
Lymphatic drainage of the stomach
Understanding the lymphatic drainage of the stomach is the 
key to comprehending the radical surgery of gastric cancer. 
The lymphatics of the antrum drain into the right gastric 
lymph node superiorly, and right gastroepiploic and subpyloric 
lymph nodes inferiorly. The lymphatics of the pylorus drain 
into the right gastric suprapyloric nodes superiorly and the 
subpyloric lymph nodes situated around the gastroduodenal 
artery inferiorly. The efferent lymphatics from suprapyloric 
lymph nodes converge on the para-aortic nodes around the 
coeliac axis, whereas the efferent lymphatics from the sub -
pyloric lymph nodes pass up to the main superior mesenteric 
lymph nodes situated around the origin of the superior mes -
enteric artery. The lymphatic vessels related to the  cardiac 
Charles Emile Troisier , 1844–1919, Professor of Pathology, Paris, France.
Friedrich Ernst Krukenberg , 1870–1946, ophthalmologist, Halle, Germany, wrote a classic paper on malignant tumours of the ovary in 1896.
Sister Mary Joseph (Julia Dempsey) , 1856–1939, Nursing Superintendent, St Mary’s Hospital, Rochester, MN, USA, noted the presence of an umbilical nodule 
in many patients who proved to have advanced gastric cancer and pointed this out to William Mayo while she was working as theatre sister at the Mayo Clinic.
TABLE 63.5 UICC staging of gastric cancer.
T1 Tumour involves lamina propria, submucosa
T1a lamina propria
T1b submucosa
T2 Tumour invades muscularis propria
T3 Tumour involves subserosa
T4a Tumour perforates serosa
T4b Tumour invades adjacent organs
N0 No lymph nodes
N1 Metastasis in 1–2 regional nodes
N2 Metastasis in 3-6 regional nodes
N3a Metastasis in 7–15 regional nodes
N3b Metastasis in more than 15 regional nodes
M0 No distant metastasis
M1 Distant metastasis (this includes peritoneum and 
distant lymph nodes)
Staging
IA T1 N0 M0
IB T1 N1 M0
T2 N0 M0
IIA T1 N2 M0
T2 N1 M0
T3 N0 M0
IIB T1 N3 M0
T2 N2 M0
T3 N1 M0
T4a N0 M0
IIIA T2 N3 M0
T3 N2 M0
T4a N1 M0
IIIB T3 N3 M0
T4a N2 M0
T4b N0-1 M0
IIIC T4a N3 M0
T4b N2-3 M0
IV Any T Any N M1
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1135 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1136
orifice of the stomach communicate freely with those of the 
oesophagus.
The prognosis of operable cases of carcinoma of the 
stomach depends on whether or not there is histological 
evidence of regional lymph no de involvement. Retrograde 
(downwards) spread may occur if the upper lymphatics 
are blocked. In Japan, the lymph node dissection is highly 
advanced and the Japanese Research Society for Gastric 
Cancer has assigned a number to each lymph node station 
to aid the patho logical staging (Figure 63.30). Many centres 
in resource-rich countries now perform surgery that involves 
a radical lymphadenectomy but, in other centres, both the 
staging and surgery are less developed.
Operability
It is important that patients with incurable disease are not 
subjected to radical surgery that cannot help them, hence the 
value of CT/PET and preoperative laparoscopy. Unequivo -
cal evidence of incurability is haematogenous metastases, 
involvement of the distant peritoneum, N4 no dal disease 
and disease beyond the N4 nodes, and fixation to structures 
that cannot be removed. It is important to note that involve-
ment of another organ per se does not imply incurability, pro-
vided that it can be removed. Controversies with respect to 
operability include N3 nodal involvement and involvement 
of the adjacent peritoneum, performed in Japan but seldom 
elsewhere. Curative resection should be considered on the 
remaining patients.
Most operable patients should have neoadjuvant chemo -
therapy as described below as this improves survival.
Total gastrectomy
This is best performed through a long upper midline incision. 
The stomach is removed en bloc, including the tissues of the 
entire greater omentum and lesser omentum (Figure 63.31). 
In commencing the operation, the transverse colon is com -
pletely separated from the greater omentum. The dissection 
may then be commenced proximally or, more usually , dis -
tally. The subpyloric nodes are dissected and the first part of 
the duodenum is divided, usually with a surgical stapler. The 
hepatic nodes are dissected down to clear the hepatic artery; 
this dissection also includes the suprapyloric nodes. The right 
gastric artery is taken on the hepatic artery. The lymph node 
dissection is continued to the origin of the left gastric artery, 
which is divided flush with its origin. The dissection is con -
tinued along the splenic artery, taking all of the nodes at the 
superior aspect of the pancreas and accessible nodes in the 
splenic hilum. Separation of the stomach from the spleen, 
if this organ is not going to be removed, is carried out and 
this then allows access to the nodal tissues around the upper 
stomach and oesophagogastric junction. The oesophagus can 
then be divided at an appropriate point using a combination 
of stay sutures and a soft non-crushing clamp, usually of the 
right-angled variety. It is important that the resection mar -
gins are well clear of the tumour (>5  cm). Involvement of 
either proximal or distal resection margin carries an appalling 
prognosis and, if in doubt, frozen section should be performed. 
There is some controversy regarding the management of the 
spleen and distal pancreas in this procedure and this is dis -
cussed below.
Gastrointestinal continuity is reconstituted by means of 
a Roux loop. Other methods of reconstruction should be dis -
couraged because of poor functional results. The alimentary 
limb of the Roux loop should be at least 50  cm long to avoid 
bile reflux oesophagitis. The simplest means of effecting the 
oesophagojejunostomy is to place a purse string in the cut 
end of the oesophagus and, using a circular stapler introduced 
through the blind end of the Roux loop, staple the end of the 
oesophagus onto the side of the Roux loop. The blind open 
end of the Roux loop may then be closed either with sutures 
or, alternatively, with a linear stapler. The anastomosis can 
also be fashioned end to end. The Roux loop may be placed in 
either an anticolic or retrocolic position. The jejunojejunos -
tomy is undertaken at a convenient point in the usual fashion 
(end to side, Figure 63.32).
There remains some controversy about the extent of the 
lymphadenectomy required for the optimal treatment of 
curable gastric cancer. In Japan, at least a D2 gastrectomy 
(removal of the second tier of nodes) is performed on all 
18
1011
2
1
9812
5 13 16
3
6
4
4
4
17
11
10
14
6
(a)
(b)
15
7
Figure 63.30 Lymphatic drainage of the stomach and nodal stations 
by the Japanese classification: (a) the anterior view of the stomach; 
(b) the posterior view.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1136 25/10/2017   09:45Gastric cancer 1137
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
operable gastric cancer and some centres are practicing more 
radical surgery (D3 and even D4 resections). Certainly , the 
results of surgical treatment stage for stage in Japan are much 
better than commonly reported in western resource-rich 
countries, and the Japanese contention is that the difference 
is principally related to the staging and the quality of the 
surgery. It is observed that the physical proportions of the 
average Japanese patient favour the performance of more 
radical procedures compared with the average patient in 
western countries. However, radical lymphadenectomies 
above D2 have not been subjected to any randomised con-
trolled trials. In the UK and Europe, randomised trials have 
been set up to compare D1 and D2 gastrectomy, but the results 
are difficult to interpret. One of the problems relates to stan -
dardisation of the operation. Overall, it seems that the onco-
logical outcome may be better following a D2 gastrectomy, 
but this operation is associated with higher levels of morbid -
ity and perioperative mortality. It is clear that most of this 
morbidity and mortality relates to the removal of the spleen 
with or without the distal pancreas. The traditional radical 
gastrectomy removes the spleen and distal pancreas en bloc 
with the stomach and, although this is indeed an adequate 
means of performing clearance of the lymph nodes around the 
splenic artery, there now seems little doubt that adding this 
substantially increases the complication rate. The Japanese 
D2 gastrectomy will commonly preserve spleen and pancreas 
and this practice has been widely adopted by specialist centres 
in western countries.
The differentiation between a D1 and a D2 operation 
depends upon the tiers of nodes removed. Different tiers need 
to be removed depending on the positions of primary tumour 
and this is outlined in Table 63.6. In general, a D1 resec -
tion involves the removal of the perigastric nodes and a D2 
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 63.31 Radical total gastrectomy: (a) dissection of omentum off the transverse colon; (b) exposure of the lesser sac; (c) splenectomy; 
(d) division and oversewing of the duodenum; (e) dissection of the left gastric artery nodes (group 17); (f) mobilisation of the oesophagus.
Surgery Fig 51.34
Figure 63.32 Oesophagojejunostomy Roux-en-Y .
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1137 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1138
resection involves the clearance of the major arterial trunks. 
In practice the majority of specialist centres will perform a 
radical total gastrectomy, conserving the spleen and pancreas, 
with D2 lymphadenectomy sparing station 10 lymph nodes.
Subtotal gastrectomy
For tumours distally placed in the stomach, it appears unnec-
essary to remove the whole stomach. However, the opera -
tion is very similar to that of a total gastrectomy except that 
the proximal stomach is preserved, the bloo d supply being 
derived from the short gastric arteries. Following the resec -
tion, the simplest form of reconstruction is to close the stom-
ach from the lesser curve, near the oesophagogastric junction, 
with either sutures or staples and then perform an anastomo-
sis of the greater curve to the jejunum. Although this can 
be performed as in a Billroth II/Polya-type gastrectomy, this 
reconstruction may result in quite marked enterogastric reflux 
and bile reflux oesophagitis, and the preferred method is to 
perform the reconstruction using a Roux loop.
Palliative surgery
In patients suffering from significant symptoms of either 
obstruction or bleeding, palliative resection is appropriate. A 
palliative gastrectomy need not be radical and it is sufficient to 
remove the tumour and reconstruct the gastrointestinal tract. 
Sometimes it is impossible to resect an obstructing tumour in 
the distal stomach and other palliative procedures need to be 
considered, although the prognosis in such patients, even in 
the short term, is poor. A high gastroenterostomy is a poor 
operation that very frequently does not allow the stomach to 
empty adequately, but may produce the additional problem of 
bile reflux. A Roux loop with a wide anastomosis between the 
stomach and jejunum may be a better option, although even 
this may not allow the stomach to empty particularly well. 
Gastric exclusion and oesophagojejunostomy is practised by 
some surgeons. For inoperable tumours situated in the cardia, 
either palliative intubation, stenting or another form of reca-
nalisation can be used (Chapter 62). Recanalisation appears 
to offer better functional results.
Postoperative complications of 
gastrectomy
Radical gastrectomy is complex major surgery and predictably 
there are a large number of potential complications of the 
operation. Leakage of the oesophagojejunostomy should be 
uncommon in experienced hands. When it occurs it can often 
be managed conservatively as the Roux-en-Y reconstruction 
means that it is mainly saliva and ingested food that leaks. 
Some patients may establish a fistula from the wound or drain 
site and others may need radiological or surgically placed 
drains. It is unclear whether a nasoenteric tube should be used 
routinely. Many surgeons use such tubes routinely, but this is 
not supported by any evidence base. It is unusual to detect a 
major anastomotic leak in the absence of clinical signs and 
the use of postoperative water-soluble contrast swallows is not 
now routine in expert centres. Physiological scoring systems 
TABLE 63.6 The lymph node stations (see Figure 63.30) that need to be removed in a D1 (N1 nodes removed) or a D2 (N2 
nodes removed) resection.
LN number
Site of cancer
Antrum Middle Cardia Cardia and oesophagus
1 Right cardia N2 N1 N1 N1
2 Left cardial N1 N1 N1
3 Lesser curve N1 N1 N1 N1
4sa Short gastric N1 N1 N1 N1
4sb Left gastroepiploic N1 N1 N1 N1
4d Right gastroepiploic N1 N1 N2 N2
5 Suprapyloric N1 N1 N2 N2
6 Infrapyloric N1 N1 N2 N2
7 Left gastric artery N2 N2 N2 N2
8a Anterior hepatic artery N2 N2 N2 N2
9 Coeliac artery N2 N2 N2 N2
10 Splenic hilum N2 N2 N2
11 Splenic artery N2 N2 N2
19 Infradiaphragmatic N2
20 Oesophageal hiatus N2 N1
110 Lower oesophagus N2
111 Supradiaphragmatic N2
The nodes in stations 12–18 are not routinely removed in a D1 or D2 gastrectomy.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1138 25/10/2017   09:45Gastrointestinal stromal tumours 1139
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
to predict those patients likely to experience significant com-
plications offer potential in this area.
As with any gastrectomy, leakage from the duodenal stump 
can occur. This is usually due to a degree of distal obstruction 
and care must be taken when performing the Roux-en-Y anas-
tomosis that there is no kinking. Paraduodenal collections 
can be drained radiologically, which will often convert the 
collection into an external fistula. Biliary peritonitis requires 
a laparotomy and peritoneal toilet, and in this circumstance it 
is best to leave a Foley catheter in the duodenum to establish 
a controlled duodenal fistula. If it is established that there is 
no distal obstruction, or if any such obstruction is managed, 
then with time the fistula will close.
The presence of septic collections along with a very rad -
ical vascular dissection may lead to catastrophic secondary 
haemorrhage from the exposed or divided blood vessels. This 
situation may be very difficult to manage, whether or not 
reoperation or interventional radiology is employed.
Long-term complications of surgery
It is surprising that, considering the radical nature of the total 
gastrectomy, many patients, particularly the younger ones, 
have good functional results. However, most patients will 
have a reduced capacity, particularly in the short term. They 
need to be given detailed nutritional advice, the substance 
of which is to eat small meals and often, while the jejunum 
or small gastric remnant adapts. In fact, there is very little 
functional difference between patients who have a total gas -
trectomy and those who have a subtotal gastrectomy. Various 
attempts have been made to try to improve the short-term 
functional results by a forming a jejunal pouch and attaching 
this to the oesophagus. Most surgeons do not perform this as 
in the long term there seems little functional advantage. It 
is surprising that these patients only infrequently suffer from 
the complications of gastric surgery, such as dumping and 
diarrhoea. Nutritional deficiencies may occur and the patient 
should be monitored with this in view. The loss of the parietal 
mass leads to vitamin B12 deficiency and replacement should 
be given routinely.
Outlook after surgical treatment
The outlook after surgical treatment varies considerably 
between western countries and Japan. In Japan, approxi-
mately 75% of patients will have a curative resection and, of 
these, the overall 5-year survival rate will be in the region of 
50–70%. In contrast, in western countries most series show 
that only 25–50% of patients undergoing surgery will have a 
curative operation and the 5-year survival rate in such patients 
is only about 25–30%, although in some series it approaches 
Japanese levels. A combination of differences in staging and a 
higher standard of surgery in Japan probably accounts for the 
differences. Staging is clearly crucial when survival figures are 
being compared. The more thorough the staging, the higher 
the stage is likely to be and, therefore, stage for stage the 
outcome seems better in patients who are adequately staged 
pathologically. This phenomenon is termed ‘stage migration’.
Other treatment modalities
Because of the failure of radical surgery to cure advanced gas-
tric cancer, there has been an interest in the use of radiother-
apy and chemotherapy.
Radiotherapy
The routine use of radiotherapy is controversial as the results 
of clinical trials are inconclusive. There are a number of 
radiosensitive tissues in the region of the gastric bed, which 
limits the dose that can be given. Radiotherapy has a role in 
the palliative treatment of painful bony metastases.
Chemotherapy
Gastric cancer may respond well to combination cytotoxic 
chemotherapy and neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves the 
outcome following surgery. Most patients therefore should 
have prior chemotherapy. There are a number of well- 
investigated regimes, but the best results are currently 
obtained using a combination of epirubacin, cis-platinum 
and infusional 5-FU or an oral analogue such as capecitabine. 
The same regimen is used as first line for patients with 
inoperable disease although oxaliplatin is being substituted 
for cis-platinum as it has fewer side effects. Second-line 
treatment using combinations which include taxotere are 
increasingly being used. Chemotherapy for advanced disease 
is palliative. Newer biological agents such as trastuzumab 
(Herceptin) offer potential advantages to survival in the 
minority of patients (<20%) with HER2-positive gastric 
cancer. However the absolute survival advantages are small 
(~4 months) and the cost of treatment is high. Nevertheless, 
trastuzumab has been approved for use in metastatic HER2-
positive gastric cancer in the UK and the European Union.
Pattern of relapse following surgical 
treatment
As might be expected, the most common site of relapse fol-
lowing radical gastrectomy is the gastric bed, representing 
inadequate extirpation of the primary tumour. Widespread 
nodal intraperitoneal metastases, distant nodal metastases 
and liver metastases are all common. Dissemination to the 
lung and bones usually only occurs after liver metastases are 
already established.
GASTROINTESTINAL STROMAL 
TUMOURS
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) may arise in any 
part of the gastrointestinal tract but 50% will be found in 
the stomach. Previously named leiomyoma and leiomyosar -
coma, the term GIST is now used, recognising their particular 
Frederic Eugene Basil Foley , 1891–1966, urologist, Ankher Hospital, St Paul, MN, USA.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1139 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1140
 distinct phenotype. They are tumours of mesenchymal origin 
and are observed equally commonly in males and females. 
The tumours are universally associated with a mutation in the 
tyrosine kinase c-kit oncogene. These tumours are sensitive to 
the tyrosine kinase antagonist imatinib, and an 80% objec -
tive response rate can be observed. Tumours with mutations 
in exon 11 of c-kit are particularly sensitive to this drug. The 
biological behaviour of these tumours is unpredictable but size 
and mitotic index are the best predictors of metastasis. Peri -
toneal and liver metastases are most common but spread to 
lymph nodes is extremely rare.
The incidence of the condition is unclear as small stro -
mal tumours of the stomach are probably quite common and 
remain unnoticed. Clinically obvious tumours are consider -
ably less common than gastric cancer. GISTs comprise 1–3% 
of all gastrointestinal neoplasia.
The only ways that many stromal tumours are recognised 
are either that the mucosa overlying the tumour ulcerates (see 
Figure 63.24), leading to bleeding, or that they are noticed 
incidentally at endoscopy. Because the mucosa overlying the 
tumour is normal, endoscopic biopsy can be uninformative 
unless the tumour has ulcerated. Targeted biopsy by endo-
scopic ultrasound is more helpful. Larger tumours present 
with non-specific gastric symptoms and, in many instances, 
they may be thought to be gastric cancer initially (Figure 
63.33).
As the biological behaviour is difficult to predict, the best 
guide is to consider the size of the tumour. Tumours over 5 cm 
in diameter should be considered to have metastatic potential. 
If easily resectable, surgery is the primary mode of treatment. 
Smaller tumours can be treated by wedge excision although 
the appropriate management of asymptomatic diminutive 
tumours found incidentally at endoscopy is unclear. Larger 
tumours may require a gastrectomy or duodenectomy (see 
Chapter 68) but lymphadenectomy is not required. Larger 
tumours which require multivisceral resection may be better 
treated with 3–6 months of imatinib prior to operation as 
this will usually radically reduce the size and vascularity of 
the tumours. Adjuvant imatinib for large resected tumours 
of high malignant potential should probably be continued 
indefinitely.
The prognosis of advanced metastatic GISTs has been 
dramatically improved with imatinib chemotherapy but 
resection of metastases, especially from the liver, still has an 
important role.
GASTRIC L YMPHOMA
Gastric lymphoma is an interesting disease and some aspects 
of its management are controversial. It is first important to 
distinguish primary gastric lymphoma from involvement of 
the stomach in a generalised lymphomatous process. This lat-
ter situation is more common than the former. Unlike gastric 
carcinoma, the incidence of lymphoma seems to be increas -
ing. Primary gastric lymphoma accounts for approximately 
5% of all gastric neoplasms.
Gastric lymphoma is most common in the sixth decade 
and the presentation is no different from gastric cancer, the 
common symptoms being pain, weight loss and bleeding. 
Acute presentations of gastric lymphoma such as haemate -
mesis, perforation or obstruction are not common. Primary 
gastric lymphomas are B-cell derived, the tumour arising from 
the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). Primary gas-
tric lymphoma remains in the stomach for a prolonged period 
before involving the lymph nodes. At an early stage, the dis -
ease takes the form of a diffuse mucosal thickening, which 
may ulcerate. Diagnosis is made as a result of the endoscopic 
biopsy and seldom on the basis of the endoscopic features 
alone, which are not specific.
Following diagnosis, adequate staging is necessary, primar-
ily to establish whether the lesion is a primary gastric lym -
phoma or part of a more generalised process. CT scans of the 
chest and abdomen and bone marrow aspirate are required, as 
well as a full blood count.
Although the treatment of primary gastric lymphoma is 
somewhat controversial, it seems most appropriate to use sur-
gery alone for the localised disease process. No benefit has 
been shown from adjuvant chemotherapy, although some 
oncologists contend that primary gastric lymphoma can be 
treated by chemotherapy alone. Chemotherapy alone is 
appropriate for patients with systemic disease.
Some of the more controversial aspects of gastric lym -
phoma concern the role of H. pylori. Lymphocytes are not 
found to any degree in normal gastric mucosa, but are found 
in association with Helicobacter infection. It has also been 
shown that early gastric lymphomas may regress and disappear 
when the Helicobacter infection is treated (Isaacson).
Peter Gersohn Isaacson , contemporary, Professor of Morbid Anatomy, University College, London, UK.
Figure 63.33 Computed tomography scan of the upper abdomen 
showing a 3.5  cm gastrointestinal str omal tumour arising from the 
gastric wall.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1140 25/10/2017   09:45Duodenal tumours 1141
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Gastric involvement with diffuse 
lymphoma
These patients are treated with chemotherapy , sometimes 
with dramatic and rapid responses. Surgeons are frequently 
asked to deal with the complications of gastric involvement. 
The two common complications are bleeding and perfora -
tion. Both may occur at presentation, but more usually may 
follow the chemotherapy when there is rapid regression and 
necrosis of the tumour. These operations can be technically 
very challenging and normally require gastrectomy.
DUODENAL TUMOURS
Benign duodenal tumours
Duodenal villous adenomas occur principally in the peri -
ampullary region. Although generally uncommon, they are 
often found in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. 
The appearances are similar to those adenomas arising in the 
colon and, as they have malignant potential, they should be 
locally excised with histologically clear margins.
Patients with familial polyposis, which is due to a mutation 
in the APC gene on chromosome 5, are predisposed to peri -
ampullary cancer, which is one of the most common causes of 
death in patients who have had their colon removed. Other 
duodenal malignancies include GISTs (see above) and neuro-
endocrine tumours.
Neuroendocrine tumours
A number of neuroendocrine neoplasms occur in the duode -
num. It is a common site for primary gastrinoma (Zollinger–
Ellison syndrome). Non-functioning neuroendocrine tumours 
(usually called carcinoid tumours) also occur but uncom -
monly in comparison to the ileum.
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome
This syndrome is mentioned here because the gastrin-  
producing endocrine tumour is often found in the duo  denal 
loop, although it also occurs in the pancreas, especially the 
head. It is a cause of persistent peptic ulceration. Before the 
development of potent gastric antisecretory agents, the condi-
tion was recognised by the sometimes fulminant peptic ulcer-
ation which did not respond to gastric surgery short of total 
gastrectomy. It was also recognisable from gastric secretory 
studies in which the patient had a very high basal acid output 
but no marked response to pentagastrin, as the parietal cell 
mass was already nearly maximally stimulated by pathological 
levels of gastrin. The advent of proton pump inhibitors such 
as omeprazole has rendered this extreme endocrine condition 
fully controllable, but also less easily recognised.
Gastrinomas may be either sporadic or associated with the 
autosomal dominantly inherited multiple endocrine neopla -
sia (MEN) type I (in which a parathyroid adenoma is almost 
invariable). The tumours are most commonly found in the 
‘gastrinoma triangle’ (Passaro) defined by the junction of the 
cystic duct and common bile duct superiorly, the junction of 
the second and third parts of the duodenum inferiorly, and 
the junction of the neck and body of the pancreas medially 
(essentially the superior mesenteric artery). Many are found 
in the duodenal loop, presumably arising in the G cells found 
in Brunner’s glands. It is extremely important that the duo -
denal wall is very carefully inspected endoscopically and also 
at operation. Very often all that can be detected is a small 
nodule that projects into the medial wall of the duodenum.
Even malignant sporadic gastrinomas may have a very 
indolent course. The palliative resection of liver metastases 
may be beneficial and liver transplantation is practised in 
some centres, as for other gut endocrine tumours, with rea -
sonable long-term results. However, the minority of tumours 
found to the left of the superior mesenteric artery (outside the 
‘triangle’) seem to have a worse prognosis, more having liver 
metastases at presentation. In MEN type I, the tumours may be 
multiple and the condition is incurable. Even in this situation,  
Summary box 63.7
Duodenal tumours
●● Duodenal villous adenomas are commonly found around the 
ampulla of Vater and are premalignant
●● Duodenal carcinoma is uncommon, but the commonest site 
for adenocarcinoma is in the small intestine
●● Both adenoma and carcinoma occur commonly in patients 
with familial polyposis and screening these patients is advised
●● Pancreatic cancer is the most common cause of duodenal 
obstruction
Abraham Vater , 1684–1751, Professor of Anatomy and Biology, Wittenburg, Germany.
Allen Oldfather Whipple , 1881–1963, Valentine Mott Professor of Surgery, The College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
Edward Passaro , Emeritus Professor of Surgery 1974–1997, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Duodenal adenocarcinoma
Although uncommon, this is the most common site for adeno-
carcinoma arising in the small bowel. Most tumours originate 
in the periampullary region and commonly arise in pre-exist-
ing villous adenomas. Patients present with anaemia due to 
ulceration of the tumour or obstruction as the polypoid neo -
plasm begins to obstruct the duodenum. Direct involvement 
in the ampulla leads to obstructive jaundice. Histologically, 
the lesion is a typical adenocarcinoma and the metastases are 
commonly to regional lymph nodes and the liver. At presen -
tation, about 70% of the patients have resectable disease and 
for those who survive operation the 5-year survival rate is in 
the region of 20%, this approximately equating to cure. Poor 
prognostic features in the resected specimen include regional 
lymph node metastases, transmural involvement and peri -
neural invasion. Curative surgical treatment will normally 
involve a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple’s procedure). 
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1141 25/10/2017   09:45CHAPTER 63  Stomach and duodenum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1142
as with sporadic gastrinoma, surgical treatment should be 
employed to remove any obvious tumours and associated 
lymphatic metastases, as the palliation achieved may be good.
DUODENAL OBSTRUCTION
Duodenal obstruction in the adult is usually due to malignancy, 
and cancer of the pancreas is the most common cause. About 
one-fifth of patients with pancreatic cancer treated with endo-
scopic stenting will develop obstruction. Treatment is usually 
by gastroenterostomy but duodenal stenting is increasingly 
being used. In patients having a surgical biliary bypass for 
pancreatic cancer, gastric drainage may be necessary.
A variety of other malignancies can cause duodenal 
obstruction, including metastases from colorectal and gastric 
cancer. Primary duodenal cancer is much less common as a 
cause of obstruction than these other malignancies.
Annular pancreas may rarely cause duodenal obstruction. 
Obstruction usually follows an attack of pancreatitis and, on 
occasions, the obstruction may be mistaken for malignancy.
Arteriomesenteric compression is an ill-defined condition 
in which it is proposed that the fourth part of the duodenum 
is compressed between the superior mesenteric artery and the 
vertebral column; when it is convincingly demonstrated and 
causing weight loss, duodenojejunostomy may be performed.
OTHER GASTRIC CONDITIONS
Acute gastric dilatation
This condition usually occurs in association with pylorodu -
odenal disorders or postsurgery without nasogastric suction. 
The stomach, which may also be atonic, dilates enormously. 
Often the patient is also dehydrated and has electrolyte distur-
bances. Failure to treat this condition can result in a sudden 
massive vomit with aspiration into the lungs. The treatment 
is nasogastric suction, with a large-bore tube, fluid replace -
ment and treatment of the underlying condition.
Trichobezoar and phytobezoar
Trichobezoar (hair balls) (Figure 63.34) are unusual and are 
virtually exclusively found in female psychiatric patients, 
often young. It is caused by the pathological ingestion of hair, 
which remains undigested in the stomach. The hair ball can 
lead to ulceration and gastrointestinal bleeding, perforation 
or obstruction. The diagnosis is made easily at endoscopy 
or, indeed, from a plain radiograph. Treatment consists of 
removal of the bezoar, which may require open surgical treat-
ment. Phytobezoars are made of vegetable matter and found 
principally in patients who have gastric stasis. Often this fol -
lows gastric surgery.
Foreign bodies in the stomach
A variety of ingested foreign bo dies reach the stomach, and 
very often these can be seen on a plain radiograph. If possi -
ble, they should be removed endoscopically but, if not, most 
can be left to pass normally . Even objects such as needles, 
with which there is understandable anxiety, will seldom cause 
harm. In general, an object which leaves the stomach will 
pass spontaneously. In contrast, attempted removal at lapa -
rotomy can be very difficult as the object may be much more 
difficult to find than might be expected. Most adults who 
swallow foreign bodies have ill-defined psychiatric problems 
and may appear to relish the attention associated with serial 
laparotomies. The treatment should therefore be expectant 
and intervention reserved for patients with symptoms in 
whom the foreign body is failing to progress.
Volvulus of the stomach
Rotation of the stomach usually occurs around the axis and 
between its two fixed points, i.e. the cardia and the pylorus. 
In theory, rotation can occur in the horizontal (organoaxial) 
or vertical (mesenteroaxial) direction but, commonly, it is 
the former which occurs. This condition is usually associated 
with a large diaphragmatic defect around the oesophagus 
(paraoesophageal herniation) (Figure 63.35). What com-
monly happens is that the transverse colon moves upwards to 
lie under the left diaphragm, thus taking the stomach with it, 
and the stomach and colon may both enter the chest through 
the eventration of the diaphragm. The condition is commonly 
chronic, the patient presenting with difficulty in eating. An 
acute presentation with ischaemia may occur. Endoscopically, 
it can be extremely difficult to sort out the anatomy, and this 
is one situation in which the contrast radiograph is superior.
Treatment
If the problem is causing symptoms then surgical treatment 
is the only satisfactory approach. Traditionally , open surgery 
Figure 63.34 Trichobezoar of the stomach in a girl aged 15 years.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1142 25/10/2017   09:45Further reading 1143
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
has been employed but this problem is suitable for laparo -
scopic treatment if appropriate skill is available. If there is a 
hernia, the sac and its contents (usually the stomach) should 
be reduced. The defect in the diaphragm should be closed, if 
necessary, with a mesh. It is advisable to separate the stom -
ach from the transverse colon and then perform an anterior 
gastropexy to fix the stomach to the anterior abdominal wall. 
The results from this treatment are good.
FURTHER READING
Best LM, Mughal M, Gurusamy KS.  Laparoscopic versus open gastrec -
tomy for gastric cancer.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016; Mar 
31;3:CD011389.
Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molec -
ular characterisation of gastric adenocarcinoma. Nature 2014; 
513(7517):202–9.
Gurusamy KS, Pallari E. Medical versus surgical treatment for refractory 
or recurrent peptic ulcer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016; Mar 
29;3:CD011523.
Pelletier JS, Gill RS, Gazala S, Karmali S. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of open vs. laparoscopic resection of gastric gastroin -
testinal stromal tumours. J. Clin. Med. Res. 2015; 7(5): 289–96.
Sano T, Aiko T. New Japanese classifications and treatment guidelines 
for gastric cancer: revision concepts and major revised points. Gas-
tric Cancer 2011; 14: 97–100.
Sobin LH, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittekind C (eds). UICC TNM classifi-
cation of malignant tumours, 7th edn. New York: Wiley, 2009.
Figure 63.35  Barium meal showing organoaxial volvulus of the 
stomach associated with eventration of the diaphragm.
11_63-B&L27_Pt11_Ch63.indd   1143 25/10/2017   09:45Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To know and understand:
 • What severe and complex obesity is
 • Rationale for surgery and the concept of metabolic 
surgery
 • Eligibility and NICE guidelines
 • Multidisciplinary assessment
 • The common operations and how they work
 • How to assess and treat perioperative complications
 • Follow-up, nutritional supplements and biochemical 
monitoring
INTRODUCTION
Obesity is becoming the plague of the 21st century. With over-
weight becoming the norm in most western countries and newly 
resource-rich countries, two-thirds of adults are overweight or 
obese (Table 64.1). Every clinician faces the condition and its 
associated diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, as part of their prac-
tice. Obesity and lack of physical activity have the second larg-
est public health impact after smoking. Severe obesity increases 
the risk of cancer, is associated with multiple other diseases, 
affects quality of life and reduces life expectancy by 5–20 years. 
Obese people will more often be of lower social class, unem -
ployed and/or on state benefits. Obesity runs in families and 
social networks and very few obese people have an identifiable 
genetic, hormonal basis such as Prader–Willi syndrome. Sur -
geons encounter the problem of obesity on a daily basis as it 
affects the treatment of nearly every abdominal pathology in 
terms of approach and outcomes.
Dieting, increasing energy expenditure through exercise, 
and intensive lifestyle intervention, are successful for most 
obese people in helping them lose 6–8% body weight in the 
short term, up to 1–3 years. Reaching a plateau and cyclical 
rebound weight regain is, however, expected with all diets. 
Currently there is no available pharmacotherapy that is safe 
and clinically or cost-effective in the long term, and there is 
none on the horizon remotely as effective as bariatric surgery.
Bariatric surgery is the branch of surgery involving manip-
ulation of the stomach and/or small bowel to aid weight loss. 
Severe and complex obesity is a phrase commonly used for
patients with body mass index (BMI) ≥35 and obesity-related 
disease, or BMI ≥40 by itself (Table 64.2).
Bariatric surgery  comes from the Greek baros: weight/pressure, and -iatric: the medicine or surgery thereof.
Andrea Prader , 1919–2001, paediatric endocrinologist, Zurich, Switzerland.
Heinrich Willi , 1900–1971, paediatrician, Zurich, Switzerland.
TABLE 64.1 Definitions of overweight and obesity*.
Adult weight status BMI (kg/m2)
Normal 18.5–24.9
Overweight 25–29.9
Class 1 obesity 30–34.9
Class 2 obesity 35–39.9
Class 3 obesity ≥40
Body mass index (BMI) = 
weight (kg)/height (m)2.
* Obesity for children is defined as BMI at or above the 95th centile.
TABLE 64.2 Conditions that are associated with severe 
and complex obesity.
Type 2 diabetes
Hypertension
Dyslipidaemia
Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA)
Arthritis and functional impairment
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease/non-alcoholic steatohepatosis
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Clinical depression
Functional impairment
64Chapter
Bariatric and metabolic surgery
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1144 25/10/2017   09:47Cost effectiveness 1145
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
RATIONALE
Bariatric surgery leads to weight loss of 25–35% of body 
weight (usually at least 15 kg) after 1 year, and this is sus-
tained at 15–25% after 20 years. Additional benefits are that 
most or all of the obesity-related diseases improve as weight 
is lost. Quality of life improves. A number of randomised 
controlled trials (RCTs) have reported on the outcomes of 
bariatric surgery versus intensive lifestyle interventions, 
and all favour surgery. The longest follow-up in an RCT is 
5 years. However, the non-randomised Swedish Obese Sub-
jects (SOS) study has now shown sustained weight loss and 
improvement in obesity-related disease up to 20 years after 
surgery. In this study 2010 patients who chose to have surgery 
were compared to 2037 controls who did not. All had best 
medical care throughout and follow-up was better than 99%.
The SOS study was among the first to demonstrate that 
bariatric surgery also leads to survival benefit. The primary 
end point was overall mortality and a significant difference 
was found at mean follow-up of 10 years. Several other studies 
have found similarly, including one of nearly 8000 operated 
patients from Utah, USA.
The SOS study also reported a lower incidence of both 
microvascular and macrovascular complications at 15 years’ 
follow-up in the surgical group. Although there are no RCT 
data available for this potential outcome, the Swedish regis -
try (SOREG) data indicate lower mortality within only 3–4 
years after surgery in diabetic patients. Both the SOS and 
Utah studies have shown that bariatric surgery also effectively 
reduces cancer risk in large series of patients.
 syndrome, with weight loss being a welcomed additional 
effect. Type 2 diabetes is part of the ‘metabolic syndrome’ that 
includes high bloo d pressure, dyslipidaemia and polycystic 
ovary syndrome.
It has been known for more than 20 years that control of 
type 2 diabetes improves with weight loss. Remarkably, after 
several types of bariatric surgery diabetes control appears to 
improve before significant weight loss occurs. Some of the 
effects on glucose metabolism can be attributed to the caloric 
restriction, but changes in gut hormone levels, particularly 
glucagon-like-peptide 1 (GLP-1), have provoked much inter-
est. GLP-1 is an incretin, which stimulates the beta cells in 
the pancreas to restore the normal first phase insulin response 
after eating. Bile acids are also involved.
Although type 2 diabetes is a chronic disease, surgeons 
initially claimed to ‘cure’ it. The emphasis has now changed 
to improving glycaemic control by lowering HbA1c and 
improving insulin resistance. Patients with the shortest 
duration of type 2 diabetes have a higher rate of remission 
or improvement. Even so, patients with depleted pancreatic 
beta cell reserve, associated with longer disease duration and 
being on insulin, still benefit from the improved glycaemic 
control. As they are usually able to reduce or stop their dia -
betes medications as well, including insulin, it adds to the 
cost effectiveness. Diabetes ‘remission’ is defined as patients 
being off all medication with normal glucose homeostasis. In 
the SOS study, diabetic patients not only went into remission 
after surgery, but there was a decreased incidence of patients 
becoming diabetic.
Many surgical societies have added the word ‘metabolic’ 
to their titles, e.g. American Society for Metabolic and Bar -
iatric Surgery (ASMBS), and British Obesity and Metabolic 
Surgery Society (BOMSS), to emphasise the goal of surgery as 
an accepted treatment option for metabolic syndrome, rather 
than just for weight loss. It is hoped that this approach will 
improve the acceptability in public funded healthcare systems 
of bariatric/metabolic surgery.
When the SOS study  was conceived in 1987, all surgery was done by laparotomy and it was considered unethical to attempt to randomise patients between best 
medical therapy and bariatric surgery as the latter was considered too risky.
 In the wrong place at the wrong time. The Utah paper was the first large 
study to show improved survival after gastric bypass surgery compared to 
matched population controls. One of the operated patients was staying in 
a hotel and killed by a stray bullet fired from the next room by a complete 
stranger. The mortality still had to be included as a death after surgery 
(source Dr Ted Adams, author of the Utah study).
Summary box 64.1
Rationale for surgery
Due to the tendency for basal metabolic rate to decrease with 
dieting, most people will regain all their weight, returning to the 
previous homeostatic set point
Bariatric surgery appears to alter this mechanism and ‘reset’ this 
point, with 15–25% weight loss maintenance up to 20 years
Bariatric surgery leads to long-term survival benefit and improves 
obesity-related disease and quality of life
METABOLIC SURGERY
‘Metabolic’ or ‘diabetes’ surgery is increasingly being used 
in conjunction with, or instead of, ‘bariatric surgery’ due 
to the highly effective way surgery improves the metabolic 
Summary box 64.2
Metabolic surgery
The term refers to the marked effects of some operations on 
diabetes and the metabolic syndrome, which may have an 
impact more important than weight loss itself
The improvement in type 2 diabetes may be additional to the 
weight loss
Surgery is very cost effective since medications reduce or stop 
as glycaemic control improves
COST EFFECTIVENESS
The cost effectiveness of bariatric surgery has been shown in 
studies from several different countries. A 2009 Health Tech-
nology Assessment report in the UK showed bariatric surgery 
to be cost effective compared to non-surgical options. The 
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1145 25/10/2017   09:47CHAPTER 64  Bariatric and metabolic surgery
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1146
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) compared to no 
surgery was between £2000 and £4000 per Quality Adjusted 
Life Year (QAL Y) gained for patients with BMI ≥40  kg/m2 
over 20 years. For patients with BMI 30–40  kg/m2 the ICER 
was £1367 per QALY gained. Regarding maximum willing -
ness to pay , compared with non-surgical interventions, if a 
decision-maker is willing to pay £20  000 for an additional 
QALY, then the probability of surgery being cost effective 
over a 20-year time horizon was reported as 100%. The 
ICERs are similar to the cost effectiveness of stopping smok-
ing and routine statin therapy for the primary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease. In practice it means that the cost of 
the operation is recouped within 1–2 years after surgery from 
reduced medication costs. All the cost-effectiveness studies 
assess direct or indirect healthcare costs, but not additional 
benefits of surgery. Thus, return to paid work, coming off state 
benefits, improved functional capacity and quality of life are 
‘add-ons’ that incur no cost.
ELIGIBILITY
Eligibility criteria were first proposed by the United States’ 
National Institutes of Health in 1991, when the obesity epi -
demic was just starting. All bariatric surgery was done by lapa-
rotomy, and the safety profile was very different. The National 
Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK 
recommends consideration of bariatric surgery for people with 
severe obesity in whom all non-surgical measures have been 
tried with no adequate weight loss achieved or maintained. 
Commitment to long-term follow-up and behaviour change 
are also advised. After a review of recent RCTs NICE updated 
its guidance and lowered the BMI threshold to 30 kg/m 2 for 
recent-onset type 2 diabetes (Table 64.3).
NICE estimated that about 80% of people fulfilling the 
eligibility criteria would have no medical or psychological 
reason why they would not be fit for surgery. An estimate is 
that perhaps 10% of these might want it.
PRINCIPLES OF SETTING UP 
A BARIATRIC/METABOLIC 
SURGERY SERVICE
As for gastrointestinal cancer surgery where oncologists 
and surgeons routinely work together, it is now agreed that 
‘bariatric physicians/internists’ should be part of the team 
assessing and managing long-term care after bariatric surgery 
(Table 64.4). Very obese sick patients with, for instance, sleep 
apnoea with complications need careful multidisciplinary 
team (MDT) work-up. Using risk scores such as the Edmon-
ton Obesity Staging System (EOSS) and Obesity Surgery-  
Mortality Risk Score (OS-MRS) can help the team discuss 
with patients the likely prognosis without surgery, and the 
risk of complications. The OS-MRS scores one point for each 
of: age ≥45, BMI ≥50, male gender (due to central obesity), 
hypertension (due to central obesity), increased deep vein 
thrombosis (DVT)/pulmonary embolus (PE) risk. The more 
points that are present the greater is the risk. Swedish reg -
istry data indicate that obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is a 
risk factor for anastomotic leak. Therefore, OSA should be 
actively investigated, as treatment with continuous positive 
airway pressure might reduce risk. Uncontrolled diabetes 
must also be considered a risk factor, as it is for all other 
operations.
Better surgical results are likely in high-volume surgical 
units. The International Federation for Surgery of Obesity 
(IFSO) and the ASMBS recommended 100–125 cases per 
year, and there should be at least two surgeons each perform-
ing 50 or more cases. Surgeons early in the learning curve 
(about 100 for gastric bypass) need to be mentored before 
independent practice. Irrespective of the technical expertise 
of each surgeon, higher volumes usually mean that there are 
sufficient MDT members available to provide support and 
 follow- up. Each unit should have expertise in a variety of 
 surgical procedures including revisions.
It is routine to put patients on a ‘liver shrinkage diet’ for 
at least 2 weeks before surgery , especially when there is cen -
tral obesity, as this is associated with large livers that can make 
surgery impossible. If a patient cannot lose weight or comply 
with the liver diet it implies there may be important psycholog-
ical blocks that need addressing. Male patients especially, with 
 There is far more accumulated evidence now that surgery is an effective 
treatment option for severe and complex obesity than there was historically 
for the first effective therapies for human immunodeficiency virus infection, 
which were universally taken up in western countries. The uptake of bar -
iatric surgery worldwide is much less than 1% of those who could benefit.
TABLE 64.3 Summary of 2014 updated NICE guidance on 
bariatric surgery (CG 189). 
Bariatric surgery is a treatment option for anyone with a BMI ≥40
Offer an expedited assessment for people with a BMI ≥35 with 
onset of type 2 diabetes in the past 10 years
Consider an assessment for people with a BMI of 30–34.9 with 
onset of type 2 diabetes within 10 years
Consider an assessment for people of Asian origin with onset of 
type 2 diabetes at a lower BMI than other populations
Bariatric surgery is the option of choice for adults with BMI >50 
when other interventions have not been effective
People fitting the above criteria are also required to be receiving, 
or to receive, assessment in a specialist weight-management 
service before referral to a surgical team
TABLE 64.4 NICE-accredited guidance on the make-up of 
the medical and surgical bariatric multidisciplinary team.
Bariatric physician in primary (can be the general practitioner) or 
secondary care (usually a diabetologist)
Dietitian
Specialist nurse
Appropriately trained mental health professional
Bariatric surgeon
Anaesthetist
Radiologist
± Exercise therapists
Other secondary care specialities, e.g. respiratory/sleep medicine, 
cardiology
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1146 25/10/2017   09:47Principles of setting up a bariatric/metabolic surgery service 1147
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
 central obesity, a very dense/hard abdomen, OSA/diabetes and 
a BMI >50 may need more, supervised, mandatory weight loss 
to make surgery safe.
Although not stipulated in any national guidance, every 
successful bariatric unit depends on active patient support 
groups and preoperative education sessions, best run by bar -
iatric nurses and dietitians. These are invaluable in preparing 
patients for surgery and it is difficult to conceive how a pro -
gramme can run without them. Also, the ward and outpatient 
environment must be suitably equipped for severely obese 
patients, to include scales that can measure up to 250 kg.
to inform practice. The By-Band-Sleeve study is an ongo-
ing pragmatic, multicentre, 3-arm RCT in the UK assessing 
weight loss and quality of life at 3 years between gastric band-
ing, gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy in 1341 patients.
 In the 1970s a hospital in the USA designed lavatories to be wall-mounted 
to make cleaning the floor easier . A bariatric patient broke the lavatory, 
resulting in a 20-storey waterfall (source Dr Neil Hutcher, past-president 
ASBS).
Summary box 64.3
Multidisciplinary assessment
Every patient should be assessed and managed by a coherent 
and well-functioning team of healthcare professionals with a 
varied background and expertise
Improved outcomes are usually achieved in high-volume, 
specialised units
Data collection and submission to national registries are 
recommended to provide quality assurance and long-term 
outcome data
Laparoscopic surgery and enhanced 
recovery
Bariatric surgery has been transformed by its amenability to 
laparoscopic techniques, including intracorporeal suturing 
and mo dern laparoscopic stapling devices. Probably equally 
important is enhanced recovery with the avoidance of cath -
eters, central venous and arterial lines. Free access to fluids 
is routine immediately after surgery, and due to the relative 
lack of pain patients can mobilise straightaway. It is usual for 
gastric bypass and sleeve gastrectomy patients to go home on 
postoperative day 2 or 3. Gastric banding patients go home as 
day cases or within 24 hours. The main cause of death after 
surgery is now DVT/PE, rather than anastomotic leakage or 
bleeding, and appropriate prophylaxis is usually used for at 
least 1 week.
Randomised controlled trial 
evidence for the different types of 
surgery
Bariatric surgery needs more RCTs comparing different pro -
cedures, with long-term follow-up. One of the challenges is 
keeping the research question relevant, given the rapidity 
with which surgeons adopt different techniques. Long-term, 
large scale, pragmatic RCTs with good follow-up are needed 
Summary box 64.4
Evidence for the different operations
Usually the operation choice is guided by patient, surgeon and 
unit preference
Well-conducted RCTs comparing the the different operations, 
with comprehensive follow-up, are needed
The common operations
An international survey by IFSO in 2013 indicated that there 
were nearly 500 000 procedures done annually. Gastric bypass 
comprised 45%, sleeve gastrectomy 37%, gastric banding 
10% and biliopancreatic diversion/duo denal switch (BPD/
DS) 1.5%. The variety of procedures usually reflects surgeon 
expertise and surgeon and patient preferences, as there are no 
RCTs beyond 5 years comparing different operations. Sleeve 
gastrectomy is rapidly gaining popularity at the expense of 
gastric banding and to a lesser extent gastric bypass. Some 
clinical outcomes are shown in Table 64.5). The mechanism 
of action of most weight-loss procedures remains incom -
pletely understood. Reduced appetite and early satiety are 
common features that are potentially explained by changes 
in levels of gut hormones, such as PYY and GLP-1, and how 
these interact with the brain.
TABLE 64.5 Malabsorption, percent excess weight loss 
(EWL)* and diabetes remission after bariatric surgery.
Protein/calorie 
malabsorption
3-year 
% EWL
3-year % 
diabetes 
remission
Gastric band No 40–50% 20%
Gastric bypass No 50–60% 50%
Sleeve gastrectomy No 50–60% 50%
BPD/DS Yes 70–80% 80%
BPD, biliopancreatic diversion; DS, duodenal switch.
* % EWL refers to the excess weight lost above a notional upper normal 
BMI of 25. Percent weight loss is another way of measuring weight change, 
preferred by physicians.
Gastric banding
Although adjustable gastric banding is declining in the UK 
and elsewhere, it did boost the popularity of bariatric sur -
gery due to the perioperative safety, the lack of nutritional 
complications and its relative ease and availability. The pars 
flaccida technique (through the window of the lesser omen -
tum) is now standard practice with a band placed just below 
the oesophagogastric junction, making a small ‘virtual’ gastric 
pouch (Figure 64.1). The band is sutured into place anteri-
orly with gastrogastric tunneling sutures to reduce slippage. 
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1147 25/10/2017   09:47CHAPTER 64  Bariatric and metabolic surgery
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1148
Gastric band
Subcutaneous
injection port(a)
(b)
Tube to carry fluid
Figure 64.1 Adjustable gastric band. Gastric band surgery showing 
(a) a small ‘virtual’ pouch of stomach below the gastro-oesophageal 
junction and (b) gastrogastric tunnelling sutures. (Reproduced from 
Griffin SM, Raimes SA, Shenfine J. Oesophagogastric surgery, 5th 
edn. Saunders Elsevier, 2013.)
The access port is routinely sutured to the rectus sheath in 
the upper abdomen for ease of access by a non-coring, Huber 
needle for band adjustments.
The operation appears to work by reducing hunger, prob -
ably vagally mediated. The initial surgical placement is only 
the beginning of the treatment. Specialist nurses, physicians 
and surgeons do ‘band consultations’ to assess eating habits 
and then perform an adjustment with injection or aspiration 
of saline if indicated. The objective is to reach the so-called 
‘sweet spot’ of optimal appetite control. Follow-up should be 
monthly to begin with as needed during the first year, with 
full MDT support to help patients get the best use out of their 
bands. Lack of appropriate follow-up accounts for why some 
of the results in the literature vary so much, with a conse -
quent high band removal rate.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
Despite the variety in laparoscopic techniques described and 
the lack of standardisation, most agree that Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass includes a short vertical lesser curvature-based gastric 
pouch. The available techniques of pouch-jejunostomy are 
linear stapler with suture closure of the defect, circular stapler 
and entirely hand sewn. It is routine to perform a leak test. 
The Roux limb can be retro- or antecolic. Again, there is no 
standard length of the biliary and Roux limbs; however , the 
biliary limb is usually kept short with the objective to reduce 
vitamin and mineral deficiencies and the Roux limb length is 
varied between 100 and 150 cm (Figure 64.2). There are no 
consistent data regarding the effect of different limb lengths 
on weight loss. Bowel continuity is restored by a ‘Y’ jejuno -
jejunostomy, which is either stapled with suture closure of the 
defect, or stapled in its entirety.
Despite the widespread belief that the mechanism of 
action is a combination of restriction and malabsorption of 
calories, there is no evidence to suggest this. Patients lose 
weight, at least in part, because they eat less, due to a change 
in appetite, facilitated by a change in satiety gut hormones. 
Other mechanisms such as changes in energy expenditure and 
change in food preferences, may also play a role.
Sleeve gastrectomy
This operation is less challenging to perform than gastric 
bypass. It evolved from the Magenstrasse and Mill operation, 
where the divided fundus (the ‘mill’) was left in continuity 
with the lesser curve-based tube (the ‘main street’). At the 
same time, it was acting as the first step of the DS operation 
and proving to be effective on its own.
The lesser curve-based gastric tube is constructed over 
a size 32–36  Fr bougie, although some advocate that even 
larger sizes reduce the risk of staple line leakage (Figure 
64.3). Linear stapling devices are used and again there is 
variation in the different techniques between how wide the 
staplers should be and whether reinforcement strips should 
be used. The ‘Achilles heel’ of the sleeve is the risk of staple 
line leaks at the angle of His, which can take months to 
heal due to the high-pressure system in the stomach with an 
intact pylorus. There is no consensus on how these should be 
treated and many patients become severely catabolic, having 
multiple procedures with long hospital stays. However, the 
sleeve is considered to be associated with lower periopera-
tive risk and similar weight-loss outcomes to gastric bypass 
up to 3 or more years. Long-terms results are still awaited. A 
proportion of patients will need revisional surgery in future 
for weight regain.
Oesophagus
Proximal pouch
of stomach
‘Short’ intestinal
Roux limb
Pylorus
Duodenum
Biliopancreatic limb
Alimentary
limb
Bypassed portion
of stomach
Figure 64.2 Gastric bypass showing a short vertical lesser curve-
based gastric pouch with Roux-en-Y jejunojejunostomy r econ-
struction. (Reproduced from Griffin SM, Raimes SA, Shenfine J. 
Oesophagogastric surgery, 5th edn. Saunders Elsevier, 2013.)
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1148 25/10/2017   09:47Principles of setting up a bariatric/metabolic surgery service 1149
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
The mechanism of action is still being investigated. The 
initial thought that this is a restrictive procedure has been 
challenged with studies suggesting that gastric emptying is 
accelerated rather than delayed after sleeve gastrectomy. A 
change in satiety gut hormones and bile salt metabolism, 
 similar to those described after gastric bypass, may explain 
some of the phenomena observed.
Biliopancreatic diversion/duodenal switch
BPD, described by Scopinaro in Naples, produces greater  
weight loss than other procedures, but is associated with a 
higher nutritional complication rate. The mechanism of action 
appears to be mainly malabsorption of calories. The DS is a 
variant of the BPD (Figure 64.4). A sleeve gastrectomy is fol-
lowed by division of the duodenum just distally to the pylorus. 
The ileum is divided with a linear stapler, followed by a duo -
denoileostomy and ileoileostomy with the objective to create a 
common channel of 75–125 cm and an alimentary channel of 
100–250 cm. The long remaining biliary limb is not measured.
DS is increasingly seen as a definitive procedure, particu -
larly after significant weight regain following sleeve gastrec -
tomy. A high protein diet and regular vitamin and mineral 
supplements with life-long monitoring and patient commit -
ment, to avoid malnutrition, are essential postoperatively . 
Only a few centres offer these procedures.
Banded Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
Less common procedures include the banded bypass of Fobi 
and Capella, where a silicone ring is placed around the gas-
tric pouch above the gastrojejunostomy with the objective 
to reduce weight regain. The design is not supported by our 
current understanding of the mechanism of action of gastric 
bypass and no benefit has been demonstrated by RCT.
Alimentary
limb 1.5 m
Biliary
limb
Common
channel 1.0 m
(b)
Common
channel 0.5 m
Alimentary
limb 2.0 m
Biliary limb
(a)
Figure 64.4 (a) Biliopancreatic diversion (BPD); (b) BPD with duodenal switch variant (BPD/DS).
Gastric sleeve
Pylorus
Resected stomach
Figure 64.3  Sleeve gastrectomy. (Repr oduced from Griffin SM, 
Raimes SA, Shenfine J. Oesophagogastric surgery , 5th edn. Saun -
ders Elsevier, 2013.)
Nicola Scopinaro , contemporary, Professor of Surgery, University of Genoa, Italy.
Mathias Fobi , contemporary, surgeon, California, USA.
Rafael Capella , contemporary, Assistant Professor of Surgery, New Jersey Medical School of Newark, NJ, USA.
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1149 25/10/2017   09:47CHAPTER 64  Bariatric and metabolic surgery
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1150
One anastomosis gastric bypass
One anastomosis gastric bypass, also known as mini-gastric 
bypass, was first described by Rutledge. The objective was 
to develop a technique that is technically less demanding, 
with only one anastomosis (antecolic loop gastrojejunostomy 
without a Roux-en-Y configuration) and a longer gastric 
pouch than for standard gastric bypass. Similar weight-loss 
outcomes have been reported, but there is concern regarding 
symptomatic biliary reflux causing gastritis or oesophagitis, 
marginal ulcers and the management of anastomotic leaks 
due to a potentially high volume of biliary and pancreatic 
secretions. With the Roux-en-Y historically the standard in 
surgery of the stomach for ulcer disease and cancer, there 
is further concern due to possibly increased risk of Barrett’s 
oesophagus and gastric or oesophageal cancer associated 
with biliary reflux. These outcomes will need long-term 
 investigation.
Single anastomosis duodenoileal bypass 
with sleeve gastrectomy
Single anastomosis duodenoileal bypass with sleeve gastrec-
tomy (SADI-S) is a novel procedure based on the BPD-DS. A 
sleeve gastrectomy is followed by an end-to-side duodenoileal 
anastomosis. The length of the common channel–alimentary 
limb is 200 cm. Potential advantages include the preservation 
of the pylorus, elimination of one anastomosis compared to 
the DS, reduced operating time and reduced risk of perioper -
ative complications.
Sleeve gastrectomy and ileal transposition
Addition to the sleeve gastrectomy of an ileal transposition 
has also been suggested as an alternative option. In this oper-
ation, a large part of the ileum is transposed to the jejunum, in 
continuity. The lack of a bypass component with the potential 
benefits on glucose homeostasis should be balanced against 
the addition of three anastomoses and the creation of mes-
enteric defects at risk of internal herniation. This technique 
remains experimental and comparative studies are needed to 
establish the role of this procedure.
Complications
The common complications are shown in Table 64.6. Very 
few gastric banding patients develop early intra-abdominal 
complications. Unfortunately, a large number of patients have 
their bands removed later on if there is inadequate  follow-up 
or a late complication.
Anastomotic leakage, bleeding and closed loop obstruc -
tion after gastric bypass can be life-threatening. If a bypass 
patient is not well after 24 hours, urgent consideration should 
be given to oral contrast x-ray swallow or computed tomogra-
phy (CT) scanning and/or relaparoscopy. Other than a feeling 
of ‘impending doom’ patients may have few overt features of 
sepsis and abdominal examination can be very misleading. 
Deterioration after an anastomotic leak can be very rapid and 
there is no time for delay.
In sleeve gastrectomy, a staple line leak at the angle 
of His usually presents any time after discharge up to 30 
days, and patients can also deteriorate rapidly with sepsis. 
Urgent CT scanning and relaparoscopy are indicated, with 
source control by drainage the major goal. Patients are typ -
ically in hospital for months and need multiple reinterven -
tions, including any of stenting, making a controlled fistula, 
conversion to gastric bypass and fistula enterostomy. Long-
term nutritional support is needed as patients are severely 
catabolic after complications from both bypass and sleeve 
 surgery.
Robert Rutledge , contemporary, surgeon, Las Vegas USA.
TABLE 64.6 Estimated early surgical complication rates, operative mortality after gastric banding, gastric bypass and 
sleeve gastrectomy and late complications.
Early Mortality Late
Gastric band Access port infection (1%)
DVT/PE (<0.1%)
0.05–0.1% Band infection
Tubing leak
Slippage
Erosion into stomach
Band intolerance
Failure to lose weight/weight regain
Gastric bypass Anastomotic leak (<1%)
Intra-abdominal bleed (2–3%)
Unspecified obstruction (1–2%)
DVT/PE (<1%)
0.1–0.2% Internal hernia
Chronic abdominal pain
Malnutrition if long limb bypass
Anastomotic ulcer/stricture
Weight regain
Sleeve gastrectomy Leak at angle of His (2–3%)
Intra-abdominal bleed (2–3%)
DVT/PE (<1%)
0.1–0.2% Gastro-oesophageal reflux
Weight regain
DVT, deep vein thrombosis; PE, pulmonary embolus.
 A 7-month pregnant patient presented with 48 hours of colicky  abdominal 
pain and vomiting 5 years after a gastric bypass. At laparoscopy/laparotomy 
there was an internal hernia at the jejunojejunostomy . The patient lost 
two-thirds of her small bowel and the pregnancy. A Swedish RCT has now 
shown that closure of hernia defects at the time of surgery reduces the inci-
dence of symptomatic internal hernias.
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1150 25/10/2017   09:47Future challenges 1151
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
The incidence of late complications is difficult to esti -
mate, as so many patients are lost to follow-up. Internal her -
nias develop as weight is lost and hernia spaces open up after 
gastric bypass. CT scanning has a high rate of false negatives 
for internal hernia, so anyone presenting with severe, cramp-
ing abdominal pain 2–3 years after surgery needs to be high 
priority for investigation by laparoscopy.
Outcomes reported
There is wide variation in how surgeons report the results 
of surgery, which means that it is often difficult to compare 
studies. There is a need to standardise clinician reported out-
comes and patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) into 
an agreed core outcome set that includes risk stratification. 
Obvious PROMs include quality of life.
Follow-up and a shared-care model 
of chronic disease
Shared-care arrangements with surgeons/physicians and pri -
mary care need to be in place so that diabetes and hyperten -
sion medications and dosage can be appropriately reduced as 
weight is lost. Every diabetic needs at least an annual review. 
Although gastric banding, gastric bypass and sleeve gastrec -
tomy do not cause protein–calorie malabsorption, bariatric 
surgery can cause severe vitamin and mineral deficiencies, 
amplifying pre-existing deficiencies caused by being obese. 
All patients should have routine metabolic and  nutritional 
monitoring lifelong (Table 64.7). Patients need regular mul-
tivitamins/trace element supplements (Table 64.8). The 
minimum frequency of assessment is 3–6 monthly in the first 
postoperative year, 6–12 monthly in the second year and at 
least annually thereafter. Folic acid supplementation should 
be considered in all sexually active women of child-  bearing 
age, due to the risk of neural tube defects. This is especially 
important as fertility often improves after surgery. The MDT 
also needs to support the small number of patients who 
develop severe mental health issues after surgery, as there is 
a slightly increased risk of suicide after gastric bypass.
Summary box 64.5
Acute complications
Anastomotic leak and staple line dehiscence can be rapidly fatal 
and require emergency laparoscopy
Internal hernias developing after surgery, e.g. gastric bypass, are 
very difficult to diagnose other than by prompt laparoscopy, and 
require a high index of suspicion
TABLE 64.7 Summary of British Obesity and Metabolic 
Surgery Society (BOMSS) biochemical guidance after 
bariatric surgery.
Blood tests all patients should have at baseline:
Full blood count, urea and electrolytes, liver function tests, thyroid 
function tests, ferritin, folate, vitamin D, Ca++, parathyroid hormone 
plus HbA1c, fasting glucose, lipid profile if diabetic
After gastric banding:
Annual full blood count, urea and electrolytes, HbA1c, fasting 
glucose, lipids as appropriate
After gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, BPD/DS:
As for bands + liver function tests, ferritin, folate, vitamin D, Ca++, 
parathyroid hormone at 3, 6, 12 months then annually; vitamin 
B12 at 6, 12 months then annually; zinc, copper annual; vitamin 
A, E, K, selenium if concern (e.g. steatorrhoea, night blindness, 
unexplained fatigue, anaemia, metabolic bone disease, chronic 
diarrhoea, heart failure)
BPD, biliopancreatic diversion; DS, duodenal switch.
TABLE 64.8 Summary of British Obesity and Metabolic 
Surgery Society (BOMSS) nutritional and micronutrient 
guidance after bariatric surgery.
After gastric banding:
Multivitamin and mineral supplement, thiamine if vomiting, vitamin 
D, iron
After gastric bypass, sleeve gastrectomy, BPD/DS:
As for banding + selenium, copper, zinc, folic acid, vitamins B12, 
A, E, K (BPD/DS may require higher doses)
BPD, biliopancreatic diversion; DS, duodenal switch.
Summary box 64.6
Shared-care model of chronic disease
Close collaboration between surgeons, physicians and primary 
care clinicians is needed to enable seamless follow-up before 
and after surgery, with a focus on long-term care of patients
Patients should be committed to lifelong vitamin and 
micronutrient monitoring and replacement
FUTURE CHALLENGES
Patients with obesity suffer from widespread prejudice. Under-
standing that the obesity epidemic currently experienced 
in different parts of the world is driven by a change in the 
environment towards becoming ‘obesogenic’, and not lack of 
willpower, would be the first step in removing the barriers to 
more surgery.
All surgeons should contribute their results to national 
registries so that safety can be monitored and operation 
trends established. Ideally, registries should also link to other 
national healthcare records, e.g. diabetes databases, so that 
long-term outcomes data can be collected outside of funded 
RCTs.
 A female patient travelled abroad to have a self-funded laparoscopic Roux-
en-Y gastric bypass. Three months after returning she came to the clinic in 
a wheelchair, unable to stand, with polyneuropathy and severe paraesthesia 
up to her chest (‘bariatric beriberi’). She had not received multidisciplinary 
care or been advised to take multivitamins and have nutritional monitor -
ing. After prompt thiamine injections and multivitamin support, she made 
a partial recovery.
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1151 25/10/2017   09:47CHAPTER 64  Bariatric and metabolic surgery
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1152
FURTHER READING
Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC et al. Long-term mortality after gastric 
bypass surgery. NEJM 2007; 357: 753–61.
BOMSS Guidelines on perioperative and postoperative biochemical 
monitoring and micronutrient replacement for patients undergo -
ing bariatric surgery. 2014. http://www.bomss.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2014/09/BOMSS-guidelines-Final-version1Oct14.pdf.
Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A et al. Bariatric–metabolic sur -
gery versus conventional medical treatment in obese patients with 
type 2 diabetes: 5-year follow-up of an open-label, single-centre, ran-
domised controlled trial. Lancet 2015; 386: 964–73.
NICE. Obesity: identification, assessment and management. NICE 
guidelines (CG189) 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg189.
Sjöström L. Review of the key results from the Swedish Obese Subjects 
(SOS) trial – a prospective controlled intervention study of bariatric 
surgery. J Int Med 2013; 273: 219–34.
Welbourn R, Dixon J, Barth JH et al. NICE-accredited commissioning 
guidance for weight assessment and management clinics: a model for a 
specialist multidisciplinary team approach for people with severe obe-
sity. Obes Surg 2016; 26: 649–59.
Welbourn R, le Roux CW , Owen-Smith A et al. Why the NHS should 
be doing more bariatric surgery; how much should we do? BMJ 2016; 
353: i1472.
11_64-B&L27_Pt11_Ch64.indd   1152 25/10/2017   09:47Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy of the liver
 • The signs of acute and chronic liver disease
 • The investigation of liver disease
 • The management of liver trauma
 • The management of liver infections
 • The management of colorectal liver metastases
 • The management of hepatocellular carcinoma
Chapter
The liver
65
INTRODUCTION
The liver is the largest organ in the body, weighing 1.7 kg in the 
average 80-kg man. It sits in the right upper quadrant beneath 
the diaphragm, and is protected by the rib cage. The liver 
parenchyma is entirely covered by a thin capsule (Glisson’s 
capsule) and by visceral peritoneum on all but the posterior 
surface of the liver, termed the ‘bare area’. The liver is divided 
into a large right lobe, which constitutes three-quarters of the 
liver volume, and a smaller left lobe.
ANATOMY OF THE LIVER
Ligaments and peritoneal 
reflections
The liver is fixed in the right upper quadrant by peritoneal 
reflections that form ligaments. On the superior surface of the 
left lobe is the left triangular ligament. Dividing the anterior 
and posterior folds of this ligament allows the left lobe to be 
mobilised from the diaphragm and the left lateral wall of the 
inferior vena cava (IVC) to be exposed. The right triangular 
ligament fixes the entire right lobe of the liver to the under -
surface of the right hemidiaphragm. Division of this ligament 
allows the liver to be mobilised from under the diaphragm 
and rotated to the left. Another major supporting structure 
is the falciform ligament (remnant of the umbilical vein), 
which runs from the umbilicus to the liver between the right 
and left lobes, passing into the interlobar fissure. From the fis-
sure, it passes anteriorly on the surface of the liver, attaching 
it to the posterior aspect of the anterior abdominal wall. Divi-
sion of the superior leaves of the falciform ligament allows 
exposure of the suprahepatic IVC, lying within a thin sheath 
of fibrous tissue. The final peritoneal reflection is between the 
stomach and the liver. This lesser omentum is often thin and 
fragile, but contains the hilar structures in its free edge.
Liver blood supply
The blood supply to the liver is unique, 80% being derived 
from the portal vein and 20% from the hepatic artery. The 
arterial blood supply in most individuals is derived from the 
coeliac trunk of the aorta, where the hepatic artery arises 
along with the splenic and left gastric artery. After supply -
ing the gastroduodenal artery, the hepatic artery branches 
at a very variable level to produce the right and left hepatic 
arteries. The right artery supplies the majority of the liver 
parenchyma and is, therefore, the larger of the two arteries. 
There are many anatomical variations, knowledge of which is 
essential for safe surgery on the liver. The blood supply to the 
right lobe of the liver may be partly or completely supplied by 
a right hepatic artery arising directly from the superior mesen-
teric artery, rather than the coeliac trunk. This vessel passes 
posterior to the uncinate process and head of the pancreas, 
and runs to the liver on the posterior wall of the bile duct. 
Similarly, the arterial blood supply to the left lobe of the liver 
may be derived from a branch of the left gastric artery. This 
vessel runs between the lesser curve of the stomach and the 
left lobe of the liver in the lesser omentum.
Structures in the hilum of the liver
The porta hepatis, a transverse fissure on the visceral surface 
of the liver, is the hilum of the liver. The hepatic artery, portal 
vein and bile duct are present within the free edge of the lesser 
omentum (the hepatoduodenal ligament) and together with 
nerves and lymphatics enter the liver at the porta  hepatis. 
Francis Glisson , 1597–1677, Regius Professor of Physic, Cambridge, UK, described the capsule of the liver and its blood supply in his book Anatomia hepatis (1654).
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1153 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1154
described the liver as being divided into eight segments 
(Figure 65.1). Each of these segments can be considered as a 
functional unit, with a branch of the hepatic artery, portal vein 
and bile duct, and drained by a branch of the hepatic vein. It 
is the concept of these segments as distinct functional units 
that guides ‘anatomical’ liver resection. The overall anatomy 
of the liver is divided into a functional right and left ‘unit’ 
The usual anatomical relationship of these structures is for 
the bile duct to be within the free edge, the hepatic artery to 
be above and medial, and the portal vein to lie posteriorly. 
Within this ligament, the common hepatic duct is joined by 
the cystic duct (draining the gallbladder) at a varying level 
to form the common bile duct (CBD). The common hepatic 
artery branches at a variable level within the ligament, with 
the right hepatic artery crossing the bile duct either anteriorly 
or posteriorly before giving rise to the cystic artery. Multiple 
small hepatic arterial branches provide blood to the bile duct, 
predominantly from the right hepatic artery. The portal vein 
arises from the confluence of the splenic vein and the superior 
mesenteric vein behind the neck of the pancreas. It has some 
important tributaries, including the left gastric vein, which 
joins just above the pancreas.
Division of structures at the hilum
At the hilum, the major structures divide into right and left 
branches. The right and left hepatic ducts arise from the 
hepatic parenchyma and join to form the common hepatic 
duct. The left duct has a longer extrahepatic course of approx-
imately 2  cm. Once within the liver parenchyma, the duct 
accompanies the branches of the hepatic artery and portal 
vein within a fibrous sheath. The portal vein often gives off 
two large branches to the right lobe, which are usually outside 
the liver for a short length, before giving a left portal vein 
branch that runs behind the left hepatic duct.
Venous drainage of the liver
The venous drainage of the liver is via the hepatic veins into 
the IVC. The vena cava lies within a groove in the posterior 
wall of the liver. Above the liver , it immediately penetrates 
the diaphragm to join the right atrium, whereas below the 
liver parenchyma, there is a short length of vessel before the 
insertion of the renal veins. The inferior hepatic veins are 
short vessels that pass directly between the liver parenchyma 
and the anterior wall of the IVC. The major venous drainage 
is through three large veins that join the IVC immediately 
below the diaphragm. Outside the liver, these vessels are sur-
rounded by a thin fibrous layer. The right hepatic vein can be 
exposed fully outside the liver, but the middle and left veins 
usually join within the liver parenchyma. The right kidney 
and adrenal gland lie immediately adjacent to the retro -
hepatic IVC. The right adrenal vein drains into the IVC 
at this level, usually via one main branch. The IVC can be 
mobilised fully from the retroperitoneal tissues and, in the 
healthy state, there are no large vessels in this tissue plane.
Segmental anatomy of the liver
Understanding the internal anatomy of the liver has greatly 
facilitated safe liver surgery. Couinaud, a French surgeon, 
Surgical lobes
Right Left
Falciform
ligament
(a)
IVC
RHV LHVMHV
VII
VIII
VI
V
IV
III
LT
LT
(b)
II
Figure 65.1 (a) The ‘surgical’ labels of the liver compar ed with the 
usual anatomical division into right and left lobes by the falciform 
ligament. (b) Segments of the liver (after Couinaud). IVC, inferior 
vena cava; LHV, left hepatic vein; LT, ligamentum teres; MHV, middle 
hepatic vein; RHV, right hepatic vein. 
Claude Couinaud , 1922–2008, French surgeon and anatomist, described the segmental anatomy of the liver in his seminal book Le Foie: Études anatomiques et 
chirurgicales.
Sir James Cantlie , 1851–1926, Scottish born physician who cofounded the Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese (now Hong Kong University School of 
Medicine).
Summary box 65.1
Liver anatomy
●● There are two anatomical lobes with separate blood supply, 
bile duct and venous drainage
●● Dual blood supply (20% hepatic artery and 80% portal vein)
●● The liver regenerates fully after partial resection
●● Resection is based on anatomical lines to preserve maximal 
functioning liver
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1154 25/10/2017   09:49Acute and chronic liver disease 1155
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
along the line between the gallbladder fossa and the middle 
hepatic vein (Cantlie’s line). Liver segments (V–VIII) to the 
right of this line are supplied by the right hepatic artery and 
the right branch of the portal vein, and drain bile via the right 
hepatic duct. To the left of this line (segments I–IV), function-
ally, is the left liver, which is supplied by the left branch of the 
hepatic artery and the left portal vein branch, and drains bile 
via the left hepatic duct. Resections can be performed of indi-
vidual segments or of the whole of the left or right hemiliver.
The hepatic lobules
The functional units within the liver segments are the liver lob-
ules. These comprise plates of liver cells separated by the hepatic 
sinusoids, large, thin-walled venous channels that carry blood to 
the central vein, a tributary of the hepatic vein, from the portal 
tracts, which contain branches of the hepatic artery and portal 
vein. During passage through the sinusoids, the many functions 
of the liver take place, including bile formation, which is chan-
nelled in an opposite direction to the blood flow to drain via the 
bile duct tributaries within the portal tracts.
Embryology
The liver is a foregut structure and forms as a small endoder -
mal bud early in gestation. The cell population is bipotential, 
and cells may develop into hepatocytes or intrahepatic duc -
tal cells. The liver endothelium is derived from the vitelline 
and umbilical veins, which merge with the endodermal bud 
to form the liver sinusoids. The supporting connective tissue, 
haemopoietic cells, and Kupffer cells are derived from the 
mesoderm of the septum transversum, which is a mass of mes-
enchymal connective tissue.
ACUTE AND CHRONIC LIVER 
DISEASE
Liver function and tests
Adequate liver function is essential to survival; humans will 
survive for only 24–48 hours in the anhepatic state despite full 
supportive therapy. The liver is central to many key  metabolic 
pathways.
An awareness of the currently available liver function 
tests and their significance is essential (Table 65.1).
Bilirubin is synthesised in the liver and excreted in bile. 
Increased levels may be associated with increased haemo -
globin breakdown, hepatocellular dysfunction resulting in 
impaired bilirubin transport and excretion or biliary obstruc -
tion. In patients with known parenchymal liver disease, pro-
gressive elevation of bilirubin in the absence of a secondary 
complication suggests deterioration in liver function. The 
serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is particularly elevated 
with cholestatic liver disease or biliary obstruction. It is 
important to note that routine laboratory analysis of ALP 
is not isoform-specific and so alkaline phosphatase from a 
skeletal source may also lead to elevation. The transaminase 
levels (aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine trans -
aminase (ALT)) reflect acute hepatocellular damage, as does 
the gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) level, which 
may be used to detect the liver injury associated with acute 
alcohol ingestion. However, marked liver injury can occur 
in the presence of normal liver function tests. The synthetic 
functions of the liver are reflected in the ability to syn -
thesise proteins (albumin level) and clotting factors (pro -
thrombin time). The standard method of monitoring liver 
function in patients with chronic liver disease is therefore 
serial measurement of bilirubin, albumin and prothrombin 
time.
Clinical signs of impaired liver 
function
These signs depend on the severity of dysfunction and 
whether it is acute or chronic.
Acute liver failure
Causes of acute liver failure
In the early stages, there may be no objective signs, but with 
severe dysfunction the onset of clinical jaundice may be asso-
ciated with neurological signs of liver failure (hepatic enceph-
alopathy), consisting of a liver flap, drowsiness, confusion 
and, eventually, coma.
Karl Wilhelm von Kupffer , 1829–1902, Professor of Anatomy at Kiel (1867), Königsberg (1875) and Munich, Germany (1880), described these ‘stellate cells’ 
in 1880.
TABLE 65.1 Routinely available tests of liver function.
Test Normal range
Bilirubin 5–17 μmol/L
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 35–130 IU/L
Aspartate transaminase (AST) 5–40 IU/L
Alanine transaminase (ALT) 5–40 IU/L
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 10–48 IU/L
Albumin 35–50 g/L
Prothrombin time (PT) 12–16 s
Summary box 65.2
Main functions of the liver
●● Maintaining core body temperature
●● pH balance and correction of lactic acidosis
●● Synthesis of clotting factors
●● Glucose metabolism, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis
●● Urea formation from protein catabolism
●● Bilirubin formation from haemoglobin degradation
●● Drug and hormone metabolism and excretion
●● Removal of gut endotoxins and foreign antigens
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1155 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1156
Treatment of acute liver failure
The overall mortality from acute liver failure is approximately 
50%, even with the best supportive therapy.
Chronic liver disease
Lethargy and weakness are common features irrespective of 
the underlying cause. These often precede clinical jaundice, 
which indicates impairment of the liver’s ability to metabolise 
bilirubin. Progressive deterioration in liver function is associ-
ated with a hyperdynamic circulation involving a high cardiac 
output, large pulse volume, low blood pressure and flushed 
warm extremities. Fever is a common feature, which may 
be related to underlying inflammation and cytokine release 
from the diseased liver or may be due to bacterial infection, 
to which patients with chronic liver disease are predisposed. 
Skin changes may be evident, including spider naevi, cuta-
neous vascular abnormalities that blanch on pressure, palmar 
erythema and white nails (leuconychia). Endocrine abnor -
malities are responsible for hypogonadism and gynaecomas -
tia. The mental derangement associated with chronic liver 
disease is termed hepatic encephalopathy. This is associated 
with memory impairment, confusion, personality changes, 
altered sleep patterns and slow, slurred speech. The most use-
ful clinical sign is the flapping tremor, demonstrated by asking 
the patient to extend his or her arms and hyperextend the 
wrist joint. Abdominal distension due to ascites is a common 
late feature. This may be suggested clinically by the demon-
stration of a fluid thrill or shifting dullness. Protein catabolism 
produces loss of muscle bulk and wasting, and a coagulation 
defect is suggested by the presence of skin bruising.
Summary box 65.3
Causes of acute liver failure
●● Viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, C, D, E)
●● Drug reactions (halothane, isoniazid–rifampicin, 
antidepressants, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
valproic acid)
●● Paracetamol overdose
●● Mushroom poisoning
●● Shock and multiorgan failure
●● Acute Budd–Chiari syndrome
●● Wilson’s disease
●● Fatty liver of pregnancy
Summary box 65.4
Supportive therapy for acute liver failure
●● Fluid balance and electrolytes
●● Acid–base balance and blood glucose monitoring
●● Nutrition
●● Renal function (haemofiltration)
●● Respiratory support (ventilation)
●● Monitoring and treatment of cerebral oedema
●● Treat bacterial and fungal infection
Summary box 65.5
King’s College selection criteria for liver 
transplantation in acute liver failure
Paracetamol induced
●● pH <7.30 (irrespective of grade of encephalopathy) or 
prothrombin time (PT) >100 s + serum creatinine >300 μmol/L 
+ grade 3 or 4 encephalopathy.
Non-paracetamol induced (irrespective of encephalopathy)
●● PT >100 s
or any three of the following:
●● Age <10 years or >40 years
●● Aetiology non-A, non-B, halothane or idiosyncratic drug 
reaction
●● More than 7 days’ jaundice before encephalopathy
●● PT >50 s
●● Bilirubin >300 μmol/L
Summary box 65.6
Features of chronic liver disease
●● Lethargy
●● Fever
●● Jaundice
●● Protein catabolism (wasting)
●● Coagulopathy (bruising)
●● Cardiac (hyperdynamic circulation)
●● Neurological (hepatic encephalopathy)
●● Portal hypertension
Ascites
Oesophageal varices
Splenomegaly
●● Cutaneous
Spider naevi
Palmar erythema
George Budd , 1808–1882, Professor of Medicine, King’s College Hospital, London, UK.
Hans Chiari , 1851–1916, Austrian pathologist, later Professor at University of Strasbourg, France.
SA Kinnier Wilson , 1878–1937, Professor of Neurology, King’s College, London, UK.
Liver transplantation is appropriate for some patients with 
acute liver failure, although the short-term results are poor 
in comparison with liver transplantation for chronic liver 
disease and suitable donor livers are frequently unavailable 
during the brief window of opportunity before death from 
liver failure.
Quantifying the severity of chronic liver 
disease
T wo prognostic models commonly used to assess the severity 
of chronic liver disease and perioperative risk are the Child–
Turcotte–Pugh (CTP) Classification and the Model for 
End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score. The original Child 
classification was developed to predict mortality following 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1156 25/10/2017   09:49Imaging the liver 1157
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
shunt surgery in cirrhotic patients, with the modified CTP 
classification developed to predict mortality after any surgery. 
The CTP classification is detailed in Table 65.2. The MELD 
score was originally developed to predict short-term progno -
sis in patients undergoing transjugular intrahepatic portosys -
temic shunt insertion, but has now been adopted to prioritise 
patients awaiting liver transplantation. In the MELD model 
the survival probability of patients with end-stage liver disease 
is computed based on the patient’s international normalised 
ratio (INR), serum bilirubin and serum creatinine.
Surgery in the presence of chronic liver 
disease
Patients with liver disease are at greater risk of surgical and 
anaesthetic complications, with the magnitude of risk depen-
dent on size of procedure, degree of liver impairment and type 
of anaesthesia. Overall surgical mortality rates are generally 
considered to be increased by 10% in CTP A disease, 30% in 
CTP B and 75–80% in CTP C. MELD score also correlates 
with operative mortality, with a 1% increase for each MELD 
point up to 20, with a further 2% for each point above 20. 
These figures are considerably higher in patients who present 
as an emergency.
IMAGING THE LIVER
Major advances have taken place over recent years in surgical 
approaches to the liver, and the enormous improvement in 
the safety of liver surgery and surgical outcomes are in part due 
to improvements in preoperative imaging. The ideal choice 
of imaging modality is determined by the likely pathology as 
well as locally available equipment and radiological expertise 
(Table 65.3).
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is conventionally the first line modality in imag -
ing the liver and biliary tract for detection of focal liver lesions 
(FLL) and assessment of biliary tract dilatation (Figure 65.2). 
Good quality ultrasound can characterise a definite benign 
lesion (e.g. cyst), from a definite malignant lesion (e.g. metas-
tasis). However, due to considerable overlap in appearance of 
benign and malignant lesions, as well as interoperator vari-
ability, accurate characterisation is often not possible using 
unenhanced ultrasound alone. Obese patients and those with 
variant anatomy can be particularly difficult to evaluate. Fatty 
liver attenuates ultrasound, resulting in poor liver penetra-
tion, reducing confidence in accurate evaluation of the entire 
liver, and the technique should not be used when there is a 
high clinical suspicion of malignancy. Although ultrasound is 
frequently used to assess biliary dilatation, it is less useful in 
determining the aetiology. Dilatation of the ducts can suggest 
the presence of malignancy in a high-risk patient, but due 
to frequent overlying gastric and duodenal gas, the ducts are 
Charles Gardner Child , 1908–1991, surgeon, Michigan, USA. Child and JG Turcotte first proposed the scoring system in 1964. In 1972, RN Pugh and colleagues 
from King’s College Hospital, London modified the scoring system by replacing nutritional status with prothrombin time or international normalised ratio.
TABLE 65.2 Child–Turcotte–Pugh (CTP) classification of 
hepatocellular function in cirrhosis. 
Points 1 point each 2 points each 3 points each
Bilirubin (μmol/L) <34 34–50 >50
Albumin (g/L) >35 25–35 <25
Ascites None Easily 
controlled
Poorly 
controlled
Encephalopathy None GR I–II Gr III–IV
INR <1.7 1.7–2.2 >2.2
CTP A= 5–6 points, CTP B= 7–9 points, CTP C= 10–15 points
TABLE 65.3 Imaging the liver.
Imaging modality Principal indication
Ultrasound Standard first-line investigation
Spiral CT Anatomical planning for liver surgery
MRI Alternative to spiral CT
MRCP First-line, non-invasive cholangiography
ERCP Imaging the biliary tract when endoscopic 
intervention is anticipated (e.g. ductal stones)
PTC Biliary tract imaging when ERCP impossible 
or failed
Angiography To detect vascular involvement by tumour
PET scanning To quantify tumour spread
Laparoscopy/
laparoscopic 
ultrasound
To detect peritoneal tumour spread and 
superficial liver metastases
CT, computed tomography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography; MRCP , magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, 
positron emission tomography; PTC, percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography.
Figure 65.2 Ultrasound scan of the upper abdomen, showing the 
liver on the left and a gallbladder containing multiple gallstones cen -
trally. The stones can be seen to cast an acoustic shadow. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1157 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1158
rarely seen throughout their entire course. The advent of con-
trast enhanced ultrasound scanning (CEUS), which employs 
transient intravascular bubbles to delineate normal liver 
parenchyma from solid tumours, has significantly increased 
the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound scanning. CEUS 
assesses real-time lesion vascularity with a temporal resolu-
tion superior to that of other imaging modalities.
Computed tomography
Modern spiral computed tomography (CT) technology has  
increased the accuracy of diagnosis and staging of liver lesions, 
and contrast-enhanced CT is currently the most widely used 
and best validated modality for liver imaging. It provides fine 
detail of liver lesions down to less than 1 cm in diameter and 
gives information on their nature (Figure 65.3). Oral contrast 
enhancement allows visualisation of the stomach and duode-
num in relation to the liver hilum. The early arterial phase of 
the intravenous contrast vascular enhancement is particularly 
useful for detecting small primary liver cancers, owing to their 
preferential arterial blood supply. The venous phase maps the 
branches of the portal vein within the liver and the drainage 
via the hepatic veins. Inflammatory liver lesions often exhibit 
rim enhancement with intravenous contrast, whereas com-
monly found haemangiomas characteristically show late venous 
enhancement. The density of any liver lesion can be measured, 
which is useful in establishing the presence of a cystic lesion. 
CT has high accuracy in determining the stage, and high sen-
sitivity and specificity in determining resectability, of liver 
tumours. Local and distant metastases can also be detected, 
although peritoneal metastases are often missed on CT.
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance (MR) of the liver is superior to CT in 
characterising liver lesions and detecting small liver metas -
tases (Figure 65.4). The advent of liver-specific contrast 
agents has significantly improved lesion characterisation and 
detection, particularly in differentiating small hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) from regenerative nodules. These contrast 
agents are taken up by normally functioning hepatocytes. A 
lesion not containing hepatocytes will not take up contrast, 
and will appear dark against an enhancing background liver. 
These contrast agents are now being used more frequently due 
to the increased detection of lesions on liver-specific phase CT 
scans. This observation is particularly important for colorec -
tal liver metastases prior to consideration of liver resection. 
In addition to standard MR scanning, magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) provides excellent qual -
ity non-invasive imaging of the biliary tract, the accuracy of 
which is comparable to direct cholangiography by endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) or percutane -
ous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC).
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography
ERCP (Figure 65.5) is performed in patients with obstruc-
tive jaundice when an endoscopic intervention is anticipated 
based on prior imaging (endoscopic removal of CBD stones, 
biliary drainage in septic patient or insertion of a biliary tract 
stent). Preoperative assessment of coagulation is essential, 
and if abnormal it is appropriately corrected, along with pro -
phylactic antibiotics and an explanation of the main compli-
cations, which include pancreatitis, cholangitis and bleeding 
or perforation of the duodenum related to sphincterotomy.
Direct endoscopic cholangioscopy
Cholangioscopy enables direct visualisation of the bile ducts, 
either operatively or endoscopically. Originally , ‘mother 
and baby’ ERCP cholangioscopy only visualised the biliary 
mucosa of the common duct, and required two endoscopists 
to operate. This has changed with the development of the 
Figure 65.3 Computed tomography scan of a patient with a liver 
tumour in the right lobe of the liver , using intravenous contrast 
enhancement. 
Figure 65.4 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is increasingly used 
for the diagnosis and staging of liver cancers. This figure shows a 
colorectal liver metastasis as seen on contrast MRI. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1158 25/10/2017   09:49Imaging the liver 1159
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
new SpyGlass TM (Boston Scientific) cholangioscope. Spy -
GlassTM cholangioscopy enables a single operator to visualise 
the biliary mucosa to at least second- and third-order ducts, 
with the benefit of a working channel to allow directly visu -
alised biopsies and application of targeted therapy. Directly 
targeted biopsies improve the diagnostic yield to >80% in 
patients with indeterminate biliary strictures.
Endoscopic ultrasound
EUS evaluates the extrahepatic biliary tree, including 
indeterminate lymphadenopathy at the porta hepatis and 
para-aortic regions. EUS provides detailed views of the bile 
ducts, ampulla, pancreas and liver hilum, but does not carry 
the associated risks of ERCP . Radial EUS provides a 360° 
image, whereas linear EUS provides a view in the plane of 
the scope and allows for the sampling of tissue via biopsy or 
fine-needle aspiration (FNA). EUS is also the most sensitive 
tool for diagnosing small bile duct calculi (Figure 65.6).
Percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography
PTC is indicated where endoscopic cholangiography has 
failed or is impossible, e.g. in patients with previous pan -
creatoduodenectomy or gastrectomy. It is often required in 
patients with hilar bile duct tumours to guide external drain -
age of the obstructed bile ducts to relieve jaundice, evaluate 
resectability and to direct stent insertion (Figure 65.7).
Angiography
Angiography is generally employed only for direct therapeutic 
intervention. Therapeutic interventions include the occlu -
sion of arteriovenous malformations, the embolisation of 
bleeding sites in the liver and the treatment of liver tumours 
(transarterial chemoembolisation, TACE).
Positron emission tomography
18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomogra-
phy (FDG–PET) depends on the avid uptake of glucose by 
cancerous tissue in comparison with benign or inflammatory 
tissue. Deoxyglucose is labelled with the positron emitter 
 fluorine-18 (18FDG), and this is administered to the patient 
Figure 65.5  Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatography 
demonstrating the biliary tract with multiple stones in the distal com -
mon bile duct. 
Figure 65.6  Endoscopic ultrasound gives excellent views of the 
head of pancreas and distal biliary tr ee, and is a sensitive method of 
detecting microcalculi not seen on standard transabdominal ultraso -
nography. This figure demonstrates the common bile duct (CBD) and 
confluence with the pancreatic duct (PD), with the portal vein lying 
deep to this (PV). 
Figure 65.7  Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography . Some 
contrast has extravasated at the site of hepatic puncture of the per -
cutaneously placed needle, but the biliary tract is clearly demon -
strated and shows the multiple strictures typical of primary sclerosing 
 cholangitis. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1159 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1160
prior to imaging by PET. A three-dimensional image of the 
whole body is obtained, highlighting areas of increased glu -
cose metabolism (Figure 65.8). PET or integrated PET-CT 
can be useful in the diagnosis of regional lymph node metas -
tases and distant metastases.
Laparoscopy
Laparoscopy is useful for the staging of primary hepatopan -
creatobiliary cancers. Lesions overlooked by conventional 
imaging are mainly peritoneal metastases and superficial liver 
tumours. These lesions can be detected at laparoscopy thus 
avoiding an unnecessary laparotomy. A liver biopsy to confirm 
or exclude chronic liver disease can also be performed during 
laparoscopy, but routine biopsy of resectable lesions should 
be avoided because of the risk of tumour seeding. There is no 
role for routine laparoscopy in patients with colorectal liver 
metastases.
LIVER TRAUMA
General
The liver is the second most common organ injured in abdom-
inal trauma after the spleen.
Liver trauma can be divided into blunt and penetrat -
ing injuries. Blunt injury produces contusion, laceration 
and avulsion injuries to the liver, often in association with 
splenic, mesenteric or renal injury. Penetrating injuries, such 
as stab and gunshot wounds, are often associated with chest 
or pericardial involvement. Blunt injuries are more common 
and have a higher mortality than penetrating injuries.
Figure 65.8 Patient with colorectal liver metastasis seen on (a) an 
MRI liver and (b) 18F-2-fluoro-2- deoxy-D-glucose uptake on a com-
bined PET-CT scan. Similar uptake outside the liver usually precludes 
curative intent surgery as it indicates distant metastases. As seen in 
these images, some background renal activity is expected. 
(a)
(b)
Diagnosis of liver injury
The liver is an extremely well-vascularised organ, and blood 
loss is therefore the major early complication of liver inju -
ries. Clinical suspicion of a possible liver injury is essential, 
as a laparotomy by an inexperienced surgeon with inadequate 
preoperative preparation is doomed to failure. All lower chest 
and upper abdominal stab wounds should be suspect, espe -
cially if considerable blood volume replacement has been 
required. Similarly, severe crushing injuries to the lower chest 
or upper abdomen often combine rib fractures, haemothorax 
and damage to the spleen and/or liver. Focused assessment 
sonography in trauma (FAST) performed in the emergency 
room by an experienced operator can reliably diagnose free 
intraperitoneal fluid. Patients with free intraperitoneal fluid 
on FAST and haemodynamic instability, and patients with 
a penetrating wound, will require a laparotomy and/or tho-
racotomy once active resuscitation is under way. Owing to 
the opportunity for massive ongoing blood loss and the rapid 
development of a coagulopathy, the patient should be directly 
transferred to the operating theatre while blood products are 
obtained and volume replacement is taking place. Patients 
who are haemodynamically stable should have a contrast- 
Summary box 65.7
Management of liver trauma
●● Remember associated injuries
●● At-risk groups
Stabbing/gunshot in lower chest or upper abdomen
Crush injury with multiple rib fractures
●● Resuscitate
Airway
Breathing
Circulation
●● Assessment of injury
CT chest and abdomen with contrast
Laparotomy if haemodynamically unstable
●● Treatment
Correct coagulopathy
Suture lacerations
Resect if major vascular injury
Packing if diffuse parenchymal injury
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1160 25/10/2017   09:49Liver trauma 1161
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
enhanced CT scan of the chest and abdomen as the next step. 
This scan will demonstrate evidence of parenchymal damage 
to the liver or spleen, as well as associated traumatic injuries to 
their feeding vessels. Free fluid can also be clearly established. 
The chest scan will help to exclude injuries to the great ves -
sels and demonstrate damage to the lung parenchyma.
Initial management of liver injuries
Penetrating
The initial management is maintenance of airway patency, 
breathing and circulation (ABC) following the principles 
of advanced trauma life support (A TLS). Peripheral venous 
access is gained with two large-bore cannulae and blood sent 
for cross-match of 10 units of blood, full blood count, urea and 
electrolytes, liver function tests, clotting screen, glucose and 
amylase. Initial volume replacement should be with blood. 
Arterial blood gases should be obtained and the patient 
intubated and ventilated if the gas exchange is inadequate. 
Intercostal chest drains should be inserted if associated pneu-
mothorax or haemothorax is suspected. Once initial resusci -
tation has commenced, the patient should be transferred to 
the operating theatre, with further resuscitation performed on 
the operating table. The necessity for fresh frozen plasma and 
cryoprecipitate should be discussed with the blood transfu -
sion service immediately the patient arrives in the hospital 
(often by activation of a major transfusion protocol), as these 
patients rapidly develop irreversible coagulopathies due to a 
lack of fibrinogen and clotting factors. Standard coagulation 
profiles are inadequate to evaluate this acute loss of clotting 
factors, and factors should be given empirically, aided by the 
results of thromboelastography (TEG), if available (Figure 
65.9). A contrast CT prior to laparotomy should be consid -
ered if the patient is haemodynamically stable.
Blunt trauma
With blunt injuries, the initial plan for resuscitation and 
management is as outlined above for penetrating injuries. 
Patients who are haemo dynamically unstable will require an 
immediate laparotomy. For the patient who is haemodynam -
ically stable, imaging by CT should be performed to further 
evaluate the nature of the injury. Most patients with blunt 
liver injury who are haemodynamically stable can be man -
aged conservatively. The indication for discontinuing con -
servative treatment is the development of haemodynamic 
instability, evidence of ongoing blood loss despite correction 
of any underlying coagulopathy and the development of signs 
of generalised peritonitis. Interventional radiology has an 
important role in management of liver trauma and embolisa -
tion to control hepatic artery bleeding is safe and effective in 
a stable patient with no evidence of hollow viscus perforation.
The surgical approach to liver 
trauma
Good access is vital. A ‘rooftop’ incision with midline exten-
sion to the xiphisternum and retraction of the costal margins 
gives excellent access to the liver and spleen. If the laparot -
omy has been started through a midline incision, a transverse 
lateral extension to the right can be added to improve access 
to the liver. Compression of the liver with packs and correc-
tion of coagulopathy, if present, will control most of the active 
bleeding. If bleeding persists, further control can be acheived 
by vascular inflow occlusion by placing an atraumatic clamp 
across the foramen of Winslow (the Pringle manoeuvre). A 
stab incision in the liver can be sutured with a fine absorbable 
monofilament suture. Lacerations to the hepatic artery should 
be identified and repaired with 6/0 Prolene suture. If unavoid-
able, the hepatic artery may be ligated, although parenchymal 
necrosis and abscess formation will result in some individu -
als. Portal vein injuries should be repaired with 5/0 Prolene. 
Inflow occlusion facilitates suturing of lacerations and vessels.
If bleeding persists despite inflow occlusion, consider 
major hepatic vein or IVC injuries, and also look for abberant 
arteries to the liver. Deceleration injuries often produce lacer-
ations of the liver parenchyma adjacent to the anchoring lig-
aments of the liver. These may be amenable to suture with an 
absorbable monofilament suture. Again, inflow occlusion may 
facilitate this suturing and, if necessary, the sutures can be 
buttressed to prevent them cutting through the liver paren -
chyma. With more severe deceleration injuries, a portion of 
the liver may be avulsed. These injuries are more complex as 
they are associated with a devitalised portion of the liver and, 
often, major injuries to the hepatic veins and IVC. Diffuse 
parenchymal injuries should be treated by packing the liver to 
achieve haemostasis (Figure 65.10). This is effective for the 
majority of liver injuries if the liver is packed against the nat-
ural contour of the diaphragm by packing from below. Large 
AB CD E
Figure 65.9  Thromboelastography (TEG). This dynamic form of 
assessing the coagulation status is being used increasingly for 
intraoperative monitoring. The shape of the TEG trace defines the 
nature of the underlying coagulation deficiency as shown. A, normal; 
B, delayed clot formation; C, reduced clot strength; D, clot lysis; E, 
 hypercoagulable. 
Jacob Benignus Winslow , 1669–1760, Professor of Anatomy, Physic and Surgery, Paris, France.
James Hogarth Pringle , 1863–1941, surgeon, The Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, UK. Born in Australia and trained in Edinburgh, he was a strong supporter of women 
in medicine; he performed the first successful autologous vein graft in the UK and the first excision and block dissection for malignant melanoma. He and his father, 
George Hogarth Pringle (1830 –1872, who practised in Australia), formed a famous team of surgical innovators.
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1161 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1162
abdominal packs should be used to ease their removal, and 
the abdomen closed to facilitate compression of the paren-
chyma. Care should be taken to avoid overzealous packing, as 
this may produce pressure necrosis of the liver parenchyma or 
abdominal compartment syndrome.
Crush injuries to the liver often result in large parenchy -
mal haematomas and diffuse capsular lacerations (Figure 
65.11). Suturing is usually ineffective, and perihepatic pack-
ing, which involves placing packs above, behind and below 
the liver, is the most useful method of providing haemosta -
sis. Necrotic tissue should be removed, but poorly perfused, 
though viable, liver left in situ. If packing is necessary, the 
patient should have the packs removed after 48 hours, and 
usually no further surgical intervention is required. Antibi -
otic cover is advisable, and full reversal of any coagulopathy is 
essential. If a major liver vascular injury (hepatic vein or vena 
cava, grade V or VI) is suspected at the time of the initial 
laparotomy, then packing and referral to a specialist centre 
should be considered. A common surgical approach in these 
circumstances would be to place the patient on venovenous 
bypass, using cannulae in the femoral vein via a long saphe -
nous cut-down, with the blood returned using a roller pump 
to the superior vena cava (SVC) via an internal jugular line. 
Venovenous bypass allows the IVC to be safely clamped to 
facilitate caval or hepatic vein repair. A rapid infuser blood 
transfusion machine facilitates the delivery of large volumes 
of blood instantaneously. Once prepared, the patient is relap-
arotomised via the rooftop incision with a midline extension 
to the xiphisternum. The liver is mobilised by division of the 
supporting ligaments, and complete vascular isolation of the 
liver is achieved by occluding the hilar inflow and the IVC 
above the renal veins and at the level of the diaphragm with 
atraumatic vascular clamps. Venous return is provided by the 
venovenous bypass. Warm ischaemia of the liver is tolerated 
for up to 45 minutes, allowing sufficient time in a blood-free 
field for repair of injuries to the IVC or hepatic veins.
Other complications of liver trauma
A subcapsular or intrahepatic haematoma requires no specific 
intervention and should be allowed to resolve spontaneously. 
Abscesses may form as a result of secondary infection of an 
area of parenchymal ischaemia, especially after penetrating 
trauma. Treatment is with systemic antibiotics and aspiration 
Figure 65.10 Packing the liver to achieve haemostasis. The abdomen can then be closed and the patient transferred to critical care for 
 stabilisation prior to relook laparotomy 24–48 hours later. (Adapted from Poston, D’Angelica, Adam (eds). Surgical management of hepatobiliary 
and pancreatic disorders. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2010.)
Figure 65.11 Computed tomography scan demonstrating grade IV 
liver injury.
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1162 25/10/2017   09:49Portal hypertension 1163
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
under ultrasound guidance once the necrotic tissue has lique-
fied. Bile collections require aspiration under ultrasound guid-
ance or percutaneous insertion of a pigtail drain. The site of 
origin of a biliary fistula should be determined by endoscopic  
or percutaneous cholangiography, and biliary decompression 
achieved by nasobiliary or percutaneous transhepatic drainage 
or stent insertion. If this fails to control the fistula, the affected 
portion of the liver may require resection. Late vascular com-
plications include hepatic artery aneurysm and arteriovenous 
(precipitating acute heart failure if between the hepatic artery 
and hepatic vein and acute portal hypertension if arteriopor -
tal) or arteriobiliary fistulae (resulting in often painful haemo-
bilia) (Figure 65.12). These are best treated non-surgically 
by a specialist hepatobiliary interventional radiologist. The 
feeding vessel can be embolised transarterially.
Hepatic failure may occur following extensive liver 
trauma. This will usually reverse with conservative support -
ive treatment if the blood supply and biliary drainage of the 
liver are intact.
Long-term outcome of liver trauma
The capacity of the liver to recover from extensive trauma 
is remarkable, and parenchymal regeneration occurs rapidly. 
Late complications are rare, but the development of biliary 
strictures many years after recovery from liver trauma has been 
reported. The treatment depends on the mode of presentation 
and the extent and site of stricturing. A segmental or lobar 
stricture, associated with atrophy of the corresponding area of 
liver parenchyma and compensatory hypertrophy of the other 
liver lobe, may be treated expectantly. A dominant extrahe -
patic bile duct stricture associated with obstructive jaundice 
may be treated initially with endobiliary balloon dilatation or 
stenting, but will usually require surgical correction using a 
Roux-en-Y hepatodochojejunostomy.
PORTAL HYPERTENSION
An elevation in portal pressure is most commonly found in 
the presence of liver cirrhosis, although it may be present in 
patients with extrahepatic portal vein occlusion, intrahepatic 
veno-occlusive disease or occlusion of the main hepatic veins 
(Budd–Chiari syndrome (BCS)). As portal hypertension per 
se produces no symptoms, it is usually diagnosed following 
presentation with decompensated chronic liver disease and 
encephalopathy, ascites or variceal bleeding.
Management of bleeding varices
General resuscitation
Varices usually present with the acute onset of a large-volume 
haematemesis, the lower oesophagus being the most common 
site for variceal bleeding. The diagnosis may be suspected if 
the patient is known to have liver cirrhosis, but it needs to 
be confirmed following initial resuscitation of the patient. 
Variceal haemorrhage is a medical emergency. Patients with 
massive hemorrhage should be admitted to the intensive care 
unit. Venous access should be obtained through two large-bore 
peripheral cannulae. Resuscitation should be commenced, 
ideally with blood. Liver function tests will reveal underlying 
liver disease, and a coagulation profile will reveal any under -
lying coagulopathy. Hypervolaemia should be avoided since 
this may increase portal pressure and exacerbate the bleed -
ing. Vitamin K is administered (10 mg intravenously (i.v.)) as 
well as tranexamic acid (1 g i.v.), but correction of a coagu -
lopathy will require the administration of fresh frozen plasma 
(FFP). A major transfusion protocol should be activated. An 
associated thrombocytopenia is usually secondary to hyper -
splenism due to cirrhosis and is treated if the platelet count 
falls below 50 × 109/L. Treatment with a splanchnic vasocon-
strictor (such as terlipressin) should be started. Administra-
tion of a prophylactic antibiotic is recommended to prevent 
or treat associated bacterial infection. As soon as the patient 
is haemodynamically stabilised, an upper gastrointestinal 
endoscopy should be performed to establish the diagnosis 
because 50% of patients with portal hypertension will have 
a non-variceal source of bleeding. Variceal bleeding is often 
associated with hepatic encephalopathy and, in these circum-
stances and when bleeding is severe, endotracheal intubation 
Summary box 65.8
Complications of liver trauma
●● Intrahepatic haematoma
●● Liver abscess
●● Bile collection
●● Biliary fistula
●● Hepatic artery aneurysm
●● Arteriovenous fistula
●● Arteriobiliary fistula
●● Liver failure
Figure 65.12  Hepatic aneurysm following liver trauma. An aneu -
rysm arising from the right hepatic artery (arr ow), which can be 
optimally treated by the interventional radiologist using transarterial 
 embolisation. 

11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1163 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1164
will be required to provide definitive airway protection prior 
to endoscopy. Bronchial aspiration is a frequent complication 
of variceal bleeding.
remaining channels allow gastric and oesophageal aspiration. 
The position of the tube is confirmed radiologically. The bal-
loons should be temporarily deflated after 12 hours to prevent 
pressure necrosis of the oesophagus. Aspiration pneumonia 
and oesophageal ulceration are other complications. Balloon 
tamponade is very effective in stopping bleeding and once 
the patient is stabilised, a more definitive treatment can be 
carried out.
Endoscopic treatment of varices
Treatment with a vasoconstrictor combined with endoscopic 
therapy is the standard medical treatment for acute variceal 
bleeding. The two most commonly used endoscopic tech-
niques are endoscopic band ligation, which involves placing 
a constricting rubber band at the base of the varix, and endo-
scopic sclerotherapy, which involves injection of a sclerosant 
into or around the varix. Although both are effective in con-
trolling the bleed, banding is signficantly better in prevent -
ing rebleeding and is the preferred option. The majority of 
variceal bleeds will respond to a single course of endoscopic 
treatment.
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic 
stent shunts
The emergency management of variceal haemorrhage has 
been revolutionised by the introduction of transjugular 
intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunts (TIPSS). Over a 
short period, this has become the main treatment of variceal 
haemorrhage that has not responded to drug treatment and 
endoscopic therapy. The shunts are inserted under local 
anaesthetic, analgesia and sedation, using fluoroscopic guid -
ance and ultrasonography. Via the internal jugular vein and 
SVC, a guidewire is inserted into a hepatic vein and through 
the hepatic parenchyma into a branch of the portal vein. 
The track through the parenchyma is then dilated with a 
balloon catheter to allow insertion of a metallic stent, which 
is expanded once a satisfactory position is achieved (Figure 
65.14) to form a channel between systemic and portal venous 
systems. A satisfactory drop in portal venous pressure is usu -
ally associated with good control of the variceal haemorrhage. 
The main early complication of this technique is perfor  ation 
of the liver capsule, which can be associated with fatal intra-
peritoneal haemorrhage. TIPSS occlusion may result in fur -
ther variceal haemorrhage and occurs more commonly in 
patients with well-compensated liver disease and good syn -
thetic function. Post-shunt encephalopathy is a confusional 
state caused by the portal blood bypassing the detoxification 
of the liver. It occurs in about 40% of patients, a similar inci-
dence to that found after surgical shunts. If severe, the lumen 
of the TIPSS can be reduced by insertion of a smaller stent. 
The main contraindication to TIPSS is portal vein occlusion. 
The main long-term complication of TIPSS is stenosis of the 
shunt, which is common (approximately 50% at 1 year) and 
may present as further variceal haemorrhage.
Robert William Sengstaken Sr ., 1923–1978, neurosurgeon, Garden City, New York, NY, USA.
Arthur Blakemore , 1897–1970, surgeon, The Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.
If the rate of blood loss prohibits endoscopic evaluation, 
a Sengstaken–Blakemore tube may be inserted to provide 
temporary haemostasis (Figure 65.13). Once inserted, the 
gastric balloon is inflated with 300 mL of air and retracted 
to the gastric fundus, where the varices at the oesophagogas -
tric junction are tamponaded by the subsequent inflation of 
the oesophageal balloon to a pressure of 40 mmHg. The two 
Summary box 65.9
Management of bleeding oesophageal varices
●● Blood transfusion
●● Correct coagulopathy
●● Oesophageal balloon tamponade (Sengstaken–Blakemore 
tube)
●● Drug therapy (terlipressin)
●● Endoscopic sclerotherapy or banding
●● Assess portal vein patency (Doppler ultrasound or CT)
●● Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunts (TIPSS)
●● Surgery
Portosystemic shunts
Splenectomy and gastric devascularisation
Oesophageal aspiration
channel
Oesophageal balloon:
40 mmHg 
Gastric balloon: at
least 300 mL of air
Gastric aspiration
channel
Figure 65.13 Oesophageal balloon tamponade with a Sengstaken–
Blakemore tube. The tube should be decompressed every 12 hours 
to prevent necrosis. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1164 25/10/2017   09:49Portal hypertension 1165
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Surgical shunts for variceal haemorrhage
The increasing availability of liver transplantation and 
TIPSS has greatly reduced the indications for surgical shunts. 
It is rarely considered for the acute management of variceal 
haemorrhage, as the morbidity and mortality in these circum-
stances are high. The main current indication for a surgical 
shunt is a patient with CTP grade A cirrhosis, in whom the 
initial bleed has been controlled by sclerotherapy. Long-term 
β-blocker therapy and chronic sclerotherapy or banding are 
the main alternatives. β-blockers lower portal pressure by a 
combination of vasodilation and decreasing cardiac output, 
reducing the risk of subsequent rebleeds.
Surgical shunts are an effective method of preventing 
rebleeding from oesophageal or gastric varices, as they reduce 
the pressure in the portal circulation by diverting the blood 
into the low-pressure systemic circulation. Shunts may be 
divided into selective (e.g. splenorenal) and non-selective 
(e.g. portocaval), the former attempting to preserve blood 
flow to the liver while decompressing the left side of the por -
tal circulation responsible for giving rise to the oesophageal 
and gastric varices (Figure 65.15). Selective shunts are asso-
ciated with a lower incidence of portal systemic encephalop -
athy (PSE), a confusional state commonly found in patients 
with chronic liver disease who have undergone radiological or 
surgical portosystemic shunts. There is no evidence that pro-
phylactic shunting is beneficial in patients with varices that 
have not bled.
Management of recurrent variceal bleeds 
secondary to splenic or portal vein 
thrombosis
Treatment is by splenectomy and gastro-oesophageal devas -
cularisation, in which the bloo d supply to the greater and 
lesser curve of the stomach and lower oesophagus is divided. 
Splenic vein thrombosis may be seen secondary to chronic 
Figure 65.14  A check angiogram following insertion of a TIPSS 
(transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunt) (open arrow). 
Injection of contrast into the portal vein flows thr ough the metallic 
stent and outlines the right hepatic vein. Pressure measurements 
are taken from within the portal vein before and after insertion. Solid 
arrows indicate coils placed at the site of previous embolisation. 

(b)
(c)
(a)
(d)
Figure 65.15 (a–d) Surgical shunts. Surgical shunts for portal hypertension involve shunting portal blood into the systemic veins. This com -
monly involves a side-to-side portocaval anastomosis (a) or end-to-side portocaval (b), mesocaval (c) or splenorenal (d) anastomoses. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1165 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1166
pancreatitis, and portal vein thrombosis is a common late 
complication of liver cirrhosis.
Variceal bleeding and orthotopic liver 
transplantation
Liver transplantation is the only therapy that will treat both 
portal hypertension and the underlying liver disease. The 
management of variceal bleeding should always take into 
account the possibility of liver transplantation when this is 
available. Previous surgical shunts greatly increase the mor -
bidity associated with orthotopic liver transplantation. TIPSS 
would be the preferred management for bleeds resistant to 
sclerotherapy, as long as placement is optimal.
Ascites
The accumulation of ascites is a common feature of advanced 
liver disease independent of the aetiology. The fluid accumu-
lation is usually associated with abdominal discomfort and 
a dragging sensation. Development is usually insidious. The 
aetiology of the ascites must be established.
diuretics should be monitored for the development of hypo -
natraemia and hypokalaemia.
Imaging by CT will confirm the ascites and demonstrate 
the irregular and shrunken nature of a cirrhotic liver and asso-
ciated portal hypertension and splenomegaly. Intravenous 
contrast enhancement will allow abdominal varices to be 
demonstrated and assess patency of the portal vein, as portal 
vein thrombosis is a common predisposing factor to the devel-
opment of ascites in chronic liver disease. In patients without 
evidence of liver disease, malignancy is a common cause, and 
the primary site may also be established on CT. Aspiration of 
the peritoneal fluid allows the measurement of protein con -
tent to determine whether the fluid is an exudate or transu -
date, and an amylase estimation to exclude pancreatic ascites. 
Cytology will determine the presence of malignant cells, and 
both microscopy and culture will exclude primary bacterial 
and tuberculous peritonitis.
Treatment of ascites in chronic liver disease
The initial treatment is to restrict additional salt intake and 
commence diuretics using either spironolactone or furose-
mide. This should be combined with advice on avoiding any 
precipitating factors for impaired liver function, such as alco-
hol intake in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis. Patients on 
Summary box 65.10
Determining the cause of ascites
●● Imaging (ultrasound or CT)
Irregular cirrhotic liver
Portal vein patency
Splenomegaly of cirrhosis
●● Aspiration
Culture and microscopy
Protein content
Cytology
Amylase level
Summary box 65.11
Treatment of ascites in chronic liver disease
●● Salt restriction
●● Diuretics
●● Abdominal paracentesis
●● TIPSS
●● Liver transplantation
Abdominal paracentesis
Patients who fail to respond to diuretic treatment may require 
repeated percutaneous aspiration of large volumes of the asci-
tes (abdominal paracentesis), combined with volume replace-
ment using salt-poor or standard human albumin solution, 
dependent on the serum sodium level. Paracentesis provides 
only short-term symptomatic relief.
TIPSS for ascites
The use of TIPSS for ascites is for symptomatic relief. In 
patients with intractable ascites, TIPSS is a good alternative 
to repeated paracentesis but post-stent encephalopathy is 
common (about 40%), and the majority of stents will stenose 
or thrombose on follow-up (approximately 50% by 1 year).
Liver transplantation for ascites
Diuretic-resistant ascites is an indication for liver transplan -
tation if associated with deterioration in liver function (rising 
bilirubin, dropping albumin, prolonged prothrombin time). 
The patient’s age, underlying aetiology of liver disease and 
associated medical problems will be the major factors deter -
mining suitability for liver transplantation. In those consid -
ered inappropriate for liver transplantation, management is 
aimed at symptomatic control of ascites.
CHRONIC LIVER CONDITIONS
There are several chronic liver conditions, which, although 
rare, are important to recognise because they require a specific 
plan for investigation and treatment, and may present mim -
icking a more common clinical condition (Table 65.4).
Budd–Chiari syndrome
Budd–Chiari syndrome (BCS) is a condition principally 
affecting young females, in which the venous drainage of the 
liver is occluded by hepatic venous thrombosis or obstruction 
from a venous web. As a result of venous outflow obstruction, 
the liver becomes acutely congested, with the development 
of impaired liver function and, subsequently, portal hyperten-
sion, ascites and oesophageal varices. In an acute thrombosis, 
the patient may rapidly progress to fulminant liver failure but, 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1166 25/10/2017   09:49Chronic liver conditions 1167
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
in the majority of cases, abdominal discomfort and ascites are 
the main presenting features. If chronic, the liver progresses 
to established cirrhosis. The cause of the venous thrombosis 
needs to be established, and an underlying myeloprolifera -
tive disorder or procoagulant state is commonly found, such 
as antithrombin 3, protein C or protein S deficiency. The 
diagnosis is commonly suspected in a patient presenting with 
ascites, in whom a CT scan shows a large congested liver or 
a small cirrhotic liver in which there is gross enlargement of 
segment I (the caudate lobe); this feature results from pres -
ervation and hypertrophy of the segment with direct venous 
drainage to the IVC in the face of atrophy of the rest of the 
liver due to venous obstruction. IVC compression or occlu -
sion from the segment I hypertrophy is also a common fea -
ture, as is portal vein thrombosis.
Treatment of BCS must be tailored to the individual 
patient and, in particular, to the stage of disease at presen -
tation. Patients presenting in fulminant liver failure should 
be considered for liver transplantation, as should those with 
established cirrhosis and the complications of portal hyper -
tension. Those in whom cirrhosis is not established may be 
considered for portosystemic shunting by TIPSS. IVC com-
pression may be relieved by the insertion of a retrohepatic 
expandable metallic stent. If the BCS is treated satisfactorily, 
the prognosis of this patient group is largely dependent on the 
underlying aetiology and whether this is amenable to treat -
ment. Patients are usually left on lifelong anticoagulation.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
This condition often presents in young adults with mild 
non-specific symptoms, and biliary disease is suggested by 
the finding of abnormal liver function tests. Rarely, the first 
presentation is with jaundice due to biliary obstruction. The 
disease process results in progressive fibrous stricturing and 
obliteration of both the intrahepatic and the extrahepatic 
bile ducts. Although the aetiology is unknown, a genetic pre-
disposition is likely, owing to its association with ulcerative 
colitis (UC). In patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis 
(PSC) and UC, the condition usually progresses even if the 
diseased colon is removed. The diagnosis is principally based 
on the findings at cholangiography, in which irregular, nar -
rowed bile ducts are demonstrated in both the intrahepatic 
and the extrahepatic biliary tree (Figure 65.16). If the radio-
logical appearances are equivocal, a liver biopsy is required 
to demonstrate the fibrous obliteration of the biliary tracts. 
There is no specific treatment that can reverse the ductal 
changes, and the patients usually slowly progress to progres -
sive cholestasis and death from liver failure. There is a strong 
predisposition to cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) and gallblad-
der cancer, and this should be considered in any patient with 
PSC in whom a new or dominant stricture is demonstrated on 
cholangiography, or in whom gallbladder polyps are identified.
Diagnosis of CCA in PSC is greatly facilitated by bil -
iary brush cytology and direct endoscopic inspection (Spy -
glass, see above), as imaging rarely shows evidence of a mass 
lesion even in patients with advanced CCA. Further, imag-
ing cannot reliably differentiate between inflammatory and 
malignant biliary strictures. Serum CA 19-9 level may be 
increased but the sensitivity of CA 19-9 in detecting CCA 
in PSC is only 60%. Patients with good liver function, no 
dominant strictures and negative biliary cytology may simply 
be monitored for disease progression. The only useful treat -
ment modality is liver transplantation, which is associated 
with excellent results if carried out before bile duct cancer has 
developed. Temporary relief of obstructive jaundice due to a 
dominant bile duct stricture can be achieved by biliary stent-
ing, although there is considerable risk of cholangitis from the 
introduction of bacteria to the biliary tract.
Primary biliary cirrhosis
As with PSC, the presentation of patients with primary biliary 
cirrhosis (PBC) is often hidden, with general malaise, lethargy 
and pruritus prior to the development of clinical jaundice or 
TABLE 65.4 Important chronic liver conditions.
Condition Common presentations
Budd–Chiari syndrome Ascites
Primary sclerosing cholangitis Abnormal LFTs or jaundice
Primary biliary cirrhosis Malaise, lethargy, itching, 
abnormal LFTs
Caroli’s disease Abdominal pain, sepsis
Simple liver cysts Coincidental finding, pain
Polycystic liver disease Hepatomegaly, pain
LFTs, liver function tests.
Figure 65.16  Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). Per cutaneous 
cholangiography showing the characteristic extensive bile duct stric -
tures and dilatations associated with PSC. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1167 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1168
the finding of abnormal liver function tests. The condition 
is largely confined to females. Diagnosis is suggested by the 
finding of circulating antismooth muscle antibodies and, if 
necessary, is confirmed by liver biopsy. The condition is slowly 
progressive, with deterioration in liver function resulting in 
lethargy and malaise. It may be complicated by the develop -
ment of portal hypertension and the secondary complications 
of ascites and variceal bleeding. The mainstay of treatment is 
liver transplantation, which should be considered when the 
patient’s general condition starts to deteriorate with inability 
to lead a normal lifestyle.
Caroli’s disease
This is congenital dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree, 
which is often complicated by the presence of intrahepatic 
stone formation. Presentation may be with abdominal pain or 
sepsis. Imaging is usually diagnostic, with the finding on ultra-
sound or CT of intrahepatic biliary lakes containing stones. 
Biliary stasis and stone formation combine to predispose to 
biliary sepsis, which may be life-threatening. No specific treat-
ment is available. Acute infective episodes are treated with 
antibiotics. Obstructed and septic bile ducts may be drained 
either radiologically or surgically . Malignant change within 
the ductal system results in cholangiocarcinoma, which may 
be amenable to resection. Segmental involvement of the liver 
by Caroli’s disease may be treated by resection of the affected 
part, although the ductal dilatation is usually diffuse. Liver 
transplantation is a radical but definitive treatment.
Simple cystic disease
Simple cysts are generally solitary, and occur more frequently 
in women. Most are incidental findings, and have a charac -
teristic blue hue when seen at laparoscopy. Indications for 
surgical intervention include symptoms, rupture, haemor -
rhage, infection or indeterminate diagnosis. Surgical resection 
typically involves laparoscopic deroofing, with oversewing of 
the cyst wall. Polycystic liver disease is less common. It is 
an autosomal dominant condition, more commonly seen in 
women, and around half of patients will also have poly  cystic 
kidneys. Indications for surgical intervention are broadly 
similar to those for simple cysts, although the large number of 
lesions means that deroofing a single cyst is unlikely to relieve 
symptoms.
LIVER INFECTIONS
Ascending cholangitis
Ascending bacterial infection of the biliary tract is usually 
associated with obstruction and presents with clinical jaun -
dice, rigors and a tender right upper quadrant (Charcot’s 
triad). The diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of dilated 
bile ducts on ultrasound, an obstructive picture of liver 
function tests and the isolation of an organism from the blood 
on culture. The condition is a medical emergency, and delay in 
appropriate treatment results in multiorgan failure secondary 
to septicaemia. Once the diagnosis has been confirmed, the 
patient should be commenced on a first-line broad spectrum 
antibiotic and rehydrated, and arrangements should be 
made for urgent endoscopic or percutaneous transhepatic 
drainage of the biliary tree. Biliary stone disease is a common 
predisposing factor, and the causative ductal stones may 
be removed at the time of endoscopic cholangiography by 
endoscopic sphincterotomy.
Pyogenic liver abscess
The aetiology of a pyogenic liver abscess is unexplained in 
the majority of patients. Common causes include biliary stone 
disease and other causes of intra-abdominal sepsis, including 
appendicitis and diverticular disease. It has an increased inci-
dence in the elderly , diabetics and the immunosuppressed, 
who usually present with anorexia, fevers and malaise, accom-
panied by right upper quadrant discomfort. The diagnosis is 
suggested by the finding of a multiloculated cystic mass on 
ultrasound or CT scan (Figure 65.17) and is confirmed by 
aspiration for culture and sensitivity. The most common 
organisms are Streptococcus milleri and Escherichia coli, but 
other enteric organisms such as Streptococcus faecalis, Klebsiella 
and Proteus vulgaris also occur, and mixed growths are com-
mon. Opportunistic pathogens include staphylococci. Treat-
ment is with antibiotics and ultrasound-guided aspiration. 
First-line antibiotics to be used are a penicillin, aminoglyco-
side and metronidazole or a cephalosporin and metronidazole. 
Often repeated aspirations may be necessary. Percutaneous 
drainage without ultrasound guidance should be performed 
with caution as an empyema may follow drainage through the 
pleural space. A source for the liver abscess should be sought, 
Jacques Caroli , 1902–1979, Professor of Medicine, St Antoine Hospital, Paris, France, described the disease in 1958.
Jean-Martin Charcot , 1825–1893, French neurologist and Professor of Pathology at Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
Figure 65.17 Liver abscess. Computed tomography scan showing 
an air–fluid level and rim enhancement with intravenous contrast typ-
ical of a liver abscess. In the adjacent liver is a calcified hydatid cyst. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1168 25/10/2017   09:49Liver tumours 1169
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
particularly from the colon. Atypical clinical or radiological 
findings should raise the possibility of a necrotic neoplasm.
Amoebic liver abscess
Entamoeba histolytica is endemic in many parts of the world. It 
exists in vegetative form outside the body and is spread by the 
faecal–oral route. The most common presentation is with dys-
entery, but it may also present with an amoebic abscess, the 
common sites being paracaecal and in the liver. The amoebic 
cyst is ingested and develops into the trophozoite form in the 
colon, and then passes through the bowel wall and to the liver 
via the portal blood. Diagnosis is by isolation of the parasite 
from the liver lesion or the stool and confirming its nature by 
microscopy. Often patients with clinical signs of an amoebic 
abscess will be treated empirically with metronidazole (400–
800 mg t.d.s. for 7–10 days) and investigated further only if 
they do not respond. Resolution of the abscess can be moni-
tored using ultrasound.
Hydatid liver disease
This is a very common condition in countries around the 
Mediterranean and Middle East. The causative tapeworm, 
Echinococcus granulosus, is present in the dog intestine, and 
ova are ingested by humans and pass in the portal blood to 
the liver. Liver abscesses are often large by the time of presen-
tation with upper abdominal discomfort or may present after 
minor abdominal trauma as an acute abdomen due to rupture 
of the cyst into the peritoneal cavity. Diagnosis is suggested by 
the finding of a multiloculated cyst on ultrasound and is fur -
ther supported by the finding of a floating membrane within 
the cysts on CT scan (Figure 65.18). Active cysts contain a 
large number of smaller daughter cysts (Figure 65.19), and 
rupture can result in these implanting and growing within 
the peritoneal cavity. Liver cysts can also rupture through 
the diaphragm producing an empyema, into the biliary tract 
producing obstructive jaundice, or into the stomach. Clin -
ical and radiological diagnosis can be supported by serology 
for antibodies to hydatid antigen, in the form of an enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Treatment is indicated 
to prevent progressive enlargement and rupture of the cysts. 
In the first instance, a course of albendazole or mebenda -
zole may be tried. There are many reports that percutaneous 
treatment of hydatid cysts is safe and effective. Percutaneous 
treatment (PAIR) constitutes of an intial course of albenda -
zole followed by puncture of the cyst under image guidance, 
aspiration of the cyst’s contents, instillation of hypertonic 
saline in the cyst cavity and reaspiration. PAIR should only 
be attempted if there is no communication with the biliary 
tree. Failure to respond to medical treatment or percutane-
ous treatment usually requires surgical intervention. The 
surgical options range from liver resection or local excision 
of the cysts to deroofing with evacuation of the contents. 
Contamination of the peritoneal cavity at the time of surgery 
with active hydatid daughters should be avoided by continu -
ing drug therapy with albendazole and adding peroperative 
praziquantel. This should be combined with packing of the 
peritoneal cavity with 20% hypertonic saline-soaked packs 
and instilling 20% hypertonic saline into the cyst before it is 
opened. A biliary communication should be actively sought 
and sutured. The residual cavity may become infected, and 
this may be reduced, as may bile leakage, by packing the space 
with pedicled greater omentum (an omentoplasty). Calci -
fied cysts may well be dead. If doubt exists as to whether a 
suspected cyst is active, it can be followed on ultrasound, as 
active cysts gradually become larger and more superficial in 
the liver. Rupture of daughter hydatids into the biliary tract 
may result in obstructive jaundice or acute cholangitis. This 
may be treated by endoscopic clearance of the daughter cysts 
prior to cyst removal from the liver.
LIVER TUMOURS
Surgical approaches to resection 
of liver tumours
Adequate exposure of the liver is an absolute prerequisite 
to safe liver surgery. A transverse abdominal incision in the 
right upper quadrant with a vertical midline extension to 
the xiphoid provides excellent access to the liver if adequate 
Figure 65.18 Hydatid liver cyst. Active hydatid disease usually pro-
duces a non-calcified liver cyst and, within the cyst, floating layers of 
the germinal membrane can be seen. 
Figure 65.19 Hydatid ‘daughter’ cysts. These were r emoved from 
the bile duct of a patient presenting with obstructive jaundice due 
to a hydatid liver cyst communicating with the bile duct. Endoscopic 
removal should also be considered. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1169 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1170
retraction of the costal margin is employed, using a costal 
margin retractor. If necessary the incision can be extended 
across the midline transversely in the left upper quadrant. 
Thoracoabdominal incisions are very rarely required. The 
procedure for complete mobilisation of the liver is described, 
although this will not be necessary in all cases. There are 
many variations in surgical technique.
Mobilisation of the liver
The falciform ligament is first divided and followed along the 
anterosuperior surface of the liver towards the suprahepatic 
IVC. The left triangular ligament is divided, facilitated by 
placing a swab in front of the oesophagogastric junction. The 
right triangular ligament is then divided by retraction of the 
diaphragm away from the right lobe. On exposure of the bare 
area of the liver, the IVC can be seen as it passes behind the 
liver, and this can be slung above the renal veins below the 
liver and at the level of the main hepatic veins. Mobilisation 
of the liver is completed by division of the lesser omentum. 
Separating the liver from the IVC is achieved by lifting the 
liver anteriorly, to expose the multiple small veins (inferior 
hepatic veins) passing between the liver parenchyma and 
the IVC. These should be suture ligated to ensure haemosta -
sis. This proceeds from above the renal veins until the main 
named hepatic veins are reached below the diaphragm.
Dissection of the hilum
The peritoneum overlying the hilum is divided. The CBD is 
then exposed on the free edge of the lesser omentum, mobil -
isation being facilitated by ligation and division of the cys -
tic duct and artery followed by removal of the gallbladder. 
Slinging the CBD with an elastic sling allows exposure of the 
common hepatic artery and dissection of the main right and 
left branches. These again may be slung to allow the remain -
ing lymphatic tissue surrounding the portal vein to be ligated 
and divided. The possibility of a replaced right hepatic artery 
should be sought arising from the superior mesenteric artery 
and lying posterior to the bile duct (25% of people), and an 
accessory left hepatic artery from the left gastric artery in the 
lesser omentum (25% of people). Dissection of the hilar bile 
ducts requires careful retraction on segment IV of the liver , 
and division of the small vessels and bile duct branches pass-
ing between segment IV and the confluence of the right and 
left hepatic ducts.
Division of the parenchyma: 
hemihepatectomy
Once the liver has been adequately mobilised and the hilar 
vessels have been exposed, the main inflow vessels and bile 
duct to the liver to be resected can be divided. The arterial 
branch, bile duct and portal vein branch are all suture ligated. 
For a hemihepatectomy, division of the inflow vessels in the 
portal pedicle produces a line of demarcation between the 
right and left liver, passing to the right of, and parallel with, 
the falciform ligament. The parenchyma is divided along this 
plane of demarcation, commencing by diathermy of the liver 
capsule. The ultrasound dissector (CUSA ®, Cavitron ultra -
sonic surgical aspirator) is the most common method used for 
division of the parenchyma, but alternative methods includ -
ing stapling, Kelly-clasia crushing and Aquaseal have all been 
used. Prospective evidence suggests there is no difference in 
speed of transection or blood loss between these methods. As 
the parenchyma is divided, vessels and bile duct branches are 
diathermised or ligated depending on their size. Dissection 
continues on until the hepatic vein branches are approached 
from within the liver parenchyma, when they are ligated or 
stapled then divided. Alternatively, the hepatic veins can be 
divided outside the liver at the time of mobilisation (Figure 
65.20).
Segmental and local resections
Traditionally, surgical strategy has involved removal of the 
entire liver segment or hemiliver containing disease, with 
a view to providing the largest possible negative margin. 
Although anatomical resection remains the treatment of 
choice for patients with HCC (Figure 65.21), for those with 
colorectal liver metastasis a parenchymal-sparing non-an -
atomical approach involving multiple metastectomies is 
now considered the standard of care (Figure 65.22). This 
approach has no impact on long-term oncological outcome, 
and preserves liver remnants, so allowing the opportunity for 
further resection in the case of recurrent disease.
Laparoscopic liver resections
Laparoscopic liver surgery aims to provide curative resection 
while minimising postoperative time to recovery. There are 
Figure 65.20 Hepatectomy post resection. Cut surface of the resid-
ual liver following a right hepatectomy in which segments V–VIII have 
been removed. On the lower edge, the portal vein and bile duct can 
be visualised. 
Howard A Kelly , 1858–1943, American gynaecologist, who together with William Osler, William Halstead and William Welsh, was one of the founding  professors 
of Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, MD, USA.
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1170 25/10/2017   09:49Liver tumours 1171
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
no randomised controlled trials comparing laparoscopic and 
open surgery, and so the evidence is based on retrospective 
series. Meta-analysis suggests that blood loss and duration 
of hospital stay are significantly reduced after laparoscopic 
 surgery, with no impact on oncological clearance. Prospective 
studies are underway to validate these findings.
Blood loss and transfusion
The reduction of blood loss during liver surgery has been one 
of the major achievements in the last 20 years, and resection 
is often possible without blood transfusion. Better under -
standing of the segmental anatomy of the liver, better patient 
selection for surgery and low central venous pressure anaes -
thesia (<10 mmHg) have all helped to reduce the need for 
blood transfusions. Better control of the coagulation cascade 
has been achieved using TEG, and the antifibrinolytic drug 
aprotinin has significantly reduced bleeding in patients with 
liver disease and an underlying coagulopathy. Oozing from 
the resected surface of the remnant liver can be reduced by 
the topical application of fibrin glue or fibrin-impregnated 
collagen fleece. The main alternative is use of an argon-beam 
coagulator. Intermittant temporary clamping of the portal vein 
and hepatic artery in the hepatoduodenal ligament (Pringle 
manoeuvre) can reduce blood loss during parenchymal tran -
section. The optimal duration of the Pringle manoeuvre is 
unknown, but it can be applied intermittently, e.g. cycles of 
15 minutes inflow occlusion followed by 5 minutes of reperfu-
sion, until parenchymal transection is complete.
Ablation for liver tumours
Ablative therapies aim to destroy tumour by the direct appli-
cation of energy to discrete lesions and can be perfomed per -
cutaneously, laparoscopically or at open surgery. There is wide 
variation in overall survival and local recurrence rates after 
ablation, so surgery remains the gold standard treatment for 
resectable disease. Despite these concerns, ablation still has 
a role as an adjunct to resection. Patients with small volume 
resectable lesions who are not sufficiently fit to undergo liver 
resection should be considered for ablation, as should those 
with limited liver metastases who have insufficient liver vol -
ume to undergo resection. In addition, a combined resection/
ablation approach has also been advocated.
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is the most widely used 
ablative technique and relies on direct current transmission 
through tissue to generate heat and ablation of the tumour. 
Increasing lesion size leads to exponential increases in resis -
tance to current, limiting the size of the effective ablation 
zone and explaining the increased risk of local recurrence 
and diminished survival with lesions >3 cm. Microwave abla-
tion has been designed to overcome some of the limitations 
of RFA and offers higher intratumoural temperatures, larger 
tumour ablation volumes and faster ablation times. Despite 
this, local recurrence after microwave ablation has been 
reported at between 5% and 13%.
Benign liver tumours
Haemangiomas
These are the most common liver lesions, and the reported 
incidence has increased with the widespread availability of 
Figure 65.21 (a, b) Segmental resection. Removal of a primary liver 
tumour by resection of liver segment VI in a patient with well-compen-
sated liver cirrhosis. 
(a)
(b)
Figure 65.22 Combined anatomical and non-anatomical resection 
with formal right hemihepatectomy and multiple metastectomies. 
Sparing the maximal amount of parenchyma is critical for patients 
with colorectal liver metastases, as it maximises the chance of further 
resection in the event of disease recurrence. 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1171 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1172
diagnostic ultrasound. They consist of an abnormal plexus of 
vessels, and their nature is usually apparent on ultrasound. 
If diagnostic uncertainty exists, CT scanning with delayed 
contrast enhancement shows the characteristic appearance of 
slow contrast enhancement due to small vessel uptake in the 
haemangioma. Often, haemangiomas are multiple. Lesions 
found incidentally require radiological confirmation of their 
nature and no further treatment. The management of ‘giant’ 
haemangiomas is more controversial. Occasional reports of 
rupture of haemangiomas have led some to consider resection 
for large lesions, especially if they appear to be symptomatic. 
Diagnosis is usually incidental, and surgical resection only 
recommended if patients are significantly symptomatic or 
significant diagnostic uncertainty remains after multimodal 
imaging.
Hepatic adenoma
Adenomas are benign liver tumours seen almost exclusively in 
women aged between 25 and 50 years. These well-defined and 
vascular lesions are classically associated with use of the oral 
contraceptive pill, and are generally solitary. The majority are 
found incidentally on imaging, although up to one-third may 
present with pain because of rupture or bleeding. Adenomas 
are recognised as having malignant potential, with up to 10% 
developing into hepatocellular carcinoma. The risk of rupture 
and malignancy means that surgical excision is generally rec-
ommended if >5 cm in size, although some lesions may regress 
after discontinuation of the oral contraceptive pill.
Focal nodular hyperplasia
Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) is an unusual but not 
uncommon benign condition of unknown aetiology, in which 
there is a focal overgrowth of functioning liver tissue sup-
ported by fibrous stroma. Patients are usually middle-aged 
females, and there is no association with underlying liver 
disease. Ultrasound shows a solid tumour mass. Contrast 
CT or MRI may show central scarring and a hypervascular 
lesion. FNH contains both hepatocytes and Kupffer cells. 
MRI using liver-specific contrast agents, such as gadoxetic 
acid, which is taken up by hepatocytes and excreted in bile, 
or superparamagnetic iron oxide, which is taken up by Kupffer 
cells, may be useful in determining the hepatocellular origin 
of FNH and allowing differentiation of FNH from metastatic 
cancer. FNH does not have any malignant potential and once 
the diagnosis is confirmed, does not require any treatment or 
follow-up.
Colorectal liver metastases
T wenty years ago, a diagnosis of stage IV (metastatic) colorec-
tal cancer was associated with a survival of less than 3% at 5 
years. A small minority of patients with liver-only metastatic 
disease were offered surgical resection and these patients had 
a 50% chance of being alive after 5 years. These excellent 
long-term outcomes highlighted the potential survival bene-
fits of resection in appropriate cases, and lead to a revolution 
in the approach to metastatic colorectal disease. Instead of a 
terminal diagnosis, it was recognised that in certain situations 
resection could offer a cure.
Around 30% of patients with colorectal cancer will have 
metastatic disease at the time of presentation, and a further 
20% will develop liver disease after the primary colorec -
tal malignancy has been resected. In 2016, 20% of these 
patients will be candidates for upfront curative liver surgery 
and a further 20–30% of patients with initially unresectable 
liver disease may achieve a response to systemic therapy of 
sufficient magnitude to render the liver disease resectable 
(see below).
Defining resectability for colorectal liver 
metastases
Previously, patients with synchronous disease, rectal primary, 
multiple diffuse metastases, metastases larger than 5  cm, 
disease-free interval of less than 1 year from the diagnosis of 
primary disease or a high serum carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA) were considered irresectable and suitable only for 
palliative treatment. Mo dern surgical techniques and che -
motherapeutic regimes mean none of these contraindications 
now hold true.
Resectability with curative intent is now loosely defined 
as the ability to successfully remove all residual disease from 
the liver with clear surgical margins, while leaving adequate 
disease-free viable liver tissue to sustain life. Technical con -
traindications to resection are related to the anatomical loca-
tion of metastases, mainly due to close proximity to major 
vascular or biliary drainage structures. The boundaries of 
technical resectability have been extended by the develop -
ment of techniques such as total vascular exclusion, which 
offer hope for certain patients with involvement of major ves-
sels. Resection with a negative surgical margin of 1 cm (R0) 
has always been considered the gold standard, but in an era 
of effective modern chemotherapy, patients with R1 (micro -
scopically negative) resection have similar survival to those 
with R0 resections. A future liver remnant (FLR) of 25% pre-
operative volume is considered sufficient to prevent postoper-
ative hepatic failure, although patients with impaired hepatic 
function, including those with chemotherapy-induced liver 
damage, may require a larger FLR. The regenerative nature 
of liver parenchyma means that significant regrowth takes 
place after resection, and this unique feature means that two-
stage procedures are feasible, with parenchymal regeneration 
between resections ensuring adequate FLR. This regenerative 
capacity can be further manipulated further using preopera -
tive portal vein embolisation (PVE) to cause reactive hyper -
trophy in the proposed FLR.
The ALPPS procedure (associating liver partition and 
portal vein ligation for staged hepatectomy) combines both 
these procedures, maximising hypertrophy of the FLR, but 
is associated with significant operative mortality (10%) and 
morbidity (>50%). For some patients, a combination of resec-
tion and thermal ablation may also offer long-term benefits.
Oncological contraindications to hepatic resection 
include unresectable extrahepatic malignancy. T wenty years 
ago, any extrahepatic metastatic disease was considered a con-
traindication to liver resection. However, long-term survival 
is now possible in selected groups of patients with resected 
extrahepatic disease. Survival after lung resection for colorec-
tal metastases is similar to that seen after liver resection, with 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1172 25/10/2017   09:49Liver tumours 1173
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
most series quoting a 5-year survival in the order of 40–50%, 
with low operative morbidity and mortality.
Staging and selection of patients for liver 
surgery
Patients with colorectal liver metastases must be fully staged 
prior to any treatment plan and this should be coordinated 
by a specialist multidisciplinary team. Routine staging com -
monly involves triple phase CT chest/abdomen/pelvis (Fig-
ure 65.23), contrast MRI scan of the liver and whole body 
PET-CT to identify metastatic disease.
Chemotherapy for colorectal liver 
metastases
The precise role of adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemother -
apy in the management of resectable disease remains con -
troversial. Current consensus is that the majority of patients 
with colorectal liver metastases should receive perioperative 
chemotherapy irrespective of their initial resectability, with 
the rationale that this will result in the destruction of occult 
disease, and allow a test of biology where progression despite 
chemotherapy signifies poorer prognosis, as well as reducing 
lesion size and so improving resectability.
A major development in the chemotherapeutic manage-
ment of advanced disease over the last 20 years has been the 
recognition that there is a subgroup of patients who may not 
be resectable at presentation, but become resectable after 
systemic chemotherapy as lesions decrease in size and move 
away from critical vascular and biliary structures. Resectabil -
ity rates after chemotherapy for initially irresectable disease 
vary widely from 6% to 60%. Attempting to convert irresect-
able disease into resectable is a worthwhile aim, with 5-year 
survival around 35–50% if liver resection becomes feasible, 
similar to those patients who are able undergo resection at the 
time of presentation. Chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5FU) 
and folinic acid produces a response rate of approximately 
30% but, when combined with oxaliplatin, the response rate 
increases to 50–60%, often with a dramatic size reduction of 
the lesions. The combination of chemotherapy with mono -
clonal antibodies (mAbs) that recognise vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor (VEGFR) or the epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) may provide additional benefit.
Hepatocellular carcinoma
HCC comprises the overwhelming majority of primary liver 
cancers, with a steadily rising global burden. There is wide 
variation in the geographical incidence of HCC, with >80% of 
cases occurring in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, with an inci-
dence of 99 per 100 000. By contrast, the incidence in Europe 
is considerably lower (approximately 5 per 100  000). The 
wide variations in distribution reflect the varying incidence 
of aetiological factors known to be integral to the develop-
ment of hepatocellular carcinogenesis (Table 65.5 ). Chronic 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection accounts for >50% of cases 
of HCC worldwide. HBV as a risk factor for HCC is supported 
by strong evidence that HBV vaccination programmes have 
led to falls in the incidence of HCC in high-risk areas such 
as Hong Kong. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) increases the risk 
of HCC by 17 times, primarily by promoting end-stage liver 
disease. There is clear evidence that lifetime alcohol exposure 
correlates with the incidence of HCC. Hepatic metabolism of 
alcohol is thought to lead to the production of free radicals, 
causing intracellular oxidative stress eventually leading to a 
chronic inflammatory state. Because of the critical role of the 
liver in glucose metabolism, it is not surprising that obesity 
and diabetes mellitus (both of which involve impaired glu -
cose handling) are significant independent risk factors for the 
development of HCC, and the global rise in obesity and dia -
betes is likely to lead to a significant increase in HCC devel -
oping on a background of hepatic non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD).
Figure 65.23  Colorectal liver metastases on a computed tomo -
graphy scan. 
TABLE 65.5 Liver infections and their treatment.
Condition Causative agent Treatment
Viral hepatitis Hepatitis A, B, C Supportive, antiviral 
agents (lamivudine, 
interferon, ribavirin)
Liver transplant for 
cirrhosis
Ascending 
cholangitis
Enteric bacteria Antibiotics 
(cephalosporin)
Relieve obstruction
Pyogenic liver 
abscess
Streptococcus milleri Antibiotics
Escherichia coli Aspiration
Streptococcus faecalis Drainage
Amoebic liver 
abscess
Entamoeba Metronidazole
Hydatid liver 
disease
Echinococcus Mebendazole, 
Resection/omentoplasty
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1173 25/10/2017   09:49CHAPTER 65  The liver
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1174
Cohort studies have suggested that 60% of patients with 
HCC die of cancer-related causes, with the remaining 40% 
succumbing to underlying parenchymal liver disease. It is 
therefore critical that treatments for patients with HCC are 
considered in the context of both the cancer and the underly-
ing parenchymal disease.
Staging of hepatocellular carcinoma
Clinical staging systems for HCC are often designed to guide 
choice of therapy , the most commonly used being the Bar -
celona Clinic Liver Group (BCLC) staging system, which 
was initially designed to define both prognosis and optimal 
treatment for patients with HCC (Figure 65.24). As patients 
with HCC usually have underlying liver disease as well as can-
cer (both of which have a marked impact on prognosis), the 
BCLC system was designed to reflect underlying liver func -
tion and patient performance status as well as characteristics 
of the tumour. Underlying liver function is assessed using the 
CTP system (see Table 65.2).
Surgical resection for HCC
Only 20–40% of patients with HCC are considered candi -
dates for surgical resection. However, with the introduction of 
surveillance programmes for those patients identified to be at 
risk, improved imaging and better perioperative management, 
surgical resection is increasingly considered the mainstay of 
treatment for patients with preserved hepatic function.
Considerable controversy remains over which patients 
should be considered surgical candidates. Although tumour 
size, vascular invasion and multifocal disease are recognised as 
poor prognostic indicators, none is considered an absolute con-
traindication to surgical intervention. Multinodular lesions 
present a particular management challenge. These may repre-
sent multiple discrete lesions occurring independently against 
a background of procarcinogenic parenchymal damage, or 
may represent aggressive tumour biology with intrahepatic 
metastases.
In general, oncological contraindications to resection 
now include: (1) extrahepatic metastasis; (2) multiple and 
HCC
Stage 0
PST 0, Child–Pugh A
Stage A–C
PST 0–2, Child–Pugh A–B
Stage D
PST >2, Child–Pugh C
Intermediate stage (B)
Multinodular
PST 0
Early stage (A)
Single or 3 nodules <3cm
PST 0
Very early stage (0)
Single <2cm
Carcinoma in situ
Advanced stage (C)
Portal invasion
N1, M1, PST 1–2
Terminal stage (D)
3 nodules <3cm
Associated diseases
Single
Normal
Resection TACERF/PEI Sorafenib Best supportive care
Target: 10%
OS: <3 months
Target: 40%
OS: 11 months
(SD 6–14)
Target: 20%
OS: 20 months
(SD 14–45)
Curative treatment (30–40%)
Median OS >60 months; 5-year survival: 40–70%
Liver transplantation
(DDLT/LDLT)
Portal pressure
and/or bilirubin
Increased
No Yes
Figure 65.24 The Barcelona Clinic Liver Group staging system for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Patients with asymp-
tomatic early tumours (stage 0–A) are candidates for curative therapies (r esection, transplantation or local ablation). Asymptomatic patients 
with multinodular HCC (stage B) are suitable for chemoembolisation (TACE), whereas patients with advanced symptomatic tumours and/or an 
invasive tumoural pattern (stage C) are candidates for sorafenib. End-stage disease (stage D) includes patients with grim prognosis who should 
be treated by best supportive care. DDLT, deceased donor liver transplantation; LDLT, living donor liver transplantation; OS, overall survival; 
PEI, percutaneous ethanol injection; PST, ECOG performance status; RF , radiofrequency ablation; SD, standard deviation; TACE, transcatheter 
arterial chemoembolisation. (Reproduced with permission from Villanueva A. Medical therapies for hepatocellular carcinoma: a critical view of 
the evidence. Nature Rev Gastroenterolol Hepatol 2013; 10: 34–42). 
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1174 25/10/2017   09:49Further reading 1175
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
bilobar tumours; (3) involvement of the main bile duct; and 
(4) presence of tumour thrombus in the main portal vein/
vena cava. However, reasonable long-term outcomes from 
highly selected patients outside these contraindications have 
also been reported.
Preoperative evaluation of patients with HCC
Ensuring good outcome for patients undergoing surgical 
resection for HCC relies on an accurate assessment of tumour 
stage, patient fitness and underlying liver function. This is 
particularly important when considering patients for larger 
resections, where the function of the FLR becomes critical. 
Postoperative morbidity and mortality are known to increase 
with a higher CTP score, and major liver resection is gener -
ally only considered feasible in patients with CTPA disease. 
Minor liver resection may be considered in CTP grade B, but 
remains a high-risk procedure. CTP grade C score patients 
are not candidates for liver resection. For some patients, inad-
equate FLR may the only contraindication to surgical resec -
tion. For this group, preoperative radiological portal vein 
embolisation can be performed to induce hypertrophy in the 
proposed remnant liver, increasing the FLR.
Preoperative imaging for HCC
Imaging is a critical part of the pretreatment assessment of 
HCC. Accurate tumour staging and anatomical assessment is 
essential, to determine both technical and oncological resect-
ability, as well as to exclude distant metastatic spread. Triple 
phase CT chest/abdomen/pelvis and MRI of the liver is con-
sidered standard of care in most units. However, both MRI 
and CT have limited sensitivity and specificity for detection 
of lesions <1 cm, although this is improved with the use of 
liver-specific contrast agents. There is also growing interest in 
the assessment of background liver fibrosis and cirrhosis with 
functional imaging techniques that use hepatospecific con -
trast medium. The use of FDG-PET to exclude extrahepatic 
involvement has been investigated, but it remains unclear 
whether this offers any benefit over standard CT chest/abdo-
men/pelvis.
Surgical principles for HCC
The objectives of surgical resection for HCC can appear 
contradictory: (1) resection of all malignant and as much 
preneoplastic tissue as possible; and (2) preserving enough 
functional hepatic parenchyma to reduce the risk of postop -
erative liver failure. HCC spreads within the liver by direct 
invasion of both the portal and hepatic venous systems, and 
anatomical resection that includes removal of the entire 
venous drainage of a HCC is therefore considered the optimal 
approach to increase the removal of occult micrometastases . 
There is a clear long-term survival advantage to anatomical 
versus non-anatomical resection, and this approach is now 
considered standard of care where underlying liver func -
tion allows. Improvements in patient selection and surgical 
 technique have led to a reduction in mortality, with 30-day 
postoperative death rates consistently quoted as <5%, includ-
ing patients with underlying cirrhosis.
Disease recurrence after resection
Intrahepatic recurrence occurs in around 80% of cases within 
5 years of resection. There are no effective neoadjuvant or 
adjuvant treatment options to reduce the risk of recurrence 
after resection. Intrahepatic recurrence after surgery is 
thought to consist of two discrete groups: patients who had 
missed micrometastases at initial staging, and those who 
developed lesions de novo in diseased background liver. The 
most effective approach to reducing intrahepatic recurrence 
of HCC is to remove both of these possibilities by performing 
liver transplantation.
Liver transplantation
Liver transplantation for HCC offers the advantage of not 
only definitively treating the tumour but also removing the 
diseased hepatic parenchyma, so reducing the potential for 
intrahepatic recurrence. The concept of organ transplanta-
tion for primary liver cancer was first described by Mazzaferro 
in 1996, who performed liver transplantation for patients with 
one hepatocellular carcinoma of ≤5  cm, or up to three nod -
ules of ≤3  cm, and reported a 4-year overall survival of 75% 
and recurrence-free survival of 83%. Other groups have since 
replicated these results, and these inclusion criteria (Milan 
criteria) are now considered the benchmark indications for 
transplantation for HCC. Patients outside these criteria can 
also be successfully downstaged using locoregional therapies 
(such as ablation), and following a period of observation with 
adequate disease control may be considered suitable candi -
dates for transplantation.
FURTHER READING
Belghiti J, Clavien PA, Gadzijev E et al. The Brisbane 2000 terminol-
ogy of liver anatomy and resections terminology committee of the 
international hepato-pancreato-biliary association: Chairman, SM 
Strasberg (USA). HPB 2000; 2(3): 333–9.
Clavien PA. Recommendations for liver transplantation for hepatocel -
lular carcinoma: an international consensus statement. Lancet Oncol 
2012; 13(1): 11–22.
Forner A, Llovet JM, Bruix J. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet 2012; 
379(9822): 1245–55.
Franklin JM, Sharma RA, Harris AL, Gleeson FV . Imaging oligomet -
astatic cancer before local treatment. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17(9): 
406–14.
Jarnagin W . Surgical treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma: expert con-
sensus statement. HPB 2010; 12(5):302–10.
Jones RP , Brudvik KW , Franklin JM, Poston GJ. Precision surgery for 
colorectal liver metastases: opportunities and challenges of omics-
based decision making. Eur Journ Surg Oncol 2017; 43(5): 875–83.
Jones RP , Poston GJ. Resection of liver metastases in colorectal cancer 
in the era of expanding systemic therapy. Ann Rev Med 2017; 68: 
183–96.
Vincenzo Mazzaferro , contemporary surgeon, Milan, Italy.
11_65-B&L27_Pt11_Ch65.indd   1175 25/10/2017   09:49Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The function of the spleen
 • The common pathologies involving the spleen
 • The principles and potential complications of 
splenectomy
 • The potential advantages of laparoscopic splenectomy
 • The benefits of splenic conservation
 • The importance of prophylaxis against infection 
following splenectomy
The spleen
66
EMBRYOLOGY, ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
Embryology
Fetal splenic tissue develops from condensations of mesoderm 
in the dorsal mesogastrium. This peritoneal fold attaches the 
dorsal body wall to the fusiform swelling in the foregut that 
develops into the stomach. This condensation divides the 
mesogastrium into two parts, one between the fetal splenic 
tissue and the stomach to form the gastrosplenic ligament and 
the other between it and the left kidney to form the lieno­
renal ligament.
Anatomy
The weight of the normal adult spleen is 75–250 g and it mea­
sures up to 10 × 7 × 3  cm. It lies in the left hypochondrium 
between the gastric fundus and the left hemidiaphragm, with 
its long axis lying along the 10th rib. The hilum sits in the 
angle between the stomach and the kidney and is in contact 
with the tail of the pancreas. The concave visceral surface lies 
in contact with these structures, and the lower pole extends 
no further than the mid ­axillary line. There is a notch on 
the inferolateral border, and this may be palpated when the 
spleen is enlarged. The tortuous splenic artery arises from 
the coeliac axis, usually from a common stem with a hepatic 
artery, and runs along the upper border of the body and tail 
of the pancreas, to which it gives small branches. The short 
gastric and left gastroepiploic branches pass between the lay ­
ers of the gastrosplenic ligament. The main splenic artery 
generally divides into superior and inferior branches, which, 
in turn, subdivide into several segmental branches (Figure 
66.1).
The splenic vein is formed from several tributaries that 
drain the hilum. The vein runs behind the pancreas, receiv ­
ing several small tributaries from the pancreas before joining 
the superior mesenteric vein at the neck of the pancreas to 
form the portal vein.
The splenic pulp is invested by an external serous and 
internal fibroelastic coat which is reflected inwards at the 
hilum onto the vessels to form vascular sheaths. The lym ­
phatic drainage comprises efferent vessels in the white pulp 
that run with the arterioles and emerge from nodes at the 
hilum. These nodes and lymphatics drain via retropancreatic 
nodes to the coeliac nodes.
Sympathetic nerve fibres run from the coeliac plexus and 
innervate splenic arterial branches.
Physiology
The splenic parenchyma consists of white and red pulp that is 
surrounded by serosa and a collagenous capsule with smooth 
muscle fibres. These penetrate the parenchyma as trabeculae 
of dense connective tissue fibres rich in collagen and elastic 
tissue. These, with the reticular framework, support the cells 
of the spleen and surround the vessels in the splenic pulp. The 
white pulp comprises a central trabecular artery surrounded 
by nodules with germinal centres and periarterial lymphatic 
sheaths that provide a framework filled with lymphocytes and 
macrophages. Arteries from the central artery and the periph­
eral ‘penicillar’ arteries pass into the marginal zone that lies at 
the edge of the white pulp. Plasma­rich blood that has passed 
through the central lymphatic nodules is filtered as it passes 
through the sinuses within the marginal zone, and particles 
are phagocytosed.
Immunoglobulins produced in the lymphatic nodules 
enter the circulation through the sinuses in the marginal 
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1176 25/10/2017   09:50Functions of the spleen 1177
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
zone, beyond which lies the red pulp, which consists of cords 
and sinuses. Cell­concentrated blood passes in the trabecular 
artery through the centre of the white pulp to the red pulp 
cords. Red cells must elongate and become thinner to pass 
from the cords to the sinuses, a process that removes abnor ­
mally shaped cells from the circulation (Figure 66.2). As 
90% of the blood passing through the spleen moves through 
an open circulation in which blood flows from arteries to 
cords, and thence sinuses, splenic pulp pressure reflects the 
pressure throughout the portal system. The remaining 10% 
of the blood flow through the spleen bypasses the cords and 
sinuses by direct arteriovenous communications. The overall 
flow rate of blood is about 300 mL/min.
FUNCTIONS OF THE SPLEEN
Although the spleen was previously thought to be dispensable, 
increasing knowledge of its function has led to a conservative 
approach in the management of conditions involving the 
spleen. It is now recognised that an incidental splenectomy 
during the course of another operative procedure increases 
the risk of complication and death. The surgeon should there­
fore normally endeavour to preserve the spleen to maintain 
the following functions:
 ● Immune function. The spleen contains 66.5% and 
10–15% of the body’ s total T and B lymphocyte popula ­
tion, respectively. It processes foreign antigens and is the 
Stomach
(cut)
Diaphragm
9th rib
Spleen
Tail of pancreas
Tranverse colon
Short gastric vessels
in gastrosplenic
ligamentSuprarenal
gland
Splenorenal
ligament
Attachment of
transverse mesocolon
(cut)
Left kidney
Splenic artery
and vein
Figure 66.1 Anatomy of the spleen.
Capsule
 Trabecula
Vascular sinusoid
Red pulp
Vein Artery
Germinal centre
Primary follicle
White pulp
Marginal zone
Periarteriolar
lymphoid sheath 
(PALS)
Figure 66.2 Functional anatomy of the spleen. Blood from a central trabecular artery passes through the 
white pulp into the surr ounding red pulp and hence to the vascular cords and sinuses that drain into the 
trabecular vein.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1177 25/10/2017   09:50CHAPTER 66  The spleen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1178
major site of specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) produc ­
tion. The non­specific opsonins, properdin and tuftsin, are 
synthesised. These antibodies are of B ­ and T­cell origin 
and bind to the specific receptors on the surface of macro­
phages and leukocytes, stimulating their phagocytic, bac ­
tericidal and tumoricidal activity.
 ● Filter function. Macrophages in the reticulum capture 
cellular and non ­cellular material from the blood and 
plasma. This will include the removal of effete plate ­
lets and red blood cells. This process takes place in the 
sinuses and the splenic cords by the action of the endo ­
thelial macrophages. Iron is removed from the degraded 
haemoglobin during red cell breakdown and is returned to 
plasma. Removed non­cellular material may include bac ­
teria and, in particular, pneumococci.
 ● Pitting. Particulate inclusions from red cells are removed, 
and the repaired red cells are returned to the circulation. 
These include Howell–Jolly and Heinz bodies, which rep­
resent nuclear remnants and precipitated haemoglobin or 
globin subunits, respectively.
 ● Reservoir function . This function in humans is less 
marked than in other species, but the spleen does con ­
tain approximately 8% of the red cell mass. An enlarged 
spleen may contain a much larger proportion of the blood 
volume.
 ● Cytopoiesis. From the fourth month of intrauterine life, 
some degree of haemopoiesis occurs in the fetal spleen. 
Stimulation of the white pulp may occur following anti ­
genic challenge, resulting in the proliferation of T and B 
cells and macrophages. This may also occur in myelopro ­
liferative disorders, thalassaemias and chronic haemolytic 
anaemias.
portal hypertension caused by cirrhosis is diagnosed on the 
history, physical signs of liver dysfunction, abnormal tests of 
liver function, often anaemia, leukopenia and thrombocyto ­
penia, as well as endoscopic evidence of oesophageal varices. 
Sinistral or segmental portal hypertension may result from 
isolated occlusion of the splenic vein by thrombosis, pancre ­
atic inflammation or tumour infiltration. As many conditions 
that cause splenomegaly are associated with lymphadenopa ­
thy, investigation should be directed at those disease processes 
known to be associated with both physical signs. Lymph node 
biopsy may be required.
Radiological imaging
Plain radiology is rarely used in investigation, but the inci­
dental finding of calcification of the splenic artery or spleen 
may raise the possible diagnosis of a splenic artery aneurysm, 
an old infarct, a benign cyst or hydatid disease. Multiple areas 
of calcification may suggest splenic tuberculosis. Ultrasonog ­
raphy can determine the size and consistency of the spleen, 
and whether a cyst is present. However, computed tomog ­
raphy (CT) with contrast enhancement is more commonly 
undertaken to better characterise the nature of the suspected 
splenic pathology and to exclude other intra ­abdominal 
pathology. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be sim ­
ilarly useful. Radioisotope scanning is used occasionally to 
provide information about the spleen. The use of techne ­
tium­99m ( 99mTc)­labelled colloid is normally restricted to 
determining whether the spleen is a significant site of destruc­
tion of red blood cells.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES 
OF THE SPLEEN
Splenic agenesis is rare but is present in 5% of children with 
congenital heart disease. Polysplenia is a rare condition 
resulting from failure of splenic fusion.
Splenunculi are single or multiple accessory spleens that 
are found in approximately 10–30% of the population. They 
are located near the hilum of the spleen in 50% of cases and 
are related to the splenic vessels, or behind the tail of the pan­
creas in 30%. The remainder are located in the mesocolon, 
greater omentum or the splenic ligaments. Their significance 
lies in the fact that failure to identify and remove these at the 
time of splenectomy may give rise to persistent disease.
Hamartomas are rarely found in life and vary in size 
from 1 cm in diameter to masses large enough to produce an 
abdominal swelling. One form is mainly lymphoid and resem­
bles the white pulp, whereas the other resembles the red pulp.
Non­parasitic splenic cysts are rare. Splenic cysts are 
classified as primary cysts (true) or pseudocysts (secondary) 
on the basis of the presence or absence of lining epithelium. 
True cysts form from embryonal rests and include dermoid 
Summary box 66.1
Functions of the spleen
●● Immune
●● Filter function
●● Pitting
●● Reservoir
●● Cytopoiesis
INVESTIGATION OF THE SPLEEN
Conditions that result in splenomegaly can be diagnosed on 
the basis of the history and examination findings and from 
laboratory examination. In haemolytic anaemia, a full blood 
count, reticulocyte count and tests for haemolysis will deter ­
mine the cause of the anaemia. Splenomegaly associated with 
William Henry Howell , 1860–1945, Professor of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Justin Marie Jules Jolly , 1870–1953, Professor of Histopathology, College de France, Paris, France.
Robert Heinz , 1865–1962, Professor of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Erlangen, Germany.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1178 25/10/2017   09:50Splenic artery aneurysm, infar ct and rupture 1179
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
and mesenchymal inclusion cysts (Figure 66.3). True cysts of 
the spleen are very rare, and are frequently classified as cystic 
haemangiomas, cystic lymphangiomas, and epidermoid and 
dermoid cysts. Epidermoid cysts are thought to be of congen­
ital origin and represent 10% of splenic cysts. They are lined 
by flattened squamous epithelium and more frequent in chil­
dren and young patients. Splenectomy or partial splenectomy 
is usually considered for cysts larger than 5  cm in diameter. 
These should be differentiated from false or secondary cysts 
that may result from trauma and contain serous or haemor ­
rhagic fluid. The walls of such degenerative cysts may be cal ­
cified and therefore resemble the radiological appearances of 
a hydatid cyst. The spleen is also a common site for pseudo ­
cyst development following a severe attack of pancreatitis  
(Figure 66.4). Pseudocysts can easily be diagnosed on scan­
ning, and intervention is normally required for symptomatic 
lesions that persist following a period of observation.
SPLENIC ARTERY ANEURYSM, 
INFARCT AND RUPTURE
Splenic artery aneurysm
Aneurysms involving the splenic artery are estimated to be 
identified at 0.04–1% of postmortem examinations. They are 
twice as common in women and are usually situated in the 
main arterial trunk. Although these are generally single, more 
than one aneurysm is found in one ­quarter of cases. These 
may be a consequence of intra ­abdominal sepsis and pancre­
atic necrosis, in particular. They are more likely to be associ­
ated with arteriosclerosis in elderly patients.
The aneurysm is symptomless unless it ruptures and is 
more likely to be detected on a plain abdominal radiograph 
or scan. It is unlikely to be palpable, although a bruit may 
be present. Rupture is unsuspected in the majority of cases 
and, as it will generally rupture into the peritoneal cavity, the 
symptoms mimic those of splenic rupture. Almost half the 
cases of rupture occur in patients younger than 45 years of 
age, and one­quarter are in pregnant women, usually in the 
third trimester of pregnancy or at labour. Aneurysmal rupture 
carries a high mortality rate and this increases disproportion­
ately in pregnant women, with almost inevitable fetal death.
The treatment of choice previously consisted of sple ­
nectomy and removal of the diseased artery . Some surgeons 
advocate ligation of the proximal and distal ends of the sac 
to allow thrombosis of the aneurysm and partial or complete 
splenectomy, if necessary. The procedure has been performed 
laparoscopically with success. Embolisation or endovascular 
stenting following selective splenic artery angiography can be 
considered, and is now more commonly undertaken. In the 
younger patient with an asymptomatic splenic artery aneu ­
rysm, surgery or interventional radiology is indicated depend­
ing on local expertise after CT scan, MRI or selective coeliac 
angiography has confirmed the diagnosis (Figure 66.5). In 
the elderly patient with a calcified aneurysm, there is less risk 
of rupture, and observation may be preferred. In patients with 
pancreatic necrosis, the treatment will include drainage of 
the septic focus.
Splenic infarction
This condition commonly occurs in patients with a mas ­
sively enlarged spleen from myeloproliferative syndrome, 
portal hypertension or vascular occlusion produced by pre ­
vious surgical intervention (such as spleen ­preserving distal 
pancreatectomy), pancreatic disease, splenic vein thrombo ­
sis or sickle cell disease. The infarct may be asymptomatic 
or give rise to left upper quadrant and left shoulder tip pain. 
Contrast­enhanced CT will show the characteristic perfu ­
sion defect in the enlarged spleen (Figure 66.6). Treatment 
is conservative, and splenectomy should be considered only 
when a septic infarct causes an abscess.
Figure 66.3  Computed tomography scan showing multiple low-  
density areas in the spleen consistent with multiple benign splenic 
cysts.
Figure 66.4 Computed tomography scan showing a lar ge pseudo-
cyst involving the spleen. There is displacement of the stomach medi-
ally, and a trace of ascitic fluid is present above the liver.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1179 25/10/2017   09:50CHAPTER 66  The spleen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1180
Splenic rupture
Splenic rupture should be considered in any case of blunt 
abdominal trauma, particularly when the injury occurs to 
the left upper quadrant of the abdomen. Iatrogenic injury to 
the spleen remains a frequent complication of any surgical 
procedure, particularly those in the left upper quadrant when 
adhesions are present.
Rupture of a malarial spleen
In tropical countries, rupture of a spleen enlarged due to 
malaria is not uncommon (see Tropical spleen, below) . 
Delayed presentation following a ‘trivial’ injury is not infre ­
quent. In such patients, radiological embolisation may be 
performed if available, and splenectomy should be considered 
before a perisplenic haematoma ruptures, a complication that 
is associated with a worse prognosis.
Surgery in such patients is challenging, and early ligation 
of the splenic vessels along the superior border of the pancre­
atic body should be considered before disturbing the haema­
toma.
SPLENOMEGAL Y AND 
HYPERSPLENISM
Splenomegaly is a common feature of many disease processes, 
although the spleen has to enlarge three times before it is 
palpable (Table 66.1). It should be borne in mind that many 
conditions affecting the spleen, such as idiopathic throm­
bocytopenic purpura, may be associated with enlargement, 
but the gland is seldom palpable. Few conditions that cause 
splenomegaly will require splenectomy as part of treatment. 
Hypersplenism is an indefinite clinical syndrome that is char­
acterised by splenic enlargement, any combination of anae ­
mia, leucopenia or thrombocytopenia, compensatory bone 
marrow hyperplasia and improvement after splenectomy. 
Careful clinical judgement is required to balance the long ­ 
and short­term risks of splenectomy against continued con ­
servative management.
Splenic abscess
Splenic abscess may arise from an infected splenic embolus 
or in association with typhoid and paratyphoid fever, osteo ­
myelitis, otitis media and puerperal sepsis. In general surgi ­
cal practice, it may be associated with pancreatic necrosis or 
other intra ­abdominal infection (Figure 66.7). An abscess 
may rupture and form a left subphrenic abscess, or result in 
diffuse peritonitis. Treatment involves that of the under ­
lying cause; percutaneous drainage of the splenic abscess 
under radiological guidance is normally required, with 
splenectomy being reserved when interventional radiology is 
not available.
Figure 66.5 Computed tomography scan showing a pool of contrast 
in a pseudoaneurysm situated in the tail of the pancreas adjacent to 
the spleen.
Figure 66.6 Computed tomography scan showing a splenic infarct 
(arrows) in a patient with splenomegaly and hypersplenism secondary 
to portal hypertension and portal vein thrombosis. The varices are evi-
dent at the hilus and at the greater curvature of the stomach.
Figure 66.7 Computed tomography scan showing a multiloculated 
abscess in the enlar ged spleen. This was managed successfully by 
percutaneous drainage under ultrasound guidance.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1180 25/10/2017   09:50Splenomegaly and hypersplenism 1181
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
TABLE 66.1 Causes of splenic enlargement.
Infective Bacterial Typhoid and paratyphoid
Typhus
Tuberculosisa
Psittacosis
Septicaemia
Splenic abscessb
Spirochaetal Weil’s disease
Syphilis
Viral Infectious mononucleosis
HIV-related thrombocytopeniab
Protozoal and parasitic Malaria
Schistosomiasisa
Trypanosomiasis
Kala-azar
Hydatid cystc
Tropical splenomegalya
Blood disease Acute leukaemia Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpurac
Chronic leukaemia Hereditary spherocytosisa
Pernicious anaemia Autoimmune haemolytic anaemiaa
Polycythaemia vera Thalassaemiaa
Erythroblastosis fetalis Sickle cell diseasea
Metabolic Rickets
Amyloid
Porphyria
Gaucher’s diseaseb
Circulatory Infarct
Portal hypertension
Segmental portal hypertensionb (Pancreatic carcinoma, splenic vein thrombosis)
Collagen disease Still’s disease
Felty’s syndromea
Non-parasitic cysts Congenital
Acquired
Neoplastic Angioma
Primary fibrosarcoma
Hodgkin’s lymphomab
Other lymphomas
Myelofibrosisb
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
a Often benefited by splenectomy.
b Splenectomy may be indicated.
c Benefited by splenectomy.
Adolph Weil , 1848–1916, physician, Dorpat (now Tartu), Estonia, described leptospirosis icterohaemorrhagica in 1886.
Sir George Frederic Still , 1868–1941, Professor of Diseases of Children, King’s College Hospital, London, UK, described chronic articular rheumatism in children 
in 1896.
Augustus Roy Felty , 1895–1964, physician Hartford CT, USA, described the combination of arthritis, splenomegally and leukopenia in 1924, while still a medical 
student at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, ML, USA.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1181 25/10/2017   09:50CHAPTER 66  The spleen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1182
Tuberculosis
The diagnosis of tuberculosis should be considered in young 
adults with splenomegaly presenting with asthenia, loss of 
weight and fever. Tuberculosis of the spleen may produce 
portal hypertension or, rarely, cold abscess. Treatment with 
antituberculous drugs will normally produce improvement. 
Splenectomy is not normally required and is made difficult by 
the inflammatory adhesions.
Tropical splenomegaly
Massive splenic enlargement frequently occurs in the trop­
ics from malaria, kala­azar and schistosomiasis. Occasionally, 
splenomegaly cannot be fully attributed to these diseases. It 
may result from occult infection or be related to malnutri­
tion. The massive splenomegaly observed in this condition 
may require removal in those patients disabled by anaemia or 
local symptoms. Lifelong antimalarial therapy is indicated in 
malaria endemic areas.
Schistosomiasis
This condition is prevalent in Africa, Asia and South Amer­
ica. It is caused by infection with Schistosoma mansoni in 75% 
of cases and by S. haematobium in the remainder. The splenic 
enlargement may result from portal hypertension associated 
with hepatic fibrosis, but can also result from hyperplasia 
induced by the phagocytosis of disintegrated worms, ova and 
toxin. Splenomegaly can occur at any age. The diagnosis is 
based on examination of the urine and faeces for ova, abnor ­
mal liver function tests and the presence of hypochromic 
anaemia.
Successful medical treatment of established cases does not 
result in regression of splenomegaly, and removal of the pain­
ful and bulky spleen is indicated where there is no evidence of 
hepatic or renal insufficiency. Splenectomy may be required 
as part of a devascularisation procedure in patients with portal 
hypertension associated with schistosomiasis.
Leukaemia
Leukaemia should be considered in the differential diagno ­
sis of splenomegaly and the diagnosis is made by examining 
blood or marrow film. Splenectomy is reserved for hypersplen­
ism that occurs during the chronic phase of chronic granulo­
cytic leukaemia.
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura
In most cases of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(ITP), the low platelet count results from the development 
of antibodies to specific platelet membrane glycoproteins 
(antiplatelet IgG autoantibodies) that damage the patient’s 
own platelets. It is also known as immune and autoimmune 
thrombocytopenic purpura. It is defined as isolated thrombo­
cytopenia with normal bone marrow and the absence of other 
causes of thrombocytopenia. T wo distinct clinical types are 
evident: the acute condition in children and a chronic condi­
tion in adults. Acute ITP often follows an acute infection and 
has a spontaneous resolution within 2 months. Chronic ITP 
persists longer than 6 months without a specific cause being 
identified. Approximately 50–75 cases per million arise each 
year in adults compared with 50 cases per million each year 
in children.
Clinical features
The adult form normally affects females between the ages 
of 15 and 50 years, although it can be associated with other 
conditions, including systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic 
lymphatic leukaemia and Hodgkin’s disease. The childhood 
form is distributed equally between males and females and 
commonly presents before the age of 5 years. Purpuric patches 
(ecchymoses) occur on the skin and mucous membranes. 
Following trauma or pressure, examination often reveals 
numbers of petechial haemorrhages in the skin. There is a 
tendency to spontaneous bleeding from mucous membranes 
(e.g. epistaxis); in women, menorrhagia and the prolonged 
bleeding of minor wounds are common. Haemorrhage from 
the urinary and gastrointestinal tracts and haemarthrosis are 
rare. Although intracranial haemorrhage is also uncommon, 
it is the most frequent cause of death. The diagnosis is made 
based upon the presence of cutaneous ecchymoses and a posi­
tive tourniquet test. The spleen is palpable in fewer than 10% 
of patients, and the presence of gross splenic enlargement 
should raise the suspicion of an alternative diagnosis.
Investigations
Coagulation studies are normal, and a bleeding time is not 
helpful in diagnosis. Platelet count in the peripheral blood 
film is reduced (usually <60 × 109/L). Bone marrow aspiration 
reveals a plentiful supply of platelet ­producing megakaryo ­
cytes.
Treatment
The course of the disease differs in children and adults. The 
disease regresses spontaneously in 75% of paediatric cases fol­
lowing the initial attack. Short courses of corticosteroids in 
both adult and child are usually followed by recovery. Pro ­
longed steroid therapy should not be continued if this does 
not produce remission. Splenectomy is usually recommended 
if a patient has two relapses on steroid therapy, or if the plate­
let count remains low. Generally, this is indicated where the 
ITP has persisted for more than 6–9 months.
Up to two­thirds of patients will be cured by surgical inter­
vention, and 15% will be improved, but no benefit will be 
Sir Patrick Manson , 1844–1922, practised in Formosa (now Taiwan) and Hong Kong before becoming physician to the Dreadnought Hospital, Greenwich, Lon­
don, UK. He is regarded as ‘the father of tropical medicine’.
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, lecturer in morbid anatomy and curator of the Museum, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described lymphadenoma in 1836.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1182 25/10/2017   09:50Splenomegaly and hypersplenism 1183
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
derived in the remainder. The response to steroids predicts a 
good response to splenectomy. In the acute setting, if severe 
bleeding has not been controlled by steroid therapy, fresh 
blood transfusion or transfusion with platelet concentrates 
before operation is necessary, although these are generally 
withheld until the splenic vessels have been controlled at 
operation.
Haemolytic anaemias
There are four causes of haemolytic anaemia that are gener ­
ally amenable to splenectomy.
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hereditary spherocytosis is an autosomal dominant hereditary 
disorder characterised by the presence of spherocytic red cells, 
caused by various molecular defects in the genes that code 
for alpha­ and beta­spectrin, ankyrin, band 3 protein, protein 
4.2 and other erythrocyte membrane proteins. These proteins 
are necessary to maintain the normal biconcave shape of the 
erythrocyte. Spherocytosis arises essentially from an increase 
in permeability of the red cell membranes to sodium. As this 
ion leaks into the cell, the osmotic pressure rises, resulting 
in swelling and increased fragility of the spherocyte. As the 
sodium pump has to work harder to rid the cells of sodium, 
there is greater loss of membrane phospholipid, resulting in 
an increased fragility of the membrane, and the energy and 
oxygen requirements increase. A large number of red cells are 
destroyed in the spleen, where there is a relative deficiency of 
both glucose and oxygen.
The clinical presentation is generally in childhood, but 
may be delayed until later life. Mild intermittent jaundice is 
associated with mild anaemia, splenomegaly and gallstones. 
Circulating bilirubin is not conjugated with glucuronic acid, 
and is not therefore excreted in the urine as it is bound to 
albumin. Excretion of the resulting bilirubin complex by the 
liver favours the formation of pigment gallstones. Once the 
disease manifests itself, spontaneous remissions are uncom­
mon; the patient is often pale and jaundiced at presentation 
and, in established cases, lassitude and undue fatigue are 
present.
In some families, the disease is characterised by a severe 
crisis of red blood cell destruction, during which the eryth ­
rocyte count may fall from 4.5 × 10 6/mL to 1.5 × 10 6/mL 
within 1 week. Such crises are characterised by the onset of 
pyrexia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and extreme pal ­
lor, followed by increased jaundice. These episodes may be 
precipitated by acute infection. Any child with gallstone dis­
ease should be investigated for hereditary spherocytosis and a 
family history sought.
Examination reveals splenomegaly, and the liver may also 
be palpable. Chronic leg ulcers may arise in adults with the 
disease.
Haematological investigations include the fragility test. 
Erythrocytes begin to haemolyse in 0.47% saline solution 
but, in this condition, haemolysis may occur in 0.6% or even 
stronger solutions. Immature red blood cells (reticulocytes), 
which differ from adult cells by possessing a reticulum, are 
discharged into the circulation by the bone marrow to com ­
pensate for the loss of erythrocytes by haemolysis.
Faecal urobilinogen is increased as this route excretes 
most of the urinobilinogen.
Radioactive chromium ( 51Cr) labelling of the patient’s 
own red cells will demonstrate the severity of red cell destruc­
tion. Daily scanning over the spleen will show the degree of 
red cell sequestration by the spleen. The presence of high lev­
els of splenic radioactivity generally predicts a good response 
to splenectomy, but this test is used less commonly.
All patients with hereditary spherocytosis should be 
treated by splenectomy but, in juvenile cases, this is generally 
delayed until 6 years of age to minimise the risk of postsple ­
nectomy infection, but before gallstones have had time to 
form. Ultrasonography should be performed preoperatively to 
determine the presence or absence of gallstones.
Acquired autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
This condition is divided into immune ­ and non ­immune­ 
mediated forms. It may arise following exposure to agents such 
as chemicals, infection or drugs, e.g. alpha­methyldopa, or be 
associated with another disease (e.g. systemic lupus erythema­
tosus). In most instances, the cause is unknown, and red cell 
survival is reduced because of an immune reaction triggered 
by immunoglobulin or complement on the red cell surface. 
This condition is more common in women after the age of 50 
years. In half the patients, the spleen is enlarged and, in 20% 
of cases, pigment gallstones are present.
Anaemia is invariably present and may be associated with 
spherocytosis because of red cell membrane damage. In the 
immune type, antibody, which coats the red cells, can be 
detected by agglutination when antihuman globulin is added 
to a suspension of the patient’s erythrocytes (Coombs’ test 
positive). The disease runs an acute self ­limiting course, and 
no treatment is necessary. Splenectomy should, however , be 
considered if corticosteroids are ineffective, when the patient 
is developing complications from long­term steroid treatment 
or if corticosteroids are contraindicated; 80% of patients 
respond to splenectomy.
Thalassaemia (synonyms: Cooley’s anaemia, 
Mediterranean anaemia)
This condition results from a defect in haemoglobin pep­
tide chain synthesis and is transmitted most commonly as a 
recessive trait. The disease is really a group of related diseases, 
alpha, beta and gamma, depending upon which haemoglobin 
peptide chain’s rate of synthesis is reduced. Most patients suf­
fer from beta­thalassaemia, in which a reduction in the rate of 
beta­chain synthesis results in a decrease in haemoglobin A. 
Intracellular precipitates (Heinz bodies) contribute to prema­
ture red cell destruction.
Robin Royston Amos Coombs , 1921–2006, Quick Professor of Biology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, described this test in 1945.
Thomas Benton Cooley , 1871–1945, Professor of Pediatrics, Wayne University, Detroit, MI, USA, described this type of anaemia in 1927.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1183 25/10/2017   09:50CHAPTER 66  The spleen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1184
Graduations of the disease range from heterozygous 
thalassaemia minor to homozygous thalassaemia major, 
which is associated with chronic anaemia, jaundice and sple­
nomegaly. Patients with homozygous thalassaemia major fre ­
quently develop clinical signs in the first year of life, and these 
include retarded growth, enlarged head with slanting eyes and 
depressed nose, leg ulcers, jaundice and abdominal distension 
secondary to splenomegaly.
Red cells are small, thin and misshapen and have a char ­
acteristic resistance to osmotic lysis. In the more severe forms, 
nucleated red cells and other immature blood cells are seen. 
The final diagnosis is by haemoglobin electrophoresis.
Blood transfusion may be required to correct profound 
anaemia, but the patient may become transfusion dependent 
because of the development of hypersplenism. Splenectomy 
is therefore of benefit in patients who require frequent blood 
transfusion, and if haemolytic antibodies have developed as 
a result.
Sickle cell disease
Sickle cell disease is a hereditary, autosomal recessive hae ­
molytic anaemia occurring mainly among those of African 
origin, in whom the normal haemoglobin A is replaced by 
haemoglobin S (HbS). The HbS molecule crystallises when 
the blood oxygen tension is reduced, thus distorting and elon­
gating the red cell. The resulting increased blood viscosity 
may obstruct the flow of blood in the spleen. Splenic microin­
farcts are therefore common.
The sickle cell trait can be detected in 9% of those of 
African origin, but most are asymptomatic; sickle cell disease 
occurs in about 1% of Africans. Depending upon the vessels 
affected by vascular occlusion, patients may complain of bone 
or joint pain, priapism, neurological abnormalities, skin ulcers 
or abdominal pain due to visceral blood stasis. The diagno­
sis is made by the finding of characteristic sickle ­shaped cells 
on blood film, although this investigation has largely been 
replaced by haemoglobin electrophoresis.
Hypoxia that provokes a sickling crisis should be avoided 
and is particularly relevant in patients undergoing general 
anaesthesia. Adequate hydration and partial exchange trans­
fusion may help in a crisis. Splenectomy is of benefit in a 
few patients in whom excessive splenic sequestration of red 
cells aggravates the anaemia. Chronic hypersplenism usually 
occurs in late childhood or adolescence, although Streptococ-
cus pneumoniae infection may precipitate an acute form in the 
first 5 years of life.
Porphyria
Porphyria is a hereditary error of haemoglobin catabolism in 
which porphyrinuria occurs. Abdominal crises, characterised  
by severe intestinal colic and constipation, can be precipitated 
by the administration of barbiturates. The patient is anaemic 
and may suffer from photosensitivity; in advanced forms of 
the disease, neurological and mental symptoms are present. 
The splenomegaly associated with this condition may be over­
looked. The urine may be orange and develops a port ­wine 
colour after a few hours of exposure to the air. Splenectomy has 
little role to play in the management of this condition.
Gaucher’s disease
This lipid storage disease is characterised by storage of glu ­
cocerebroside in the reticuloendothelial system and in the 
spleen. Enormous splenic enlargement may be associated 
with yellowish brown discolouration of the skin on the hands 
and face, anaemia and conjunctival thickening (pinguecula). 
Slavonic and Jewish races are more prone to the disease, and 
the detection of Gaucher cells in the bone marrow confirms 
the diagnosis. Splenectomy is indicated only for severe 
symptoms related to the splenomegaly.
Hypersplenism due to portal 
hypertension
Splenomegaly is an invariable feature of portal hyperten­
sion (Figure 66.8) and results in the thrombocytopenia and 
granulocytopenia observed in these patients. These may be 
improved if the portal hypertension is relieved by shunt sur ­
gery or liver transplantation. Splenectomy would normally be 
required only in those patients whose segmental portal hyper­
tension has resulted in symptomatic oesophagogastric varices.
Felty’s syndrome
Patients with rheumatoid arthritis may develop leukopenia. 
This is referred to as Felty’s syndrome if it is extreme and asso­
ciated with splenomegaly . There is no definite relationship 
between the severity of the arthritic changes and the leukope­
nia and splenomegaly. Splenectomy produces only a transient 
Philippe Charles Ernest Gaucher , 1854–1918, physician, Hôpital St Louis, Paris, France, described familial splenic anaemia in 1882.
Figure 66.8  Computed tomography scan showing an enlarged 
spleen in a patient with portal hypertension secondary to portal vein 
thrombosis. Clot is evident within the lumen of the portal vein (black 
arrow), and large varices (white arrows) are present at the splenic hilus. 
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1184 25/10/2017   09:50Splenectomy 1185
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
improvement in the blood picture, but rheumatoid arthritis 
may respond to steroid therapy to which it had previously 
become resistant.
NEOPLASMS
Haemangioma is the most common benign tumour of the 
spleen and may rarely develop into a haemangiosarcoma that 
is managed by splenectomy. The spleen is rarely the site of 
metastatic disease. Lymphoma is the most common cause of 
neoplastic enlargement, and splenectomy may play a part in 
its management. Splenectomy may be required to achieve a 
diagnosis in the absence of palpable lymph nodes or to relieve 
the symptoms of gross splenomegaly. However, the need for 
staging laparoscopy has largely receded with the advent of CT. 
Its use has been restricted to those patients in whom a defi­
nite histological diagnosis of intra­abdominal disease will affect 
management. Thus, selected patients with stage IA or IIA 
Hodgkin’s disease may be candidates for staging laparotomy or 
laparoscopy, although percutaneous biopsy under ultrasound or 
CT guidance is more commonly performed. In the absence of 
obvious liver or intra ­abdominal nodal disease, splenectomy  
is an integral part of the staging procedure to exclude splenic 
involvement, which would alter the method of treatment.
Myelofibrosis results from an abnormal proliferation of 
mesenchymal elements in the bone marrow, spleen, liver and 
lymph nodes. Most patients present over the age of 50 years, 
and the spleen may produce pain, owing to its gross enlarge ­
ment (Figure 66.9) or from splenic infarcts. Splenectomy 
reduces the need for transfusion and may relieve the discom ­
fort resulting from the splenomegaly.
SPLENECTOMY
The common indications for splenectomy are:
 ● trauma resulting from an accident or during a surgical pro­
cedure, as for example during mobilisation of the oesoph­
agus, stomach, distal pancreas or splenic flexure of the 
colon;
 ● removal en bloc with the stomach as part of a radical gas­
trectomy, or with the pancreas as part of a distal or total 
pancreatectomy;
 ● to reduce anaemia or thrombocytopenia in spherocytosis, 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura or hypersplenism;
 ● in association with shunt or variceal surgery for portal 
hypertension.
Figure 66.9  Magnetic resonance imaging scan showing massive 
hepatosplenomegaly secondary to myelofibrosis. Note the prominent 
portal system and the left kidney, which is superimposed over the 
grossly enlarged spleen.
Summary box 66.2
Indications for splenectomy
Trauma
●● Accidental
●● Operative
Oncological
●● Part of en bloc resection
●● Diagnostic
●● Therapeutic
Haematological
●● Spherocytosis
●● Purpura (ITP)
●● Hypersplenism
Portal hypertension
●● Variceal surgery
Preoperative preparation
In the presence of a bleeding tendency, transfusion of bloo d, 
fresh­frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate or platelets may be 
required. Coagulation profiles should be as near normal as 
possible at operation, and platelets should be available for 
patients with thrombocytopenia at operation and in the early 
postoperative period.
Antibiotic prophylaxis appropriate to the operative pro ­
cedure should be given, and consideration should be given to 
the risk of postsplenectomy sepsis (see below).
Technique of open splenectomy
Most surgeons use a midline or transverse left subcostal inci ­
sion for open splenectomy with the patient in the supine posi­
tion. Rarely, a thoracoabdominal incision may be necessary 
for a massive spleen that is adherent to the diaphragm. Pas ­
sage of a nasogastric tube following induction of the anaes ­
thetic enables the stomach to be emptied.
In elective splenectomy, the gastrosplenic ligament is 
opened up, and the short gastric vessels are divided. The 
splenic vessels at the superior border of the pancreas are 
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1185 25/10/2017   09:50CHAPTER 66  The spleen
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1186
suture­ligated. The posterior surface of the spleen is exposed, 
the posterior leaf of the lienorenal ligament divided with long 
curved scissors, and the spleen rotated medially along with 
the tail and body of the pancreas (Figure 66.10). The pan­
creas is separated from the hilar vessels, which are normally 
doubly ligated separately and divided. Accessory splenic tis ­
sue in the splenic hilum or omentum should be excluded by 
a careful search at operation. There is no need to drain the 
wound if haemostasis is adequate.
The segmental vasculature of the spleen does make it 
possible to undertake limited resection of the parenchyma. 
Haemostasis can be achieved by ligation of, or application 
of metal clips to, intrasplenic vessels, and by careful applica ­
tion of topical haemostatic agents such as fibrin pad (EVAR­
REST®). Conservative splenic surgery is therefore possible 
in some cases of splenic trauma and other pathology such as 
splenic cysts.
Technique of laparoscopic 
splenectomy
The patient is placed on the right side with the space between 
the left ilium and costal margin exposed. Placement of access 
ports is often determined by the size of the patient and the 
spleen. Insufflation of the abdomen can be performed once 
access is obtained through an incision 1 cm from the cos­
tal margin at the left mid ­clavicular line. A further trocar 
is inserted close to the costal margin below the xiphoid. A 
12­mm trocar is inserted at a similar distance from the cos ­
tal margin at the posterior axillary line. The splenocolic 
ligament is divided to give access to the lower splenic pole. 
The spleen is separated from the kidney and diaphragm 
before the gap between the splenic hilum and the tail of the 
pancreas is enlarged. The spleen is elevated to expose the 
splenic hilum, which is secured and divided with an endo­
scopic vascular stapler (Figure 66.11). T wo or three applica­
tions of the instrument may be required to secure the hilum 
and the short gastric vessels. Any remaining attachments to 
the diaphragm are divided before a self­retaining opening bag 
is introduced through the incision of the open laparoscopy, 
after removal of the 12­mm port. The spleen is placed in the 
bag, the mouth of which is pulled out of the abdominal open­
ing before the spleen is crushed and retrieved with an instru ­
ment. The operation may be undertaken as a hand ­assisted 
procedure, particularly when the spleen is grossly enlarged.
Postoperative complications
Immediate complications specific to splenectomy include 
haemorrhage resulting from a slipped ligature. Haematemesis 
from gastric mucosal damage and gastric dilatation is uncom­
mon. Left basal atelectasis is common, and a pleural effusion 
may be present. Adjacent structures at risk during the proce ­
dure include the stomach and pancreas. A fistula may result 
from damage to the greater curvature of the stomach during 
ligation of the short gastric vessels. Damage to the tail of the 
pancreas may result in pancreatitis, a localised abscess or a 
pancreatic fistula.
Postoperative thrombocytosis may arise and, if the blood 
platelet count exceeds 1 × 10 6/mL, prophylactic aspirin is 
recommended. Long ­term surveillance programmes have 
emphasised an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis and 
pulmonary embolism. The relative risk and benefit of throm­
boprophylaxis in this setting has not been assessed adequately.
Postsplenectomy septicaemia may result from Streptococcus 
pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitides, Haemophilus influenzae and 
Escherichia coli . Long ­term surveillance programmes have 
Figure 66.10  Diagrammatic view of the approach r equired to 
divide the short gastric vessels anteriorly and the lienorenal ligament 
posteriorly.
Figure 66.11  Photograph showing a stapling device across the 
splenic hilus for division of the splenic vessels during laparoscopic 
splenectomy.
Albert Ludwig Siegmund Neisser , 1855–1916, Director of the Dermatological Institute, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Theodor Escherich , 1857–1911, Professor of Paediatrics, Vienna, Austria.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1186 25/10/2017   09:50Further reading 1187
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
suggested that the risk of pneumonia, meningitis and major 
sepsis following splenectomy is increased three ­fold. How ­
ever, the risk is greater in the young patient, in splenectomised 
patients treated with chemoradiotherapy and in patients who 
have undergone splenectomy for thalassaemia, sickle cell dis­
ease and autoimmune anaemia or thrombocytopenia.
Opportunist postsplenectomy infection (OPSI) is a major 
concern. Published guidelines emphasise that most infections 
after splenectomy could be avoided through measures that 
include offering patients appropriate and timely immunisa­
tion, antibiotic prophylaxis, education and prompt treatment 
of infection. The benefit of prophylactic antibiotics in this 
setting remains controversial. It is thought that children who 
have undergone splenectomy before the age of 5 years should 
be treated with a daily dose of penicillin until the age of 10 
years. Prophylaxis in older children should be continued at 
least until the age of 16 years, but its use is less well defined 
in adults. Furthermore, compliance is problematic in the long 
term but, as the risk of overwhelming sepsis is greatest within 
the first 2–3 years after splenectomy, it seems reasonable to 
give prophylaxis during this time. However, all patients with 
compromised immune function should receive prophylaxis. 
Satisfactory oral prophylaxis can be obtained with penicil ­
lin, erythromycin, amoxicillin or co ­amoxiclav. Suspected 
infection can be treated intravenously with these same anti ­
biotics and cefotaxime or ceftriaxone, or chloramphenicol in 
patients allergic to penicillin and cephalosporins.
If elective splenectomy is planned, consideration should 
be given to vaccinating against pneumococcus, meningococ ­
cus C (both repeated every 5 years) and H. influenzae type 
B (Hib) (repeated every 10 years). The latter two vaccines 
are commonly delivered as a combined preparation. Yearly 
influenza vaccination has been recommended, as there is 
some evidence that it may reduce the risk of secondary bac­
terial infection. Such vaccinations should be administered 
at least 2 weeks before elective surgery or as soon as possible 
after recovery from surgery but before discharge from hospital. 
Pneumococcal vaccination is recommended in those patients 
aged over 2 years. Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccination 
is recommended irrespective of age. Asplenic patients should 
carry a medical alert and an up­to­date vaccination card. They 
require specific advice regarding travel and animal handling. 
Patients who have undergone splenectomy and are travelling 
FURTHER READING
Boyle S, White RH, Brunson A, Wun T. Splenectomy and the incidence 
of venous thromboembolism and sepsis in patients with immune 
thrombocytopenia. Blood 2013; 121: 4782–90.
Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Postsplenectomy and hypo­
splenic states. Lancet 2011; 378: 86–97.
Easow MM, Sharma A, Aravindakshan R. Splenectomy for people with 
thalassaemia major or intermedia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 
6: CDO10517.
Edgren G, Almqvist R, Hartman M, Utter GH. Splenectomy and the 
risk of sepsis: a population­based cohort study. Ann Surg 2014; 260: 
1081–7.
Glasgow RE, Mulvihill SJ Laparoscopic splenectomy. World J Surg 1999; 
23: 384–8.
Mourtzoukou EG, Mikhael J, Northridge K et al. Short­term and long ­
term failure of laparoscopic splenectomy in adult immune thrombo­
cytopenic purpura patients: a systematic review. Am J Hematol 2009; 
84(11): 743–8.
Pappas G, Peppas G, Falagas ME. Vaccination of asplenic or hyposplenic 
adults. Br J Surg 2008; 95(3): 273–80.
Weatherall DJ. The hereditary anaemias. Br Med J 1997; 314: 492–6.
Summary box 66.3
Splenectomy
●● Remember preoperative immunisation
●● Prophylactic antibiotics in the long term
●● Opportunistic postsplenectomy infection is a real clinical 
danger
●● Splenic conservation should be considered
to countries where malaria is present are strongly advised to 
use all physical antimosquito barriers as well as antimalarial 
therapy since they are at increased risk of severe malaria. 
Overwhelming postsplectomy sepsis due to Capnocytophaga 
canimorsus may result from dog, cat or other animal bites.
In the trauma victim, vaccination can be given in the 
postoperative period, and the resulting antibody levels will 
be protective in the majority of cases. Antibody levels are, 
however, less than 50% of those achieved if vaccination is 
given in the presence of an intact spleen. Protection follow ­
ing vaccination is not always guaranteed.
11_66-B&L27_Pt11_Ch66.indd   1187 25/10/2017   09:50Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • To understand the anatomy and physiology of the 
gallbladder and bile ducts
 • To be familiar with the pathophysiology and 
management of gallstones
 • To be aware of unusual disorders of the biliary tree
 • To be aware of malignant disease of the gallbladder and 
bile ducts
The gallbladder and bile ducts
67
SURGICAL ANATOMY AND 
PHYSIOLOGY
The gallbladder lies on the underside of the liver in the main 
liver scissura at the junction of the right and left lobes of the 
liver. The relationship of the gallbladder to the liver varies 
between being embedded within the liver substance to being 
suspended by a mesentry. It is a pear-shaped structure, 7.5–
12 cm long, with a normal capacity of about 25–30  mL. The 
anatomical divisions are a fundus, a body and a neck that ter-
minates in a narrow infundibulum. The muscle fibres in the 
wall of the gallbladder are arranged in a criss-cross manner, 
being particularly well developed in its neck. The mucous 
membrane contains indentations of the mucosa that sink into 
the muscle coat; these are the crypts of Luschka.
The cystic duct is about 3  cm in length but the length 
is variable. The lumen is usually 1–3  mm in diameter. The 
mucosa of the cystic duct is arranged in spiral folds known as 
the valves of Heister and the wall is surrounded by a sphinc -
teric structure called the sphincter of Lütkens. The cystic 
duct joins the supraduodenal segment of the common hepatic 
duct in 80% of cases, however the anatomy may vary and the 
junction may be much lower in the retro duodenal or even 
retropancreatic part of the bile duct. Occasionally, the cystic 
duct may join the right hepatic duct or even a right hepatic 
sectorial duct (see below).
The common hepatic duct is usually less than 2.5 cm long 
and is formed by the union of the right and left hepatic ducts. 
The common bile duct is about 7.5 cm long and formed by the 
junction of the cystic and common hepatic ducts. It is divided 
into four parts:
 ● the supraduodenal portion, about 2.5 cm long, runs in the 
free edge of the lesser omentum;
 ● the retroduodenal portion;
 ● the infraduodenal portion lies in a groove, but at times in 
a tunnel, on the posterior surface of the pancreas;
 ● the intraduo denal portion passes obliquely through the 
wall of the second part of the duodenum, where it is 
surrounded by the sphincter of Oddi, and terminates by 
opening on the summit of the ampulla of Vater.
The cystic artery, a branch of the right hepatic artery, usu-
ally arises behind the common hepatic duct (Figure 67.1). 
Occasionally, an accessory cystic artery arises from the gastro-
duodenal artery. In 15% of cases the right hepatic artery and/
or the cystic artery crosses in front of the common hepatic 
duct and the cystic duct.
Calot’s triangle, or the hepatobiliary triangle, was ini-
tially described by Calot as the space bordered by the cystic 
duct inferiorly, the common hepatic duct medially and the 
superior border of the cystic artery. This has been modified 
in contemporary literature to be the area bound superiorly by 
the inferior surface of the liver, laterally by the cystic duct 
and the medial border of the gallbladder and medially by the 
common hepatic duct. It is an important surgical landmark 
as the cystic artery usually can be found within its boundaries 
and should be identified by surgeons performing a cholecys -
tectomy to avoid damage to the extrahepatic biliary system 
(Figure 67.2a).
The most dangerous anomalies are where the hepatic 
artery takes a tortuous course on the front of the origin of 
the cystic duct (Figure 67.2b), or the right hepatic artery 
Hubert Luschka , 1820–1875, Professor of Anatomy, Tübingen, Germany.
Ulrich Lütkens , b.1894, surgeon at the University Clinic, Berlin, Germany, published a monograph on the structure and function of the extrahepatic biliary tract 
in 1926.
Lorenz Heister , 1683–1758, Professor of Surgery and Botany, Helmstädt, Germany.
Ruggero Oddi , 1845–1906, physiologist, Perugia, Italy.
Abraham Vater , 1684–1751, Professor of Anatomy and Botany, Wittenberg, Germany.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1188 25/10/2017   09:52Surgical anatomy and physiology 1189
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Lymphatics
The lymphatic vessels of the gallbladder (subserosal and 
submucosal) drain into the cystic lymph node of Lund (the 
sentinel lymph no de), which lies in the fork created by the 
junction of the cystic and common hepatic ducts. Efferent 
vessels from this lymph node go to the hilum of the liver, and 
to the coeliac lymph nodes. The subserosal lymphatic vessels 
of the gallbladder also connect with the subcapsular lymph 
channels of the liver, and this accounts for the frequent spread 
of carcinoma of the gallbladder to the liver.
Surgical physiology
Bile is produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder , 
from which it is released into the duodenum. As it leaves 
the liver it is composed of 97% water, bile salts (cholic and 
chenodeoxycholic acids, deoxycholic and lithocholic acids), 
phospholipids, cholesterol and bilirubin. The liver excretes 
bile at a rate estimated to be approximately 40  mL/hour. 
About 95% of bile salts are reabsorbed in the terminal ileum 
(enterohepatic circulation).
Functions of the gallbladder
The gallbladder is a reservoir for bile. During fasting, resis-
tance to flow through the sphincter of Oddi is high, and bile 
excreted by the liver is diverted to the gallbladder. After feed-
ing, the resistance to flow through the sphincter is reduced, 
the gallbladder contracts and the bile enters the duodenum. 
These motor responses of the biliary tract are in part affected 
by the hormone cholecystokinin.
is tortuous and the cystic artery short (Figure 67.2c). The 
tortuosity is known as the ‘caterpillar turn’ or ‘Moynihan’s 
hump’. This variation is the cause of many problems during a 
difficult cholecystectomy with inflammation in the region of 
the cystic duct.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 67.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Left hepatic
artery
Right hepatic
artery
Cystic artery
Hepatic artery
Left choledochal
artery
Right choledochal
artery
Common
hepatic artery
Retroduodenal
artery
Gastroduodenal
artery
Figure 67.1 The anatomy of the gallbladder and bile ducts. Note the 
arrangement of the arterial tree.
(a) (b) (c)Figure 67.2 (a) Usual anatomy of Calot’s triangle; (b) tortuous common hepatic artery; (c) tortuous right hepatic artery with short cystic artery; 
(b) and (c) are examples of so-called ‘caterpillar turn’ or ‘Moynihan’s hump’, which if not recognised can lead to inadvertent arterial injury or 
bleeding during cholecystectomy.
Berkeley George Andrew Moynihan (Lord Moynihan) , 1865–1936, Professor of Clinical Surgery, Leeds, UK.
Jean François Calot , 1861–1944, surgeon, Paris, France.
Fred Bates Lund , 1865–1950, surgeon, Boston City Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(a) (b) (c)
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1189 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1190
The second function of the gallbladder is concentration of 
bile by active absorption of water, sodium chloride and bicar-
bonate via the mucous membrane of the gallbladder. The 
hepatic bile which enters the gallbladder becomes concen -
trated 5–10 times, with a corresponding increase in the pro -
portion of bile salts, bile pigments, cholesterol and calcium.
The third function of the gallbladder is the secretion of 
mucus – approximately 20 mL is produced per day. With com-
plete obstruction of the cystic duct in an otherwise healthy 
gallbladder, a mucocoele may develop as a result of ongoing 
mucus secretion by the gallbladder mucosa.
RADIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION 
OF THE BILIARY TRACT
Plain radiographs
The skillfully taken plain radiograph of the gallbladder will 
show radiopaque gallstones in 10% of patients (Figure 67.3). 
Rarely, the centre of a stone may contain radiolucent gas in 
a triradiate or biradiate fissure and this gives rise to charac -
teristic dark shapes on a radiograph: the ‘Mercedes–Benz’ or 
‘seagull’ sign.
A plain x-ray may also show the rare cases of calcification 
of the gallbladder, a so-called ‘porcelain’ gallbladder (Figure 
67.4). This is more commonly seen on computed tomography 
(CT) (Figure 67.5). Traditionally, this has been considered 
an indication for cholecystectomy as it was associated with a 
high incidence of gallbladder carcinoma. However, contem -
porary data suggest that this may not be the case, with the true 
incidence of cancer being less than 5%. Therefore, decisions 
on whether or not a cholecystectomy should be  performed 
should be individualised depending on the age of the patient, 
comorbidities and presence or absence of symptoms.
Gas may be seen in the wall of the gallbladder (emphy-
sematous cholecystitis) (Figure 67.6). Gas in the biliary tree 
may also be seen normally after endoscopic sphincterotomy or 
following a surgical anastomosis
Oral cholecystography and 
intravenous cholangiography
Oral and intravenous cholecystography are of interest for 
historical purposes only as they have been replaced by more 
accurate imaging modalities.
The Mercedes–Benz  sign takes its name from the insignia displayed on the bonnet of a Mercedes–Benz car.
Figure 67.3 Plain radiograph showing radiopaque stones in the gall-
bladder. Radiopaque stones are rare (10%).
Figure 67.4 Porcelain gallbladder.
Figure 67.5 Computed tomography scan demonstrating calicifica-
tion in the gallbladder wall (‘porcelain gallbladder’).
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1190 25/10/2017   09:52Radiological investigation of the biliary tract 1191
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Ultrasonography
Transabdominal ultrasonography (US) (Figures 67.7 and 
67.8) is the initial imaging modality of choice as it is accu-
rate, readily available, inexpensive and quick to perform. 
However, it is operator dependent and may be compromised 
by excessive body fat and intraluminal bowel gas. The size of 
the gallbladder can be seen, the presence of stones or polyps 
determined and the thickness of the wall measured. Addi-
tionally, the presence of inflammation around the gallblad -
der, the size of the common bile duct and, occasionally, the 
presence of stones within the extrahepatic biliary tree can be 
determined.
For the patient who presents with obstructive jaundice, 
ultrasonography is particularly helpful because it can identify 
intra- and extrahepatic biliary dilatation and often the level 
of obstruction. In addition, the cause of the obstruction may 
also be determined, such as gallstones in the gallbladder, com-
mon hepatic or common bile duct stones, lesions within the 
wall of the common bile duct suggestive of a cholangiocarci -
noma or enlargement of the pancreatic head indicative of a 
pancreatic carcinoma.
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) utilises a specially 
designed endoscope with an ultrasound transducer at its tip 
which allows the gastroenterologist to visualise the liver and 
biliary tree from within the stomach and duodenum (Figure 
67.9). It is accurate in imaging the bile duct and detecting 
the presence of choledocholithiasis. In addition, it has been 
shown to be useful in diagnosing and staging both pancre -
atic and periampullary cancers. Biopsies can be taken from 
suspicious areas for either cytological or histopathological 
analysis.
Figure 67.6 Gas in the gallbladder and gallbladder wall (Clostridium 
perfringens). Emergency surgery is indicated.
Figure 67.7  Ultrasound examination. Multiple gallstones noted 
within the gallbladder.
Figure 67.8 Ultrasound examination. Gallstones noted at the neck 
of the gallbladder with associated acoustic shadowing.
Figure 67.9 Endoscopic ultrasonography. CBD, common bile duct; 
PD, pancreatic duct.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1191 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1192
Cholescintigraphy
Technetium-99m (99mTc)-labelled derivatives of iminodia-
cetic acid (HIDA, IODIDA) when injected intravenously are 
selectively taken up by the retroendothelial cells of the liver 
and excreted into the bile. This allows visualisation of the 
biliary tree and gallbladder. In 90% of normal individuals the 
gallbladder is visualised within 30 minutes following injec -
tion, with 100% being seen within 1  hour (Figure 67.10 ). 
The bowel is seen, usually within 1  hour, in the majority of 
patients.
Non-visualisation of the gallbladder is suggestive of acute 
cholecystitis. If the patient has a contracted gallbladder, as 
often seen in chronic cholecystitis, the gallbladder visualisa -
tion may be reduced or delayed.
An abnormally low gallbladder ejection fraction may be 
suggestive of gallbladder dyskinesia; however , the diagnosis 
and interpretation of cholescintigraphy in this context are 
controversial.
Biliary scintigraphy may also be helpful in diagnosing bile 
leaks and iatrogenic biliary obstruction.
Computed tomography (CT)
Unlike ultrasonography, CT is less affected by bo dy habitus 
and is not operator dependent. It allows visualisation of the 
liver, bile ducts, gallbladder and pancreas (Figure 67.11). It is 
particularly useful in detecting hepatic and pancreatic lesions 
and is the modality of choice in the staging of cancers of the 
liver, gallbladder, bile ducts and pancreas. It can identify the 
extent of the primary tumour and define the relationship of 
the tumour to other organs and blood vessels (Figure 67.12). 
In addition, the presence of enlarged lymph nodes or meta -
static disease may be seen. However, as only 75% of gallstones 
are identified by CT, it is not used as a screening modality for 
uncomplicated gallstones.
Magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography is a non-  
invasive modality that provides excellent imaging of the gallbladder and biliary system (Figures 67.13 and 67.14) . 
Images can be obtained of the biliary tree demonstrating 
ductal obstruction, strictures or other intraductal abnormal-
ities. Images comparable to those obtained using ERCP or 
PTC (see below) can be achieved non-invasively without the 
potential complications of either technique.
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
This technique remains widely used as both a diagnostic and 
a therapeutic modality. Using a side-viewing endoscope the 
ampulla of Vater can be identified and cannulated. Injection 
of water-soluble contrast directly into the bile duct provides 
excellent images of the ductal anatomy (Figure 67.15) and 
can identify causes of obstruction such as calculi (Figure 
67.16) or malignant strictures (Figure 67.17). While the 
widespread availability of ultrasound and MRCP has reduced 
Figure 67.10 Dimethyl iminodiacetic acid (HIDA) scan (arrow indi -
cates the gallbladder).
Figure 67.11  Computed tomography scan demonstrating a gall -
stone within the gallbladder (arrow).
Figure 67.12  Computed tomography scan demonstrating a hilar 
mass (arrow).
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1192 25/10/2017   09:52Radiological investigation of the biliary tract 1193
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
its diagnostic use, ERCP still has an important role in the 
assessment of the patient with obstructive jaundice. In this 
group of patients it is especially useful in determining the 
cause and level of obstruction.
During ERCP , bile aspirates can be sent for cytological and 
microbiological examination, and endoluminal brushings can 
be taken from strictures for cytological studies. Therapeutic 
interventions such as stone removal or stent placement to 
relieve the obstruction can be performed. Thus, ERCP has 
evolved into a mainly therapeutic rather than a diagnostic 
technique.
Percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography (PTC)
This is an invasive technique in which the bile ducts are can-
nulated percutaneously. It is only undertaken once a bleeding 
tendency has been excluded and if the patient’s prothrombin 
time is normal. Antibiotics should be given prior to the proce-
dure. Usually, under fluoroscopic control, a needle (the Chiba 
or Okuda needle) is introduced percutaneously into the liver 
substance. Under radiological control (either ultrasound or 
CT) a bile duct is cannulated. Successful entry is confirmed 
Figure 67.13  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancr eatography: 
cross-sectional image demonstrating a hilar mass (thick arrow) and 
gallstones (thin arrow).
Figure 67.14  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancr eatography: 
projectional images demonstrating stones and hilar obstruction 
(arrow).
Figure 67.15 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: 
normal cholangiogram.
Figure 67.16 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreato graphy: 
common duct obstruction (arrow).
Figure 67.17 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography: 
partial occlusion of the bile duct by a malignant stricture (arrow).
Evarts Ambrose Graham , 1883–1957, Bixby Professor of Surgery, Washington University, St Louis, MO, USA.
Warren Henry Cole , 1898–1990, Emeritus Professor of Surgery, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA, introduced cholecystography in 1924.
Kunio Okuda , 1921–2003, Professor of Medicine, Chiba University, Japan.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1193 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1194
by contrast injection or aspiration of bile. Water-soluble con-
trast medium is injected to visualise the biliary system. Mul-
tiple images can be taken demonstrating areas of strictures 
or obstruction (Figure 67.18). Bile can be sent for cytology. 
In addition, this technique enables placement of a catheter 
into the bile ducts to provide external biliary drainage or the 
insertion of indwelling stents. The scope of this procedure can 
be further extended by leaving the drainage catheter in situ for 
a number of days and then dilating the track sufficiently for 
a fine flexible choledochoscope to be passed into the intrahe-
patic biliary tree in order to diagnose strictures, take biopsies 
and remove stones.
In general, if a malignant stricture at the level of the con-
fluence of the right and left hepatic ducts or higher is sus -
pected in a jaundiced patient, a PTC is preferred to ERCP 
because successful drainage is more likely.
the biliary tree. The technique defines the anatomy and is 
used mainly to exclude the presence of stones within the bile 
ducts (Figures 67.19–67.21). A single x-ray plate or image 
intensifier can be used to obtain and review the images intra-
operatively. Irrespective of the technique used the operating 
table should be tilted head down by approximately 20° to 
facilitate filling of the intrahepatic ducts. In addition, care 
should be taken when injecting contrast not to introduce air 
bubbles into the system as these may give the appearance of 
stones and lead to a false-positive result.
Operative biliary endoscopy 
(choledochoscopy)
At operation, a flexible fibreoptic endoscope can be passed 
either via the cystic duct or directly via a choledochotomy 
into the common bile duct, enabling stone identification and 
removal under direct vision. After exploration of the bile 
duct, a tube can be left in the cystic duct remnant or in the 
common bile duct (a T-tube) and drainage of the biliary tree 
established. After 7–10 days, a track will be established. This 
track can be used subsequently for the passage of a choledo-
choscope to remove residual stones in the awake patient in an 
endoscopy suite.
Intraoperative imaging techniques
Peroperative cholangiography
During open or laparoscopic cholecystectomy a catheter can 
be placed in the cystic duct and contrast injected directly into 
Summary box 67.1
Radiological investigation of the biliary tree
●● Plain radiograph: calcification, air within biliary system
●● Ultrasound: stones and biliary dilatation
●● MRCP: anatomy and stones
●● CT scan: anatomy, liver, gallbladder and pancreatic cancer
●● Radioisotope scanning (HIDA scan): function
●● ERCP: anatomy, stones and biliary strictures
●● PTC: anatomy and biliary strictures
●● EUS: anatomy, stones
Figure 67.18 Transhepatic cholangiogram showing a stricture of the 
common hepatic duct (courtesy of Miss Phyllis George, FRCS, Lon -
don, UK).
X-ray /f_ilm
Angle to 20º
Figure 67.19  Peroperative cholangiography using a radiolucent 
table-top.
Figure 67.20 Peroperative cholangiography. Technique of introduc-
ing contrast.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1194 25/10/2017   09:52Congenital abnormalities of the gallbladder and bile ducts 1195
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Laparoscopic ultrasonography
At laparoscopy, the use of a laparoscopic ultrasound probe can 
be used to image the extrahepatic biliary system. It is a useful 
technique in biliary and pancreatic tumour staging as it can 
identify the primary tumour and determine its relationship to 
major vessels such as the hepatic artery , superior mesenteric 
artery, portal vein and superior mesenteric vein.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES 
OF THE GALLBLADDER AND 
BILE DUCTS
Embryology
The hepatic diverticulum arises from the ventral wall of the 
foregut and elongates into a stalk to form the choledochus. A 
lateral bud is given off, which is destined to become the gall-
bladder and cystic duct. The embryonic hepatic duct sends 
out many branches which join up the canaliculi between 
the liver cells. As is usual with embryonic tubular structures, 
hyperplasia obliterates the lumina of this ductal system; nor -
mally recanalisation subsequently occurs and bile begins to 
flow. During early fetal life the gallbladder is entirely intra-
hepatic.
Absence of the gallbladder
Occasionally, the gallbladder is absent. Failure to visualise 
the gallbladder does not necessarily indicate a pathological 
problem.
The Phrygian cap
The Phrygian cap (Figure 67.22) is present in 5% of cases and 
may be mistaken for a pathological deformity of the organ. 
‘Phrygian cap’ refers to hats worn by the people of Phrygia, an 
ancient country of Asia Minor; it was rather like a liberté cap 
of the French Revolution.
Floating gallbladder
The gallbladder may hang on a mesentery, which makes it 
liable to undergo torsion.
Figure 67.21  Peroperative cholangiogra-
phy. (a) Gentle infusion of contrast, passing 
without hindrance into the duodenum. A nor-
mal duct with no problems. (b) The duct is 
dilated and contains multiple stones. There is 
hold-up of contrast passing into the duode -
num. A sphincterotomy was performed.
(a) (b)
(a)
12
(b) (c)
(d)
12 1
12
Figure 67.22  The main variations in gallbladder and cystic duct 
anatomy. (a) Double gallbladder. (b) Septum of the gallbladder: 1 is 
the most common, the so-called ‘Phrygian cap’. (c) Diverticulum of 
the gallbladder. (d) Variations in cystic duct insertion.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1195 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1196
Absence of the cystic duct
This is usually a pathological, as opposed to an anatomical, 
anomaly and indicates the recent passage of a stone or the 
presence of a stone at the lower end of the cystic duct, which 
is ulcerating into the common bile duct. The main danger 
at surgery is damage to the bile duct, and particular care to 
identify the correct anatomy is essential before division of 
any duct.
Low insertion of the cystic duct
The cystic duct opens into the common bile duct near the 
ampulla. Variations of this anomaly can occur (Figure 
67.23). It is important that the operating surgeon correctly 
identifies the anatomy to avoid inadvertent damage to the 
common hepatic or common bile duct. Complete dissection 
of a cystic duct which is inserted low into the bile duct (Fig-
ure 67.24) should be avoided because there is a potential to 
devascularise the common bile duct, which could result in 
stricture formation.
An accessory cholecystohepatic 
duct
Ducts passing directly into the gallbladder from the liver are not 
uncommon. Larger ducts should be closed, but before doing so 
the precise anatomy should be carefully ascertained to ensure 
that a right hepatic duct is not being ligated (Figure 67.23).
EXTRAHEPATIC BILIARY 
ATRESIA
Aetiology and physiology
Atresia is present in approximately 1 per 12  000 live births, 
and affects males and females equally. The extrahepatic bile 
ducts are progressively destroyed by an inflammatory pro -
cess which starts around the time of birth. The aetiology is 
unclear. Intrahepatic changes also occur and eventually result 
in biliary cirrhosis and portal hypertension. Untreated, death 
from the consequences of liver failure occurs before the age 
of 3 years.
The inflammatory destruction of the bile ducts has been 
classified into three main types (Figure 67.25):
 ● type I: atresia restricted to the common bile duct;
 ● type II: atresia of the common hepatic duct;
 ● type III: atresia of the right and left hepatic ducts.
Associated anomalies occur in about 20% of cases and 
include cardiac lesions, polysplenia, situs inversus, absent 
vena cava and a preduodenal portal vein.
Clinical features
About one-third of patients are jaundiced at birth. In all, 
however, jaundice is present by the end of the first week and 
deepens progressively. Liver function tests show an obstruc-
tive pattern with elevated bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase. 
The meconium may be a little bile stained, but later the stools 
are pale and the urine is dark. Prolonged steatorrhoea gives 
rise to osteomalacia (biliary rickets). Pruritus is severe. Club-
bing and skin xanthomas, probably related to raised serum 
cholesterol, may be present.
Differential diagnosis
This includes any form of jaundice in a neonate giving a 
cholestatic picture. Examples are α1-antitrypsin deficiency, 
cholestasis associated with intravenous feeding, choledochal 
cyst and inspissated bile syndrome. Neonatal hepatitis is the 
most difficult to differentiate. Both extrahepatic biliary atre -
sia and neonatal hepatitis are associated with giant cell trans-
formation of the hepatocytes. Liver biopsy and radionuclide 
excretion scans are essential.
VI
RP RP
Figure 67.23 Patterns of cystic duct anatomy – note segment VI 
drainage into the cystic duct and the drainage of the right posterior 
sectorial duct (RP) into the neck of the gallbladder, or an accessory 
duct, the so-called duct of Luschka.
Figure 67.24 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demon-
strating low insertion of the cystic duct (thick arrow) into the common 
bile duct (thin arrow).
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1196 25/10/2017   09:52Choledochal cyst 1197
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Treatment
Patent segments of proximal bile duct are found in 10% of 
type I lesions. A direct Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy will 
achieve bile flow in 75%, but progressive fibrosis results in dis-
appointing long-term results. A simple biliary–enteric anato-
mosis is not possible in the majority of cases in which the 
proximal hepatic ducts are either very small (type II) or atretic 
(type III). These are treated by the Kasai procedure, in which 
radical excision of all bile duct tissue up to the liver capsule 
is performed. A Roux-en-Y loop of jejunum is anastomosed 
to the exposed area of liver capsule above the bifurcation of 
the portal vein, creating a portoenterostomy. The chances of 
achieving effective bile drainage after portoenterostomy are 
maximal when the operation is performed before the age of 
8 weeks, and approximately 90% of children whose bilirubin 
falls to within the normal range can be expected to survive for 
10 years or more. Early referral for surgery is critical.
Postoperative complications include bacterial cholangi -
tis, which occurs in 40% of patients. Repeated attacks lead 
to hepatic fibrosis, and 50% of long-term survivors develop 
portal hypertension, with one-third having variceal bleeding.
Liver transplantation should be considered in children in 
whom a portoenterostomy is unsuccessful. Results are improv-
ing, with 70–80% alive 2–5 years following transplant.
CONGENITAL DILATATION OF 
THE INTRAHEPATIC DUCTS 
(CAROLI’S DISEASE)
This rare congenital condition is characterised by multiple 
irregular saccular dilatations of the intrahepatic ducts, sepa -
rated by segments of normal or stenotic ducts, with a normal 
extrahepatic biliary system. In Caroli’s syndrome, the biliary 
dilatation is associated with congenital hepatic fibrosis. The 
presentation is varied, with many patients presenting with 
abdominal pain, cholangitis or end-stage liver disease. The 
majority of patients present before the age of 30. Sex distri -
bution is equal. Management is multidisciplinary: cholangitis 
or jaundice are treated with appropriate antibiotic therapy 
and endoscopic or interventional stenting. Malignancy is a 
complication of long-standing disease. Hepatic resection is 
indicated for patients with limited disease. Patients with dif -
fuse disease and concomitant hepatic fibrosis are candidates 
for liver transplantation. Recurrence is common, particularly 
after resection, and long-term surveillance is required.
CHOLEDOCHAL CYST
Cystic disease of the biliary system is rare. Choledochal cysts 
are congenital dilations of the intra and/or extrahepatic bili -
ary system. The pathogenesis is unclear. Anomalous junctions 
of the biliary pancreatic junction are frequently observed, but 
whether or not these play a role in the pathogenesis of the 
condition is unclear. Todani and colleagues proposed a clas-
sification of cystic disease of the biliary tract (Figure 67.26). 
Type I cysts are the most common and account for approxi -
mately 75% of patients.
Patients may present at any age with jaundice, fever, 
abdominal pain and a right upper quadrant mass on exam -
ination; however, 60% of cases are diagnosed before the age 
of 10 years. Pancreatitis is not an infrequent presentation in 
adults. Patients with choledochal cysts have an increased 
risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma with the risk varying 
directly with the age at diagnosis.
Ultrasonography will confirm the presence of an abnor -
mal cyst and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI/MRCP) will 
reveal the anatomy, in particular the relationship between the 
lower end of the bile duct and the pancreatic duct. CT is also 
useful for delineating the extent of the intra- or extrahepatic 
dilatation.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 67.24Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
I
Patent
Patent
Atretic
Atretic
Atretic
IIIII
Figure 67.25  Classification of 
biliary atresia. Gallbladder filling 
provides a clue to the type of 
atresia.
César Roux , 1857–1934, Professor of Surgery and Gynaecology, Lausanne, Switzerland. Described the Roux-en-Y loop in 1908.
Morio Kasai , 1922–2008, Professor of Surgery, Tokyo University, Japan.
Jacques Caroli , 1902–1979, gastrogenterologist, Hôpital St Antoine, Paris, described cavernous ectasia in the biliary tree in 1958.
Takuji Todani , b.1931, Department of Surgery, Okayama University Medical School, Japan, modified Alonso-Lej’s classification of choledochal cysts in 1977.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1197 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1198
Radical excision of the cyst is the treatment of choice, 
with reconstruction of the biliary tract using a Roux-en-Y 
loop of jejunum. Complete resection of the cyst is important 
because of the association with the development of cholan -
giocarcinoma. Resection and roux-en-Y reconstruction are 
also associated with a reduced incidence of stricture forma-
tion and recurrent cholangitis.
TRAUMA
Injuries to the gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary tree are 
rare. They occur as a result of blunt or penetrating abdomi -
nal trauma. Iatrogenic injury is perhaps more frequent than 
external trauma. The physical signs are those of an acute 
abdomen. Management depends on the location and extent 
of the biliary and associated injury. In the stable patient a 
transected bile duct is best repaired by a Roux-en-Y choledo-
chojejunostomy. Injuries to the gallbladder can be dealt with 
by cholecystectomy.
TORSION OF THE 
GALLBLADDER
This is very rare and requires a long mesentery, and therefore 
often occurs in an older patient with a large mucocoele of 
the gallbladder. The patient presents with extreme pain and 
an acute abdomen. Immediate exploration is indicated, with 
cholecystectomy as the only treatment.
GALLSTONES 
(CHOLELITHIASIS)
Gallstones are the most common biliary pathology. It is esti -
mated that gallstones affect 10–15% of the population in 
Western societies. They are asymptomatic in the majority of 
cases (>80%). In the UK, the prevalence of gallstones at the 
time of death is estimated to be 17% and may be increasing. 
Approximately 1–2% of asymptomatic patients will develop 
symptoms requiring surgery per year, making cholecystectomy 
one of the most common operations performed by general 
surgeons.
Causal factors in gallstone formation
Gallstones can be divided into three main types: cholesterol, 
pigment (brown/black) or mixed stones. In the USA and 
Europe 80% are cholesterol or mixed stones, whereas in Asia 
80% are pigment stones. Cholesterol or mixed stones contain 
51–99% pure cholesterol plus an admixture of calcium salts, 
bile acids, bile pigments and phospholipids.
Cholesterol, which is insoluble in water, is secreted from 
the canalicular membrane in phospholipid vesicles. Whether 
cholesterol remains in solution depends on the concentration 
of phospholipids and bile acids in the bile, and on the type of 
phospholipid and bile acid. Micelles formed by the phospho -
lipid hold cholesterol in a stable thermodynamic state. When 
bile is supersaturated with cholesterol or bile acid concentra-
tions are low, unstable unilamellar phospholipid vesicles form, 
from which cholesterol crystals may nucleate, and stones may 
form. The process of gallstone formation is complex (Figure 
67.27), and many areas remain unclear. Obesity, high-caloric 
diets and certain medications (e.g. oral contraceptives) can 
increase secretion of cholesterol and supersaturate the bile, 
increasing the lithogenicity of bile. Resection of the terminal 
ileum, which diminishes the enterohepatic circulation, will 
deplete the bile acid pool and result in cholesterol supersatu -
ration. Nucleation of cholesterol monohydrate crystals from 
multilamellar vesicles is a crucial step in gallstone formation. 
Abnormal emptying of the gallbladder may aid the aggrega -
tion of nucleated cholesterol crystals; hence, removing gall -
stones without removing the gallbladder inevitability leads to 
gallstone recurrence.
Ia Ib II
IIII VV
Figure 67.26 Classification of types of choledochal cyst. T ype Ia 
and b: diffuse cystic. Note extension into pancreas of type Ib. Type 
II: diverticulum of common bile duct. Type III: diverticulum within pan-
creas. Type IV: extension into the liver. Type V: cystic dilatation only of 
the intrahepatic ducts.
Impaired gall- 
bladder function
• Emptying
• Absorption
• Exc re tion
Supersaturated
bile
• Age
• Sex
• Genetics
• Obesity
• Diet
Absorption/enterohepatic
circulation of bile acids
• Deoxycholate
• Bowel transit time
• Faecal enteric /f_lora
• Ileal resection
• Cholestyramine
Cholesterol
nucleating factors
• Mucus
• Glycopro tein
• Infection
Figure 67.27 Factors associated with gallstone formation.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1198 25/10/2017   09:52Gallstones (cholelithiasis) 1199
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Pigment stone is the name used for stones containing 
<30% cholesterol. There are two types: black and brown. 
Black stones are largely composed of an insoluble bilirubin 
pigment polymer mixed with calcium phosphate and calcium 
bicarbonate. Overall, 20–30% of stones are black. The inci -
dence rises with age. Black stones are associated with haemo-
lysis, usually hereditary spherocytosis or sickle cell disease. For 
reasons that are unclear, patients with cirrhosis have a higher 
instance of pigmented stones.
Brown pigment stones contain calcium bilirubinate, cal -
cium palmitate and calcium stearate, as well as cholesterol. 
Brown stones are rare in the gallbladder. They form in the 
bile duct and are related to bile stasis and infected bile. Stone 
formation is related to the deconjugation of bilirubin deglu -
curonide by bacterial β-glucuronidase. Insoluble unconju-
gated bilirubinate precipitates. Brown pigment stones are 
also associated with the presence of foreign bodies within the 
bile ducts such as endoprostheses (stents) or parasites such as 
 Clonorchis sinensis and Ascaris lumbricoides.
Clinical presentation
Gallstones may remain asymptomatic, being detected inci -
dentally as imaging is performed for other symptoms. If 
symptoms occur, patients typically complain of right upper 
quadrant or epigastric pain, which may radiate to the back. 
This may be described as colicky but more often is dull and 
constant. Other symptoms include dyspepsia, flatulence, food 
intolerance particularly to fats and some alteration in bowel 
frequency. Biliary colic is typically present in 10–25% of 
patients. This is described as a severe right upper quadrant 
pain which ebbs and flows, associated with nausea and vomit-
ing. Pain may radiate to the chest. The pain is usually severe 
and may last for minutes or even several hours. Frequently, 
the pain starts during the night and wakes the patient. Minor 
episodes of the same discomfort may occur intermittently 
during the day. Dyspeptic symptoms may coexist and be 
worse after such an attack. As the pain resolves the patient 
improves and is able to eat and drink again, often only to 
suffer further episodes. It is of interest that a patient may have 
When the symptoms do not resolve but progress to con-
tinued pain with fever and leukocytosis, the diagnosis of acute 
cholecystitis should be considered. The differential diagnosis 
is given in Summary box 67.3.
Summary box 67.2
Effects and complications of gallstones
●● Biliary colic
●● Acute cholecystitis
●● Chronic cholecystitis
●● Empyema of the gallbladder
●● Mucocoele
●● Perforation
●● Biliary obstruction
●● Acute cholangitis
●● Acute pancreatitis
●● Intestinal obstruction (gallstone ileus)
Diagnosis
A diagnosis of gallstone disease is based on the history and 
physical examination with confirmatory radiological studies 
such as transabdominal ultrasonography and radionuclide 
scans (see above). In the acute phase the patient may have 
right upper quadrant tenderness that is exacerbated during 
inspiration by the examiner’s right subcostal palpation (Mur-
phy’s sign). A positive Murphy’s sign suggests acute inflamma-
tion and may be associated with a leukocytosis and moderately 
elevated liver function tests. A mass may be palpable as the 
omentum walls off an inflamed gallbladder. While the pre-
sentation and examination may suggest acute cholecystitis, a 
definitive diagnosis can only be made following appropriate 
imaging studies (US or CT). Fortunately, in the majority of 
cases the process is limited by the stone slipping back into the 
body of the gallbladder and the contents of the gallbladder 
escaping by way of the cystic duct. This achieves adequate 
drainage of the gallbladder and enables the inflammation to 
resolve.
If resolution does not occur, an empyema of the gallblad -
der may result. The wall may become necrotic and perforate, 
with development of localised peritonitis. The abscess may 
then perforate into the peritoneal cavity with a septic perito-
nitis; however, this is uncommon, because the inflamed gall -
bladder is usually localised by omentum which contains the 
perforation.
A palpable, non-tender gallbladder (Courvoisier’s sign) 
portends a more sinister diagnosis. This usually results from a 
distal common duct obstruction secondary to a peripancreatic 
Summary box 67.3
Differential diagnosis of acute cholecystitis
Common
●● Appendicitis
●● Perforated peptic ulcer
●● Acute pancreatitis
Rare
●● Acute pyelonephritis
●● Myocardial infarction
●● Pneumonia – right lower lobe
several episodes of this nature over a perio d of a few weeks 
and then no more trouble for some months. Jaundice may 
result if the stone migrates from the gallbladder and obstructs 
the common bile duct. Rarely, a gallstone can lead to bowel 
obstruction (gallstone ileus).
John Benjamin Murphy , 1857–1916, surgeon, Mercy Hospital Chicago, IL, USA.
Ludwig Courvoisier , 1843–1918, Professor of Surgery, Basle, Switzerland.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1199 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1200
malignancy. Rarely, a non-tender, palpable gallbladder results 
from complete obstruction of the cystic duct with reabsorp-
tion of the intraluminal bile salts and secretion of uninfected 
mucus by the gallbladder epithelium, leading to a mucocoele 
of the gallbladder.
Treatment
Most consider that it is safe to observe patients with asymp -
tomatic gallstones, with cholecystectomy reserved for 
patients who develop symptoms or complications. However, 
prophylactic cholecystectomy may be considered for diabetic 
patients, those with congenital haemolytic anaemia and 
those patients who are undergoing bariatric surgery for mor -
bid obesity because it has been found in these groups that the 
risk of developing symptoms is increased. For patients with 
symptomatic gallstones, cholecystectomy is the treatment of 
choice if there are no medical contraindications.
Experience shows that, in more than 90% of cases, the 
symptoms of acute cholecystitis subside with conservative 
measures. Non-operative treatment is based on four principles:
 ● Nil per mouth (NPO) and intravenous fluid administra-
tion until the pain resolves.
 ● Administration of analgesics.
 ● Administration of antibiotics. As the cystic duct is blocked 
in most instances, the concentration of antibiotic in the 
serum is more important than its concentration in bile. A 
broad-spectrum antibiotic effective against gram-negative 
aerobes is most appropriate (e.g. cefazolin, cefuroxime or 
ciprofloxacillin).
 ● Subsequent management. When the temperature, pulse 
and other physical signs show that the inflammation is 
subsiding, oral fluids are reinstated, followed by a regular 
diet. Ultrasonography is performed to confirm the diagno-
sis. If jaundice is present MRCP is performed to exclude 
choledocholithiasis. If there is any concern regarding the 
diagnosis or presence of complications such as perforation 
CT should be performed. Cholecystectomy may be per -
formed on the next available list, or the patient may be 
allowed home to return later when the inflammation has 
completely resolved.
The 2013 Toyko guidelines allow assessment of severity 
to be made (Table 67.1). In patients with grade III disease 
depending on the status of the patient either operative inter-
vention and cholecystectomy should be performed or if the 
patient has comorbid conditions, a percutaneous cholecystos-
tomy can be performed by a radiologist under ultrasound con-
trol. This will usually rapidly relieve symptoms, however an 
interval cholecystectomy will be required once the patient’s 
condition has stablised.
The timing of surgery in acute cholecystitis remains 
controversial, with many units favouring an early inter -
vention within the first week whereas others suggest that a 
delayed approach is preferable. Early cholecystectomy during 
acute cholecystitis appears to be safe and shortens the total 
 hospital stay.
Provided that the operation is undertaken within 5–7 
days of the onset of the attack, the surgeon is experienced 
and excellent operating facilities are available, goo d results 
are achieved. Nevertheless, the conversion rate in laparo -
scopic cholecystectomy is higher in acute than in elective 
surgery. If an early operation is not indicated one should wait 
approximately 6 weeks for the inflammation to subside before 
operating.
EMPYEMA OF THE 
GALLBLADDER
Empyema may be a sequel to acute cholecystitis or the result 
of a mucocoele becoming infected. The gallbladder is dis -
tended with pus. The optimal treatment is drainage (chole -
cystostomy, see above) and, later, cholecystectomy.
Acalculous cholecystitis
Acute and chronic inflammation of the gallbladder can occur 
in the absence of stones and give rise to a clinical picture 
similar to that of calculous cholecystitis. Some patients have 
non-specific inflammation of the gallbladder, whereas others 
have one of the cholecystoses (see below). Acute acalculous 
cholecystitis is particularly seen in critically ill patients and 
those recovering from major surgery, trauma and burns. The 
diagnosis is often missed and the mortality rate is high.
TABLE 67.1 Tokyo Consensus Guidelines for severity 
grading of acute cholecystitis. Reproduced with permission 
from Yokoe et al. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 2013; 30: 
35–46.
Grade III (severe) acute cholecystitis
Associated with dysfunction of any one of the following organs/
systems:
1 Cardiovascular dysfunction Hypertension requiring treatment 
with dopamine ≤5 µg/kg/min, 
or any dose of norepinephrine 
(noradrenaline)
2 Neurological dysfunction Decreased level of consciousness
3 Respiratory dysfunction PaO2/FiO2 ratio <300
4 Renal dysfunction Oliguria; creatinine >2.0 mg/dL
5 Hepatic dysfunction Prothrombin time (PT-INR) >1.5
6 Haematological dysfunction Platelet count <100 000/mm3
Grade II (moderate) acute cholecystitis
Associated with any one of the following conditions:
1 Elevated white cell count (>18 000/mm3)
2 Palpable tender mass in the right upper abdominal quadrant
3 Duration of complaints >72 hours
4 Marked local inflammation (gangrenous cholecystitis, 
pericholecystic abscess, hepatic abscess, biliary peritonitis, 
emphysematous cholecystitis)
Grade I (mild) acute cholecystitis
Does not meet the criteria of grade II or grade III acute 
cholecystitis. Grade I can also be defined as acute cholecystitis in 
a healthy person with no organ dysfunction and mild inflammatory 
changes in the gallbladder, making cholecystectomy a safe and 
low-risk operative procedure
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1200 25/10/2017   09:52The cholecystoses (cholesterosis, polyposis, adenomyomatosis and cholecystitis glandularis proliferans) 1201
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
THE CHOLECYSTOSES 
(CHOLESTEROSIS, POL YPOSIS, 
ADENOMYOMATOSIS AND 
CHOLECYSTITIS GLANDULARIS 
PROLIFERANS)
This is a relatively uncommon group of conditions affecting 
the gallbladder, in which there are chronic inflammatory 
changes with hyperplasia of all tissue elements.
Cholesterosis (‘strawberry 
gallbladder’)
In the fresh state, the interior of the gallbladder looks some -
thing like a strawberry in patients with this condition; the 
yellow specks (submucous aggregations of cholesterol crys -
tals and cholesterol esters) correspond to the seeds (Figure 
67.28). It may be associated with cholesterol stones.
Cholesterol polyposis of the 
gallbladder
Ultrasound may show a non-mobile defect in the gallbladder 
lumen which does not exhibit an associated acoustic shadow. 
The differential is an adenomatous polyp, and interval 
follow-up is indicated to ensure stability. Surgery is only 
advised if there is a diagnostic dilemma.
Cholecystitis glandularis proliferans 
(polyp, adenomyomatosis and 
intramural diverticulosis)
Figure 67.29 summarises the varieties of this condition. A 
polyp of the mucous membrane is fleshy and granulomatous. 
All layers of the gallbladder wall may be thickened, but some-
times an incomplete septum forms that separates the hyper -
plastic from the normal. Intraparietal ‘mixed’ calculi may be 
present. These can be complicated by an intramural, and later 
extramural, abscess and potentially fistula formation. If symp-
tomatic, the patient is treated by cholecystectomy.
Diverticulosis of the gallbladder
Diverticulosis of the gallbladder is usually manifest as black 
pigment stones impacted in the outpouchings of the lacunae 
of Luschka. Diverticulosis of the gallbladder may be demon -
strated by cholecystography, especially when the gallbladder 
contracts after a fatty meal. There are small dots of contrast 
medium just within and outside the gallbladder (Figure 
67.30). A septum may also be present, to be distinguished 
from the Phrygian cap. The treatment is cholecystectomy.
Typhoid infection of the gallbladder
Salmonella typhi or Salmonella typhimurium can infect the 
gallbladder. Acute cholecystitis can occur . More frequently, 
Daniel Elmer Salmon , 1850–1914, veterinary pathologist, Chief of the Bureau of Animal Industry, Washington, DC, USA.
Figure 67.28 The interior of a strawberry gallbladder (cholesterosis) 
(courtesy of Dr Sanjay P Thakur, Patna, India).
Figure 67.29  Types of cholecystitis 
glandularis proliferans (polypus, intra -
mural or diverticular stones and fistula).
Figure 67.30 Cholecystogram showing diverticulosis with dots of 
contrast medium in the gallbladder wall.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1201 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1202
chronic cholecystitis occurs, the patient becoming a typhoid 
carrier excreting the bacteria in the bile. Gallstones may be 
present (surgeons should not give patients their stones after 
their operation if there is any suspicion of typhoid!). It is 
debatable whether the stones are secondary to the Salmonella 
cholecystitis or whether pre-existing stones predispose the 
gallbladder to chronic infection. Salmonellae can, however, 
frequently be cultured from these stones. Treatment with 
ampicillin and cholecystectomy are indicated. In cases of 
penicillin allergy a quinolone antibiotic can be used.
CHOLECYSTECTOMY
Preparation for operation
After appropriate history taking and assessment of the 
patient’s fitness for the procedure, a full bloo d count and 
biochemical profile should be performed to exclude anaemia 
and to identify abnormal liver function. A blood coagulation 
screen should be checked if there is a history of jaundice or 
liver function is abnormal. Prophylactic antibiotics should be 
administered either with the premedication or at the time of 
induction of anaesthesia. A second-generation cephalosporin 
is appropriate. Subcutaneous heparin or antiembolic stock -
ings should be prescribed. The patient must sign a consent 
form to indicate that he or she is fully aware of the procedure 
being undertaken, alternative options and the risks involved 
and complications that may occur.
a ‘closed’ technique using a Verres needle to establish pneu -
moperitoneum prior to placing the initial trocar. Recently, 
single-port laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been described. 
Proponents report decreased postoperative pain and improved 
cosmesis. However, recent systematic reviews have reported a 
higher failure rate, longer operative time and increased blood 
loss without any substantive benefits for the technique.
Additional operating ports are inserted in the subxiphoid 
area and in the right subcostal area. The patient is placed 
in a reverse Trendelberg position slightly rotated to the left. 
This exposes the fundus of the gallbladder which is retracted 
towards the diaphragm. The neck of the gallbladder is then 
retracted towards the right iliac fossa, exposing Calot’s trian -
gle. This area is laid wide open by dividing the peritoneum 
on the posterior and on the anterior aspect. The cystic duct 
is carefully defined, as is the cystic artery. The gallbladder is 
separated from the liver bed for about 2 cm to allow confirma-
tion of the anatomy. Unless there are specific indications (see 
below) a routine cholangiogram is not performed. However , 
if doubt exists regarding the anatomy a cholangiogram is war-
ranted. Once the anatomy is clearly defined and the triangle 
of Calot has been laid wide open, the cystic duct and artery 
are clipped and divided. The gallbladder is then removed 
from the gallbladder bed by sharp or cautery dissection and, 
once free, removed via the umbilicus.
Open cholecystectomy
For patients in whom a laparoscopic approach is not indi -
cated or in whom conversion from a laparoscopic approach is 
required an open cholecystectomy is performed.
Either an upper midline or a short right upper transverse 
incision is made, centred over the lateral border of the rectus 
muscle. The gallbladder is appropriately exposed and packs 
are placed on the hepatic flexure of the colon, the duodenum 
and the lesser omentum to ensure a clear view of the anat -
omy of the porta hepatis. These packs may be retracted by 
the assistant’s hand (‘It is the left hand of the assistant that 
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy
The preparation and indications for cholecystectomy are 
the same whether it is performed by laparoscopy or by open 
techniques. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the procedure of 
choice for the majority of patients with gallbladder disease. 
The key, as in open surgery, is the identification and safe dis-
section of Calot’s triangle (Figure 67.31).
The patient is placed supine on the operating table. Fol-
lowing induction and maintenance of general anaesthesia, 
the abdomen is prepared in a standard fashion. Pneumoperi -
toneum is established. A number of techniques are described. 
The author’s preference is to use an open subumbilical cut-
down with direct visualisation of the peritoneum, to place 
the initial port. This port will function as the camera port. 
An angled telescope (30°) is preferred. Many surgeons perfer 
Summary box 67.4
Preparation for cholecystectomy
●● Full blood count
●● Renal profile and liver function tests
●● Prothrombin time
●● Chest x-ray and electrocardiogram (if over 45 years or 
medically indicated)
●● Antibiotic prophylaxis
●● Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis
●● Informed consent
Figure 67.31 Operative image of a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. 
Laparoscopic forceps (arrow) are used to dissect Calot’s triangle.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1202 25/10/2017   09:52Cholecystectomy 1203
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
does all the work’ – Moynihan). Alternatively, a stabilised 
ring retractor is used to keep the packs in position.
An artery or Duval forceps is placed on the infundibulum 
of the gallbladder and the peritoneum overlying Calot’ s tri-
angle is placed on a stretch. The peritoneum is then divided 
close to the wall of the gallbladder and the fat in the triangle 
of Calot carefully dissected away to expose the cystic artery 
and the cystic duct. The cystic duct is cleaned down to the 
common bile duct, whose position is clearly ascertained. The 
cystic artery is tied and divided. The whole of the triangle of 
Calot is displayed to ensure that the anatomy of the ducts is 
clear and the cystic duct is then divided between ligatures 
(Figure 67.32). The gallbladder is then dissected away from 
the gallbladder bed.
Some golden rules to observe in case of difficulty:
 ● When the anatomy of the triangle of Calot is unclear, 
blind dissection should stop.
 ● Bleeding adjacent to the triangle of Calot should be con -
trolled by pressure and not by blind clipping or clamping.
 ● When there is doubt about the anatomy, a retrograde 
or ‘fundus-first’ cholecystectomy dissection on the gall -
bladder wall from the fundus to the cystic duct can be 
helpful.
 ● If the cystic duct is densely adherent to the common bile 
duct and there is the possibility of a Mirizzi syndrome 
(a stone ulcerating through the neck of the gallbladder 
into the common hepatic duct), the infundibulum of the 
gallbladder should be opened, the stone removed and the 
infundibulum oversewn. Attempts to dissect out the cystic 
duct completely will only lead to injury to the common 
hepatic or common bile duct.
 ● A cholecystostomy is rarely indicated but, if required, as 
many stones as possible should be extracted and a large 
Foley catheter (14  Fr) placed in the fundus of the gall -
bladder with a direct track externally. By so doing, stones 
retained in the gallbladder can be subsequently extracted 
with a choledochoscope.
Indications for choledochotomy
In an environment in which neither the modern diagnostic 
armamentarium described at the beginning of this chapter 
nor peroperative cholangiography is available, it is well to 
remember the traditional indications for choledochotomy, 
which are:
 ● palpable duct stones;
 ● jaundice or a history of jaundice or cholangitis;
 ● a dilated common bile duct;
 ● abnormal liver function tests, in particular a raised alka -
line phosphatase.
Unless the expertise is available, it is probably inadvis -
able to perform a choledochotomy laparoscopically; rather, 
one should rely on endoscopic techniques or convert to an 
open operation. The incidence of symptomatic stones in the 
bile duct varies from 5% to 8%. These can, in the main, be 
dealt with endoscopically without resort to opening the duct. 
However, current trials suggest that in experienced hands the 
morbidity associated with the two techniques is identical.
Complications of cholecystectomy
Recovery after laparoscopic cholecystectomy is associated 
with less pain and faster return to normal activity than after 
open cholecystectomy. The majority of patients undergoing 
an elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy can have this per -
formed as a day case, avoiding hospital admission. Any untow-
ard symptoms in the postoperative period such as fevers, chills 
or abdominal pain require immediate investigation.
The operative mortality for cholecystectomy is less than 
1%. Factors increasing the risk for postoperative mortal-
ity include advanced age, comorbid conditions and acute 
presentation. Complications can occur in 10–15% of cases. 
Serious complications of laparoscopic cholecystectomy fall 
into two major areas: access complications and bile duct 
injuries. The latter are rare, occurring in approximately 
0.5% of cases. In the main, biliary injury results from poor 
dissection and failure to define the surgical anatomy ade-
quately. Controversy exists as to whether or not the use of 
operative cholangiography reduces the incidence of bile duct 
injury. The majority of surgeons use cholangiography only in 
selected cases.
Patients who develop jaundice in the postoperative 
period require urgent investigation. This is especially true if 
the jaundice is associated with infection, a condition called 
cholangitis.
The first step in management following resuscitation and 
administration of appropriate antibiotics is to undertake an 
urgent ultrasound scan. This will demonstrate whether there 
is intra- or extrahepatic ductal dilatation. The anatomy 
needs to be defined by either an ERCP or a MRCP . The for-
mer will also allow therapeutic manoeuvres such as removal 
Pierre Alfred Duval , 1874–1941, French surgeon.
Pablo Luis Mirizzi , 1893–1964, Argentinian surgeon, described this condition in 1932.
Frederic Eugene Basil Foley , 1891–1965, urologist, The Miller and Anker Hospitals, St Paul, MN, USA.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 67.31Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 67.32 Ligatures are passed and tied around the cystic artery 
and cystic duct. The grey shaded area represents Calot’s triangle.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1203 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1204
of an obstructing stone or insertion of a stent across a bil -
iary leak. If a fluid collection is present in the subhepatic 
space, drainage catheters may be required. These can be 
inserted under radiological control or, if this expertise is not 
available, at open operation. Small biliary leaks will usually 
resolve spontaneously, especially if there is no distal obstruc -
tion. Should the common bile duct be damaged, the patient 
should be referred to an appropriate expert for reconstruc-
tion of the duct.
About 15% of injuries to the bile ducts are recognised 
at the time of operation; in the remaining 85% of cases, the 
injury declares itself postoperatively by either a profuse and 
persistent leakage of bile, if drainage has been provided, bile 
peritonitis if such drainage has not been provided, or deep -
ening obstructive jaundice. When the obstruction is incom-
plete, jaundice is delayed until subsequent fibrosis renders the 
lumen of the duct inadequate.
Any postoperative elevation in serum bilirubin or sugges-
tion of duct damage requires investigation and the nature of 
the bile duct injury clarified.
HIDA scanning may be helpful as it can confirm the pres-
ence of a leak or biliary obstruction. It can be used to identify 
and quantitate the leak. If available, ERCP should be consid-
ered because this is both diagnostic and potentially therapeu-
tic. The most common bile leak following cholecystectomy is 
from the cystic duct. This can be treated by a gastroenterol -
ogist placing a biliary endoprosthesis (stent) in the common 
bile duct across the origin of the cystic duct. MRCP is also 
helpful in determining the level and degree of injury.
The surgical repair and subsequent outcome are related to 
the level and degree of injury, in conjunction with the pres -
ence or absence of concomitant vascular injury. A number of 
classification systems have been proposed, with the Strasberg 
classification being commonly utilised (Figure 67.33).
In a debilitated patient, temporary external biliary drain -
age may be achieved by passing a catheter percutaneously 
into an intrahepatic duct. Also, stents may be passed through 
strictures at the time of ERCP and left to drain into the 
duodenum. When the general condition of the patient has 
improved, definitive surgery can be undertaken. The prin -
ciples of surgical repair are maintenance of duct length and 
restoration of biliary drainage. For benign stricture or duct 
transection, the preferred treatment is Roux-en-Y choledo -
chojejunostomy performed by an experienced hepatobiliary 
surgeon. For a stricture of recent onset through which a guide-
wire can be passed, balloon dilatation with insertion of a stent 
is an acceptable alternative, provided that the services of an 
experienced endoscopist are available. The outcome of such 
surgery is good, with 90% of patients having no further chol -
angitis or stricture formation.
Late symptoms after 
cholecystectomy
In up to 15% of patients, cholecystectomy fails to relieve 
the symptoms for which the operation was performed. Such 
patients may be considered to have a ‘post-cholecystectomy’ 
syndrome. However, such problems are usually related to 
the preoperative symptoms and are merely a continuation of 
those symptoms. Full investigation should be undertaken to 
confirm the diagnosis and exclude the presence of a stone in 
the bile duct, a stone in the cystic duct stump or operative 
damage to the biliary tree. This is best performed by MRCP 
or ERCP , the latter of which has the added advantage that if a 
stone is in the common bile duct it can be removed.
Post-cholecystectomy 
choledocholithiasis
Duct stones may occur many years after a cholecystectomy 
or be related to the development of new pathology, such as 
(c)(b)(a)
E1 E4 E5 E6E2
<2 cm>2 cm
E3
(d)
Figure 67.33 Schematic representation of the Strasberg classification of bile duct injuries. (a) Bile leak fr om cystic duct stump or a minor 
biliary radical in gallbladder fossa. (b) Occluded right posterior sectoral duct. (c) Bile leak from divided right posterior sectoral duct. (d) Bile 
leak from main bile duct without major tissue loss. E1: Transected main bile duct with a stricture more than 2 cm from the hilus. E2: Transected 
main bile duct with a stricture less than 2 cm from the hilus. E3: Stricture of the hilus with right and left ducts in communication. E4: Stricture of 
the hilus with separation of right and left hepatic ducts. E5: Stricture of the main bile duct and the right posterior sectoral duct. E6: Complete 
excision of the extrahepatic ducts involving the confluence (this injury is not described in Strasberg’s classification). (After Connor S, Garden 
OJ, Br J Surg 2006; 93: 158–168.) 
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1204 25/10/2017   09:52Cholecystectomy 1205
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
infection of the biliary tree or infestation by Ascaris lumbri-
coides or Clinorchis sinensis. Any obstruction to the flow of bile 
can give rise to stasis with the formation of stones within the 
duct. The consequence of duct stones is either obstruction 
to bile flow or infection. Stones in the bile ducts are more 
often associated with infected bile (80%) than are stones in 
the gallbladder.
Symptoms
The patient may be asymptomatic but usually has bouts of 
pain, jaundice and fever. The patient is often ill and feels 
unwell. The term ‘cholangitis’ is given to the triad of pain, 
jaundice and fevers sometimes known as ‘Charcot’s triad’.
Signs
Tenderness may be elicited in the epigastrium and the right 
hypochondrium. In the jaundiced patient it is useful to 
remember Courvoisier’s law: ‘in obstruction of the common 
bile duct due to a stone, distension of the gallbladder seldom 
occurs; the organ usually is already shrivelled’. In obstruction 
from other causes, distension is common, by comparison. 
However, if there is no disease in the gallbladder and the 
obstruction is due to a cancer of the ampulla, pancreas or bile 
duct, then the gallbladder may well be distended.
Management
It is essential to determine whether the jaundice is due to 
liver disease, disease within the duct, such as sclerosing chol-
angitis, or obstruction. Ultrasound scanning, liver function 
tests, liver biopsy if the ducts are not dilated, and MRI or 
ERCP will identify the nature of the obstruction.
The patient may be ill. Pus may be present within the 
biliary tree and liver abscesses may develop. Full supportive 
measures are required with rehydration, attention to clot -
ting, exclusion of diabetes and administration of appropri -
ate broad-spectrum antibiotics. As soon as resuscitation has 
taken place, relief of the biliary obstruction is essential. Endo-
scopic papillotomy is the preferred first technique, by means 
of a sphincterotomy, removal of the stones using a Dormia 
basket or placement of a stent if stone removal is not possible 
(Figures 67.34 and 67.35) . If this technique fails, percuta -
neous transhepatic cholangiography can be performed to pro-
vide drainage and subsequent percutaneous choledochoscopy. 
Surgery, in the form of choledochotomy, is now rarely used for 
this situation as most patients can be managed by minimally 
invasive techniques.
Choledochotomy
When faced with a sick patient whose investigations show 
that the cause of the cholangitis is stones in the common bile 
duct and minimally invasive techniques for stone extraction 
are not available, the surgeon has no alternative but to under-
take a laparotomy. The aim of this surgery is to drain the 
common bile duct and remove the stones through a longitu -
dinal incision in the duct. When the duct is clear of stones, a 
Jean Martin Charcot , 1825–1893, physician, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Figure 67.34 This patient presented with jaundice 4  days after a 
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The duct contained multiple stones.
Figure 67.35 (a) Endoscopic sphincterotomy; (b) extraction of a 
stone from the bile duct through the ampulla.
(a) (b)
T-tube is inserted and the duct closed around it; the long limb 
is brought out on the right side and the bile allowed to drain 
externally. When the bile has become clear and the patient 
has recovered, a cholangiogram is performed. If residual 
stones are found, the tube is left in place for 6 weeks so that 
the track is ‘mature’. The radiologist can then use the tract for 
percutaneous removal of the stones (Figure 67.36). Once the 
radiologist has removed the tube, the track will close and the 
patient will make a rapid recovery.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1205 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1206
Stricture of the bile duct
The causes of benign biliary stricture are given in Summary 
box 67.5. Bile duct strictures may be investigated radiologi -
cally as described in Summary box 67.6.
factor suggest an immunological basis. The majority of 
patients are between 30 and 60 years of age. There appears to 
be a male predominance and a strong association with inflam-
matory bowel disease, especially ulcerative colitis.
Common symptoms include right upper quadrant discom-
fort, jaundice, pruritus, fever, fatigue and weight loss. Investi-
gation reveals a cholestatic pattern to the liver function tests 
with elevation of the serum alkaline phosphatase and γ-glu-
tamyl transferase and smaller rises in the aminotransferases. 
Bilirubin values can be variable and may fluctuate. Imaging 
studies such as MRCP or ERCP may demonstrate stricturing 
and beading of the bile ducts (Figure 67.37). A liver biopsy 
is helpful to confirm the diagnosis and may help guide therapy 
by excluding cirrhosis. The important differential diagnoses 
are secondary sclerosing cholangitis and cholangiocarcinoma. 
The latter may be very difficult to diagnose and a high index 
of suspicion is required especially in the setting of unexplained 
clinical deterioration.
Medical management with antibiotics, vitamin K, cho -
lestyramine, steroids and immunosuppressant drugs such as 
azathioprine is generally unsuccessful. Endoscopic stenting 
of dominant strictures and, in selected patients with pre -
dominantly extrahepatic disease, operative resection may be 
worthwhile. For patients with cirrhosis, liver transplantation 
is the best option. Five-year survival following transplanta -
tion in high-volume centres is in excess of 80%.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 67.36 Extraction of a stone from the common bile duct by the Burhenne technique. (a) A T-tube in situ with a stone in the duct. 
(b) A steerable catheter has been manipulated into the duct and a basket placed around the stone. (c) The stone being extracted from the bile 
duct along the T-tube track.
(c)
Summary box 67.5
Causes of benign biliary stricture
Congenital
●● Biliary atresia
Bile duct injury at surgery
●● Cholecystectomy
●● Choledochotomy
●● Gastrectomy
●● Hepatic resection
●● Transplantation
Inflammatory
●● Stones
●● Cholangitis
●● Parasitic
●● Pancreatitis
●● Sclerosing cholangitis
●● Radiotherapy
Trauma
Idiopathic
Summary box 67.6
Radiological investigation of biliary strictures
●● Ultrasonography
●● Cholangiography via T-tube, if present
●● ERCP
●● MRCP
●● Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography
●● CT scan
PRIMARY SCLEROSING 
CHOLANGITIS
Primary sclerosing cholangitis is an idiopathic fibrosing 
inflammatory condition of the biliary tree that affects both 
intrahepatic and extrahepatic ducts. It is of unknown origin 
but the association of hypergammaglobulinaemia and elevated 
markers such as smooth muscle antibo dies and  antinuclear  
Joachim Burhenne , 1926–1996, radiologist, Vancouver, Canada. His technique transformed stone management in the 1970s.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1206 25/10/2017   09:52Tumours of the bile duct 1207
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Immunoglobulin (Ig)G4-related 
cholangitis
This recently recognised entity presents with diffuse or seg-
mental narrowing of the intra- or extrahepatic bile ducts. Its 
features may make differentiation from primary sclerosing 
cholangitis (PSC), cholangiocarcinoma or pancreatic cancer 
difficult. However, patients often have elevated serum IgG 4 
levels and concomitant autoimmune pancreatitis, IgG 4- 
related sialadenitis or retroperitoneal fibrosis. Biliary biopsies 
show lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing cholangitis. Treatment is 
with systemic steroids. Failure to respond to steroid therapy 
should make one reconsider the diagnosis and exclude an 
underlying malignancy.
PARASITIC INFESTATION OF THE 
BILIARY TRACT
Biliary ascariasis
The roundworm Ascaris lumbricoides  commonly infests the 
intestines of inhabitants of Asia, Africa and Central America. 
It may enter the biliary tree through the ampulla of Vater and 
cause biliary pain. Complications include strictures, suppura-
tive cholangitis, liver abscesses and empyema of the gallblad-
der. In the uncomplicated case, antispasmodics can be given 
to relax the sphincter of Oddi and the worms will return to 
the small intestine to be dealt with by anthelminthic drugs. 
Operation may be necessary to remove the worms or deal with 
complications. Worms can be extracted via the ampulla of 
Vater by ERCP .
Clonorchiasis (Asiatic 
cholangiohepatis)
This disease is endemic in the Far East. The fluke, up to 
25 mm long and 5 mm wide, inhabits the bile ducts, including 
the intrahepatic ducts. Fibrous thickening of the duct walls 
occurs. Many cases are asymptomatic. Complications include 
biliary pain, stones, cholangitis, cirrhosis and bile duct car -
cinoma. Choledochotomy and T-tube drainage and, in some 
cases, choledochoduodenostomy are required. Because a pro-
cess of recurrent stone formation is set up, a choledochojeju -
nostomy with a Roux loop fixed to the adjacent abdominal 
wall is performed in some centres to allow easy subsequent 
access to the duct system.
Hydatid disease
A large hydatid cyst may obstruct the hepatic ducts. Some -
times, a cyst will rupture into the biliary tree and its contents 
cause obstructive jaundice or cholangitis, requiring appropri -
ate surgery (see Chapter 6).
TUMOURS OF THE BILE DUCT
Benign tumours of the bile duct
These are uncommon and may be an incidental finding. For 
symptomatic patients, the duration of symptoms may vary 
from a few days to months and their clinical presentation may 
in fact mimic conditions such as cholecystitis, choledocholi -
thiasis, cholangiocarcinoma or pancreatic cancer.
Benign neoplasms causing biliary obstruction may be clas-
sified as follows:
 ● papilloma and adenoma;
 ● multiple biliary papillomatosis;
 ● granular cell myoblastoma;
 ● neural tumours;
 ● leiomyoma;
 ● endocrine tumours.
Papilloma and adenoma
The most common benign neoplasms arise from the glandular 
epithelium lining the bile ducts. They can occur throughout 
the biliary system but are more frequent in the periampullary 
area. Lesions in this area may protrude through the ampulla 
of Vater and be visible at endoscopy. Jaundice is the most 
common symptom, occurring in >90% of cases. Coexisting 
gallstones are uncommon.
Treatment depends on the age, the general status of the 
patient and site of the disease but in general should consist of 
total resection of the lesion. In some cases a wide local resec-
tion can be performed.
Papillomatosis
This rare condition is characterised by the presence of multiple 
mucus-secreting tumours of the biliary epithelium. Patients 
present with obstructive jaundice, which may be intermit-
tent, often complicated by cholangitis. These tumours have 
Figure 67.37  Sclerosing cholangitis in a patient with ulcerative 
colitis, visualised by endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreato -
graphy.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1207 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1208
malignant potential and should be resected. This may involve 
liver resection if the disease is confined to a hepatic lobe. If 
both lobes are affected then liver transplantation may be 
required.
Granular cell myoblastoma, neural tumours, leiomyoma 
and endocrine tumours are extremely uncommon. In general, 
if biliary obstruction occurs it should be relieved by biliary 
resection, bypass or endoscopic stenting.
Malignant tumours of the biliary 
tract
Malignant tumours of the gallbladder and extrahepatic biliary 
tree are uncommon. Gallbladder cancer is the predominant 
type, accounting for 60–70% of cases with the remainder dis-
tributed between the intra- and extrahepatic biliary trees.
Unfortunately, owing to advanced stage at presentation, 
surgical resection, which offers the best survival, is only pos -
sible for a minority of patients. Thus, for most patients treat -
ment is generally palliative in nature and survival is limited.
Congenital cystic disease (Caroli’ s disease, choledochal 
cysts), hepatolithiasis, oriental cholangiohepatitis, hepatitis 
C viral infection and infestation with liver flukes have also 
been associated with an increased risk of cholangiocarci-
noma. Liver fluke infestations are particularly important in 
South-East Asia. Opisthorchis viverrini and Clonorchis sinen-
sis infestations are important in Thailand, Laos and western 
Malaysia. While the pathophysiology is unclear, it is thought 
that these parasites cause chronic inflammation that leads to 
DNA mutations through production of carcinogens and free 
radicals, which stimulate cellular proliferation in the intra -
hepatic bile ducts and ultimately can lead to invasive cancer.
Other risk factors suggested include chemical carcinogens 
such as thorium dioxide, vinyl chloride, dioxin and asbestos.
Incidence
Cholangicarcinoma is a rare malignancy. The overall annual 
incidence is 1–1.5 per 100 000 with the peak incidence in the 
8th decade. The male:female ratio is approximately 1.5:1.
Anatomically, tumours involving the biliary confluence 
(hilar cholangiocarcinoma or Klatskin tumours) account for 
60% of cases, with the remainder involving the distal bile 
duct (20–30%) or intrahepatic ducts (10–20%).
Risk factors
A minority of patients presenting with cholangiocarcinoma 
have a known risk factor. The major risk factor in Western 
practice is primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC). It is esti-
mated that a long-standing history of PSC increases the risk 
of developing biliary tract cancer by 20-fold compared to the 
normal population. It appears that patients with PSC and 
concomitant inflammatory bowel disease are at significantly 
higher risk of developing cancer compared to those with -
out the disease. Cholangiocarcinoma appears to occur at an 
earlier age in patients with PSC (30–50 years of age) com -
pared to the general population. In addition, disease is usually 
multifocal and detected at advanced stage with resultant 
poor prognosis.
Summary box 67.7
Bile duct cancer (cholangiocarcinoma)
●● Rare, but incidence increasing
●● Most patients present with abnormal liver function tests or 
frank jaundice
●● Diagnosis by ultrasound, CT or MRCP scanning
●● The majority of patients receive palliative care only
●● Complete surgical excision possible in <10%
●● Prognosis poor: 90% die within 1 year, from liver failure or 
biliary sepsis
●● Adjuvant chemoradiation therapy has a limited role
Summary box 67.8
Risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma
Chronic inflammatory conditions
●● Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)
●● Oriental cholangiohepatitis
●● Hepatitis C infection
Parasitic infections
●● Opisthorchis viverrini
●● Clonorchis sinensis
Congenital
●● Choledochal cysts
●● Caroli’s disease
Chemical agents
●● Thorium dioxide (Thorotrast)
●● Vinyl chloride
●● Dioxin
●● Asbestos
Post surgical
●● Biliary–enteric anastomosis
Clinical features
Early symptoms of cholangiocarcinoma are often non-specific, 
with abdominal pain, early satiety , anorexia and weight loss 
commonly seen. Symptoms associated with biliary obstruc -
tion (puritus and jaundice) may be present in a minority of 
patients. In these patients, examination often demonstrates 
clinical signs of jaundice, cachexia is often noticeable and a 
palpable gallbladder present if the obstruction is in the distal 
common bile duct (Courvoisier’s sign).
Investigations
Biochemical investigations will confirm the presence of 
obstructive jaundice (elevated bilirubin, alkaline phospha -
tase and γ-glutamyltransferase). The tumour-marker CA 19-9 
may also be elevated. Imaging studies such as ultrasound, 
MDR-CT and MRI/MRCP are essential for diagnosis and 
staging. These studies allow the level of biliary obstruction to 
be defined and determine the locoregional extent of disease 
and the presence of metastases (Figure 67.38).
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1208 25/10/2017   09:52Tumours of the bile duct 1209
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
(a)
Direct cholangiography using ERCP or PTC is also used 
following non-invasive studies. Both can define the level of 
obstruction and allow access to the biliary system for biopsy 
and placement of endobiliary stents for biliary drainage. The 
choice between the modalities depends on local availability 
and the anatomical site of the tumour, with PTC preferred for 
more proximal lesions and ERCP favoured for distal tumours. 
Cytology can be obtained from either procedure but it is often 
non-diagnostic.
Positron emission tomography (PET) is useful in detecting 
lymph node and distant metastases but has limited value in 
assessment of local resectability.
The anatomical extent of the disease is classified accord -
ing to either the Bismuth–Corette or Memorial Sloan–  
Kettering Cancer Centre Classification (Figure 67.39).
Treatment
A multidisciplinary approach is required in all cases. The 
choice of treatment depends on the site and extent of the 
disease. Unfortunately, the majority of patients present with 
advanced disease. However, 10–15% are suitable for surgical 
resection, which offers the only hope for long-term survival. 
The aim of surgical resection is to achieve a complete resec -
tion with negative pathological margins (R0 resection) and 
safely restore biliary–enteric continuity.
Whether or not the disease is resectable depends on 
patient factors (comorbidities, presence or absence of chronic 
liver disease), and tumour factors (extent of disease within 
the biliary tree, vascular involvement, presence or absence of 
metastatic disease). Depending on the site of disease, surgery 
may involve either a standard or extended hepatic resection 
with en bloc lymphadenectomy and reconstruction of the bil-
iary tree. Distal common duct tumours may require a pan -
creaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure). Local resection 
should be avoided.
In selected patients, liver transplantation has been rec-
ommended for those with locally unresectable disease with -
out evidence of distant metastases. Transplantation is often 
combined with neoadjuvant chemoradiation therapy. While 
emerging data are encouraging, this aggressive approach 
remains controversial and is reserved for selected patients in 
specialised centres.
Following resection, disease-specific survival is related to 
the T-stage, nodal and margin status. Approximately 35% of 
patients will survive 5 years after surgery. Adjuvant chemo -
therapy and radiotherapy have a limited role to play and have 
not been demonstrated to add survival benefit following sur -
gical resection. However, patients at high risk for recurrence 
(positive surgical margins or node positive) may benefit from 
adjuvant therapy and should be referred for a medical or radi-
ation oncology opinion.
The majority of patients who present with unresectable 
disease are candidates for palliative therapy. The aim is to 
maintain or improve quality of life by relieving symptoms 
and preventing cholestatic liver failure. Biliary obstruction 
can be relieved by either endoscopic (ERCP) or percutaneous 
(PTC) methods. Surgical bypass rarely has a role apart from 
in patients who present with a distal bile duct lesion and are 
found to have unresectable disease at operation.
Cancer of the gallbladder
Incidence
Carcinoma of the gallbladder is a rare disease, but extremely 
variable by geographical region and racial–ethnic groups. The 
Figure 67.38 (a) A computed tomography scan demonstrating a 
cholangiocarcinoma obstructing the common hepatic duct (arr ow). 
(b) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showing the level 
of obstruction (arrow).
(b)
Herni Bismuth , contemporary, hepatobiliary surgeon, Hôpital Paul Bruce, Villejif, France, with Dr Marvin Corlette described the classification of cholangio-
carcinoma in 1975.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1209 25/10/2017   09:52CHAPTER 67  The gallbladder and bile ducts
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1210
highest incidence is among Chileans, American Indians and 
residents in parts of northern India, where it accounts for as 
much as 9% of all biliary tract disease. Women appear to have 
a higher incidence across all geographical areas. In W estern 
practice, gallbladder cancer accounts for less than 1% of new 
cancer diagnoses. The disease usually presents in the 7th or 
8th decade. The aetiology is unclear but there appears to be 
an association with pre-existing gallstone disease, suggest-
ing that chronic inflammation may play a role in a manner 
similar to tumours of the common bile duct. Calcification of 
the gallbladder wall, presumably due to chronic inflamma-
tion (porcelain gallbladder), is also associated with a small 
increased risk of cancer (see Figure 67.4). Chronic infection 
may also promote development of gallbladder cancer and the 
risk in typhoid carriers is significantly increased over the gen-
eral population.
Gallbladder polyps may be found in approximately 5% of 
patients who undergo ultrasonography (Figure 67.40). The 
majority are either adenomyomatosis or cholesterol polyps 
and have no malignant potential. True adenomatous polyps 
occur in 0.3–0.5% of the population. The risk of malignant 
transformation increases with increasing size of the polyp.
Figure 67.40 Ultrasound demonstrating a gallbladder polyp. Note 
the lack of the acoustic shadow.
Type I
Left hepatic
duct
Right hepatic
duct
Common
hepatic duct
Type II Type IIIA
Type IIIB Type IV
Figure 67.39  Bismuth-Corlette Classification 
for cholangiocarcinoma.
Summary box 67.9
Gallbladder cancer
●● Very rare
●● Similar presentation to benign biliary disease i.e., gallstones
●● Diagnosis by ultrasound, CT, MRI/MRCP
●● Most patients present with advanced disease
●● Surgical resection in less than 10% – remainder receive 
palliative treatment
●● Prognosis is poor – median survival approximately 6 months
Pathology
The majority (90%) of tumours are adenocarcinomas. Squa-
mous carcinomas also occur and are believed to arise from 
areas of mucosal squamous metaplasia.
At operation, localised carcinomas are difficult to differen-
tiate from chronic cholecystitis; the tumour most commonly 
is nodular and infiltrative, with thickening of the gallbladder 
wall, often extending to the whole gallbladder. The tumour 
spreads by direct extension into the liver, seeding of the peri-
toneal cavity and involvement of the perihilar lymphatics 
and neural plexuses. At the time of presentation the majority 
of tumours are advanced.
Clinical features
Patients may be asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. Symp-
toms, if present, are usually indistinguishable from those of 
benign gallbladder disease such as biliary colic or cholecysti -
tis, particularly in older patients. Jaundice and anorexia are 
late features. A palpable mass is a late sign.
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1210 25/10/2017   09:52Further reading 1211
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Investigation
Laboratory findings are generally non-specific but may be con-
sistent with biliary obstruction. Non-specific findings such as 
anaemia, leukocytosis, mild elevation in transaminases and 
increased inflammatory markers such as ESR or C-reactive 
protein may be present. Serum CA19-9 is elevated in approx-
imately 80% of patients.
The preoperative diagnosis is often made on ultrasonogra-
phy, and confirmed by a CT scan or MRI/MRCP. Preoperative 
staging should aim to determine the local extent of disease 
and exclude the presence of distant metastases. A percutane-
ous biopsy under radiological guidance is often done to obtain 
tissue for pathological examination. In selected cases, laparo-
scopic examination is useful in staging the disease. Laparos -
copy can detect peritoneal or liver metastases which would 
preclude further surgical resection (Figure 67.41).
PET scanning also has a role in detecting metastatic disease.
Treatment and prognosis
The majority of patients have advanced disease at presenta -
tion, and are not candidates for surgical therapy. Surgery is 
indicated in only very selected cases.
Cholecystectomy should be performed for all gallbladder 
polyps greater than 1  cm. Polyps less than 1  cm can be fol -
lowed with serial ultrasonography to detect any change in 
size or character as the incidence of malignancy in polyps less 
than 1 cm is extremely low.
Radical en bloc resection that may include segmental 
or extended hepatectomy, bile duct resection and regional 
lymphadenectomy should be considered in selected patients. 
The aim is to remove the tumour entirely and achieve nega -
tive histopathological margins.
Patients can have the disease diagnosed following his-
topathological examination of the gallbladder removed for 
presumed benign disease. In these cases, the need for further 
surgery is determined by the stage of disease. For early-stage 
disease, confined to the mucosa or muscle of the gallbladder, 
no further treatment is indicated. However, for transmural 
disease, a radical en bloc resection of the gallbladder fossa and 
surrounding liver along with the regional lymph nodes should 
be performed. If the initial procedure was performed lapa -
roscopically, the surgeon should examine the laparoscopic 
port sites. Routine resection of port sites is no longer recom -
mended. However, it is recognised that the finding of disease 
at the port sites is a sign of generalised peritoneal disease and 
carries a very poor prognosis.
For the majority of patients a non-operative approach to 
palliation is best. Obstructive jaundice can be relieved by 
endoscopic and/or percutaneous methods. The value of adju-
vant therapy is unproven.
Gallbladder cancer for most patients is a lethal disease 
with a grim prognosis. The median survival is less than 
6 months and a 5-year survival figure of 5% has been reported.
FURTHER READING
Carter DC, Russell RCG, Pitt HA, Bismuth H (eds). Rob and Smith’s 
operative surgery: hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgery . London: Chap-
man & Hall, 1996.
Dooley JS, Lok A, Burroughs A, Heathcoate J (eds). Sherlock’s diseases of 
the liver and biliary system, 12th edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011.
Garden OJ, Parks RW . Hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgery: a companion to 
specialist practice, 5th edn. New York: Saunders Elsevier, 2013.
Jarnagin W . Blumgart’s surgery of the liver, pancreas and biliary tract , 5th 
edn. New York: Elsevier, 2012.
Figure 67.41  Laparoscopic staging in a patient with gallbladder 
carcinoma demonstrating gross peritoneal metastases.
Summary box 67.10
Aims of staging gallbladder cancer
●● Assessment of local disease
●● Detection of metastatic disease:
Liver
Peritoneal
Lymphatic
Extra-abdominal disease
11_67-B&L27_Pt11_Ch67.indd   1211 25/10/2017   09:52Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy and physiology of the pancreas
 • Investigations of the pancreas
 • Congenital abnormalities of the pancreas
 • Assessment and management of pancreatitis
 • Diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic cancer
The pancreas
68
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Anatomy
The name ‘pancreas’ is derived from the Greek ‘pan’ (all) and 
‘kreas’ (flesh). For a long time, its glandular function was not 
understood, and it was thought to act as a cushion for the 
stomach. The pancreas is situated in the retroperitoneum. It 
is divided into a head, which occupies 30% of the gland by 
mass, and a body and tail, which together constitute 70%. 
The head lies within the curve of the duodenum, overlying 
the body of the second lumbar vertebra and the vena cava. 
The aorta and the superior mesenteric vessels lie behind the 
neck of the gland. Coming off the side of the pancreatic head 
and passing to the left and behind the superior mesenteric 
vein is the uncinate process of the pancreas. Behind the neck 
of the pancreas, near its upper border, the superior mesenteric 
vein joins the splenic vein to form the portal vein (Figures 
68.1 and 68.2). The tip of the pancreatic tail extends up to 
the splenic hilum.
The pancreas weighs approximately 80 g. Of this, 80–90% 
is composed of exocrine acinar tissue, which is organised into 
lobules. The main pancreatic duct branches into interlobular 
and intralobular ducts, ductules and, finally, acini. The main 
duct is lined by columnar epithelium, which becomes cuboi -
dal in the ductules. Acinar cells are clumped around a central 
lumen, which communicates with the duct system. Clusters of 
endocrine cells, known as islets of Langerhans, are distributed 
throughout the pancreas. Islets consist of different cell types: 
75% are B cells (producing insulin); 20% are A cells (pro -
ducing glucagon); and the remainder are D cells (producing 
somatostatin) and a small number of pancreatic polypeptide 
cells. Within an islet, the B cells form an inner core sur -
rounded by the other cells. Capillaries draining the islet cells 
drain into the portal vein, forming a pancreatic portal system.Splenic
vein
Left
kidney
Right
kidney
Left
ureter
Right
ureter
Left
renal
vesselsRight
renal
vessels
Inferior
mesenteric
veinSuperior
mesenteric vein
SpleenAorta
Inferior
vena cava
Portal vein
Splenic
artery
Figure 68.1 The posterior relations of the pancreas.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 68.02Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Pancreatoduodenal
artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric veinUncinate
process
Head Neck
Body
Tail
Figure 68.2 Transverse section of the pancreas. Note the position of 
the uncinate process behind the vessels.
Paul Langerhans , 1847–1888, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Freiberg, Germany, described the islets in 1869, in his doctoral thesis. He later contracted 
tuberculosis, resigned and moved to warmer climes in Madeira, where he also studied marine worms.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1212 25/10/2017   09:53Anatomy and physiology 1213
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
There are nine key processes that occur during pancreatic 
embryogenesis (Table 68.1). Malrotation of the ventral bud in 
the fifth week results in an annular pancreas, while the mode of 
ductule fusion in the seventh week produces the various possi-
ble ductular patterns. Between the 12th and 40th weeks of fetal 
life, the pancreas differentiates into exocrine and endocrine 
TABLE 68.1 Steps in the development of the pancreas.
1 Day 26 Dorsal pancreatic duct arises from the dorsal side 
of the duodenum
2 Day 32 Ventral bud arises from the base of the hepatic 
diverticulum
3 Day 37 Contact occurs between the two buds. Fusion by 
the end of week 6
4 Week 6 Ventral bud produces the head and uncinate 
process
5 Week 6 Ducts fuse
6 Week 6 Ventral duct and distal portion of the dorsal duct 
form the main duct (duct of Wirsung)
7 Week 6 Proximal dorsal duct forms the duct of Santorini
8 Month 3 Acini appear
9 Months 
3–4
Islets of Langerhans appear and become 
biologically active
Giovanni Domenico Santorini , 1681–1737, Professor of Anatomy and Medicine, Venice, Italy. His drawings of the accessory pancreatic duct were published after 
his death.
Johann Georg Wirsung , 1589–1643, Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy, described the pancreatic duct in 1642, when dissecting the cadaver of a man hanged for 
murder. He died a year later from an assassin’s bullet, on his doorstep.
Eugen von Hippel , 1866–1939, Professor of Ophthalmology, Göttingen, Germany.
Arvid Lindau , 1892–1958, pathologist, Lund, Sweden, established the link between the retinal angiomatosis described by von Hippel and the cerebellar and  
visceral components of the syndrome.
Abraham Vater , 1684–1751, Professor of Anatomy and Botany, and later of Pathology and Therapeutics, Wittenberg, Germany.
Summary box 68.1
Anomalies of the pancreas
●● Aplasia
●● Hypoplasia
●● Hyperplasia
●● Hypertrophy
●● Dysplasia
●● Variations and anomalies of the ductsa
Pancreas divisum
Rotational anomalies
●● Annular pancreasa
●● Pancreatic gall bladder
●● Polycystic diseasea
●● Congenital pancreatic cysts
Cystic fibrosisa
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome
●● Ectopic pancreatic tissue, accessory pancreasa
●● Vascular anomalies
●● Choledochal cystsa
●● Horseshoe pancreas
a The more frequent anomalies encountered in surgical practice.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 68.03Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  4      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
(g)(d)
(f)(c)
(e)(b)
60%
10%
Suppression of the
main duct
(Wirsung)
‘Normal’ pancreatic ducts
Wirsung
branch
Wirsung
branch
Pancreas
divisum
Suppression of the
accessory duct
(Santorini)
30%
Figure 68.3 Variations in the pancr eatic ducts. (a) Normal. (b–d) 
Progressive suppression of the accessory duct (30%). (e–g) Progres-
sive suppression of the main duct (10%). (f, g) Pancreas divisum.
elements. The primitive ducts and their ductules are respon-
sible for the lobular arrangement of the pancreas. Congenital 
anomalies of the pancreas are varied and arise during the early 
phase of development. The anatomy of the pancreatic duct is 
variable as a result of the primordial bud development. The 
dorsal duct is expressed in a variable manner in the adult, as 
outlined in Figure 68.3. Approximately 10% of patients will 
have a significant flow from the main duct through the acces-
sory papilla. The anatomy of the main duodenal papilla, also 
known as the ampulla of Vater, is also variable (Figure 68.4). 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1213 25/10/2017   09:53CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1214 Investigations
Physiology
In response to a meal, the pancreas secretes digestive enzymes 
in an alkaline (pH 8.4) bicarbonate-rich fluid. Spontaneous 
secretion is minimal; the hormone secretin, which is released 
from the duodenal mucosa, evokes a bicarbonate-rich fluid. 
Cholecystokinin (CCK) (synonym: pancreozymin) is released 
from the duodenal mucosa in response to food. CCK is respon-
sible for enzyme release. Vagal stimulation increases the vol-
ume of secretion. Protein is synthesised at a greater rate (per 
gram of tissue) in the pancreas than in any other tissue, with 
the possible exception of the lactating mammary gland. About 
90% of this protein is exported from the acinar cells as a vari-
ety of digestive enzymes. Approximately 6–20  g of digestive 
enzymes enters the duodenum each day . Nascent proteins 
are synthesised as preproteins and undergo modification in a 
sequence of steps. The proteins move from the rough endo -
thelial endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi complex, where 
lysosomes and mature zymogen storage granules containing 
proteases are stored, and then to the ductal surface of the cell, 
from which they are extruded by exocytosis. During this phase, 
the proteolytic enzymes are in an inactive form, the mainte-
nance of which is important in preventing pancreatitis.
INVESTIGATIONS (TABLE 68.2)
Estimation of pancreatic 
enzymes in body fluids
When the pancreas is damaged, enzymes such as amylase, 
lipase, trypsin, elastase and chymotrypsin are released into 
the serum. Measurement of serum amylase is the most widely 
used test of pancreatic damage (serum lipase is more sensitive 
and specific, but is not widely available). The serum amylase 
rises within a few hours of pancreatic damage and declines 
over the next 4–8 days. A markedly elevated serum level is 
highly suspicious but not diagnostic of acute pancreatitis. 
Urinary amylase and amylase–creatinine clearance ratios add 
little to diagnostic accuracy. If confirmation of the diagnosis 
is required, computed tomography (CT) of the pancreas is of 
greater value.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:68.04Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 68.4 Variations in the relation of the common bile duct and 
main pancreatic duct at the main duodenal papilla. In (a), there is 
a common channel with no sphincter mechanism protecting flow 
between the ducts. In (b), there is a partial common channel, while in 
(c), there is separation of the two channels. Gallstone pancreatitis is 
more likely with (a) and (b).
Ruggero Oddi , 1866–1913, anatomist and physiologist, Perugia, Italy, wrote about the structure and function of the ampullary sphincter in 1887, when still a 
student. He struggled in later life with drug addiction.
Camillo Golgi , 1844–1926, Professor of Anatomy and Histology at Pavia, and later at Siena, Italy, developed silver staining of neural tissue and received the  
Nobel Prize in 1906 (with Ramon y Cajal) for his studies in neuroanatomy.
Göran Lundh , 1926–1999, surgeon, Södersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden. Working with Bengt Borgstrom, a biochemist at Lund University, he described this test 
of pancreatic function in 1962. The test has largely been superseded by measurement of faecal elastase.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 68.05Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  4      ISBN: 9781444121278
1
2
3
4
Figure 68.5 The complexity of the sphincter of Oddi. (1) Superior 
choledochal sphincter; (2) inferior choledochal sphincter; (3) ampul-
lary sphincter; (4) pancreatic sphincter.
TABLE 68.2 Investigation of the pancreas.
Serum enzyme levels
Pancreatic function tests
Morphology
 Ultrasound scan
 Computed tomography
 Magnetic resonance imaging
 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
 Endoscopic ultrasound
 Plain radiography
  Chest
  Upper abdomen
Pancreatic function tests
Pancreatic exocrine function can be assessed by directly measur-
ing pancreatic secretion in response to a standardised stimulus. 
The stimulus to secretion can be physiological, e.g. ingestion 
of a test meal, as in the Lundh test, or pharmacological, e.g. 
Summary box 68.2
Causes of raised serum amylase level other than acute 
pancreatitis
●● Upper gastrointestinal tract perforation
●● Mesenteric infarction
●● Torsion of an intra-abdominal viscus
●● Retroperitoneal haematoma
●● Ectopic pregnancy
●● Macroamylasaemia
●● Renal failure
●● Salivary gland inflammation
The outlet of each duct is protected by a complex sphincter 
mechanism (sphincter of Oddi) (Figure 68.5).
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1214 25/10/2017   09:541215
PART 11 | ABDOMINALInvestigations
intravenous injection of a hormone such as secretin or CCK. 
Duodenal intubation has to be performed with a triple-lumen 
tube so that the gastric and duodenal juices can be aspirated, 
and a non-absorbable marker such as polyethylene glycol 
is used to assess the completeness of the aspiration. The 
nitroblue tetrazolium–para-aminobenzoic acid (NBT–PABA) 
test provides an indirect measure of pancreatic function. The 
substance is administered orally and degraded in the gut by a 
pancreatic enzyme, and the breakdown product (PABA) is 
absorbed by the intestine and excreted in the urine; its uri -
nary level is measured. The pancreolauryl test works on a 
similar principle. These tests are cheap and easy to perform, 
but are non-specific, especially following gastrectomy and in 
conditions that may alter gastrointestinal transit and intesti -
nal absorptive capacity. Measurement of the enzyme elastase 
in stool is simple, specific and now used widely. A low level of 
faecal elastase indicates exocrine insufficiency.
Imaging investigations
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is the initial investigation of choice in 
patients with jaundice to determine whether or not the bile 
duct is dilated, the coexistence of gallstones or gross disease 
within the liver such as metastases. It may also define the 
presence or absence of a mass in the pancreas (Figure 68.6). 
However, obesity and overlying bowel gas often make inter -
pretation of the pancreas itself unsatisfactory.
Computed tomography
Most significant pathologies within the pancreas can be diag-
nosed on high-quality CT scans, with three-dimensional 
reconstruction if necessary . A specific pancreatic protocol 
should be followed. An initial unenhanced CT scan is essen-
tial to determine the presence of calcification within the pan-
creas and gall bladder (Figure 68.7). Then, following rapid 
injection of intravenous contrast, scanning is performed in 
the arterial and venous phases. The stomach and duodenum 
should be outlined with water and distended to define the 
Figure 68.6 Ultrasound scan showing a mass in the head of the pan-
creas (marked by an arrow) and a dilated pancreatic duct in the body 
of the gland (courtesy of Dr Alison McLean).
Figure 68.7 (a) Unenhanced computed tomography scan of a man 
with chronic pancreatitis, showing a focus of calcification (marked by 
an arrow) in the head of the pancreas and a cyst adjacent to that. Oral 
contrast has been administered. (b) The same area after injection of 
intravenous contrast.
(a)
(b)
duodenal loop. Pancreatic carcinomas of 1–2  cm in size can 
usually be demonstrated (Figure 68.8). Endocrine tumours 
are also well imaged on CT (Figure 68.9). In patients with 
pancreatitis, necrotic areas within the gland can be identified 
by the absence of contrast enhancement on CT. Inflamma -
tory collections and pseudocysts can be seen (Figure 68.10). 
CT-guided drainage is helpful in the treatment of pancreatic 
collections, cysts and pseudocysts, and facilitates percutane-
ous fine-needle or Trucut biopsy.
Magnetic resonance imaging
With magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the pancreas can 
be clearly identified, and the anatomy of the bile duct and 
the pancreatic duct, together with fluid collections, can be 
defined. Magnetic resonance cholangiography and pancrea-
tography (MRCP) may well replace diagnostic endoscopic 
cholangiography and pancreatography (ERCP) as it is 
non-invasive and less expensive (Figure 68.11). Using the 
technique in conjunction with intravenous injection of secre-
tin, emptying of the pancreatic duct can be demonstrated to 
show the absence or presence of obstruction.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1215 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1216 Investigations
Figure 68.9 Computed tomography scan showing a hypervascular 
insulinoma (arrow) adjacent to the splenic vein. Local excision of the 
tumour resulted in normoglycaemia.
Stomach
Pseudocyst
Figure 68.10 Computed tomography scan of a large pseudocyst in 
relation to the body and tail of the pancreas.
Figure 68.11 Magnetic resonance cholangiopancr eatography in a 
patient with obstructive jaundice. A dilated common bile duct was 
seen on ultrasound, but no pancreatic mass lesion was visible on 
computed tomography. The bile duct and the main pancreatic duct 
are seen very well, with a stone visible in the lower part of the bile duct 
and another in the neck of the gall bladder.
Figure 68.12  Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatography. 
(a) Normal pancreatic duct with filling of the duct of Santorini fr om 
the duct of Wirsung. (b) Diagrammatic outline of (a).
(a)
Contrast in duodenal loop
Catheter
(b)
1 3
2
4
Figure 68.8 Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of a 
patient with a carcinoma of the pancreatic head. The main bulk of the 
tumour lies inferior to the section shown here. The dilated bile duct 
(1) and main pancreatic duct (2) can be seen, with tumour infiltration 
around them. There is a thrombus in the superior mesenteric vein (3). 
The gall bladder is distended (4).
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1216 25/10/2017   09:541217
PART 11 | ABDOMINALInvestigations
Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography
ERCP is performed using a side-viewing fibreoptic duode -
noscope. The ampulla of V ater is intubated, and contrast is 
injected into the biliary and pancreatic ducts to display the 
anatomy radiologically (Figure 68.12). In pancreatic carci -
noma, the main pancreatic duct may be narrowed or com -
pletely obstructed at the site of the tumour (Figure 68.13), or 
the distal bile duct may be narrowed. Concurrent narrowing 
of both ducts results in the so-called double duct sign (Fig-
ure 68.14). Changes seen in chronic pancreatitis include the 
presence of pancreatic duct strictures, dilatation of the main 
pancreatic duct with stones, abnormalities of pancreatic duct 
side branches, communication of the pancreatic duct with 
cysts, and bile duct strictures (Figures 68.15–68.17). A plain 
Figure 68.13  Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatography: 
pancreatic carcinoma. Irregular stricture of the main pancreatic duct 
(arrow) with dilatation distal to the obstruction.
1
2
Figure 68.14  Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatography 
depicting a malignant strictur e in the lower part of the common bile 
duct (1) and in the main pancreatic duct (2), an appearance referred to 
as the double duct sign (courtesy of Dr George Webster).
Figure 68.15  Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatography: 
chronic pancreatitis. Most of the opacities lie within the duct system 
and are stones. Gross dilatation of ducts in the body and tail are due 
to obstruction by stones in the head of the pancreas.
radiograph before contrast studies is essential to delineate 
calcification (Figure 68.18). In addition to imaging, bile or 
pancreatic fluid and brushings from duct strictures can yield 
cells that confirm the suspected diagnosis of carcinoma (Fig-
ure 68.19). Brush cytology taken from malignant strictures 
at the time of ERCP yields a positive diagnosis in 40–50% 
of patients. ERCP also allows the placement of biliary and 
pancreatic stents.
CBD
Dilated PD
Small cyst
Stricture
Dilated
Partially /f_illed cyst
(b)
Figure 68.16  (a) Endoscopic retr ograde cholangiopancreatogra -
phy: relapsing acute pancreatitis. Normal biliary tree. Pancreatogram 
shows stricture of the main duct in the body with distal dilatation and 
cyst formation. (b) Diagrammatic outline of (a). CBD, common bile 
duct; PD, pancreatic duct.
(a)
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1217 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1218
Dilated chain of lakes
Stricture
Catheter
Figure 68.17  (a) Endoscopic r etrograde cholangiopancreatogra-
phy: chronic pancreatitis. Long stricture of the pancreatic duct in the 
head; distal pancreatic duct shows sacculation with intervening short 
strictures, ‘chain of lakes’. (b) Diagrammatic outline of (a).
(a)
(b)
Figure 68.18 Plain abdominal radiograph: chronic pancreatitis. Mul-
tiple opacities can be seen in the region of the head and tail of the 
pancreas.
Figure 68.19 A group of adenocar cinoma cells identified in pan -
creatic juice collected at the time of endoscopic retrograde cholan -
giopancreatography (courtesy of Professor Roger Feakins).
(a)
Figure 68.20  (a) Carcinoma of the pancr eatic head as seen on 
endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). (b) Aspiration biopsy carried out under 
EUS guidance: needle seen entering the tumour (courtesy of Dr Peter 
Fairclough).
(b)
Endoscopic ultrasound
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is performed using a special 
endoscope that has a high-frequency ultrasonic transducer at 
its tip. When the endoscope is in the lumen of the stomach or 
duodenum, the pancreas and its surrounding vasculature and 
lymph nodes can be assessed (Figure 68.20). This is particu-
larly useful in identifying small tumours that may not show up 
well on CT or MRI, and in demonstrating the relationship of 
a pancreatic tumour to major vessels nearby. EUS can clarify 
the relationship of a neuroendocrine tumour to the main pan-
creatic duct (important if enucleation is being considered). 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1218 25/10/2017   09:54Congenital abnormalities 1219
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
It helps to distinguish cystic tumours from pseudocysts. Trans-
duodenal or transgastric fine needle aspiration (FNA) or Tru-
cut biopsy performed under EUS guidance avoids spillage of 
tumour cells into the peritoneal cavity.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
Cystic fibrosis
This is inherited as an autosomal recessive condition. It 
occurs most frequently among Caucasians, in whom it is the 
most common inherited disorder (incidence of 1:2000 live 
births in the UK). Cystic fibrosis (CF) develops when there is 
a mutation in the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane con-
ductance regulator) gene on chromosome 7. This gene creates 
a cell membrane protein that helps to control the movement 
of chloride across the cell membrane.
CF is a multisystem disorder of exocrine glands that affects 
the lungs, intestines, pancreas and liver, and is characterised 
by elevated sodium and chloride ion concentrations in sweat. 
The mother may notice that the child is salty when kissed.
Most of the organ damage is due to blockage of narrow 
passages by thickened secretions. Chronic pulmonary disease 
arises from plugging of bronchi and bronchioles. CF is the 
most common cause of chronic lung disease among children 
in resource-rich countries. Cor pulmonale may develop later. 
At birth, the meconium may set in a sticky mass and pro -
duce intestinal obstruction (meconium ileus) (see Chapter 
9). Secretions precipitate in the lumen of the pancreatic 
duct causing blockage, which results in duct ectasia and fatty 
replacement of exocrine acinar tissue. Pancreatic exocrine 
insufficiency leads to fat malabsorption. Steatorrhoea is usu -
ally present from birth, resulting in stools that are bulky, oily 
and offensive. The islets of Langerhans usually appear normal, 
but diabetes mellitus can occur in older patients. The liver 
may become cirrhotic as a result of bile duct plugging, and 
signs of portal hypertension may appear. Infertility is com -
mon, due to the absence of the vas deferens in men and thick 
cervical mucus in women.
Outside the newborn period, the earliest clinical signs 
of CF are poor growth, poor appetite, rancid greasy stools, 
abdominal distension, chronic respiratory disease and finger 
clubbing. The appearance of secondary sexual characteristics 
may be delayed. The diagnosis can be made by genetic testing 
(which may be part of prenatal or newborn screening) and by 
the sweat test. Levels of sodium and chloride ions in the sweat 
above 90 mmol/L confirm the diagnosis.
Treatment is aimed at control of the secondary conse-
quences of the disease. Pulmonary function is preserved with 
aggressive physiotherapy and antibiotics. Malabsorption is 
treated by administration of oral pancreatic enzyme prepara -
tions. The diet should be low in fat but contain added salt to 
replace the high losses in the sweat. With early diagnosis and 
optimal treatment, patients in resource-rich countries can 
now expect to survive to their mid-thirties. Those with end-
stage lung disease may be considered for lung transplanta -
tion. Heterozygous carriers of the various gene mutations are 
asymptomatic but can be identified by DNA analysis. There 
is a suggestion that such patients may develop pancreatitis 
later in life.
Pancreas divisum
Pancreas divisum occurs when the embryological ventral and 
dorsal parts of the pancreas fail to fuse (Figure 68.3). The 
dorsal pancreatic duct becomes the main pancreatic duct and 
drains most of the pancreas through the minor or accessory 
papilla. The incidence of pancreas divisum ranges from 5% in 
autopsy series to 10% in some ERCP and MRCP series. Pan -
creas divisum found incidentally in an asymptomatic person 
does not warrant any intervention. But the incidence of pan-
creas divisum ranges from 25–50% in patients with recurrent 
acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic pain. 
The minor papilla is substantially smaller than the major papilla 
(and many of these patients probably have papillary stenosis). 
A large volume of secretions flowing through a narrow papilla 
probably leads to incomplete drainage, which may then cause 
obstructive pain or pancreatitis. Certainly in patients with 
idiopathic recurrent pancreatitis, pancreas divisum should be 
excluded. The diagnosis can be arrived at by MRCP , EUS or 
ERCP , augmented by injection of secretin if necessary. There 
may be changes indicative of obstruction or chronic inflamma-
tion in the dorsal duct system. Endoscopic sphincterotomy and 
stenting of the minor papilla may relieve the symptoms. Surgi-
cal intervention can take the form of sphincteroplasty, pancre-
atojejunostomy or even resection of the pancreatic head.
Annular pancreas
This is the result of failure of complete rotation of the ventral 
pancreatic bud during development, so that a ring of pan -
creatic tissue surrounds the second or third part of the duo -
denum. It is most often seen in association with congenital 
duodenal stenosis or atresia and is therefore more prevalent 
in children with Down syndrome. Duodenal obstruction typ-
ically causes vomiting in the neonate (see Chapter 9). The 
usual treatment is bypass (duodenoduodenostomy). The dis -
ease may occur in later life as one of the causes of pancreatitis, 
in which case resection of the head of the pancreas is prefer -
able to lesser procedures.
Ectopic pancreas
Islands of ectopic pancreatic tissue can be found in the sub -
mucosa in parts of the stomach, duodenum or small intestine 
(including Meckel’s diverticulum), the gall bladder, adjoining 
the pancreas, in the hilum of the spleen and within the liver. 
Ectopic pancreas may also be found in the wall of an alimen -
tary tract duplication cyst.
John Langdon Haydon Down , (sometimes given as Haydon-Down), 1828–1896, physician, The London Hospital, London, and Superintendent, Earlswood  
Asylum for Idiots, Surrey, UK, described this syndrome in 1866.
Johann Friedrich Meckel (The Younger) , 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany, described the embryological origin of the eponymous 
diverticulum in 1809.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1219 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1220
Congenital cystic disease of the 
pancreas
This sometimes accompanies congenital disease of the kid -
neys and liver, and occurs as part of the von Hippel–Lindau 
syndrome.
INJURIES TO THE PANCREAS
External injury
Presentation and management
The pancreas, thanks to its somewhat protected location 
in the retroperitoneum, is not frequently damaged in blunt 
abdominal trauma. If there is damage to the pancreas, it is 
often concomitant with injuries to other viscera, especially 
the liver, the spleen and the duo denum. Occasionally, a 
forceful blow to the epigastrium (such as a kick from a human 
or a horse, or pressure from the steering wheel in a car acci -
dent) may crush the body of the pancreas against the ver -
tebral column. Penetrating trauma to the upper abdomen or 
the back carries a higher chance of pancreatic injury. Pan -
creatic injuries may range from a contusion or laceration of 
the parenchyma without duct disruption to major parenchy -
mal destruction with duct disruption (sometimes complete 
transection) and, rarely, massive destruction of the pancreatic 
head. The most important factor that determines treatment is 
whether the pancreatic duct has been disrupted.
Blunt pancreatic trauma usually presents with epigastric 
pain, which may be minor at first, with the progressive devel-
opment of more severe pain due to the sequelae of leakage 
of pancreatic fluid into the surrounding tissues. The clinical 
presentation can be quite deceptive; careful serial assessments 
and a high index of suspicion are required. A rise in serum 
amylase occurs in most cases. A CT scan of the pancreas 
will delineate the damage that has occurred to the pancreas 
(Figure 68.21). If there is doubt about duct disruption, an 
urgent ERCP should be sought. MRCP may also provide the 
answer, but the images can be difficult to interpret. Support 
with intravenous fluids and a ‘nil by mouth’ regimen should 
be instituted while these investigations are performed. There 
is no need to rush to a laparotomy if the patient is haemody -
namically stable, without peritonitis. It is preferable to man -
age conservatively at first, investigate and, once the extent 
of the damage has been ascertained, undertake appropriate 
action. Operation is indicated if there is disruption of the 
main pancreatic duct; in almost all other cases, the patient 
will recover with conservative management.
In penetrating injuries, especially if other organs are 
injured and the patient’s condition is unstable, there is a 
greater need to perform an urgent surgical exploration. 
Assessment of pancreatic damage and duct disruption at the 
time of surgery can be difficult, because the bruising associ-
ated with the retroperitoneal damage prevents clear visualis -
ation of the pancreas. A patient and thorough examination 
of the gland should be carried out. Haemostasis and closed 
drainage is adequate for minor parenchymal injuries. If the 
gland is transected in the body or tail, a distal pancreatectomy 
should be performed, with or without splenectomy. If damage 
is purely confined to the head of the pancreas, haemostasis 
and external drainage is normally effective. In the emergency 
setting, in an unstable patient with concomitant injuries, a 
surgeon unaccustomed to pancreatic surgery should refrain 
from trying to ascertain whether the duct in the pancreatic 
head is intact or embarking on a major resection. However, if 
there is severe injury to the pancreatic head and duodenum, 
then a pancreatoduodenectomy may be necessary.
Figure 68.21  Computed tomography scan showing a pancreatic 
transection due to a bicycle handlebar injury. A distal pancreatectomy 
was performed.
Summary box 68.3
External injury to the pancreas
●● Other organs are likely to be injured
●● It is important to ascertain if the pancreatic duct has been 
disrupted
●● CT and ERCP are the most useful tests
●● Surgery is indicated if the main pancreatic duct is disrupted
Prognosis
The most common cause of death in the immediate period 
is bleeding, usually from associated injuries. Once the acute 
phase has passed, the mortality and morbidity related to the 
pancreatic injury itself are treatable, with a complete return 
to normal activity the usual outcome.
Persistent drain output occurs in up to a third of patients 
(see the section on pancreatic fistulae below). Sometimes, in 
the aftermath of trauma that has been treated conservatively, 
duct stricturing develops, leading to recurrent episodes of pan-
creatitis. The appropriate treatment in such cases is resection 
of the tail of the pancreas distal to the site of duct disruption.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1220 25/10/2017   09:54Pancreatitis 1221
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Also, a pancreatic pseudocyst may develop. If the main 
duct is intact, the cyst can be aspirated percutaneously in the 
first instance; it may not be necessary to undertake a cyst -
gastrostomy. If the cyst develops in the presence of complete 
disruption of the pancreas, there is no alternative but to 
undertake a distal resection or, occasionally, a pancreatoje -
junostomy with a Roux-en-Y loop. In a patient who presents 
with a peripancreatic cyst and a history of previous blunt 
abdominal trauma, do not assume that it is a post-traumatic 
pseudocyst. The possibility of a cystic neoplasm should be 
considered and excluded.
Iatrogenic injury
This can occur in several ways:
 ● Injury to the tail of the pancreas during splenectomy, 
resulting in a pancreatic fistula.
 ● Injury to the pancreatic head and the accessory pancre-
atic duct (Santorini), which is the main duct in 7% of 
patients, during Billroth II gastrectomy. A pancreatogram 
performed by cannulating the duct at the time of discov -
ery of such an injury will demonstrate whether it is safe to 
ligate and divide the duct. If no alternative drainage duct 
can be demonstrated, then the duct should be reanasto -
mosed to the duodenum or alternatively resection of the 
pancreatic head should be considered.
 ● Enucleation of islet cell tumours of the pancreas can result 
in fistulae.
 ● Duodenal or ampullary bleeding following sphincterotomy. 
This injury may require duodenotomy to control the bleeding.
Pancreatic fistula
Pancreatic fistula usually follows operative trauma to the 
gland or occurs as a complication of acute or chronic pancre-
atitis. It is important to define the site of the fistula and the 
epithelial structure with which it communicates (e.g. exter -
nally to skin, or internally to bowel). If there is uncertainty 
about whether the fluid issuing from a drain site or a wound 
is pancreatic juice, measurement of the amylase content will 
be diagnostic.
Management includes correction of metabolic and elec -
trolyte disturbances and adequate drainage of the fistula into 
a stoma bag with protection of the skin. Investigation of the 
cause of the fistula is required as the underlying cause must 
be treated before the fistula will close. Frequently, the cause 
is related to obstruction within the pancreatic duct, which 
can be overcome by the insertion of a stent or catheter endo-
scopically into the pancreatic duct. While waiting for closure 
of the fistula, the patient should be given parenteral or naso -
jejunal nutritional support (as opposed to nasogastric or oral 
feeding; the rationale is that parenteral or nasojejunal feeding 
reduces the volume of pancreatic secretion). The use of oct -
reotide will also suppress pancreatic secretion.
Cesar Roux , 1857–1934, Professor of Surgery and Gynaecology, Lausanne, Switzerland, described this method of forming a jejunal conduit in 1908.
Christian Albert Theodor Billroth , 1829–1894, Professor of Surgery, Vienna, Austria. A hugely influential surgical teacher and an early proponent of surgical 
audit, Billroth performed the first oesophagectomy, first laryngectomy and first successful gastrectomy.
PANCREATITIS
Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreatic parenchyma. For 
clinical purposes, it is useful to divide pancreatitis into acute, 
which presents as an emergency, and chronic, which is a pro-
longed and frequently lifelong disorder resulting from the devel-
opment of fibrosis within the pancreas. It is possible that acute 
and chronic pancreatitis are different phases of the same process.
Acute pancreatitis is defined as an acute condition pre -
senting with abdominal pain, a threefold or greater rise in the 
serum levels of the pancreatic enzymes amylase or lipase, and/
or characteristic findings of pancreatic inflammation on con -
trast-enhanced CT. Acute pancreatitis may recur.
The underlying mechanism of injury in pancreatitis is 
thought to be premature activation of pancreatic enzymes 
within the pancreas, leading to a process of autodigestion. 
Anything that injures the acinar cell and impairs the secre -
tion of zymogen granules, or damages the duct epithelium and 
thus delays enzymatic secretion, can trigger acute pancreati -
tis. Once cellular injury has been initiated, the inflammatory 
process can lead to pancreatic oedema, haemorrhage and, 
eventually, necrosis. As inflammatory mediators are released 
into the circulation, systemic complications can arise, such as 
haemodynamic instability, bacteraemia (due to translocation 
of gut flora), acute respiratory distress syndrome and pleural 
effusions, gastrointestinal haemorrhage, renal failure and dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Acute pancreatitis may be categorised as mild (interstitial 
oedematous pancreatitis) or severe (necrotising pancreatitis). The 
former is characterised by interstitial oedema of the gland 
and minimal organ dysfunction. The majority of patients will 
have a mild attack of pancreatitis, the mortality from which 
is around 1%. Severe acute pancreatitis is seen in 5–10% of 
patients, and is characterised by pancreatic necrosis, a severe 
systemic inflammatory response and often multi-organ failure. 
Summary box 68.4
Management of pancreatic fistulae
Tests
●● Measure amylase level in fluid
●● Determine the anatomy of the fistula
●● Check if the main pancreatic duct is blocked or disrupted
Measures
●● Correct fluid and electrolyte imbalances
●● Protect the skin
●● Drain adequately
●● Parenteral or nasojejunal feeding
●● Octreotide to suppress secretion
●● Relieve pancreatic duct obstruction if possible (ERCP and 
stent)
●● Treat underlying cause
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1221 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1222
In those who have a severe attack of pancreatitis, the mortal-
ity varies from 20 to 50%.
Acute pancreatitis has an early phase that usually lasts a 
week. It is characterised by a systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) which – if severe – can lead to transient or 
persistent organ failure (deemed persistent if it lasts for over 
48 hours). About one-third of deaths occur in the early phase 
of the attack, from multiple organ failure. The late phase is 
seen typically in those who suffer a severe attack, and can 
run from weeks to months. It is characterised by persistent 
systemic signs of inflammation, and/or local complications, 
particularly fluid collections and peripancreatic sepsis. Deaths 
occurring after the first week of onset are often due to septic 
complications.
Chronic pancreatitis  is defined as a continuing inflam -
matory disease of the pancreas characterised by irreversible 
morphological change typically causing pain and/or perma -
nent loss of function. Many patients with chronic pancreatitis 
have painful exacerbations, but the condition may be com -
pletely painless.
Acute pancreatitis
Incidence
Acute pancreatitis accounts for 3% of all cases of abdomi -
nal pain among patients admitted to hospital in the UK. The 
hospital admission rate for acute pancreatitis is 9.8 per year 
per 100 000 population in the UK, although worldwide, the 
annual incidence may range from 5 to 50 per 100  000. The 
disease may occur at any age, with a peak in young men and 
older women.
Aetiology
The two major causes of acute pancreatitis are biliary calculi, 
which occur in 50–70% of patients, and alcohol abuse, which 
Among patients who undergo ERCP , 1–3% develop pan-
creatitis, probably as a consequence of duct disruption and 
enzyme extravasation. Patients with sphincter of Oddi dys-
function or a history of recurrent pancreatitis, and those who 
undergo sphincterotomy or balloon dilatation of the sphinc -
ter, carry a higher risk of developing post-ERCP pancreatitis. 
Patients who have undergone upper abdominal or cardiotho-
racic surgery may develop acute pancreatitis in the postoper -
ative phase, as may those who have suffered blunt abdominal 
trauma.
Hereditary pancreatitis is a rare familial condition asso -
ciated with mutations of the cationic trypsinogen gene. 
Patients have a tendency to suffer acute pancreatitis while in 
their teens, progress to chronic pancreatitis in the next two 
decades and have a high risk (possibly up to 40%) of develop-
ing pancreatic cancer by the age of 70 years.
Occasionally, tumours at the ampulla of Vater may cause 
acute pancreatitis. It is important to check the serum calcium 
level, a fasting lipid profile, autoimmune markers and viral 
titres in patients with so called idiopathic acute pancreati -
tis. It is equally important to take a detailed drug history and 
remember the association of corticosteroids, azathioprine, 
asparaginase and valproic acid with acute pancreatitis. Statins 
(taken over a long time) and gliptins have been linked with 
pancreatitis, but the evidence is slim. It is essential to exclude 
tiny gallstones. A careful search for the aetiology must be 
made in all cases, and no more than 20% of cases should fall 
into the idiopathic category.
Summary box 68.5
Possible causes of acute pancreatitis
●● Gallstones
●● Alcoholism
●● Post ERCP
●● Abdominal trauma
●● Following biliary, upper gastrointestinal or cardiothoracic 
surgery
●● Ampullary tumour
●● Drugs (corticosteroids, azathioprine, asparaginase, valproic 
acid, thiazides, oestrogens)
●● Hyperparathyroidism
●● Hypercalcaemia
●● Pancreas divisum
●● Autoimmune pancreatitis
●● Hereditary pancreatitis
●● Viral infections (mumps, coxsackie B)
●● Malnutrition
●● Scorpion bite
●● Idiopathic
Summary box 68.6
Aetiology of acute pancreatitis
●● It is essential to establish the aetiology
●● Investigate thoroughly before labelling it as ‘idiopathic’
●● After the acute episode resolves, remember further 
management of the underlying aetiology
●● If the aetiology is gallstones, cholecystectomy is desirable 
during the same admission
accounts for 25% of cases. Gallstone pancreatitis is thought 
to be triggered by the passage of gallstones down the common 
bile duct. If the biliary and pancreatic ducts join to share a 
common channel before ending at the ampulla, then obstruc-
tion of this passage may lead to reflux of bile or activated pan-
creatic enzymes into the pancreatic duct. Patients who have 
small gallstones and a wide cystic duct may be at a higher 
risk of passing stones. The proposed mechanisms for alcoholic 
pancreatitis include the effects of diet, malnutrition, direct 
toxicity of alcohol, concomitant tobacco smoking, hyperse -
cretion, duct obstruction or reflux, and hyperlipidaemia. The 
remaining cases may be due to rare causes or be idiopathic.
Clinical presentation
Pain is the cardinal symptom. It characteristically devel -
ops quickly, reaching maximum intensity within minutes 
rather than hours and persists for hours or even days. The 
pain is frequently severe, constant and refractory to the usual 
doses of analgesics. Pain is usually experienced first in the 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1222 25/10/2017   09:54Pancreatitis 1223
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
pancreatitis, particularly if the patient has presented a few 
days later. If the serum lipase level can be checked, it pro -
vides a slightly more sensitive and specific test than amylase. 
If there is doubt, and other causes of acute abdomen have to 
be excluded, contrast-enhanced CT is probably the best sin -
gle imaging investigation (see below).
George Grey Turner , 1877–1951, Professor of Surgery, The University of Durham, Durham (1927–1934), and at the Postgraduate Medical School, Hammer-
smith, London, UK (1934–1945).
Thomas Stephen Cullen , 1868–1953, Professor of Gynecology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. Described bluish discoloration of the peri-
umbilical skin as a sign of ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
John HC Ranson , 1938–95, Professor of Surgery, The New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. Published his scoring criteria for severe 
acute pancreatitis in 1974.
John C Marshall , contemporary, trauma surgeon and intensivist, St Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
epigastrium but may be localised to either upper quadrant or 
felt diffusely throughout the abdomen. There is radiation to 
the back in about 50% of patients, and some patients may 
gain relief by sitting or leaning forwards. The suddenness of 
onset may simulate a perforated peptic ulcer, while biliary 
colic or acute cholecystitis can be mimicked if the pain is 
maximal in the right upper quadrant. Radiation to the chest 
can simulate myocardial infarction, pneumonia or pleuritic 
pain. In fact, acute pancreatitis can mimic most causes of 
the acute abdomen and should seldom be discounted in 
differential diagnosis.
Nausea, repeated vomiting and retching are usually 
marked accompaniments. The retching may persist despite 
the stomach being kept empty by nasogastric aspiration. Hic-
coughs can be troublesome and may be due to gastric disten-
sion or irritation of the diaphragm.
On examination, the appearance may be that of a patient 
who is well or, at the other extreme, one who is gravely ill 
with profound shock, toxicity and confusion. Tachypnoea 
is common, tachycardia is usual, and hypotension may be 
present. The body temperature is often normal or even sub-
normal, but frequently rises as inflammation develops. It is 
useful to reiterate here that SIRS is defined by the presence 
of two or more of the following criteria: heart rate >90/min, 
core temperature <36 o C or >38 o C, respirations >20/min 
or pCO 2 <32  mmHg, and white blood cell count <4000 or 
>12 000/mm3. Mild icterus can be caused by biliary obstruc-
tion in gallstone pancreatitis, and an acute swinging pyrexia 
suggests cholangitis. Bleeding into the fascial planes can pro-
duce bluish discolouration of the flanks (Grey Turner’s sign) 
or umbilicus (Cullen’s sign). Neither sign is pathognomonic 
of acute pancreatitis; Cullen’s sign was first described in asso-
ciation with rupture of an ectopic pregnancy. Subcutaneous 
fat necrosis may produce small, red, tender nodules on the 
skin of the legs.
Abdominal examination may reveal distension due to 
ileus or, more rarely, ascites with shifting dullness. A mass 
can develop in the epigastrium due to inflammation. There 
is usually muscle guarding in the upper abdomen, although 
marked rigidity is unusual. A pleural effusion is present in 
10–20% of patients. Pulmonary oedema and pneumonitis are 
also described and may give rise to the differential diagno -
sis of pneumonia or myocardial infarction. The patient may 
be confused and exhibit the signs of metabolic derangement 
together with hypoxaemia.
Investigations
Typically, the diagnosis is made on the basis of the clinical 
presentation and an elevated serum amylase level. A serum 
amylase level three times above normal is indicative of the 
disease. A normal serum amylase level does not exclude acute 
Summary box 68.7
Investigations in acute pancreatitis should be aimed at 
answering three questions:
●● Is a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis correct?
●● How severe is the attack?
●● What is the aetiology?
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY
It is important to define that group of patients who will 
develop severe pancreatitis, as they are the ones with poorer 
outcomes and therefore they require aggressive early manage-
ment and possibly transfer to a specialist unit. A severe attack 
may be heralded by an initial clinical impression of a very ill 
patient and a worsening physiological state at 24–48 hours. 
Various prognostic scoring systems have been used, all aimed 
at predicting persistent organ failure, particularly respiratory, 
cardiac and renal. Severity stratification assessments should 
be performed in patients at 24 hours, 48 hours and 7 days 
after admission. The Ranson and Glasgow scoring systems are 
specific for acute pancreatitis, and a score of 3 or more at 48 
hours indicates a severe attack (Table 68.3). Several other sys-
tems that are used in intensive care units can also be applied. 
These include the APACHE, SAPS, SOFA, MODS and 
modified Marshall scoring systems (the latter has the advan-
tage of simplicity). Regardless of the system used, persisting 
organ failure indicates a severe attack. A serum C-reactive 
protein level >150 mg/L at 48 hours after the onset of symp -
toms is also an indicator of severity. Patients with a body mass 
index over 30 are at higher risk of developing complications. 
A revision in 2013 of the Atlanta classification of acute pan-
creatitis (1992) recommends that patients with acute pancre-
atitis be stratified into 3 groups:
 ● Mild acute pancreatitis:
 ● no organ failure;
 ● no local or systemic complications.
 ● Moderately severe acute pancreatitis:
 ● organ failure that resolves within 48 hours (transient  
organ failure); and/or
 ● local or systemic complications without persistent  
organ failure.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1223 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1224
 ● Severe acute pancreatitis:
 ● persistent organ failure (>48 hours);
 ● single organ failure;
 ● multiple organ failure.
IMAGING
Plain erect chest and abdominal radiographs are not diag -
nostic of acute pancreatitis, but are useful in the differential 
diagnosis. Non-specific findings in pancreatitis include a gen-
eralised or local ileus (sentinel loop), a colon cut-off sign and 
a renal halo sign. Occasionally , calcified gallstones or pan -
creatic calcification may be seen. A chest radiograph may 
show a pleural effusion and, in severe cases, a diffuse alveolar 
interstitial shadowing may suggest acute respiratory distress 
syndrome.
Ultrasound does not establish a diagnosis of acute pancre-
atitis. The swollen pancreas may be seen, but ultrasonography 
should be performed within 24 hours in all patients to detect 
gallstones as a potential cause, rule out acute cholecystitis as 
a differential diagnosis and determine whether the common 
bile duct is dilated.
CT is not necessary for all patients, particularly those 
deemed to have a mild attack on prognostic criteria. But 
a contrast-enhanced CT is indicated in the following  
situations:
 ● If there is diagnostic uncertainty.
 ● In patients with severe acute pancreatitis, to distinguish 
interstitial from necrotising pancreatitis (Figure 68.22). 
In the first 72 hours, CT may underestimate the extent of 
necrosis. The severity of pancreatitis detected on CT may 
be staged according to the Balthazar criteria.
 ● In patients with organ failure, signs of sepsis or progressive 
clinical deterioration.
 ● When a localised complication is suspected, such as fluid 
collection, pseudocyst or a pseudoaneurysm.
Cross-sectional MRI can yield similar information to that 
obtained by CT. EUS and MRCP can help in detecting stones 
in the common bile duct and directly assessing the pancreatic 
parenchyma, but are not widely available. ERCP allows the 
identification and removal of stones in the common bile duct 
in gallstone pancreatitis. In patients with severe acute gall -
stone pancreatitis and signs of ongoing biliary obstruction and 
cholangitis, an urgent ERCP should be sought (see below).
Emil J Balthazar , contemporary, Professor Emeritus, The Department of Radiology, The New York University, New York, NY, USA.
TABLE 68.3 The Ranson and Glasgow scoring systems to predict the severity of acute pancreatitis: in both systems, 
disease is classified as severe when three or more factors are present.
Ranson score Glasgow score
On admission Within 48 hours
Age >55 years Age >55 years
White blood cell count >16 × 109/L White blood cell count >15 × 109/L
Blood glucose >1.1 mmol/L (>200 mg/dL) Blood glucose >10 mmol/L (no history of diabetes)
LDH >350 units/L LDH > 600 units/L
AST >250 units/L Serum urea >16 mmol/L (no response to intravenous fluids)
Within 48 hours Arterial oxygen saturation (PaO2) <8 kPa (60 mmHg)
Haematocrit fall of 10% or greater Serum calcium <2.0 mmol/L
Blood urea nitrogen rise >5 mg/dL (1.8 mmol/L) despite fluids Serum albumin <32 g/L
Arterial oxygen saturation (PaO2) <8 kPa (60 mmHg)
Serum calcium <2.0 mmol/L
Base deficit >4 mmol/L
Fluid sequestration >6 litres
AST, aspartate aminotransferase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PaO2, arterial oxygen tension.
x
Figure 68.22  Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan 
showing acute necrotising pancr eatitis. Note the area of reduced 
enhancement in the pancreas (marked X), the peripancreatic oedema 
and stranding of the fatty tissues (courtesy of Dr Niall Power).
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1224 25/10/2017   09:54Pancreatitis 1225
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
The presentation is so variable that sometimes even an 
experienced clinician can be mistaken. While this is not 
desirable, occasionally the diagnosis is only made at laparot -
omy. The appearances at laparotomy are characteristic (Fig-
ure 68.23).
profile, blood glucose and serum levels of calcium and 
magnesium should be closely monitored.
A nasogastric tube is not essential but may be of value in 
patients with vomiting. Specific treatments such as aprotinin, 
somatostatin analogues, platelet-activating factor inhibitors 
and selective gut decontamination have failed to improve 
outcome in numerous clinical trials and should not be given. 
There are no data to support a practice of ‘resting’ the pan -
creas and feeding only by the parenteral or nasojejunal routes. 
If nutritional support is felt to be necessary, enteral nutrition 
(e.g. feeding via a nasogastric tube) should be used.
There is some evidence to support the use of prophylac -
tic antibiotics in patients with severe acute pancreatitis but 
there is no consensus. The rationale is to prevent local and 
other septic complications. The regimens used include intra -
venous cefuroxime, or imipenem, or ciprofloxacin plus met-
ronidazole. The duration of antibiotic prophylaxis should not 
exceed 14 days. Additional antibiotic use should be guided 
by microbiological cultures. If however there is evidence of 
cholangitis, or concomitant respiratory or urinary infection, 
then antibiotics should be given promptly.
If gallstones are the cause of an attack of predicted or 
proven severe pancreatitis, or if the patient has jaundice, chol-
angitis or a dilated common bile duct, urgent ERCP should be 
carried out within 72 hours of the onset of symptoms. There 
is evidence that sphincterotomy and clearance of the bile 
duct can reduce the incidence of infective complications in 
these patients. In patients with cholangitis, sphincterotomy 
should be carried out or a biliary stent placed to drain the 
duct. ERCP is an invasive procedure and carries a small risk 
of worsening the pancreatitis.
Figure 68.23 Widespread fat necrosis of the omentum. A test tube 
has been filled with blood-stained peritoneal fluid. This specimen was 
rich in amylase. Fat necroses ar e dull, opaque, yellow-white areas 
suggestive of drops of wax. They are most abundant in the vicinity 
of the pancreas, but are widespread in the greater omentum and 
the mesentery. At necropsy, they can sometimes be demonstrated 
beneath the pleura and pericardium, and even in the subsynovial fat 
of the knee joint. Fat necroses consist of small islands of saponifica -
tion caused by the liberation of lipase, which splits into glycerol and 
fatty acids. Free fatty acids combine with calcium to form soaps (fatty 
necrosis) (courtesy of Dr GD Adhia, Mumbai, India).
TABLE 68.4 Early management of severe acute 
pancreatitis.
Admission to HDU/ICU
Analgesia
Aggressive fluid rehydration
Supplemental oxygen
Invasive monitoring of vital signs, central venous pressure, urine 
output, blood gases
Frequent monitoring of haematological and biochemical 
parameters (including liver and renal function, clotting, serum 
calcium, blood glucose)
Nasogastric drainage (only initially)
Antibiotics if cholangitis suspected; prophylactic antibiotics can be 
considered
CT scan essential if organ failure, clinical deterioration or signs of 
sepsis develop
ERCP within 72 hours for severe gallstone pancreatitis or signs of 
cholangitis
Supportive therapy for organ failure if it develops (inotropes, 
ventilatory support, haemofiltration, etc.)
If nutritional support is required, consider enteral (nasogastric) 
feeding
CT, computed tomography; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography; HDU, high-dependency unit; ICU, intensive care 
unit.
Management
If after initial assessment a patient is considered to have a 
mild attack of pancreatitis, a conservative approach is indi -
cated with intravenous fluid administration and frequent, but 
non-invasive, observation. A brief period of fasting may be 
sensible in a patient who is nauseated and in pain, but there is 
little physiological justification for keeping patients on a pro-
longed ‘nil by mouth’ regimen. Antibiotics are not indicated. 
Apart from analgesics and anti-emetics, no drugs or interven-
tions are warranted, and CT scanning is unnecessary unless 
there is evidence of deterioration. However, if a stable patient 
meets the prognostic criteria for a severe attack of pancre -
atitis, then a more aggressive approach is required, with the 
patient being admitted to a high-dependency or an intensive 
care unit and monitored invasively.
Patients with a severe attack should be admitted to 
an intensive care or high-dependency unit (Table 68.4). 
Adequate analgesia should be administered. Aggressive fluid 
resuscitation is important, guided by frequent measurement 
of vital signs, urine output and central venous pressure. Sup -
plemental oxygen should be administered and serial arterial 
blood gas analysis performed. The haematocrit, clotting 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1225 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1226
Systemic complications
Pancreatitis may involve all organ systems (Table 68.5 ) 
and place demands on the surgeon beyond his or her skills. 
Patients with systemic complications should be managed by a 
multidisciplinary team that includes intensive care specialists. 
When there is organ failure, appropriate supportive therapies 
may include inotropic support for haemodynamic instability, 
haemofiltration in the event of renal failure, ventilatory sup-
port for respiratory failure and correction of coagulopathies 
(including DIC). There is no role for surgery during the initial 
period of resuscitation and stabilisation; surgical intervention 
is contemplated only in the patient who deteriorates as a 
result of local complications following successful stabilisation.
Local complications and their management
Once the acute phase has been survived, usually by the end of 
the first week, and major organ failure is under control, then 
local complications become pre-eminent in the management 
of these patients. The course of the patient should be followed 
carefully. If pain persists or recurs, clinical resolution does not 
progress as expected, signs of sepsis develop, organ dysfunc -
tion worsens, or there is a further spike in the serum amylase 
level, a CT scan should be performed. Local complications in 
pancreatic disease are serious and carry a significant mortal-
ity. The management approach is conservative on the whole, 
with surgery restricted to situations in which conservative 
management has failed. It is important to be clear about the 
definitions. Certain terms are confusing, such as ‘phlegmon’, 
which may refer to an abscess or to an inflammatory mass in 
the pancreas, and are best avoided.
ACUTE PERIPANCREATIC FLUID COLLECTION 
(APFC)
This occurs early in the course of mild pancreatitis without 
necrosis, and is located adjacent to the pancreas. It has no 
encapsulating wall and is confined within normal fascial 
planes. The fluid is sterile, and most such collections resolve. 
No intervention is necessary unless a large collection causes 
symptoms or pressure effects, in which case it can be percuta-
neously aspirated under ultrasound or CT guidance. Transgas-
tric drainage under EUS guidance is another option.
STERILE AND INFECTED PANCREATIC NECROSIS
The term ‘pancreatic necrosis’ refers to a diffuse or focal 
area of non-viable parenchyma. This can be identified by an 
absence of parenchymal enhancement on CT with intrave -
nous contrast. Pancreatic necrosis is typically associated with 
lysis of peripancreatic fat. This may lead to what is described 
as an acute necrotic collection (ANC). This is typically an intra- 
or extrapancreatic collection containing fluid and necrotic 
material, with no definable wall. Gradually, over a period of 
over 4 weeks, this may develop a well-defined inflammatory 
capsule, and evolve into what is termed walled-off necrosis 
(WON). Collections associated with necrotising pancreati -
tis are sterile to begin with but often become subsequently 
infected, probably due to translocation of gut bacteria. 
Infected necrosis is associated with a mortality rate of up to 
50%. Sterile necrotic material should not be drained or inter-
fered with. But if the patient shows signs of sepsis, then one 
should determine whether the collection is infected (Figure 
68.24). A CT scan should be performed and a needle passed 
into the area under CT guidance, choosing a path that does 
TABLE 68.5 Complications of acute pancreatitis.
Systemic Local
(More common in the first week) (Usually develop after the first 
week)
Cardiovascular Acute fluid collection
 Shock Sterile pancreatic necrosis
 Arrhythmias Infected pancreatic necrosis
Pulmonary Pancreatic abscess
 ARDS Pseudocyst
Renal failure Pancreatic ascites
Haematological Pleural effusion
 DIC Portal/splenic vein thrombosis
Metabolic Pseudoaneurysm
 Hypocalcaemia
 Hyperglycaemia
 Hyperlipidaemia
Gastrointestinal
 Ileus
Neurological
 Visual disturbances
 Confusion, irritability
 Encephalopathy
Miscellaneous
 Subcutaneous fat necrosis
 Arthralgia
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; DIC, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation.
Figure 68.24 Infected pancreatic necrosis in an elderly patient. Note 
the ar eas of r educed enhancement in the pancreas and the peri -
pancreatic fluid collection with pockets of gas within it (arrow). This 
resolved after percutaneous drainage and antibiotic therapy.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1226 25/10/2017   09:54Pancreatitis 1227
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
not traverse hollow viscera. This may be done under ultraso -
nographic guidance as well. If the aspirate is purulent, percu -
taneous drainage of the infected fluid should be carried out. 
The tube drain inserted should have the widest bore possible. 
The aspirate should be sent for microbiological assessment, 
and appropriate antibiotic therapy should be commenced as 
per the sensitivity report. The fluid can be quite viscous with 
particulate matter, and the drain may need regular flushing 
with full aseptic precautions. Often, repeated imaging and 
repeated insertion of progressively wider drains is necessary.
If the sepsis worsens despite this, then a pancreatic necro-
sectomy should be considered. This is a challenging opera-
tion that carries a high morbidity and mortality, and is best 
carried out in a specialist unit. The overwhelming majority 
of patients with peripancreatic sepsis can be successfully 
treated by conservative means, and necrosectomy should be 
necessary in a very small proportion of patients. The surgical 
approach may be through a mid-line laparotomy, especially if 
the area involved is around the head of the gland. The duo -
denocolic and gastrocolic ligaments should be divided and 
the lesser sac opened. Thorough debridement of the dead tis-
sue around the pancreas should be carried out. If the body 
and tail of the gland are primarily involved (Figure 68.25), 
a retroperitoneal approach through a left flank incision may 
be more appropriate. The tissues are inevitably friable, and 
one should be careful not to precipitate excessive bleeding 
or inadvertently breach the bowel wall. Blunt dissection is 
preferable to sharp dissection. A feeding jejunostomy may be 
a useful adjunct to the procedure. If gallstones are the precip-
itating factor of the pancreatitis, a cholecystectomy should 
be included. Some prefer a minimally invasive approach to 
a formal laparotomy. A rigid laparoscope is inserted into the 
peripancreatic area through a retroperitoneal approach, and 
vigorous irrigation and suction is combined with a gradual 
nibbling away of the necrotic debris.
Once a necrosectomy has been completed, further necrotic 
tissue may form. There are several possible ways of dealing 
with this (listed below), none of which has been proved to 
be more effective than the others. The last two approaches 
make greater logistic demands as one is committed to a re- 
exploration every 48–72 hours.
 ● Closed continuous lavage. Tube drains are left in and the 
raw area flushed (Beger) (Figure 68.26).
 ● Closed drainage. The incision is closed, but the cavity is 
packed with gauze-filled Penrose drains and closed suction 
drains. The Penrose drains are brought out through the 
flank and slowly pulled out and removed after 7 days.
 ● Open packing. The incision is left open, and the cavity 
is packed with the intention of returning to the operating 
room at regular intervals and repacking until there is a 
clean granulating cavity.
 ● Closure and relaparotomy.  The incision is closed with 
drains with the intention of performing a series of planned 
relaparotomies every 48–72 hours until the raw area gran-
ulates (Bradley).
There is a subgroup of patients who respond initially to 
percutaneous treatment but then develop recurrent sepsis 
that requires repeated insertion of drains, and fail to thrive. 
Necrosectomy should be considered in these patients, but it 
can be a difficult judgement call.
Patients with peripancreatic sepsis are ill for long periods 
of time, and may require management in an intensive care 
unit. Nutritional support is essential. The parenteral and 
nasojejunal approaches are more popular (on the assumption 
that they rest the pancreas), although there is little evidence 
to show that nasogastric feeding, if tolerated, is harmful in 
any way.
PANCREATIC ABSCESS
This is a circumscribed intra-abdominal collection of pus, 
usually in proximity to the pancreas. It may be an ANC or a 
WON that has become infected. The principles of diagnosis 
Figure 68.25 Necrotic body and tail of the pancr eas removed as 
an intact specimen rather than piecemeal. The patient had suffer ed 
severe necrotising gallstone pancreatitis complicated by persistent 
pancreatic sepsis. Necrosectomy was carried out through a left flank 
retroperitoneal approach.
Hans Beger , contemporary, Emeritus Professor of Surgery, Ulm, Germany.
Charles Bingham Penrose , 1862–1925, Professor of Gynecology, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Edward Bradley III , contemporary, Professor, The Department of Clinical Sciences, Florida State University College of Medicine, FL, USA.
Figure 68.26 Continuous postoperative closed lavage of the lesser 
sac as advised by Beger. Lavage is carried out thr ough several 
double-lumen and single-lumen catheters. Each time, 1 litre of saline 
is infused through and then drained over a period of hours, and the 
process is repeated.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1227 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1228
and management are as outlined above for infected pancreatic 
necrosis. Percutaneous drainage with the widest possible 
drains placed under imaging guidance is the treatment, along 
with appropriate antibiotics and supportive care. Repeated 
scans may be required depending on the progress of the 
patient, and drains may need to be flushed, repositioned or 
re-inserted. Very occasionally, open drainage of the abscess 
may be necessary.
PANCREATIC ASCITES
This is a chronic, generalised, peritoneal, enzyme-rich effu-
sion usually associated with pancreatic duct disruption. Para-
centesis will reveal turbid fluid with a high amylase level. 
Adequate drainage with wide-bore drains placed under 
imaging guidance is essential. Measures that can be taken to 
suppress pancreatic secretion include parenteral or nasojeju-
nal feeding and administration of octreotide. An ERCP may 
allow demonstration of the duct disruption and placement of 
a pancreatic stent.
PANCREATIC EFFUSION
This is an encapsulated collection of fluid in the pleural cav-
ity, arising as a consequence of acute pancreatitis. Concom-
itant pancreatic ascites may be present, or there may be a 
communication with an intra-abdominal collection. Percuta-
neous drainage under imaging guidance is necessary.
HAEMORRHAGE
Bleeding may occur into the gut, into the retroperitoneum 
or into the peritoneal cavity. Possible causes include bleed-
ing into a pseudocyst cavity, diffuse bleeding from a large raw 
surface, or a pseudoaneurysm. The last is a false aneurysm of a 
major peripancreatic vessel confined as a clot by the surround-
ing tissues and often associated with infection. Recurrent 
bleeding is common, often culminating in fatal haemorrhage. 
CT, angiography or MR angiography helps to make the diag-
nosis. Treatment involves embolisation or surgery.
PORTAL OR SPLENIC VEIN THROMBOSIS
This may often develop silently and is identified on a CT scan. 
A marked rise in the platelet count should raise suspicions. In 
the context of acute pancreatitis, treatment is usually con -
servative. The patient should be screened for pro-coagulant 
tendencies. If varices or other manifestations of portal hyper-
tension develop, they will require treatment, such as endo-
scopic injection or banding, β-blockade, etc. Thrombocytosis 
may mandate the use of aspirin or other antiplatelet drugs for 
a period. Systemic anticoagulation, if instituted early in the 
process, may achieve recanalisation of the vein, but it is not 
routinely used as it carries considerable risks in a patient with 
ongoing pancreatitis.
PSEUDOCYST
A pseudocyst is a collection of amylase-rich fluid enclosed in a 
well-defined wall of fibrous or granulation tissue. Pseudocysts 
typically arise following an attack of mild acute pancreatitis, 
lie outside the pancreas, and represent an APFC that has not 
resolved and matured. Formation of a pseudocyst requires 
4 weeks or more from the onset of acute pancreatitis. The 
term ‘pseudocyst’ is often used more loosely, to include sterile 
WON that has failed to resolve, or a collection that has devel-
oped in the context of chronic pancreatitis or after pancreatic 
trauma. (Figure 68.27; see also Figure 68.10). If carefully 
investigated, more than half of these will be found to have a 
communication with the main pancreatic duct. Pseudocysts 
are often single but, occasionally, patients will develop mul -
tiple pseudocysts.
A pseudocyst is usually identified on ultrasound or a CT 
scan. It is important to differentiate a pseudocyst from an 
APFC; the clinical scenario and the radiological appearances 
should allow that distinction to be made. Occasionally, a 
cystic neoplasm may be confused with a chronic pseudocyst. 
EUS and aspiration of the cyst fluid is very useful in such a 
situation. The fluid should be sent for measurement of carci -
noembryonic antigen (CEA) levels, amylase levels and cytol-
ogy. Fluid from a pseudocyst typically has a low CEA level, 
and levels above 400 ng/mL are suggestive of a mucinous neo-
plasm. Pseudocyst fluid usually has a high amylase level, but 
that is not diagnostic, as a tumour that communicates with 
the duct system may yield similar findings. Cytology typi-
cally reveals inflammatory cells in pseudocyst fluid. If there 
is no access to EUS, then percutaneous FNA is acceptable 
(just aspiration, not percutaneous insertion of a drain). ERCP 
and MRCP may demonstrate communication of the cyst with 
the pancreatic duct system, demonstrate ductal anomalies, 
or diagnose chronic pancreatitis and thus help in planning 
treatment.
Pseudocysts will resolve spontaneously in most instances, 
but complications can develop (Table 68.6). Pseudocysts that 
are thick-walled or large (over 6 cm in diameter), have lasted 
for a long time (over 12 weeks), or have arisen in the context 
of chronic pancreatitis are less likely to resolve spontaneously, 
Figure 68.27  Barium meal. Pseudocyst displacing the stomach 
(courtesy of Professor VK Kapoor, Lucknow, India).
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1228 25/10/2017   09:54Pancreatitis 1229
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
but these factors are not specific indications for intervention. 
Therapeutic interventions are advised only if the pseudocyst 
causes symptoms, if complications develop, or if a distinction 
has to be made between a pseudocyst and a tumour.
There are three possible approaches to draining a pseudo-
cyst: percutaneous, endoscopic and surgical. Percutaneous 
drainage to the exterior under radiological guidance should be 
avoided. It carries a very high likelihood of recurrence. More-
over, it is not advisable unless one is absolutely certain that the 
cyst is not neoplastic and that it has no communication with 
the pancreatic duct (or else a pancreaticocutaneous fistula 
will develop). A percutaneous transgastric cystgastros  tomy 
can be done under imaging guidance, and a double-pigtail 
drain placed with one end in the cyst cavity and the other end 
in the gastric lumen. This requires specialist expertise but, in 
experienced hands, the recurrence rates are no more than 
15%. Endoscopic drainage usually involves puncture of the 
cyst through the stomach or duodenal wall under EUS guid -
ance, and placement of a tube drain with one end in the cyst 
cavity and the other end in the gastric lumen. The success 
rates depend on operator expertise. Occasionally, ERCP and 
placement of a pancreatic stent across the ampulla may help 
to drain a pseudocyst that is in communication with the duct. 
Surgical drainage involves internally draining the cyst into 
the gastric or jejunal lumen (Figure 68.28). Recurrence rates 
should be no more than 5%, and this still remains the stan -
dard against which the evolving radiological and endoscopic 
approaches are measured. The approach is conventionally 
through an open incision, but laparoscopic cystgastrostomy is 
also feasible. Pseudocysts that have developed complications 
are best managed surgically.
There is a small group of patients who, having suffered 
an attack of necrotising pancreatitis with duct disruption, go 
on to suffer repeated complications in the form of recurrent 
fluid collections, pseudocysts, pleural effusions or pancreatic 
ascites. Very often disruption of the main pancreatic duct in 
the neck, body or tail is compounded by a stricture or a stone 
in the head that cannot be treated endoscopically. In such 
patients, some form of surgical resection and/or a drainage 
procedure – even though it may be technically challenging – 
may be the only way to achieve lasting resolution.
TABLE 68.6 Possible complications of a pancreatic 
pseudocyst.
Process Outcomes
Infection Abscess
Systemic sepsis
Rupture
 Into the gut Gastrointestinal bleeding
Internal fistula
 Into the peritoneum Peritonitis
Enlargement
 Pressure effects Obstructive jaundice from biliary 
compression
Bowel obstruction
 Pain
Erosion into a vessel Haemorrhage into the cyst
Haemoperitoneum
Figure 68.28  Cystgastrostomy for the pancreatic pseudocyst 
shown in Figure 68.10. The anterior wall of the stomach has been 
opened and the edges drawn back, held by Babcock’s forceps. An 
opening has been made through the posterior wall of the stomach into 
the pseudocyst, and the tips of the dissecting forceps are in the cavity 
of the pseudocyst, which is lined by slough and granulation tissue. 
The tip of a nasogastric tube is visible. A running stitch will next be 
placed along the edges of this opening, suturing the full thickness of 
the posterior gastric wall to the capsule of the pseudocyst.
William Wayne Babcock , 1872–1963, surgeon, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Summary box 68.8
Distinguishing a pseudocyst from a cystic neoplasm
●● History
●● Appearance on computed tomography and ultrasound (US)
●● Fine needle aspiration of fluid, preferably under endoscopic 
US guidance:
Carcinoembryonic antigen (high level in mucinous tumours)
Amylase (level usually high in pseudocysts but 
occasionally in tumours)
Cytology
Outcomes and follow-up of acute 
pancreatitis
The overall mortality from acute pancreatitis has remained at 
10–15% over the past 20 years. There is a clear responsibility 
before the patient is discharged to determine the aetiology of 
the attack of pancreatitis, and the causes listed in Summary 
box 68.5 must be looked for and excluded. Failure to remove a 
predisposing factor could lead to a second attack of pancreatitis, 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1229 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1230
which could be fatal. A proportion of patients in the idiopathic 
group who suffer repeated attacks may prove to have biliary 
microlithiasis, which can be identified only by bile sampling 
at ERCP or by endoscopic ultrasound. In a patient who has 
gallstone pancreatitis, the gallbladder and gallstones should 
be removed as soon as the patient is fit to undergo surgery and, 
preferably, before discharge from hospital.
Chronic pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis is a progressive inflammatory disease in 
which there is irreversible destruction of pancreatic tissue. 
Its clinical course is characterised by severe pain and, in the 
later stages, exocrine and endocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 
In the early stages of its evolution, it is frequently compli -
cated by attacks of acute pancreatitis, which are responsible 
for the recurrent pain that may be the only clinical symptom. 
The incidence of chronic pancreatitis in several European, 
North American and Japanese studies ranges from 2 to 10 
new cases per 100 000 population per year, with a prevalence 
of around 13 cases per 100 000, although there are suspicions 
that the prevalence is actually higher. In certain parts of the 
world, such as southern India, the prevalence is much higher 
(100–200 per 100 000). The disease occurs more frequently in 
men (male:female ratio of 4:1), and the mean age of onset is 
about 40 years.
Aetiology and pathology
High alcohol consumption is the most frequent cause of 
chronic pancreatitis, accounting for 60–70% of cases, but 
only 5–10% of people with alcoholism develop chronic pan -
creatitis. The exact mechanism of how alcohol causes chronic 
inflammation in these patients is unclear; genetic and meta-
bolic factors may be at play.
Other causes include pancreatic duct obstruction resulting 
from stricture formation after trauma, after acute pancreatitis, 
or even occlusion of the duct by pancreatic cancer. Congeni-
tal abnormalities, such as pancreas divisum and annular pan -
creas, if associated with papillary stenosis, are rare causes of 
chronic pancreatitis.
Hereditary pancreatitis, CF , infantile malnutrition and a 
large unexplained idiopathic group make up the remainder. 
Normally, if trypsinogen does become prematurely activated 
within the pancreas, it is inhibited by SPINK1 and then gets 
destroyed. Hereditary pancreatitis is an autosomal dominant 
disorder with an 80% penetrance, associated with a gain-of-
function mutation in the cationic trypsinogen gene ( PRSS1) 
on chromosome 7, which leads to production of a degradation- 
resistant form of trypsin. A loss-of-function mutation in 
SPINK1 also predisposes to idiopathic pancreatitis. Some 
patients with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis have mutations 
in the CFTR gene. Idiopathic chronic pancreatitis accounts 
for approximately 30% of cases and has been subdivided into 
early-onset and late-onset forms.
The importance of hereditary pancreatitis and pancre -
atitis occurring at a young age is that there is a markedly 
increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer, particularly if 
the patient smokes tobacco. Hyperlipidaemia and hypercal -
caemia can lead to chronic pancreatitis.
Tropical pancreatitis is a form of idiopathic pancreatitis that 
begins at a young age and is associated with a high incidence of 
diabetes mellitus and stone formation. This has been described 
in Kerala, in southern India, as well as in resource-poor coun-
tries in Asia, Africa and central America. Malnutrition, inges-
tion of cyanogenic glycosides in cassava, and exposure to 
hydrocarbons released by kerosene or paraffin lamps have been 
proposed as possible mechanisms for tropical pancreatitis. 
Autoimmune pancreatitis has been described relatively 
recently. Features include diffuse enlargement of the pan -
creas, and diffuse and irregular narrowing of the main pancre-
atic duct. It may occur in association with other autoimmune 
diseases, as a multisystem disorder, or may affect the pancreas 
alone. There may be changes in the biliary tree (autoimmune 
cholangiopathy) as well. The changes may be confused with 
neoplasia. Autoantibodies may be present, and levels of the 
immunoglobulin subtype IgG4 are elevated.
At the onset of the disease when symptoms have devel-
oped, the pancreas may appear normal. Later, the pancreas 
enlarges and becomes hard as a result of fibrosis. The ducts 
become distorted and dilated with areas of both stricture for -
mation and ectasia. Calcified stones weighing from a few mil-
ligrams to 200 mg may form within the ducts. The ducts may 
become occluded with a gelatinous proteinaceous fluid and 
debris, and inflammatory cysts may form. Histologically, the 
lesions affect the lobules, producing ductular metaplasia and 
atrophy of acini, hyperplasia of duct epithelium and interlob-
ular fibrosis.
Clinical features
Pain is the outstanding symptom in the majority of patients. 
The site of pain depends to some extent on the main focus of 
the disease. If the disease is mainly in the head of the pancreas, 
then epigastric and right subcostal pain is common, whereas 
if it is limited to the left side of the pancreas, left subcostal 
and back pain are the presenting symptoms. In some patients, 
the pain is more diffuse. Radiation to the shoulder can occur. 
Nausea is common during attacks, and vomiting may occur. 
The pain is often dull and gnawing. Severe flare-ups of pain 
may be superimposed on background discomfort. All the 
complications of acute pancreatitis can occur with chronic 
pancreatitis. Weight loss is common, because the patient 
does not feel like eating. The pain prevents sleep and time off 
work is frequent. The number of hospital admissions for acute 
exacerbations is a pointer towards the severity of the disease. 
Analgesic use and abuse is frequent. This, too, gives an indi-
cation of the severity of the disability. The patient’s lifestyle 
is gradually destroyed by pain, analgesic dependence, weight 
loss and inability to work. Loss of exocrine function leads to 
steatorrhoea in more than 30% of patients with chronic pan-
creatitis. Loss of endocrine function and the development of 
diabetes are not uncommon, and the incidence increases as 
the disease progresses. Complications frequently bring the 
patient to the attention of the surgeon. Infection is not infre-
quent, possibly related to the diabetes mellitus.
Investigations
Only in the early stages of the disease will there be a rise in 
serum amylase. T ests of pancreatic function merely confirm 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1230 25/10/2017   09:54Pancreatitis 1231
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
the presence of pancreatic insufficiency or that more than 
70% of the gland has been destroyed.
Pancreatic calcifications may be seen on abdominal X-ray 
(see Figure 68.18). CT or MRI scan will show the outline of 
the gland, the main area of damage and the possibilities for 
surgical correction (Figure 68.29; see also Figure 68.7). Cal-
cification is seen very well on CT but not on MRI. An MRCP 
will identify the presence of biliary obstruction and the state 
of the pancreatic duct (Figure 68.30). The use of intravenous 
secretin during the study may demonstrate a pancreatic duct 
stricture that is not apparent on a standard MRCP , but a normal- 
looking pancreas on CT or MRI does not rule out chronic 
pancreatitis. ERCP is the most accurate way of elucidating 
the anatomy of the duct and, in conjunction with the whole 
organ morphology, can help to determine the type of opera -
tion required, if operative intervention is indicated (Figures 
68.15 and 68.17). Histologically proven chronic pancreatitis 
can, however, occur in the setting of normal findings on 
Figure 68.29 Computed tomography scan in a patient with chronic 
pancreatitis. A stone (arr ow) is obstructing the main pancreatic duct 
in the body of the gland. The duct is markedly dilated upstream of the 
obstruction.
Figure 68.30 Magnetic r esonance cholangiopancr eatography in a 
patient with chronic pancreatitis, showing a stricture of the pancreatic 
duct in the body of the gland (arrow), with dilatation upstream.
Summary box 68.9
Medical treatment of chronic pancreatitis
Treat the addiction
●● Help the patient to stop alcohol consumption and tobacco 
smoking
●● Involve a dependency counsellor or a psychologist
Alleviate abdominal pain
●● Eliminate obstructive factors (duodenum, bile duct, pancreatic 
duct)
●● Escalate analgesia in a stepwise fashion
●● Refer to a pain management specialist
●● For intractable pain, consider CT/EUS-guided coeliac axis 
block
Nutritional and pharmacological measures
●● Diet: low in fat and high in protein and carbohydrates
●● Pancreatic enzyme supplementation with meals
●● Correct malabsorption of the fat-soluble vitamins and vitamin 
B12
●● Micronutrient therapy with methionine, vitamins C & E, 
selenium (may reduce pain and slow disease progression)
●● Steroids (only in autoimmune pancreatitis, for relief of 
symptoms)
●● Medium-chain triglycerides in patients with severe fat 
malabsorption (they are directly absorbed by the small 
intestine without the need for digestion)
●● Reducing gastric secretions may help
Treat diabetes mellitus
pancreatography. EUS can also be very useful. Sonographic  
findings characteristic of chronic pancreatitis include the 
presence of stones, visible side branches, cysts, lobularity, an 
irregular main pancreatic duct, hyperechoic foci and strands, 
dilatation of the main pancreatic duct and hyperechoic mar -
gins of the main pancreatic duct. The presence of four or more 
of these features is highly suggestive of chronic pancreatitis.
Treatment
Most patients can be managed with medical measures. There 
is no single therapeutic agent that has been shown to relieve 
symptoms (Summary box 68.9).
Endoscopic, radiological or surgical interventions are 
indicated mainly to relieve obstruction of the pancreatic 
duct, bile duct or the duodenum, or in dealing with complica-
tions (e.g. pseudocyst, abscess, fistula, ascites or variceal hae-
morrhage). Decompressing an obstructed pancreatic duct can 
provide pain relief in some patients (the assumption is that 
ductal hypertension causes the pain).
Endoscopic pancreatic sphincterotomy might be bene -
ficial in patients with papillary stenosis and a high sphinc -
ter pressure and pancreatic ductal pressure. Patients with a 
dominant pancreatic duct stricture and upstream dilatation 
may benefit by placement of a stent across the stricture. The 
stent should be left in for no more than 4–6 weeks as it will 
block. The complication rate is high, and less than two-thirds 
of patients experience pain relief, but those who do get relief 
may benefit from a surgical bypass. Pancreatic duct stones may 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1231 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1232
be extracted at ERCP , and this may sometimes be combined 
with extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. Pseudocysts may 
be drained internally under EUS guidance. Percutaneous or 
transgastric drainage of pseudocysts under ultrasound or CT 
guidance may be performed.
The role of surgery is to overcome obstruction and remove 
mass lesions. Some patients have a mass in the head of the 
pancreas, for which either a pancreatoduodenectomy or a 
Beger procedure (duodenum-preserving resection of the pan-
creatic head) is appropriate. If the duct is markedly dilated, 
then a longitudinal pancreatojejunostomy or Frey procedure 
can be of value (Figure 68.31). The natural evolution of 
the disease may not be altered significantly, but around half 
the patients get long-term pain relief. The rare patient with 
disease limited to the tail will be cured by a distal pancre -
atectomy. Patients with intractable pain and diffuse disease 
may plead for a total pancreatectomy in the expectation that 
removing the offending organ will relieve their pain. How-
ever, one should keep in mind that pancreatic function and 
quality of life are significantly impaired after this procedure, 
and the operative mortality rate is not trivial. Moreover, 
there is no guarantee of pain relief (approximately a third of 
patients get resolution, a third show some benefit, and a third 
see no benefit at all). Total pancreatectomy and islet auto -
transplantation has been reported in selected patients, but it 
is difficult to demonstrate any overall benefit.
Prognosis
Chronic pancreatitis is a difficult condition to manage. 
Patients often suffer a gradual decline in their professional, 
social and personal lives. The pain may abate after a surgical 
or percutaneous intervention, but tends to return over a 
period of time. In a proportion of patients, the inflammation 
may gradually burn out over a period of years, with disappear-
ance of the pain, leaving only the exocrine and endocrine 
insufficiencies. Development of pancreatic cancer is a risk in 
those who have had the disease for more than 20 years. New 
symptoms or a change in the pattern of symptoms should be 
investigated and malignancy excluded.
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Separate mention is warranted of this condition, which 
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of chronic 
biliary or pancreatic pain. The sphincter of Oddi is 6–10 mm 
long and lies within the duodenal wall. A part of it encircles 
the common channel, and then there are separate biliary and 
pancreatic components (see Figure 68.5). In most mammals 
the bile duct and pancreatic duct have separate openings into 
the duodenum. The one other animal that has a sphincter 
anatomy very similar to that of humans is the Australian pos-
sum. Sphincter of Oddi dyskinesia or dysfunction (SOD) is 
a clinical syndrome in which pain, biochemical abnormal-
ities and dilatation of the bile duct and/or pancreatic duct 
are attributed to abnormal function of the sphincter of Oddi. 
The true incidence of SOD is unknown. Females are more 
commonly affected than males. SOD may result from stenosis 
of the sphincter, or from dysmotility. Scarring or stenosis of 
the sphincter can result from passage of stones, pancreatitis or 
prior endoscopic sphincterotomies.
There are two clinical types of SOD. Biliary-type SOD 
is characterised by biliary pain, which may be accompanied 
by abnormally raised liver enzymes and/or dilation of the bile 
duct and/or evidence of delayed emptying on biliary scintig -
raphy. It may be a cause of persistent post-cholecystectomy 
symptoms. A predominance of pancreatic problems, espe -
cially recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis, is known as 
pancreatic-type SOD. Each type of SOD is further divided 
into types I, II and III (Table 68.7). This classification helps 
to predict the underlying pathology and the likelihood of suc-
cessful treatment. Type I disease is thought to result from a 
fixed stenosis and responds best to therapy. An episodic dys-
motility is the presumed underlying abnormality in the other 
types and often does not respond as well to treatment.
Biliary type SOD should be considered and excluded in 
patients with the post-cholecystectomy syndrome. Pancreatic 
type SOD should be excluded in patients with recurrent acute 
pancreatitis of unexplained aetiology. The role of SOD in 
chronic pancreatitis is unclear. A careful history is essential. 
CT and MRCP can demonstrate dilatation of the biliary and 
pancreatic ducts. MRCP with intravenous secretin injection 
can particularly demonstrate pancreatic duct dilatation due 
to raised sphincter pressures. EUS may achieve the same 
end. Quantitative cholescintigraphy (HIDA scan) may 
demonstrate delayed biliary transit. The gold standard for 
diagnosing SOD is ERCP with manometry of the biliary and 
pancreatic sphincters, though many would say that this is not 
essential for diagnosis of type I SOD. ERCP with manometry 
Charles Frederick Frey , b.1929, Professor of Surgery, The University of California, Davids, CA, USA.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 68.31Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  3      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 68.31 Pancreatojejunostomy. The pancreatic duct is opened 
longitudinally, and a loop of jejunum is sutured to the duct. In the Frey 
procedure, the superficial part of the head of the pancreas is removed 
to achieve drainage.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1232 25/10/2017   09:54Carcinoma of the pancr eas 1233
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
is indicated if the pain disabling, noninvasive investigations 
have not shown structural abnormalities and conservative 
therapy has not helped. The variables customarily assessed 
at manometry are basal pressure and amplitude, duration, 
frequency, and propagation pattern of the phasic waves. Basal 
sphincter pressure higher than 40 mm Hg is the manometric 
criterion used to diagnose SOD.
Endoscopic sphincterotomy is the treatment of choice for 
type I SOD. The question of whether dual sphincterotomies 
(biliary and pancreatic) should be carried out remains unan -
swered. There is however a particularly high risk of post-ERCP 
pancreatitis (30% or more), though placement of a pancreatic 
stent at the time of the procedure appears to reduce this risk. 
Such treatments are best carried out in tertiary units by expert 
gastroenterologists. For patients with type II SOD, manome -
try should be done before considering sphincterotomy, and 
the results of sphincterotomy are less consistent. Patients 
with type III SOD are even more difficult, with response rates 
to sphincterotomy ranging from 8% to 65%. Medical ther -
apy should be tried before proceeding to manometry. Proton 
pump inhibitors, spasmolytic drugs, calcium blockers (nifed -
ipine), and psychotropic agents have all been tried with vary-
ing degrees of success. Injection of botulinum toxin (which 
can cause a chemical sphincterotomy for up to 3 months) or 
placement of a pancreatic stent (these are usually removed 
after 6 weeks) do not provide lasting relief, but can be used 
to identify patients who may benefit from a sphincterotomy. 
A recent study in patients with abdominal pain after chole -
cystectomy and suspected SOD casts doubt on the efficacy 
of endoscopic sphincterotomy. In patients undergoing ERCP 
with manometry, sphincterotomy versus sham did not reduce 
disability due to pain. Manometry results were not associated 
with the outcome. No clinical subgroups appeared to benefit 
from sphincterotomy more than others.
In a small subgroup of patients who have experienced signif -
icant but short-lived relief with sphincterotomy or stenting, 
surgical transduodenal sphincteroplasty may be considered. 
But the long-term results of surgical sphincteroplasty are 
often poor. In exceptional circumstances, where the pancre -
atic head is badly scarred and sphincteroplasty has failed or is 
unlikely to succeed, there may be grounds for surgical resec -
tion of the pancreatic head.
CARCINOMA OF THE PANCREAS
Pancreatic cancer is the sixth leading cause of cancer death in 
the UK, and the incidence is 10 cases per 100 000 population 
per year. Worldwide, it constitutes 2–3% of all cancers and, 
in the USA, is the fourth highest cause of cancer death. The 
incidence has declined slightly over the last 25 years. There is 
no simple screening test; however, patients with an increased 
inherited risk of pancreatic cancer (Table 68.8) should be 
referred to specialist units for screening and counselling.
TABLE 68.7 Milwaukee classification of sphincter of Oddi 
(SOD) dysfunction.
1. Biliary type SOD:
Type I:
 Typical biliary type pain
  Liver enzymes (AST, ALT or ALP) >2 times normal limit  
 documented on at least 2 occasions during episodes of pain
 Dilated CBD >12 mm in diameter
 Prolonged biliary drainage time (>45 min)*
Type II:
 Biliary type pain, and
 One or two of the above criteria
Type III:
 Biliary type pain only
2. Pancreatic type SOD:
Type I:
 Pancreatic type pain
  Amylase and/or lipase >2 times upper normal limit on at least 2  
 occasions during episodes of pain
 Dilated pancreatic duct (head >6 mm, body >5 mm)
 Prolonged pancreatic drainage time (>9 min)*
Type II:
 Pancreatic type pain, and
 One or two of the above criteria
Type III:
 Pancreatic type pain only
* difficult to measure and often eschewed in clinical practice
TABLE 68.8 Risk factors for the development of 
pancreatic cancer.
Demographic factors
Age (peak incidence 65–75 years)
Male gender
Black ethnicity
Environment/lifestyle
Cigarette smoking
Genetic factors and medical conditions
Family history
Two first-degree relatives with pancreas cancer: relative risk 
increases 18- to 57-fold
Germline BRCA2 mutations in some rare high-risk families
Hereditary pancreatitis (50- to 70-fold increased risk)
Chronic pancreatitis (5- to 15-fold increased risk)
Lynch syndrome (HNPCC)
Ataxia telangiectasia
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome
Familial breast–ovarian cancer syndrome
Familial atypical multiple mole melanoma
Familial adenomatous polyposis – risk of ampullary/duodenal 
carcinoma
Diabetes mellitus
HNPCC, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer.
Henry T Lynch , b.1928, Professor of Preventative Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA.
John Law Augustine Peutz , 1886–1968, Chief Specialist for Internal Medicine, St. John’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Harold Joseph Jeghers , 1904–1990, Professor of Internal Medicine, The New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, Jersey City, NJ, USA. 
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1233 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1234
Pathology
More than 85% of pancreatic cancers are ductal adenocarci-
nomas. The remaining tumours constitute a variety of pathol-
ogies with individual characteristics. Endocrine tumours of 
the pancreas are rare. These are covered in Chapter 52.
Ductal adenocarcinomas arise most commonly in the head 
of the gland. They are solid, scirrhous tumours, characterised  
by neoplastic tubular glands within a markedly desmoplastic 
fibrous stroma. Fibrosis is also a characteristic of chronic pan-
creatitis, and histological differentiation between tumour and 
pancreatitis can cause diagnostic difficulties. Ductal adenocar-
cinomas infiltrate locally, typically along nerve sheaths, along 
lymphatics and into blood vessels. Liver and peritoneal metas-
tases are common. Proliferative lesions in the pancreatic ducts 
can precede invasive ductal adenocarcinoma. These are termed 
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia or PanIN, and can demon-
strate a range of structural complexity and cellular atypia.
Cystic tumours of the pancreas may be serous or mucinous. 
Serous cystadenomas are typically found in older women, and 
are large aggregations of multiple small cysts, almost like bub-
blewrap. They are benign. Mucinous tumours, on the other 
hand, have the potential for malignant transformation. They 
include mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) and intraductal 
papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs). MCNs are seen in 
perimenopausal women, show up as multilocular thick-walled 
cysts in the pancreatic body or tail, and, histologically, con -
tain an ovarian-type stroma. IPMNs are more common in the 
pancreatic head and in older men, but an IPMN arising from 
a branch duct can be difficult to distinguish from an MCN. 
IPMNs arising within the main duct are often multifocal and 
have a greater tendency to prove malignant. Thick mucus 
seen extruding from the ampulla at ERCP is diagnostic of a 
main duct IPMN. Mucinous tumours can be confused with 
pseudocysts (see Summary box 68.8). Occasionally, lympho-
epithelial cysts, lymphangiomas, dermoid cysts and intestinal 
duplication cysts can show up in the pancreas. Solid pseudo -
papillary tumour is a rare, slowly progressive but malignant 
tumour, seen in women of childbearing age, and manifests as 
a large, part-solid, part-cystic tumour.
Tumours arising from the ampulla or from the distal com-
mon bile duct can present as a mass in the head of the pan -
creas, and constitute around a third of all tumours in that area. 
Adenomas of the ampulla of Vater are diagnosed at endos-
copy as polypoid submucosal masses covered by a smooth 
epithelium. They can harbour foci of invasive carcinoma; 
the larger the adenoma, the greater the risk. Biopsies taken 
at endoscopy may not always include the malignant focus. 
Endoscopic surveillance, endoscopic resection or even sur -
gical transduodenal ampullary excision should be considered 
(Figure 68.32). Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis 
(FAP) can present with multiple duodenal polyps. Malignant 
transformation in a duodenal polyp is a significant cause of 
mortality in these patients, mandating endoscopic follow-up 
and pancreatoduodenectomy in selected patients with high-
grade dysplasia within the polyp.
Ampullary adenocarcinomas often present early with 
biliary obstruction. Their natural history is distinctly more 
favourable compared with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. 
Ampullary carcinomas are relatively small when diagnosed, 
which may account for their better prognosis. Occasion -
ally, other malignant neoplasms can arise at the ampulla, 
such as carcinoid tumours and high-grade neuroendocrine 
carcinomas.
Clinical features
Jaundice secondary to obstruction of the distal bile duct is 
the most common symptom that draws attention to ampullary 
and pancreatic head tumours. It is characteristically painless 
jaundice but may be associated with nausea and epigastric dis-
comfort. Pruritus, dark urine and pale stools with steatorrhoea 
are common accompaniments of jaundice. In the absence of 
jaundice, symptoms are often non-specific, namely vague 
discomfort, anorexia and weight loss, and are frequently dis -
missed by both patient and doctor. Upper abdominal symp -
toms in a recently diagnosed diabetic, especially in one above 
50 years of age, with no family history or obesity, should 
raise suspicion. Occasionally, a patient will present with an 
unexplained attack of pancreatitis; all such patients should 
have follow-up imaging of the pancreas. Tumours of the body 
and tail of the gland often grow silently, and present at an 
advanced unresectable stage. Back pain is a worrying symp -
tom, raising the possibility of retroperitoneal infiltration.
On examination, there may be evidence of jaundice, 
weight loss, a palpable liver and a palpable gall bladder. Cour-
voisier first drew attention to the association of an enlarged 
Figure 68.32 A large ampullary adenoma that turned into an adeno-
carcinoma; the arr ow indicates the ampulla. Photograph taken after 
resection in the form of a pancreatoduodenectomy (courtesy of Dr 
Joanne Chin-Aleong).
Ludwig Courvoisier , 1843–1918, surgeon, Basel, Switzerland, was one of the first surgeons to remove stones from the common bile duct.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1234 25/10/2017   09:54Carcinoma of the pancr eas 1235
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
gall bladder and a pancreatic tumour in 1890, when he noted 
that, when the common duct is obstructed by a stone, dis -
tension of the gall bladder (which is likely to be chronically 
inflamed) is rare; when the duct is obstructed in some other 
way, such as a neoplasm, distension of the normal gall blad -
der is common. Other signs of intra-abdominal malignancy 
should be looked for with care, such as a palpable mass, asci -
tes, supraclavicular no des and tumour deposits in the pelvis; 
when present, they indicate a grim prognosis.
Investigation
In a jaundiced patient, the usual blood tests and ultrasound 
scan should be performed. Ultrasound will determine if the 
bile duct is dilated. If it is, and there is a genuine suspicion of a 
tumour in the head of the pancreas, the preferred test is a con-
trast-enhanced CT scan (see Figure 68.8). In the majority of 
instances, this should establish if there is a tumour in the pan-
creas and if it is resectable. The presence of hepatic or peri -
toneal metastases, lymph node metastases distant from the 
pancreatic head, or encasement of the superior mesenteric, 
hepatic or coeliac artery by tumour are clear contraindica-
tions to surgical resection. Tumour size, continuous invasion 
of the duodenum, stomach or colon, and lymph node metas -
tases within the operative field are not contraindications. If 
the tumour abuts or minimally invades the portal or superior 
mesenteric vein, this is not a contraindication to surgery (as 
part of the vein can be resected if necessary), but complete 
encasement and occlusion of the vein is. MRI and MR angi -
ography can provide information comparable to CT.
ERCP and biliary stenting should be carried out if there 
is any suggestion of cholangitis, if there is diagnostic doubt 
(small ampullary lesions may not be seen on CT, and ERCP 
is the best way to identify them) or if there is likely to be a 
delay between diagnosis and surgery and the patient is deeply 
jaundiced with distressing pruritus. It relieves the jaundice 
and can also provide a brush cytology or biopsy specimen to 
confirm the diagnosis (see Figures 68.13, 68.14 and 68.19). 
Otherwise, however, preoperative ERCP and biliary stenting 
is not mandatory in patients with resectable disease; there is 
evidence to suggest that it is associated with a slightly higher 
incidence of infective complications after surgery. The pro -
thrombin time should be checked, and clotting abnormalities 
should be corrected with vitamin K or fresh-frozen plasma 
prior to ERCP . If a stent is placed in a patient who may 
undergo resection, it should be a plastic stent or a covered 
metal stent, as these can be easily pulled out during surgery. 
If a naked metal self-expanding stent is placed (that will get 
embedded in its position), it should be a relatively short one 
that does not extend too high up the bile duct towards the 
biliary confluence.
EUS is useful if CT fails to demonstrate a tumour, if tissue 
diagnosis is required prior to surgery (e.g. a mass has developed 
on a background of chronic pancreatitis and a distinction 
needs to be made between inflammation and neoplasia), if 
vascular invasion needs to be confirmed, or in separating cys-
tic tumours from pseudocysts ( Figure 68.33; see also Figure 
68.20). Transduodenal or transgastric FNA or Trucut biopsy 
performed under EUS guidance avoids spillage of tumour 
cells into the peritoneal cavity. Percutaneous transperitoneal 
biopsy of potentially resectable pancreatic tumours should be 
avoided as far as possible. Histological confirmation of malig-
nancy is desirable but not essential, particularly if the imaging 
clearly demonstrates a resectable tumour. The lack of a tissue 
diagnosis should not delay appropriate surgical therapy. In 
patients judged to have unresectable disease, tissue diagnosis 
should be obtained prior to starting palliative therapy.
Diagnostic laparoscopy prior to an attempt at resection 
can spare a proportion of patients an unnecessary laparotomy 
by identifying small peritoneal and liver metastases. It can 
be combined with laparoscopic ultrasonography. The tumour 
marker CA19-9 is not highly specific or sensitive, but a base-
line level should be established; if it is initially raised, it can 
be useful later in identifying recurrence.
Management
At the time of presentation, more than 85% of patients with 
ductal adenocarcinoma are unsuitable for resection because 
the disease is too advanced. If imaging shows that the tumour 
is potentially resectable, the patient should be considered 
Figure 68.33 (a) Carcinoma of the ampulla as seen at endoscopy . 
(b) Appearance of the same tumour (arrow) on endoscopic ultra-
sound (courtesy of Dr Peter Fairclough).
(b)
(a)
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1235 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1236
for surgical resection, as that offers the only (albeit small) 
chance of a cure. Comorbidities should be taken carefully into 
account. Biological rather than chronological age should be 
the consideration. If a cystic tumour is encountered, no matter 
how large, surgical resection should be considered, as it carries 
a reasonable chance of cure. Tumours of the ampulla have a 
good prognosis and should, if at all possible, be resected. Some 
of the rare tumours and the neuroendocrine lesions should 
also be resected if at all possible. For those patients who have 
inoperable disease, palliative treatment should be offered.
Surgical resection
The standard resection for a tumour of the pancreatic head 
or the ampulla is a pylorus-preserving pancreatoduo denec-
tomy (PPPD). This involves removal of the duodenum and 
the pancreatic head, including the distal part of the bile duct. 
The original pancreatoduodenectomy as proposed by Whip -
ple included resection of the gastric antrum. Preserving the 
antrum and the pylorus is thought to result in a more physio-
logical outcome with no difference in survival or recurrence 
rates. The Whipple procedure is now reserved for situations in 
which the entire duodenum has to be removed (e.g. in FAP) 
or where the tumour encroaches on the first part of the duo -
denum or the distal stomach and a PPPD would not achieve 
a clear resection margin. Total pancreatectomy is warranted 
only in situations where one is dealing with a multifocal 
tumour (e.g. a main duct IPMN), or the body and tail of the 
gland are too inflamed or too friable to achieve a safe anasto-
mosis with the bowel. The PPPD procedure includes a local 
lymphadenectomy. Extended lymphadenectomy has not been 
shown to be beneficial in improving survival and is associated 
with increased morbidity. If the tumour is adherent to the 
portal or superior mesenteric vein, but can still be removed by 
including a patch or a short segment of vein in the resection, 
with an appropriate reconstruction of the vessel, then that 
should be done. This is not associated with an increase in the 
morbidity or mortality of the procedure, and the outcomes 
are similar.
For tumours of the body and tail, distal pancreatectomy 
with splenectomy is the standard. Infiltration of the splenic 
artery or vein by the tumour is not a contraindication to 
resection. When resecting the pancreatic tail for a benign 
lesion, one may attempt to preserve the spleen if possible. 
When removing the spleen, prior vaccinations against pneu -
mococci, meningococci and Haemophilus influenzae B should 
be administered, and subsequent antibiotic prophylaxis given 
(see Chapter 66).
While the majority of pancreatic resections continue to 
be performed via the open approach, there is evidence that 
the laparoscopic and robotic approaches are also feasible and 
may yield comparable results. Laparoscopic pancreatic resec -
tions are technically challenging, pose additional demands on 
operating room time and equipment, and involve a signifi-
cant learning curve for the surgeon and the entire team. Dis-
tal pancreatectomy, especially for smaller tumours, lends itself 
more easily to the laparoscopic approach than a pancreatic 
head resection.
PANCREATODUODENECTOMY
The patient’s coagulation screen should be checked preoper -
atively and adequate hydration ensured. The patient should 
be aware of the diagnosis, the gravity of the operation and the 
risks involved. The operation has three distinct phases:
 ● exploration and assessment;
 ● resection;
 ● reconstruction.
A cholecystectomy is performed. The bile duct and 
hepatic artery are exposed, removing the lymphatic tissue in 
this area. Exposure of the hepatic artery enables division of 
the gastroduodenal artery and visualisation of the portal vein. 
The distal part of the gastric antrum is mobilised. The duo-
denum and right colon are mobilised from the retroperitoneal 
tissues. The superior mesenteric vein is exposed inferior to the 
pancreatic neck. Careful dissection into the plane between 
the vein and the pancreatic substance (see Figure 68.2) will 
reveal whether the tumour is adherent to the vein. At this 
juncture, a decision has to be made whether to proceed to 
the next phase of resection or not. If resection is to be per -
formed, the fourth part of the duodenum is dissected and freed 
from the ligament of Treitz so that the upper jejunum can 
be brought into the supracolic compartment. The jejunum is 
divided 20–30 cm downstream from the duodenojejunal flex-
ure, and the mesentery of the proximal jejunum is detached. 
The first part of the duodenum is divided. The neck of the 
pancreas is divided, and then the uncinate process is sepa -
rated from the superior mesenteric vein and artery working 
up towards the upper bile duct, which is divided, releasing 
the specimen (Figure 68.34). Retroperitoneal lymph nodes 
within the operative field are completely removed with the 
specimen. Reconstruction is carried out as in Figure 68.35. 
The pancreatic stump, the divided bile duct and the duodenal 
stump are anastomosed on to the jejunum, in that order. Some 
surgeons prefer to anastomose the pancreas to the posterior 
wall of the stomach instead; others prefer to create a separate 
Roux loop of the jejunum and anastomose the pancreas to 
that. The operation should take between 3 and 6 hours. Blood 
loss should be low, and transfusion is often not necessary. The 
patients are usually nursed in a high-dependency area for the 
first 24–48 hours after surgery. Prolonged nasogastric drainage 
is unnecessary, and early feeding can be commenced.
Resection for pancreatic cancer should be carried out in 
specialist units. There is a clear correlation between higher 
caseload volume and lower hospital mortality and morbidity. 
Allen Oldfather Whipple , 1881–1963, Director of Surgical Services, The Presbyterian Hospital, and Professor of Surgery, Columbia University, New York, 
NY, USA, began to perform two-stage pancreatoduodenectomies in 1934 and shortened the procedure into a one-stage process in 1940. Alessandro Codivilla 
(1861–1912) and Walter Kausch (1867–1928) had performed the operation before him, but Whipple was the surgeon who established pancreatoduodenectomy 
as an operation.
Wenzel Treitz , 1819–1872, Professor of Anatomy and Pathology, at Krakow, Poland, and later at Prague, The Czech Republic. He was involved in the struggle for 
Czech nationalism and at 52 committed suicide by taking potassium cyanide.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1236 25/10/2017   09:54Carcinoma of the pancr eas 1237
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
PPPD should carry a mortality of no more than 3–5%. The 
morbidity remains high, with some 30–40% of patients devel-
oping a complication in the postoperative period. These 
complications are usually infective, but a leak from the 
anastomosis between the pancreas and the bowel is known 
to occur in at least 10% of patients, and this may give rise 
to major complications. Octreotide may be administered in 
the perioperative period to suppress secretion and reduce 
the likelihood of a leak, but the evidence for its efficacy is 
still debatable. Following surgical resection, the pathological 
tumour–node–metastasis stage should be documented.
ADJUVANT THERAPY
At the beginning of this century, the reported 5-year survival 
following resection of a pancreatic adenocarcinoma ranged 
from 7% to 25% (around 10% for most centres). The median 
survival was 11–20 months. Considering that, at best, 15% of 
patients had resectable disease to begin with, this meant only 
two or three out of 100 patients with this disease could expect 
to survive to 5 years. Moreover, recurrences could and did 
show up even beyond the 5-year cut-off. The high recurrence 
rate following resection inevitably led to the consideration 
of adjuvant treatments to improve outcome. In a large multi-
centre European study (ESPAC-1) reported in 2004, adjuvant 
radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy was shown to confer no 
advantage, but chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) pro-
vided an overall benefit; median survival with chemotherapy 
was 20 months compared with 16 months without. Another 
trial (ESPAC-3) showed that gemcitabine works equally well. 
A further trial (ESPAC-4), of gemcitabine alone versus gem-
citabine with capecitabine (a fluorouracil that can be taken 
orally) has indicated that the latter regimen can push the 
median survival above 2 years and the 5-year survival close 
to 30%. Most patients with resected ductal adenocarcinoma 
are now offered 6 months of adjuvant chemotherapy with 
gemcitabine and/or 5-FU. Some centres continue to offer 
chemoradiotherapy, particularly in patients with involved 
(R1) resection margins, and further trials of adjuvant chemo-
radiation are in progress.
It should be emphasised, however, that these depressing 
statistics apply to ductal adenocarcinomas. Patients with 
resected ampullary tumours have a 5-year survival of 40%, 
and cystic tumours and neuroendocrine tumours can often be 
cured by surgical resection.
Palliation
The median survival of patients with unresectable, locally 
advanced, non-metastatic pancreatic cancer is 6–10 months 
and, in patients with metastatic disease, it is 2–6 months.
If unresectable disease is found in the course of a lapa -
rotomy that was commenced with the intent to resect, a 
chole dochoenterostomy and a gastroenterostomy should be 
carried out to relieve (or pre-empt) jaundice and duodenal 
obstruction. The bile duct may be anastomosed to the duo -
denum, or to a loop of jejunum. It is preferable to use the bile 
duct rather than the gall bladder. Cholecystojejunostomy is 
easier to perform, but the bile must then drain through the 
cystic duct, which is narrow and, if inserted low into the bile 
duct, is vulnerable to occlusion by tumour growth. A coeliac 
plexus block can also be administered. A transduodenal Tru -
cut biopsy of the tumour should be obtained.
In patients found to have unresectable disease on imaging, 
jaundice is relieved by stenting at ERCP (Figure 68.36a). 
Stents may be made of plastic or self-expanding metal mesh. 
Plastic stents are cheaper but tend to occlude faster and, if 
the patient is likely to have a longer life expectancy, a metal 
stent can be used. If the patient is not a suitable candidate for 
endoscopic biliary stenting, a percutaneous transhepatic stent 
can be placed (Figure 68.36b). Obstruction of the duodenum 
occurs in approximately 15% of cases. If this occurs early in 
the course of the disease, surgical bypass by gastrojejunostomy 
is appropriate but, if it is late in the course of the disease, then 
the use of expanding metal stents inserted endoscopically is 
preferable, as many of these patients have prolonged delayed 
gastric emptying following surgery (Figure 68.36c). If both 
biliary and duodenal metal stents are to be placed endoscopi-
cally, the biliary one should be placed first.
If no operative procedure is undertaken, an EUS-guided 
or percutaneous biopsy of the tumour should be performed 
before consideration of chemotherapy or chemoradiation. 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 64.34Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Portal vein
Body and tail
of pancreas
Superior mesenteric
artery and vein
Jejunum
Pancreatic
duct
Figure 68.34  Resection of the head of the pancreas in a pylo -
rus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy.
Stomach
Jejunum
Pylorus
Duodenum
Liver
Bile duct
Choledocho-
jejunostomy
Pancreato-
jejunostomy
Figure 68.35 Reconstruction after a pylorus-preserving pancreato-
duodenectomy.
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1237 25/10/2017   09:54CHAPTER 68  The pancreas
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1238
Lymphomas of the pancreas are rare and constitute less than 
3% of all pancreatic cancers. These respond to chemoradio -
therapy and surgical resection is not indicated. For patients 
with ductal adenocarcinoma, 5-FU or gemcitabine will pro -
duce a remission in 15–25%, while the remainder will receive 
no benefit from the therapy. Better tumour responses are now 
being achieved with multiagent chemotherapy regimens 
such as the combination of fluorouracil, irinotecan, oxali -
platin, and leucovorin (FOLFIRINOX) and gemcitabine 
plus albumin-bound paclitaxel particles (nab-paclitaxel). 
However the 2–5 months’ increase in median survival with 
these regimens has to be offset against the higher toxicity and 
cost. No long-term cures have been described with chemo -
therapy or radiotherapy.
Attempts to downstage unresectable disease with chemo -
therapy or chemoradiation and render it resectable are rarely 
successful. In a very small proportion of patients who have 
been deemed unresectable due to major vascular involvement 
and do not have metastatic disease, attempts have been made 
to downstage the tumour with one of the newer combination 
Mesh-metal
stent in
bile duct
Tumour
Percutaneous
approach
(b)
Mesh-metal
stent in
bile duct
Tumour
Endoscope
(a)
Stent in
duodenum
Pancreatic tumour
compressing duodenum
Endoscope
(c)
Figure 68.36  Approaches to biliary and duodenal stenting. (a) 
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography and placement of a biliary 
stent; (b) percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography followed by 
cannulation of the biliary system and percutaneous placement of a 
biliary stent (mesh metal in this instance); (c) endoscopic placement 
of a duodenal stent (mesh metal).
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1238 25/10/2017   09:54Further reading 1239
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
chemotherapy regimens, sometimes with chemoradiation 
thrown in, to try to render them resectable. Such neoadjuvant 
therapies should ideally be considered within a clinical trial.
Steatorrhoea is treated with enzyme supplementation. 
Diabetes mellitus, if it develops, is treated with oral hypogly -
caemics or insulin as appropriate, and pain with either anal -
gesics or an appropriate nerve block.
FURTHER READING
Ayub K, Imada R, Slavin J. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatog-
raphy in gallstone-associated acute pancreatitis. Cochrane Reviews  
2004; (2): CD003630.
Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C et al. Acute Pancreatitis Classification 
Working Group Classification of acute pancreatitis 2012: revision of 
the Atlanta classification and definitions by international consen -
sus. Gut 2013; 62:102–111.
Braganza JM, Lee SH, McCloy RF , McMahon MJ. Chronic pancreatitis. 
Lancet 2011; 377: 1184–97.
Jarnagin W . Blumgart’s Surgery of the liver, biliary tract and pancreas , 5th 
edn. Elsevier, 2012.
Moss AC, Morris E, MacMathuna P . Palliative biliary stents for obstruct-
ing pancreatic carcinoma. Cochrane Reviews 2006; (2):CD004200.
Pancreatic Section, British Society of Gastroenterology; Pancreatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland; Association of Upper Gastro -
intestinal Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland; Royal College of 
Pathologists; Special Interest Group for Gastro-Intestinal Radiology. 
Guidelines for the management of patients with pancreatic cancer, 
periampullary and ampullary carcinomas. Gut 2005; 54 (Suppl 
V):1–16.
Ryan DP , Hong TS, Bardeesy N. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. N Engl J 
Med 2014; 371:1039-1049.
van der Gaag NA, Rauws EAJ, van Eijck CSJ et al. Preoperative biliary 
drainage for cancer of the head of the pancreas. N Engl J Med 2010; 
362:129–137.
Working Party of the British Society of Gastroenterology; Association of 
Surgeons of Great Britain and Ireland, Pancreatic Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland; Association of Upper GI Surgeons of Great 
Britain and Ireland. UK guidelines for the management of acute 
pancreatitis. Gut 2005; 54 (Suppl III):1–9.
Summary box 68.10
Palliation of pancreatic cancer
Relieve jaundice and treat biliary sepsis
●● Surgical biliary bypass
●● Stent placed at ERCP or percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography
Improve gastric emptying
●● Surgical gastroenterostomy
●● Duodenal stent
Pain relief
●● Stepwise escalation of analgesia
●● Coeliac plexus block
●● Transthoracic splanchnicectomy
Symptom relief and quality of life
●● Encourage normal activities
●● Enzyme replacement for steatorrhoea
●● Treat diabetes
Consider chemotherapy
11_68-B&L27_Pt11_Ch68.indd   1239 25/10/2017   09:54Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To appreciate:
 • The basic anatomy and physiology of the small intestine
 • The range of conditions that may affect the small 
intestine
To understand:
 • The aetiology and pathology of common small intestinal 
conditions
 • The principles of investigation of small intestinal 
symptoms
 • The importance of non-surgical management of small 
intestinal problems
 • The principles of small intestinal surgery
 • That complex intestinal problems are best managed by 
a multidisciplinary team
 • The management of acute surgical problems of the 
intestines
The small intestine
69
ANATOMY OF THE SMALL 
INTESTINE
Although the duodenum is anatomically indistinguishable 
from the small intestine, it is subject to some specific pathol-
ogies and surgical therapies; therefore, in purely surgical 
terms it may be regarded as a distinct entity and is covered 
in Chapter 63. The length of the small bowel varies from 
300 to 850  cm between the duodenojejunal (DJ) flexure to 
the ileocaecal valve (Figure 69.1). It is notoriously difficult 
to establish the length of the small intestine, and estimates 
gathered at surgery, at postmortem and during radiological 
investigations may vary widely, even in the same individual. 
In addition, there is considerable inter-individual variability 
and the small intestine has been said to be longer in men.
Colon
Jejunum
(proximal
40%)
Ileum
(distal
60%)
Duodenojejunal /f_lexure
Terminal ileum
Figure 69.1 Portions of the small bowel and their r elations to the 
colon.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1240 25/10/2017   09:57Inflammatory bowel disease 1241
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
The proximal 40% of the small intestine is referred to as 
the jejunum; the remainder is the ileum. There is no clear 
demarcation between jejunum and ileum, but the small 
bowel does change gradually in character from proximal to 
distal. The jejunum tends to have a wider diameter and a 
thicker wall, with more prominent mucosal folds (valvulae 
conniventes), while the ileum has a thicker, more fatty mes-
entery with more complex arterial arcades. The ileum also 
contains larger aggregates of lymph nodes (Peyer’s patches), 
which can occasionally become lead points in intussusception 
in  childhood.
The small intestine has a very rich blood supply , derived 
from the superior mesenteric artery, while venous drainage is 
via the portal venous system, into which the superior mes -
enteric vein drains blood rich in nutrients after a meal. This 
arrangement facilitates processing of the nutrients by the 
liver, into which the portal vein drains in turn. The lymphatic 
drainage of the small intestine follows the arterial supply.
The small intestine has a rich autonomic innervation 
arising from the splanchnic nerves, which contribute a dense 
network of sympathetic fibres around the superior mesenteric 
artery and its branches. Referred pain from the small intestine 
is usually felt in the periumbilical region (T10). The blood 
and nerve supply to the small intestine runs in the attached 
mesentery, which originates on the posterior abdominal wall 
and runs obliquely downwards to the right between the duo -
denojejunal flexure to the left of the second lumbar vertebra 
and the right sacroiliac joint.
absorptive functions, but resection of the terminal ileum will 
result in a diminished bile salt pool, B12 deficiency and may 
lead to deficiency of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K.
The small intestine plays an important role in the metab-
olism of plasma lipoproteins, as it is the main site of synthesis 
of high-density, low-density and very low-density lipoproteins 
(HDL, LDL, VLDL). These particles transport most of the 
absorbed dietary fat to the systemic circulation via the lymph. 
The small bowel also synthesises intestinal hormones such as 
glucagon-like peptides GLP-1 and 2, peptide YY and motilin, 
which interact with the enteric nervous system to modulate 
intestinal function, growth and differentiation.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL 
DISEASE
By definition, the term ‘inflammatory bowel disease’ is 
reserved for conditions characterised by the presence of 
idiopathic intestinal inflammation, while conditions such as 
infective or ischaemic enteritis are excluded. Crohn’s disease 
(CD) is the only known ‘inflammatory bowel disease’ affect-
ing the small intestine.
Crohn’s disease (regional enteritis)
The label ‘Crohn’s disease’ (CD) became attached to a chronic 
inflammatory disease of the ileum following a key publication 
by Crohn and colleagues in 1932. CD is characterised by a 
chronic full-thickness inflammatory process that can affect 
any part of the gastrointestinal tract from the lips to the anal 
margin. It is most common in North America and Northern 
Europe with an annual incidence of 8 per 100 000. Prevalence 
rates of around 145 per 100  000 have been reported in the 
UK. Over the last four decades, the incidence appears to have 
increased three-fold, thought to possibly be a consequence 
of environmental factors, improved diagnostic modalities, or 
both. It is slightly more common in women than in men, and 
is most commonly diagnosed between the ages of 25 and 40 
years. There is a second peak of incidence around the age of 
70 years. In those countries with high prevalence of CD, the 
groups with the highest prevalence seem to be Caucasian, 
notably American Whites and Northern Europeans, whereas 
it is less common, even in high prevalence countries, in those 
originating from Central Europe and less prevalent still in 
those originating from South America, Asia and Africa. CD 
seems to be especially prevalent (three- to five-fold higher) 
in the Ashkenazi Jewish population, although interestingly, 
the prevalence of CD in the Jewish population in Israel is 
lower than that in Europe or the United States, suggesting 
that environmental factors are also important.
Aetiology
The aetiology of CD is incompletely understood but is thought 
to involve a complex interplay of genetic and environmen-
tal factors. Although CD shares some features with chronic 
Valvulae conniventes  describes a fold of mucous membrane that passes across two-thirds of the bowel circumference.
Johann Conrad Peyer , 1653–1712, Professor of Logis, Rhetoric and Medicine, Schaffausen, Switzerland, described the lymph follicles in the intestine in 1677.
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SMALL 
INTESTINE
The principal function of the small intestine is the digestion 
of food and the absorption of nutrients, water and electro -
lytes. Carbohydrates and proteins are broken down in the 
intestinal lumen by pancreatic enzymes, but the final hydroly-
sis takes place at the brush border of the jejunum, after which 
they are absorbed. Fats are digested chiefly by the actions of 
pancreatic lipase and bile salts. The products of fat digestion, 
fatty acids and monoglycerides, separate from bile salts in the 
jejunum and are absorbed for further processing. The jejunum 
is the principal site for digestion and absorption of fluid, elec-
trolytes, iron, folate, fat, protein and carbohydrate, but the 
absorption of bile salts and vitamin B12 only occurs in the 
terminal ileum, where there are specific transporters. If the 
jejunum is resected, the ileum can assume all the required 
Summary box 69.1
Important features of small bowel anatomy
●● Comprises jejunum and ileum
●● Has valvulae conniventes
●● Blood supply from superior mesenteric artery
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1241 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1242
infection, no causative organism has ever been demon-
strated. An intriguing similarity to Johne’s disease of cattle, 
a chronic inflammatory enteropathy resulting from infection 
with Mycobacterium paratuberculosis, suggests that CD in man 
may share a similar aetiology. Some studies of tissue affected 
by CD have identified mycobacterial DNA more frequently 
in patients with CD than in controls, but others have been 
less conclusive and, importantly, randomised controlled trials 
have failed to show a significant therapeutic benefit of treat -
ing CD with antituberculous drugs.
A wide variety of foods have been implicated, in partic-
ular a diet high in refined foodstuffs, but none conclusively. 
An association with high levels of sanitation in childhood 
has been suggested. Smoking increases the relative risk of CD 
three-fold and is certainly an exacerbating factor after diagno-
sis, contrary to the protective effect seen in ulcerative colitis 
(UC). Smoking cessation has a beneficial effect on disease 
activity that is comparable to that of very strong medical 
therapies, such as the antitumour necrosis factor drugs, and is 
therefore an essential component in the management of CD.
Genetic factors are also clearly extremely important. 
Approximately 10% of patients have a first-degree rela -
tive with the disease, and concordance has been shown to 
approach 50% in monozygotic twins. Inheritance is thought 
to involve multiple genes with low penetrance. The NOD2/
CARD15 gene has excited particular interest as variants of this 
gene have been shown to have strong associations with CD. 
Genetic manipulation of these genes in mice seems to induce 
the development of a disease resembling CD and abnormal-
ities of these genes have been shown to be present in some 
members of families with a particularly high incidence of CD. 
It should be noted, however, that the vast majority of indi -
viduals with CD have no abnormalities of these genes. Since 
these genes are involved in intracellular recognition of bacte-
ria, their discovery provides potentially valuable insight into 
the pathogenesis of CD, as a disease in which the relationship 
between the gut mucosa and the normal gut bacteria becomes 
deranged, resulting in uncontrolled intestinal inflammation.
Pathogenesis
As in UC, increased gut mucosal permeability appears to 
develop at a relatively early stage of the disease. This may 
lead to increased passage of luminal antigens, which then 
induce a cell-mediated inflammatory response. This results 
in the release of proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleu-
kin-2 and tumour necrosis factor, which coordinate local and 
systemic inflammatory responses. It has been suggested that 
CD is associated with a defect in suppressor T-cells, which 
usually act to prevent escalation of the inflammatory process. 
As in UC, however, it remains unclear whether the proposed 
increase in intestinal permeability is a cause or consequence 
of the disease process. Studies of intestinal permeability in 
healthy and apparently unaffected first-degree relatives of 
patients with CD have also, however, suggested that gut per -
meability is increased, suggesting that a global, and  potentially 
genetically determined increase in gut permeability, com -
bined perhaps with an abnormal immune-mediated response 
to colonisation of the gut with some subspecies of the normal 
enteric microflora, may initiate the disease.
Pathology
The terminal ileum is most commonly involved (65%), either 
in isolation or in combination with colonic disease. Colitis 
alone occurs in up to a one-third of cases and the remainder 
are patients with more proximal small bowel involvement. 
The stomach and duodenum are affected in around 5%, 
but perianal lesions are common, affecting up to 50–75% of 
patients. Perianal disease occurs in 25% per cent of patients 
with small bowel disease, but in 75% of patients with Crohn’s 
colitis.
Macroscopically, resection specimens show fibrotic thick-
ening of the intestinal wall with narrowing of the lumen and 
fat wrapping (encroachment of mesenteric fat around the 
bowel, Figure 69.2). There is usually dilated bowel just prox-
imal to the stricture and deep mucosal ulcerations with linear 
or snake-like patterns in the strictured area itself. Oedema 
in between the ulcers gives rise to a cobblestone appearance 
of the mucosa. The transmural inflammation (which is a 
characteristic feature of CD) may lead to segments of bowel 
becoming adherent to each other and to surrounding struc -
tures, inflammatory masses with mesenteric abscesses and fis -
tulae into adjacent organs. The serosa is usually opaque, with 
thickening of the mesentery and enlarged mesenteric lymph 
nodes. CD is characteristically discontinuous, with inflamed 
areas separated by normal intestine, so-called ‘skip’ lesions.
Microscopically, there are focal areas of chronic inflamma-
tion involving all layers of the intestinal wall with lymphoid 
aggregates. Non-caseating giant cell granulomas are found in 
60% of patients and when present clearly allow a confident 
diagnosis of CD. They are most common in anorectal disease. 
A first-degree relative , defined as the individual’s parents, siblings or children.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New Y ork, NY, USA, along with Leon Ginzburg and Gordon Oppenheimer, 
described regional ileitis in 1932.
Figure 69.2 Crohn’s disease of the ileocaecal region showing typical 
thickening of the wall of the terminal ileum with narrowing of the lumen 
(courtesy of Dr B Warren, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK).
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1242 25/10/2017   09:57Inflammatory bowel disease 1243
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Multifocal arterial occlusions are found in the muscularis 
propria, which is thickened. There may be nerve cell hyper -
plasia and there is deep, fissuring ulceration within affected 
areas. Characteristically, and unlike in UC, there may be 
completely normal areas immediately next to areas of severe 
inflammation.
Clinical features
Presentation depends on the pattern of disease. Occasionally, 
CD presents acutely with ileal inflammation and symptoms 
and signs resembling those of acute appendicitis, or even with 
free perforation of the small intestine, resulting in a local or 
diffuse peritonitis. CD may present with fulminant colitis but 
this is considerably less common than in UC.
commonly, the duodenum. Fistulation into the abdominal 
wall (enterocutaneous fistulation) may also develop sponta -
neously, but it far more commonly occurs as a complication of 
abdominal surgery (see below).
Colonic CD presents with symptoms of colitis and procti-
tis as described for UC (Chapter 70), although toxic megaco-
lon is much less common.
Many patients with CD present with perianal problems. 
In the presence of active disease, the perianal skin appears 
bluish. Superficial ulcers with undermined edges are relatively 
painless and can heal with bridging of epithelium. Deep cav -
itating ulcers are usually found in the upper anal canal; they 
can be painful and cause perianal abscesses and fistulae, dis -
charging around the anus and sometimes forwards into the 
genitalia. Fistulation through the posterior wall of the vagina 
may lead to rectovaginal fistula and continuous leakage of gas 
and/or faeces per vaginam.
The rectal mucosa is often spared in CD and may feel 
normal on rectal examination. If it is involved, however, it 
will feel thickened, nodular and irregular. Perianal disease 
is frequently associated with dense, fibrous stricturing at the 
anorectal junction. Incontinence may develop as a result 
of destruction of the anal sphincter musculature because of 
inflammation, abscess formation, fibrotic change and repeated 
episodes of surgical drainage. In severe cases, the perineum 
may become densely fibrotic, rigid and covered with multiple 
discharging openings (watering-can perineum).
Each patient with CD should have their disease pheno -
type (manifestations) classified according to the Montreal 
classification. This is important as it allows an overview of 
disease progression in the individual patient over time, and 
it enables group comparisons and evaluations. The Montreal 
classification specifies age of onset, location and behaviour. 
As discussed above, the behaviour of CD can be dominated by 
inflammation without stricturing or penetration, stricturing 
or penetration (causing phlegmons, abscesses and fistulae).
EXTRAINTESTINAL MANIFESTATIONS
The extraintestinal manifestations of CD are similar to those 
that occur in UC and are outlined in Summary box 69.3. Pri-
mary sclerosing cholangitis is relatively rare in CD, compared 
with UC. Gallstones are common, as an inflamed or excised 
terminal ileum leads to reduced absorption of bile salts. Amy-
loidosis is common at postmortem examination, but is rarely 
symptomatic. ‘Metastatic’ CD can occur in the vagina and/or 
skin with nodular ulcers, which demonstrate non-  caseating 
granulomas when biopsied. Such ‘cutaneous’ CD can be vir -
tually indistinguishable macroscopically from hidradenitis 
suppurativa.
CD more commonly presents with features of chronicity. 
Small bowel CD is often characterised by abdominal colicky 
pain, which may be postprandial, and mild diarrhoea extend-
ing over many months occurring in bouts. A tender mass may 
be palpable in the right iliac fossa. Intermittent fevers, sec-
ondary anaemia and weight loss are common. After months 
of repeated attacks characterised by acute inflammation, the 
affected area of intestine begins to narrow with fibrosis, caus-
ing more chronic obstructive symptoms. Children developing 
the illness before puberty may have retarded growth and sex -
ual development. With progression of the disease, adhesions 
and transmural fissuring, intra-abdominal abscesses and fistu -
lae may develop.
Fistulation may occur into adjacent loops of bowel 
(enteroenteric or interloop fistulae). Occasionally, the 
(healthy) sigmoid loop may become adherent to the affected 
terminal ileum, resulting in ileosigmoid fistulation. The fis-
tula tracks in such cases are usually small and the profuse diar-
rhoea that results from ileosigmoid fistulation is due primarily 
to bacterial overgrowth (attributable to colonisation of the 
small bowel with colonic flora) rather than passage of small 
bowel content into the colon. Fistulation may also occur into 
the bladder (ileovesical) or the female genital tract and, less 
Summary box 69.2
Differences between ulcerative colitis (UC) and 
Crohn’s disease (CD)
●● UC affects the colon; CD can affect any part of the 
gastrointestinal tract, but particularly the small and large 
bowel
●● UC is a mucosal disease, whereas CD affects the full 
thickness of the bowel wall
●● UC produces confluent disease in the colon and rectum, 
whereas CD is characterised by skip lesions
●● CD more commonly causes stricturing and fistulation
●● Granulomas may be found on histology in CD, but not in UC
●● CD is often associated with perianal disease, whereas this is 
unusual in UC
●● CD affecting the terminal ileum may produce symptoms 
mimicking appendicitis, but this does not occur in UC
●● Resection of the colon and rectum cures the patient with UC, 
whereas recurrence is common after resection in CD
Investigations
LABORATORY
A full blood count should be performed, as anaemia is com -
mon and usually multifactorial. It may result from the anaemia 
of chronic disease, or from iron deficiency as a result of blood 
loss or malabsorption. Vitamin B12 deficiency may occur as 
a consequence of terminal ileal disease or resection. Folate 
deficiency may also result from diffuse small bowel disease or 
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1243 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1244
resection. Active inflammatory disease is usually associated 
with a fall in serum albumin, magnesium, zinc and selenium. 
Acute phase protein measurements (C-reactive protein and 
orosomucoid) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate may 
correlate with disease activity.
Finding an elevated concentration in the stools of cal -
protectin, a specific marker of inflammation, may support a 
diagnosis of CD in patients with new onset of persistent gas -
trointestinal symptoms. It can also be used to monitor disease 
activity in the long-term management of established CD.
ENDOSCOPY
Colonoscopic examination may be normal or show patchy 
inflammation. Characteristically, there are areas of normal 
mucosa in between areas of inflammation that are irregular 
and ulcerated, with a mucopurulent exudate. The earliest 
findings are of aphthous ulcers surrounded by a rim of ery -
thematous mucosa. These become larger and deeper with 
increasing severity of disease. There may be stricturing, and 
it is important to exclude malignancy at these sites by multi -
ple and often repeated mucosal biopsies. An irregular Crohn’s 
stricture with polypoid mucosa may be almost macroscopi -
cally indistinguishable from malignancy. The terminal ileum 
may be ulcerated and strictured. In patients who have had 
previous ileocaecal resection and anastomosis, recurrent dis -
ease usually presents first with aphthous ulceration just prox-
imal to the anastomosis. Interval colonoscopy is therefore 
important in the follow-up after surgery for CD.
Upper gastrointestinal symptoms may require upper gas -
trointestinal endoscopy, which may reveal deep longitudinal 
ulcers and cobblestoning of mucosa in the duodenum, stom -
ach or, rarely, in the oesophagus.
Enteroscopy may reveal jejunal ulceration and stricturing. 
Capsule endoscopy should not be undertaken where there is a 
suspicion of stricture, because of the possibility of the capsule 
becoming stuck in the narrow segment. A biodegradable test 
capsule can be used if this is a source of concern. Capsule 
endoscopy has a useful role in those patients with evidence 
of chronic gastrointestinal symptoms or blood loss where no 
evidence of ulceration can be found with more conventional 
endoscopic assessment.
IMAGING
High-resolution ultrasound in expert hands can demonstrate 
inflamed and thickened bowel loops, as well as fluid collec -
tions and abscesses. The small intestine is traditionally imaged 
by a small bowel enema (Figure 69.3). This is performed by 
instilling contrast into the small bowel via a nasoduodenal 
tube, and will show up areas of stricturing and prestenotic 
dilatation. The involved areas tend to be narrowed, irregular 
and, sometimes, when a length of terminal ileum is involved, 
there may be the ‘string sign’ of Kantor (Figure 69.3).
Computed tomography (CT) scans with oral contrast 
are widely used in the investigation of abdominal symptoms 
and can demonstrate fistulae, intra-abdominal abscesses and 
bowel thickening or dilatation. Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) is useful in assessing complex perianal disease and, 
more recently, has been shown to be an excellent method for 
investigating the small bowel. MR enterography (oral con -
trast) or enteroclysis (contrast administered via nasoduodenal 
tube) is particularly effective at demonstrating small bowel 
stricturing and avoids the need for repeated exposure to large 
Summary box 69.3
Extraintestinal manifestations of Crohn’s disease
●● Related to disease activity
Erythema nodosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Arthropathy
Eye complications (iritis/uveitis)
Aphthous ulceration
Amyloidosis
●● Unrelated to disease activity
Gallstones
Renal calculi
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Chronic active hepatitis
Sacroiliitis
Figure 69.3 Small bowel enema examination showing a narrowed 
terminal ileum involved with Crohn’s disease (arrow) – the ‘string’ sign 
of Kantor (courtesy of Pradip K Datta, Caithness General Hospital, 
Wick, UK).
John Leonard Kantor , 1890–1947, gastroenterologist, the Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described his ‘string sign’ in 1934.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1244 25/10/2017   09:57Inflammatory bowel disease 1245
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
doses of ionising radiation in young patients (Figure 69.4). A 
labelled white cell scan is occasionally of value to determine 
whether or not a segment of bowel is actively inflamed and 
guide decisions on medical treatment.
In patients with enterocutaneous fistulae, fistulography 
will be required to demonstrate the anatomy and complexity 
of the fistulae and allow adequate planning for future surgery.
Treatment
MEDICAL TREATMENT
Steroids  Steroids are the traditional method for inducing 
remission in CD, and remain important when rapid remis -
sion is required. They induce remission in 70–80% of cases 
with mo derate to severe disease. They should be used in 
short courses only and tapered when a response has been 
achieved. They reduce inflammation and are therefore inef -
fective in fibrostenotic disease, where the symptoms relate 
mainly to obstruction. Steroids can also be used as topical 
agents in the rectum where the benefits include reduced sys -
temic bioavailability, but long-term use can still cause adre-
nal suppression. More recently, oral steroid formulations such 
as budesonide have been devised, to ensure that the steroid 
moiety is removed in the portal circulation, reducing systemic 
side effects. Steroids should not be used for maintenance ther-
apy for CD and are usually replaced with immunomodulatory 
agents (see below) in order to minimise the risk of side effects 
associated with long-term steroid use.
Aminosalicylates  Colonic symptoms can be treated by 
5-ASA agents in a similar manner to that in UC. These 
agents have limited efficacy in small bowel CD.
Antibiotics  Metronidazole and ciprofloxacin may be used, 
particularly for perio ds of a few weeks at a time, especially 
in perianal disease. Long-term use of metronidazole is to be 
especially avoided, as there is a risk of peripheral neuropathy. 
Ciprofloxacin also has significant side effects when used in 
the long term, such as Achilles tendinitis and tendon rupture. 
Antibiotics may also be used to decrease systemic symptoms 
resulting from an inflammatory mass or an abscess. In general, 
however, a confirmed abscess should be treated by percutane-
ous drainage and/or surgery as antibiotics alone will not treat 
a Crohn’s mass effectively.
Immunomodulatory agents   Azathioprine is used for its 
additive and steroid-sparing effects and currently represents 
standard maintenance therapy. It is a purine analogue, which 
is metabolised to 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) and works by 
inhibiting cell-mediated immune responses. 6-MP may be 
given directly for the same effects. Approximately 10% of 
people have deficient thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) 
and 1 in 300 people have no enzyme activity, causing inef-
ficient metabolism of 6-MP . The resulting supra-pharmaco-
logical concentrations may cause severe adverse effects such 
as myelosuppression. Testing TPMT activity is usually under-
taken before commencing treatment.
Cyclosporin also acts by inhibiting cell-mediated immu -
nity. Short-course intravenous cyclosporin treatment is asso-
ciated with 80% remission; however, there is relapse after 
completion of treatment in many cases.
Monoclonal antibody therapy   Several commercially 
available agents have been developed based on monoclonal 
antibodies targeting tumour necrosis factor alpha and other 
key pro-inflammatory mediators.
Infliximab, a murine chimeric monoclonal antibo dy, was 
the first available monoclonal antibody for the treatment of 
CD. This needs to be administered as an intravenous infu -
sion and is typically given every 8 weeks for maintenance of 
remission.
Adalimumab, an entirely human monoclonal antibody, 
is an alternative to infliximab. This is administered subcuta -
neously every 1–2 weeks, depending on response, and most 
patients can self-administer this agent.
Third-generation monoclonal antibody therapies include 
integrin antibodies vedulizumab and etrolizumab. Both pre -
vent leucocyte migration preferentially in the gastrointestinal 
tract and may therefore have fewer side effects than the ear -
lier monoclonal antibodies, although they are both currently 
in limited use.
The roles of monoclonal antibodies have expanded from 
initially being used exclusively in the most severe cases of CD 
when other therapies failed, to having a more central role in 
the management of moderate to severe CD. They are cur -
rently widely used for induction and maintenance of remis -
sion. Furthermore, there is evidence that early and aggressive 
use of these agents in patients at high risk for early recrudes -
cent disease after surgery (for example, penetrating pheno -
type, early mucosal inflammation or aphthous ulceration at 
follow-up colonoscopy) may reduce the need for subsequent 
surgery.
These agents also appear to be effective treatments for 
perianal disease. Recent studies have suggested, however, 
that while they may reduce the inflammation associated with 
Figure 69.4 Magnetic resonance enteroclysis demonstrating small 
bowel inflammation (courtesy of Dr D Kasir, Hope Hospital, Salfor d, 
UK).
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1245 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1246
the process of fistulation and can achieve healing of fistula 
openings, the fistula tracks may remain patent and cessation 
of therapy is usually associated with a high risk of reactivation 
of the fistulae.
Overall, monoclonal antibodies are expensive forms of 
treatment that are associated with a small but definable risk 
of overwhelming bacterial infection and specific malignancies 
over the long term. Active infection, tuberculosis and a past 
history of malignancy are specific contraindications.
Nutritional support  It is essential that nutritional status is 
evaluated in all patients with CD. Nutritional support is fre -
quently required. Patients with moderate nutritional impair -
ment will require nutritional supplementation and severely 
malnourished patients may require enteral tube or even intra-
venous feeding. Anaemia, hypoproteinaemia and electrolyte, 
vitamin and metabolic bone problems must all be addressed. 
Elemental diet or parenteral nutrition can induce remission 
in up to 80% of patients, an effect comparable to steroids. 
However, almost all patients relapse rapidly after cessation of 
therapy.
 ● recurrent intestinal obstruction;
 ● persistent or, less commonly, massive acute bleeding;
 ● free perforation of the bowel;
 ● failure of medical therapy;
 ● steroid dependent disease;
 ● intestinal fistula;
 ● perianal disease (abscess, fistula, stenosis);
 ● malignant change (notably in the colon and less com -
monly as a complication of small bowel disease).
TOP-DOWN APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT OF 
CROHN’S DISEASE
Traditionally, active Crohn’s disease is treated in a ‘step-up’ 
approach where newer, more aggressive therapies are added 
only when more established and less toxic therapies have 
failed. Thus, active ileocolic CD may be treated initially 
with a thiopurine, adding steroids and then a monoclonal 
antibody only if and when required. Some centres instead 
advocate a top-down approach, where rapid remission is 
obtained by initiating therapy with a monoclonal antibody 
agent (unless contraindicated), often in combination with a 
thiopurine. Studies suggest advantages mainly in the form of 
rapid remission, steroid sparing and increased rates of muco -
sal healing.
Whether surgical resection should be part of a top-down 
approach is currently being debated. While surgery carries 
perioperative risks, these have been reduced during the past 
decades with the development of perioperative enhanced-  
recovery protocols and laparoscopic surgery. It has been sug -
gested that the balance of risk and benefit between surgical 
resection and non-operative treatment, typically involving 
long-term medical therapy, is finely balanced and requires 
more detailed evaluation.
SURGERY FOR CROHN’S DISEASE
Population-based studies show that roughly 70% of patients 
with CD will require a bowel resection in the first decade 
after diagnosis, and 40% will require a further resection in 
the decade following their index resection. Recent popula -
tion-based data in the era of monoclonal antibodies suggest 
that the incidence of surgery may be falling, but nevertheless 
still remains substantial.
Since surgery does not cure CD, the fundamental prin -
ciple is to preserve healthy gut and to maintain adequate 
function. The whole of the gastrointestinal tract should be 
examined carefully at surgery and intestinal resection kept to 
the minimum required to treat the local consequences of dis-
ease. In laparoscopic surgery, it may be difficult to fully assess 
the full length of the small intestine. Up-to-date and accu -
rate preoperative small bowel imaging is therefore paramount, 
particularly in laparoscopic surgery for CD.
Occasionally, unsuspected ileitis is diagnosed during the 
course of an operation for suspected appendicitis. Deter -
mining whether to resect the ileum in this situation is a 
complex clinical decision that should be made by a senior 
surgeon. This decision involves an assessment of the likeli -
hood that the ileitis is an expression of CD rather than of 
another aetiology such as Yersinia infection; an assessment of 
ENDOSCOPIC DILATATION IN CROHN’S DISEASE
Although penetrating disease will often require surgical resec-
tion (see below under Surgery), stricturing may be amena-
ble to endoscopic treatment, provided the strictures can be 
reached with an endoscope and negotiated with a guide-
wire. This may be accomplished by enteroscopy or colonos -
copy, depending on the site of the stricture. Dilatation of an 
inflamed or ulcerated stricture is contraindicated because of 
the risks of perforation, but balloon dilatation of fibrostenotic 
disease may result in substantial symptomatic improvement 
and obviate the need for surgery in selected cases.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
Surgical resection will not cure CD. Surgery therefore focuses 
on managing the complications of the disease. As many of 
these indications for surgery may be relative, joint manage -
ment by an aggressive physician and a conservative surgeon is 
ideal (see Summary box 69.4). CD is a complicated condition 
and decisions regarding management are best made jointly by 
members of a multidisciplinary team.
Complications or manifestations of CD for which surgery 
is usually appropriate include the following:
Summary box 69.4
Principles of management of Crohn’s disease (CD)
●● Close liaison between physician and surgeon is crucial
●● Medical therapy should always be considered as an 
alternative to surgery, although surgery should not be delayed 
when a clear indication for surgery exists
●● Patients must be optimised as far as possible prior to surgery, 
and this may require preoperative total parenteral nutrition
●● CD is a chronic relapsing disease with a high likelihood of 
reoperation; the surgeon must take every reasonable effort to 
preserve bowel length and sphincter function
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1246 25/10/2017   09:57Inflammatory bowel disease 1247
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
the likelihood of remission with medical therapy rather than 
surgery; and an assessment of the rest of the small bowel for 
presence of additional sites of inflammation. Thus, it would 
be advisable to surgically resect a mass caused by penetrating 
CD of the terminal ileum, as such complex disease is unlikely 
to resolve with medical therapy. On the other hand, it would 
be controversial in the current era of monoclonal therapy to 
resect uncomplicated terminal ileitis found during an emer -
gency procedure for suspected appendicitis, as uncomplicated 
Crohn’s ileitis is likely to respond to medical therapy. Many 
cases fall in between these two extremes, requiring a consid -
ered decision.
A further consideration is whether to perform an appen -
dicectomy when terminal ileitis is found. There is a risk of 
fistulation in the setting of CD, so unless the appendix itself is 
grossly inflamed with a healthy base, isolated appendicectomy 
should be avoided in this setting.
The course of CD after surgery is unpredictable, but recru-
descence (a better term than ‘recurrence’, as surgery never 
cures CD) is common. Symptomatic recrudescence does not 
seem to be related to the presence of disease at the resection 
line. The cumulative probability of recrudescence requiring 
surgery for ileal disease is approximately 20, 40, 60 and 80% at 
5, 10, 15 and 20 years, respectively, after a previous resection.
Surgery for CD is technically demanding as the involved 
mesentery is thickened and oedematous and healing may 
be impaired. The patient may be malnourished, immuno -
suppressed or suffer from sepsis (and potentially all three). 
Decision-making regarding the timing and nature of sur -
gery to be undertaken is the key to satisfactory outcome of 
surgical treatment, and frequently requires experience and 
considerable discussion with other health professional and, 
most importantly, the patient. A key decision has to be made 
whether to anastomose the apparently healthy bowel ends 
after macroscopically apparent disease has been resected, as 
anastomotic leaks and fistulation represent a considerable 
problem after surgery for CD. Intra-abdominal septic compli-
cations are more common if one or more of the following risk 
factors are present:
 ● current high-dose steroid therapy (≥10  mg prednisolone 
for ≥4 weeks before surgery);
 ● current preoperative monoclonal antibody therapy;
 ● preoperative significant weight loss (>10% premorbid 
weight);
 ● pre-existing abdominal sepsis (notably abscess or fistula);
 ● serum albumin <32 g/L.
If any these risk factors are present (and particularly if 
more than one risk factor is present as the risks appear to be 
additive), one should consider exteriorising the bowel and 
planning a delayed anastomosis when the risk factor has been 
corrected.
Ileocaecal or colonic resections can be undertaken lapa -
roscopically, with the potential advantage of smaller incisions 
and potentially shorter recovery time. Reoperative surgery is 
technically demanding and studies suggest that ileosigmoid or 
ileoduodenal adhesions and fistulae can be difficult to safely 
dissect laparoscopically and conversion to laparotomy may be 
advisable in this setting.
A range of operations is performed for CD, depending on 
the pattern of disease – the most common are outlined below:
 ● Ileocaecal resection is the usual procedure for terminal 
ileal disease, with a primary anastomosis between the 
ileum and the ascending or transverse colon, depending 
on the extent of the disease.
 ● Segmental resection of short segments of small or large 
bowel strictures can be performed.
 ● Colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis may be undertaken 
for colonic CD with rectal sparing and a normal anus.
 ● Subtotal colectomy and ileostomy for Crohn’s colitis 
accounts for 8% of such procedures for acute colonic dis -
ease. The indications are similar to those for UC.
 ● Temporary loop ileostomy . This can be used either in 
patients with acute distal CD, allowing remission and 
later restoration of continuity, or in patients with severe 
perianal or rectal disease.
 ● Proctectomy and proctocolectomy. Many patients with 
severe anal disease failing to respond to medical treatment 
will eventually require a permanent colostomy. When this 
occurs in a setting of severe colonic disease, proctocolec-
tomy and permanent ileostomy may be required.
 ● Strictureplasty. Strictured areas of CD (Figure 69.5) can 
be treated by strictureplasty, a local widening procedure, 
to avoid small bowel resection and is thus an important 
bowel sparing technique (Figure 69.6). Strictureplasty 
is particularly useful for the treatment of fibrostenotic 
disease, when there is little or no active inflammation 
in the involved segment. Multiple strictureplasties can 
be performed and strictureplasty can be combined with 
resection.
Anal disease should be treated conservatively by simple 
drainage of abscesses and the use of setons through fistulae 
to avoid sphincter injury. Infliximab or adalimumab therapy 
may be combined with seton insertion in the early phase of 
management of perianal fistulae. Once the fistula has dried 
up, typically after 2–3 doses, the seton can be removed. Lay -
ing open of fistulae (fistulotomy), commonly performed for 
fistulae resulting from the common cryptoglandular perianal 
Figure 69.5 Small bowel strictures in Crohn’s disease with dilatation 
between strictures.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1247 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1248
abscess, should be avoided in CD as the wound edges heal 
very slowly or not at all.
INFECTIVE ENTERITIS
Campylobacteriosis
Infection with Campylobacter jejuni (a gram-negative rod with 
a distinctive spiral shape) is the most common form of bacte-
rial gastroenteritis in the UK, typically acquired from eating 
infected poultry. It causes diarrhoea and abdominal pain and 
may mimic an acute abdomen. Severe cases may resemble 
UC, with rectal bleeding and colorectal ulceration, causing 
diagnostic difficulty. The organism is very sensitive and may 
take several days to isolate on stool culture. Toxic dilatation 
and even disintegrative colitis have rarely been reported to 
occur. Treatment is generally supportive as the condition usu-
ally resolves without antibiotics. It is a notifiable disease.
Yersiniosis
Yersinia enterocolitica is a gram-negative rod that can infect 
the terminal ileum, appendix, ascending colon and mesen-
teric lymph nodes, and can cause a granulomatous inflam -
matory process that mimics CD. Yersinia typically causes a 
fever and gastroenteritis, but may persist and cause a termi -
nal ileitis, which, on occasion, may perforate. The diagnosis 
may be made on stool culture, but is more often confirmed 
serologically. If discovered at laparotomy, the terminal ileum 
and mesenteric nodes will look thickened and inflamed and a 
lymph node biopsy can be taken for diagnostic purposes. The 
disease is normally self-limiting, but responds to treatment 
with cotrimoxazole or chloramphenicol.
Salmonellosis, typhoid and 
paratyphoid
Salmonella are a family of gram-negative ro ds that can cause 
a range of enteric infections. Salmonella gastroenteritis is typ-
ically caused by S. enteritidis from poultry, and is most often 
a self-limiting illness comprising headache, fever and watery 
diarrhoea. When severe, antibiotics and hospitalisation and 
intravenous fluids may be needed. The diagnosis is based on 
stool culture. Shigella and enteropathogenic strains of E. coli 
may cause similar diarrhoeal illnesses.
Typhoid fever is caused by S. typhi and presents with fever 
and abdominal pain after an incubation period of 10–20 days. 
Over the next week, the patient can develop distension, diar-
rhoea, splenomegaly and characteristic ‘rose spots’ on the 
abdomen caused by a vasculitis. Typhoid is a systemic infec -
tion and diagnosis of typhoid is confirmed by culture of blood 
or stool. Treatment is by antibiotics, usually chloramphenicol. 
A number of surgical complications can result, including par-
alytic ileus, intestinal haemorrhage, free ileal perforation and 
cholecystitis.
In addition, invasion of the systemic circulation, which 
is a characteristic feature of salmonellosis, may cause severe 
gram-negative sepsis, resulting in septic shock. Some patients 
develop metastatic sepsis, including septic arthritis and osteo-
myelitis, meningitis, encephalitis, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation and pancreatitis.
Perforation of a typhoid ulcer characteristically occurs 
during the third week of the illness, although it is sometimes 
the first clinical sign of the disease. The ulcer is parallel to 
the long axis of the gut and is usually situated in the distal 
ileum. Perforation requires surgery to wash out and close the 
ulcer and intestinal resection is usually avoided. In unstable 
patients, notably with evidence of septic shock, the bowel 
should be exteriorised and the perforation closed after recov-
ery. Paratyphoid infection (with S. paratyphi) resembles 
typhoid fever and is treated in a similar manner.
Tuberculosis of the intestine
Tuberculosis, like CD, can affect any part of the gastrointesti-
nal tract from the mouth to the anus. The sites affected most 
often are the ileum, proximal colon and peritoneum. There 
are two principal disease presentations.
Ulcerative tuberculosis
Ulcerative tuberculosis develops secondary to pulmonary 
tuberculosis and arises as a result of swallowing tubercle 
bacilli. Multiple ulcers, lying transversely, develop in the ter-
minal ileum and the overlying serosa is thickened, reddened 
and covered in tubercles. Patients typically present with diar-
rhoea and weight loss, although subacute obstruction and 
even local perforation and fistula formation can occur. A bar-
ium follow-through or CT examination fails to show filling of 
the lower ileum, caecum and the ascending colon as a result 
of narrowing of the ulcerated segment (Figure 69.7).
A course of antituberculous chemotherapy usually leads 
to cure, provided the pulmonary tuberculosis is adequately 
treated. Surgery is usually undertaken only in the rare event 
of a perforation or complete intestinal obstruction.
Hyperplastic tuberculosis
This is caused by the ingestion of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
by patients with a high resistance to the organism. The infec-
tion usually occurs in the ileocaecal region, although solitary 
and multiple lesions in the lower ileum are also sometimes 
(1) (2) (3)
A
B
A
B
A
B
Figure 69.6 Heineke–Mikulicz strictureplasty. (1) A strictured length 
of intestine is incised along its length. (2) The bowel is opened and 
the walls are r etracted as shown. (3) The bowel is resutured trans -
versely to widen the narrowed segment. Other types of strictureplasty 
are also used.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1248 25/10/2017   09:57Tumours of the small int estine 1249
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
seen. The infection establishes itself in lymphoid follicles, 
and the resulting chronic inflammation causes thickening of 
the intestinal wall and narrowing of the lumen. There is early 
involvement of the regional lymph nodes, which may caseate. 
Unlike in CD, abscess and fistula formation are rare.
Patients usually present with attacks of abdominal pain 
and intermittent diarrhoea. There is incomplete ileal obstruc-
tion, leading to stasis and bacterial overgrowth. This in turn 
causes steatorrhoea, anaemia and loss of weight. Patients may 
present with a mass in the right iliac fossa and vague ill health. 
The differential diagnosis is that of an appendix mass, lym -
phoma, carcinoma of the caecum, CD, tuberculosis or acti -
nomycosis. A barium follow-through or small bowel enema 
will show a long narrow filling defect in the terminal ileum 
(which may result in a differential diagnosis of CD). CT will 
also demonstrate the narrowed segment with proximal disten-
sion and the associated lymphadenopathy. When the diagno-
sis is clear and the patient has not yet developed obstructive 
symptoms, treatment with chemotherapy is advised and may 
be curative. Where obstruction is present, or the possibility of 
CD or lymphoma require clarification, ileocaecal resection is 
often required.
Actinomycosis
Abdominal actinomycosis is rare. It is caused by infection 
with Actinomyces israelii and infection usually develops several 
weeks after an apparently straightforward perforated appendi-
citis. An abscess develops and spreads to the retroperitoneal 
tissues and the adjacent abdominal wall, eventually becoming 
the seat of multiple indurated discharging sinuses. At first, the 
discharge from the sinuses is thin, watery and inoffensive, but 
it may later become thicker and malodorous. Secondary fis -
tulation may occur and the tissues may become extensively 
indurated and woody. In contrast to tuberculosis, however, 
mesenteric lymph nodes are not involved and the lumen of 
the intestine is not narrowed. Haematogenous spread via the 
portal vein may lead to multiple liver abscesses.
Pus should be sent for bacteriological examination, which 
will reveal the characteristic sulphur granules. Penicillin or 
cotrimoxazole treatment is required and should be prolonged 
and in high dosage.
Human immunodeficiency virus
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is associ -
ated with a number of proctological problems, as discussed 
in Chapter 73. Intestinal complications are common after 
the development of AIDS when opportunistic organisms can 
cause gastroenteritis (see Summary box 69.5.). HIV1 may also 
cause a specific enteropathy. Treatment is directed towards the 
relevant organism and surgery should be avoided if possible.
James Israel , 1848–1926, first found sulphur granules in pus from a discharging sinus in a man’s neck. Later, he became a famous Berlin urologist.
Figure 69.7 Ileocaecal tuberculosis. Absent ascending colon and 
caecum with dilatation of terminal ileum (courtesy of Dr VK Kapoor, 
Delhi, India).
TUMOURS OF THE SMALL 
INTESTINE
Small bowel tumours are rare and in total account for less 
than 10% of gastrointestinal neoplasia.
Summary box 69.5
Opportunistic intestinal infections in patients with AIDS
●● Bacteria
Salmonella
Shigella
Yersinia
Campylobacter
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare (MAI)
●● Viral
Cytomegalovirus
●● Protozoa
Cryptosporidium
Giardia
●● Fungal
Candida albicans
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1249 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1250
Benign
The majority of small bowel neoplasms are benign, comprising 
adenomas, lipomas, haemangiomas and neurogenic tumours. 
They are frequently asymptomatic and identified incidentally, 
but can present with intussusception, small bowel obstruction 
and bleeding that may cause anaemia or may even be overt. 
Where these lesions do cause anaemia, the cause can be diffi-
cult to diagnose, as CT or small bowel contrast studies do not 
show them easily. Capsule endoscopy or small bowel endos-
copy has been used successfully where the facilities exist. 
Symptomatic lesions can be treated by small bowel resection 
and anastomosis.
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome
This is an autosomal dominant disease characterised by mel -
anosis of the mouth and lips, with multiple hamartomatous 
(benign tumour-like malformation resulting from faulty 
development in an organ) polyps in the small bowel and 
colon (Figure 69.8). Melanin spots can also occur on the 
digits and perianal skin. The gene STK11 on chromosome 19 
has been found in a proportion of patients with this condi-
tion. Long-term follow-up of the original family described by 
Peutz has shown reduced survival as a consequence of compli-
cations of bowel obstruction and the development of a range 
of cancers. It is logical to perform regular colonic surveillance 
and encourage female patients to attend breast and cervical 
screening. Despite the increased risk of malignancy in gen -
eral, malignant change in the polyps themselves rarely occurs 
and the polyps can be left alone unless they are the cause of 
symptoms. Resection may be indicated, however, for heavy 
and persistent or recurrent bleeding or intussusception. Polyps 
may be removed by enterotomy or, at laparotomy, snared via a 
colonoscope introduced via an enterotomy. Heavily involved 
segments of small intestine may occasionally be resected.
Malignant
Small bowel malignancy is rare and classically presents late, 
most often diagnosed after surgery for small bowel obstruc -
tion. Four types will be considered, which account for over 
99% of small bowel malignancies: adenocarcinoma, carcinoid 
tumours, lymphomas and mesenchymal tumours (gastrointes-
tinal stromal tumours [GIST]).
Adenocarcinoma
Small bowel adenocarcinoma is more often found in the jeju-
num than the ileum and although the aetiology is unknown, 
it is more common in patients with CD, coeliac disease, famil-
ial adenomatous polyposis, hereditary non-polyposis colon 
cancer and Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. The tumours present 
with anaemia, overt gastrointestinal bleeding, intussuscep -
tion or obstruction. Prognosis is poor, particularly in patients 
with CD, in whom these tumours often present late, because 
the symptoms are commonly mistaken for those of CD and 
treated conservatively. When suspected, the advised surgical 
treatment is a resection of 5 cm of non-involved bowel either 
side of the lesion and the affected mesentery (Figure 69.9). 
A right hemicolectomy is likely to be required for tumours of 
the distal ileum.
Carcinoid tumours
These neuroendocrine tumours occur throughout the gastro -
intestinal tract, most commonly in the appendix, ileum and 
rectum in decreasing order of frequency. Appendicular carci-
noid tumours are commonly noted as an incidental finding 
at appendicectomy, and are said to occur in approximately 
2% of appendices removed surgically. The tumour arises 
from Kulchitsky cells at the base of intestinal crypts (of Lieb-
erkuhn). The primary is usually small, although significant 
lymph node metastases can occur. In up to one-third of cases 
of small bowel carcinoids, the tumours are multiple. They 
Figure 69.8  Melanin spots on the lips of a patient af flicted with 
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome (courtesy of Major PCM Manta, Indian Med-
ical Service).
 Figure 69.9 Small bowel adenocarcinoma.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1250 25/10/2017   09:57Connective tissue disor ders 1251
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
may produce dense fibrosis in the surrounding tissues, result -
ing in distortion and scarring of the bowel and associated 
mesentery, giving them a characteristic radiological appear -
ance. Carcinoid tumours can produce a number of vasoactive 
peptides, most commonly 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), 
but also histamine, prostaglandins and kallikrein. When they 
metastasise to the liver, the ‘carcinoid syndrome’ can become 
evident, because the vasoactive substances escape the filter -
ing actions of the liver. The clinical syndrome itself consists 
of reddish-blue cyanosis, flushing attacks, diarrhoea, bor -
borygmi, asthmatic attacks and, eventually, pulmonary and 
tricuspid stenosis (see Summary box 69.6). Classically, the 
flushing attacks are induced by alcohol.
T-cell lymphoma develops in patients with coeliac disease. 
It usually presents with worsening of the patient’s diarrhoea, 
pyrexia of unknown origin and local obstructive symptoms. 
Mediterranean lymphoma is found mostly in North Africa 
and the Middle East and is often widespread at diagnosis. 
Burkitt’s lymphoma can aggressively affect the ileocaecal 
region, particularly in children. The mainstay of treatment 
for these conditions is chemotherapy; however, surgery may 
be required for obstruction, perforation or bleeding.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST s) are mesenchymal 
tumours and the distinction between benign or malignant 
types is difficult even on histological examination. Increased 
size and high levels of c-kit (CD117) staining are associated 
with malignant potential. GISTs are found most commonly 
in the stomach, but can be found in other parts of the gut. 
They occur most commonly in the 50- to 70-year age group. 
Although the cause is unknown, patients with neurofibro-
matosis have an increased risk of developing these types 
of tumour. Patients may be asymptomatic and the tumour 
may present as an incidental mass on a CT scan. Symptoms 
include lethargy, pain, nausea, haematemesis or melaena. Sur-
gery is the most effective way of treating GISTs, as the tumour 
is radioresistant and is not sensitive to conventional chemo -
therapy. Glivec® (imatinib) is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that 
has been shown to be effective in advanced cases and may 
also have a role in adjuvant treatment.
CONNECTIVE TISSUE 
DISORDERS
Intestinal diverticulae
Diverticulae (hollow out-pouchings) are a common struc-
tural abnormality that can occur from the oesophagus to the 
rectosigmoid junction (but not usually in the rectum). Small 
bowel diverticulae may be congenital or acquired. In congen-
ital diverticulae, all three coats of the bowel are present in the 
wall of the diverticulum (e.g. Meckel’s diverticulum).
Acquired diverticulae
These invariably develop in the jejunum and arise from the 
mesenteric side of the bowel as a result of mucosal hernia -
tion at the point of entry of the blood vessels. There is thus 
no muscularis layer present in the wall. Jejunal diverticulae 
can vary in size and are frequently multiple. They are com -
monly asymptomatic and present as an incidental finding at 
surgery or on radiological imaging (Figure 69.10). However, 
they can result in malabsorption, as a result of bacterial stasis, 
or present as an acute abdominal emergency if they become 
inflamed or perforate. Bleeding from a jejunal diverticulum is 
a rare complication (compared with sigmoid diverticular dis -
ease). Elective resection of an affected small bowel segment 
that is causing malabsorption can be effective, provided there 
Surgical resection is usually sufficient for patients with pri-
mary disease, but the incidence of recurrence is significant. 
The extent of disease can be assessed preoperatively using 
octreotide scanning, which may detect otherwise clinically 
unapparent primary and secondary tumours. Plasma markers 
of tumour bulk, such as chromogranin A concentrations, may 
be useful markers of disease recurrence, as well as of prognos -
tic value.
Hepatic resection can be carried out in patients with met-
astatic disease. The treatment has been transformed by the 
use of octreotide (a somatostatin analogue), which reduces 
both flushing and diarrhoea, and octreotide cover is usually 
used in patients with a carcinoid syndrome who have sur -
gery to prevent a carcinoid crisis resulting from liberation of 
vasoactive substances following handling of the tumour. Car-
cinoid tumours generally grow more slowly than most meta-
static malignancies and patients may live with the syndrome 
of metastatic disease for many years. They are not usually sen-
sitive to chemo- or radiotherapy.
Lymphoma
Small bowel lymphoma may be primary or, more commonly , 
secondary to systemic lymphoma. The incidence of small 
bowel lymphoma is increased in patients with CD and immu-
nodeficiency syndromes. The classification of lymphoma is 
beyond the scope of this chapter but a number of points are 
worth noting briefly. It is rare for Hodgkin’s lymphoma to 
affect the small bowel and most western-type lymphomas are 
non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphomas. They usually present with 
anaemia, bleeding, perforation, anorexia and weight loss.
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, lecturer in morbid anatomy and curator of the museum, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK, described lymphadenoma in 1832.
Johann Friedrich Meckel  (the younger), 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany, described the diverticulum in 1809.
Summary box 69.6
Carcinoid syndrome
●● Diarrhoea
●● Bronchospasm
●● Facial/upper chest flushing
●● Palpitations
●● Tricuspid regurgitation
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1251 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1252
is only a limited amount of jejunum affected by the condi -
tion. If perforated jejunal diverticulitis is found at emergency 
laparotomy, a small bowel resection should be performed and 
a decision made between anastomosis and stoma formation. 
This will depend on the degree of contamination, physiologi-
cal stability and local resources for managing a patient with a 
high output jejunostomy.
Complications resulting from extensive jejunal diverticu-
losis can be extremely difficult to treat. In severe cases, much 
of the proximal small intestine may be involved, effectively 
precluding resection. Prolonged antibiotic therapy for bacte -
rial overgrowth may be preferable, and antibiotics (metroni -
dazole, ciprofloxacin, rifaximin) are frequently rotated in an 
attempt to avoid the development of antibiotic resistance. 
Limited resection, leaving remaining segments of affected 
jejunum, may be feasible, but may also fail to deal adequately 
with bacterial overgrowth, recurrent attacks of inflammation 
or bleeding.
Meckel’s diverticulum
A Meckel’s diverticulum is a persistent remnant of the vitel -
lointestinal duct and is present in about 2% of the population. 
It is found on the antimesenteric side of the ileum, commonly 
approximately 60 cm from the ileocaecal valve and is classi -
cally 5 cm long (Figure 69.11). A Meckel’s diverticulum is 
a congenital diverticulum. It contains all three coats of the 
bowel wall and has its own blood supply . It may be vulner -
able to obstruction and inflammation in the same way as the 
appendix; indeed, when a normal appendix is found at surgery 
for suspected appendicitis, a Meckel’s diverticulum should 
be looked for by examining the small bowel, particularly if 
free fluid or pus is found. In approximately 20% of cases, the 
mucosa of a Meckel’s diverticulum contains heterotopic epi -
thelium of gastric, colonic or pancreatic type. The presence 
of heterotopic mucosa may predispose to the development of 
complications. The vast majority of Meckel’s diverticulae are 
asymptomatic and Meckel’s diverticulum is notoriously dif -
ficult to see with contrast radiology. Meckel’s diverticulum 
may, however, present clinically in the following ways:
 ● Haemorrhage. If gastric mucosa is present, peptic ulcer -
ation can occur and present as painless dark rectal bleed -
ing or melaena. If the stomach, duodenum and colon are 
excluded as a source of bleeding by endoscopy , radioiso-
tope scanning with technetium-99m may demonstrate a 
Meckel’s diverticulum.
 ● Diverticulitis. Meckel’s diverticulitis presents like appen -
dicitis, although if perforation occurs the presentation 
may resemble a perforated duodenal ulcer.
 ● Intussusception. A Meckel’s diverticulum can be the lead 
point for ileoileal or ileocolic intussusception.
 ● Chronic ulceration. Pain is felt around the umbilicus, as 
the site of the diverticulum is midgut in origin.
 ● Intestinal obstruction. A band between the apex of the 
diverticulum and the umbilicus (also part of the vitel -
lointestinal duct) may cause obstruction directly, or by 
predisposing to the development of a volvulus around it.
 ● Perforation. (Figure 69.12).
Figure 69.10 Jejunal diverticula.
 Figure 69.11 Meckel’s diverticulum.
Alexis Littre , 1658–1726, surgeon and lecturer in Anatomy, Paris, France, described Meckel’s diverticulum in a hernial sac in 1700, 81 years before Meckel was 
born.
When found in the course of abdominal surgery, a Meck-
el’s diverticulum can safely be left alone, provided it has a 
wide mouth and is not thickened. When there is doubt, it 
can be resected. The finding of a Meckel’s diverticulum in 
an inguinal or femoral hernia has been described as ‘Littre’s 
hernia’.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1252 25/10/2017   09:57Vascular anomalies of the intestine 1253
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Figure 69.12 Gangrenous Meckel’s diverticulitis.
Meckel’s diverticulectomy
A broad-based Meckel’s diverticulum should not be 
 amputated at its base and invaginated (as for an appendix), 
as there is the risk of stricture and of leaving heterotopic epi-
thelium behind. It is safer simply to excise the diverticulum, 
either by resecting it and suturing the defect at its base, or 
with a linear stapler-cutter. If the base of the diverticulum is 
indurated, it is on balance more logical to perform a limited 
small bowel resection of the involved segment followed by 
an anastomosis.
VASCULAR ANOMALIES OF THE 
INTESTINE
Mesenteric ischaemia
Mesenteric vascular disease may be classified as acute intesti-
nal ischaemia – with or without occlusion – venous, chronic 
arterial, central or peripheral. The superior mesenteric vessels 
are the visceral vessels most likely to be affected by emboli -
sation or thrombosis, with the former being most common. 
Occlusion at the origin of the superior mesenteric artery 
(SMA) is almost invariably the result of thrombosis, whereas 
emboli tend to lodge at the origin of the middle colic artery. 
Inferior mesenteric involvement is usually clinically silent 
because the collateral circulation is better.
Possible sources for embolisation of the SMA include the 
left atrium in atrial fibrillation, the left ventricle after mural 
myocardial infarction, vegetations on mitral and aortic valves 
associated with endocarditis and an atheromatous plaque from 
an aortic aneurysm. Primary thrombosis is associated with 
atherosclerosis and vasculitides, including conditions such as 
thromboangitis obliterans and polyarteritis nodosa. Primary 
thrombosis of the superior mesenteric veins may occur in 
association with factor V Leiden, portal hypertension, portal 
pyaemia and sickle cell disease and in women taking the oral 
contraceptive pill. A specific form of ‘non-occlusive mesen -
teric ischaemia’ may complicate critical illness, possibly due 
to alterations in splanchnic blood flow.
Irrespective of whether the occlusion is arterial or venous, 
haemorrhagic infarction occurs. The mucosa is especially 
sensitive to ischaemic injury because of its high metabolic 
activity. The intestine and its mesentery become swollen 
and oedematous, especially with venous occlusion. Blood-
stained fluid exudes into the peritoneal cavity and bowel 
lumen. The changes develop rapidly and irreversible injury, 
ranging in severity from mucosal necrosis and sloughing, to 
full- thickness infarction usually occurs within a few hours at 
most. If the main trunk of the SMA is involved, the infarc -
tion usually covers an area from just distal to the DJ flexure 
to the splenic flexure. Usually, a branch of the main trunk is 
implicated and the area of infarction is less.
Clinical features
The most important clue to an early diagnosis of acute mesen-
teric ischaemia is the sudden onset of severe abdominal pain 
in a patient with atrial fibrillation or atherosclerosis. The pain 
is typically in the central abdomen and out of all proportion 
to the physical findings. Persistent vomiting and defaecation 
occur early, with the subsequent passage of altered blood. 
Abdominal tenderness may be mild initially, with rigidity 
being a late feature. Shock, with features of both hypovolae-
mia and sepsis, rapidly ensues.
Investigation
Investigation will usually reveal a profound neutrophil leuco-
cytosis with an absence of gas in the lumen of the thickened 
small intestine on abdominal radiographs and CT scans. Gas 
may be present within the intestinal wall and occasionally in 
the mesenteric and portal veins.
Treatment
Treatment should be tailored to the individual. In conjunc -
tion with full resuscitation, laparotomy with embolectomy via 
the ileocolic artery or revascularisation of the SMA by vascu-
lar bypass may be considered in early cases. Anticoagulation 
should be implemented early in the postoperative period. 
However, the condition is usually diagnosed late in the disease 
process and the mortality rate is extremely high. In the young, 
all affected bowel should be resected, whereas in the elderly or 
infirm the situation may be deemed incurable.
Summary box 69.7
Features of Meckel’s diverticulum
●● Remnant of vitellointestinal duct
●● Occurs in 2% of patients, 2 inches (5 cm) long, 2 feet (60 cm) 
from the ileocaecal valve, 20% heterotopic epithelium
●● Should be looked for when a normal appendix is found at 
surgery for suspected appendicitis
●● If a Meckel’s is found incidentally at surgery, it can be left 
provided it has a wide mouth and is not thickened
●● Can be source of gastrointestinal bleeding if it contains 
ectopic gastric mucosa
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1253 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1254
After extensive enterectomy, it is usual for patients to 
require intravenous alimentation. The young, however , may 
sometimes develop sufficient intestinal digestive and absorp -
tive function to lead relatively normal lives. In selected cases, 
consideration may be given to small bowel transplantation.
Chronic small intestinal ischaemia
Chronic small intestinal ischaemia almost invariably results 
from atherosclerosis and affects the proximal superior mes-
enteric and coeliac vessels. Patients classically present with 
symptoms of severe central abdominal pain that comes on 
within 30–60 minutes of eating (mesenteric angina). Weight 
loss and diarrhoea due to malabsorption may also occur. The 
condition may be difficult to diagnose and is often overlooked 
initially, the symptoms being mistaken for those of peptic 
ulcer disease or irritable bowel syndrome. The presence of 
significant vascular disease on visceral angiography is com-
mon in elderly patients and in those with severe vascular dis-
ease, and should not necessarily be assumed to indicate that 
abdominal symptoms are attributable to chronic ischaemia. 
Treatment is usually by selective visceral angiography, with 
stenting/angioplasty and, where this is not possible, bypass 
surgery. Smoking cessation in imperative and patients are 
usually anticoagulated.
STOMAS
A colostomy (or ileostomy) stoma is an artificial opening 
made in the colon (or small intestine) to divert faeces and 
flatus out-side the abdomen where they can be collected in 
an external appliance. Depending on the purpose for which 
the diversion has been necessary, a stoma may be temporary 
or permanent.
rised through a skin trephine in the right iliac fossa. An inci-
sion is made in the distal part of the knuckle, and this is then 
pulled over the top of the more proximal part to create a spout 
on the proximal side of the loop with a flush distal side still 
in continuity. This allows near perfect defunctioning, but also 
the possibility of restoration of continuity, by taking down the 
spout and reanastomosing the partially divided ileum.
The advantages of a loop ileostomy over a loop colostomy 
are the ease with which the bowel can be brought to the sur -
face and the relative absence of odour. Care is needed when 
the ileostomy is closed, so that suture line obstruction does 
not occur. Closure of a loop ileostomy can be a technically 
challenging procedure, particularly if there are dense adhe -
sions resulting from previous surgery.
End ileostomy
An end ileostomy is formed after a subtotal colectomy with -
out anastomosis, when it may later be reversed, or may be 
permanent after a panproctocolectomy. The ileum is nor -
mally brought through the rectus abdominis muscle. Careful 
attention to the terminal ileal mesentery should be taken to 
ensure that it is not too bulky. The use of a spout was orig -
inally described by Bryan Brooke; this should project some 
2–4  cm from the skin surface (Figure 69.13). A disposable 
appliance is placed over the ileostomy so that it is a snug fit 
at skin level.
There may be an ‘ileostomy flux’ while the ileum adapts 
to the loss of the colon. While ileostomy output can amount 
to 4 or 5 litres per day, losses of 1–2 litres are more common. 
A consistent ileostomy output in excess of 1.5 litres is usu -
ally associated with dehydration and sodium depletion in the 
absence of intravenous therapy. The stools thicken in a few 
weeks and are semisolid in a few months. The help, skill and 
advice of the stoma care nurse specialist are essential. Modern 
appliances have transformed stoma care, and skin problems 
are unusual (Figure 69.14). Complications of an ileostomy 
include prolapse, retraction, stenosis, bleeding, fistula and 
parastomal hernia.
Stoma bags and appliances
Stoma output is collected in disposable adhesive bags. Ile -
ostomy appliances tend to be drainable bags, which are left 
Summary box 69.8
Stomas
●● May be colostomy or ileostomy
●● May be temporary or permanent
●● Temporary or defunctioning stomas are usually fashioned as 
loop stomas
●● An ileostomy is spouted; a colostomy is flush
●● Ileostomy effluent is usually liquid, whereas colostomy effluent 
is usually solid
●● Ileostomy patients are more likely to develop fluid and 
electrolyte problems
●● An ileostomy is usually sited in the right iliac fossa
●● End-colostomy is usually sited in the left iliac fossa
●● Whenever possible, patients should be counselled and sited 
by a stoma care nurse before operation
Figure 69.13 Ileostomy formation. Suturing the free extremity of the 
proximal ileum to the skin edges after eversion to form a spout (after 
Brooke).
Bryan Nicholas Brooke , 1915–1998, Professor of Surgery, St George’s Hospital, London, UK.
Loop ileostomy
A loop ileostomy is often used for defunctioning a low rectal 
anastomosis or an ileal pouch. A knuckle of ileum is exterio -
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1254 25/10/2017   09:57Conditions causing malabsorption 1255
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Figure 69.14 Spouted ileostomy in the right iliac fossa.
in place for 48 hours, while colostomy appliances are simply 
changed two or three times each day . A wide range of such 
bags is currently available. Many now incorporate an adhe -
sive backing, which can be left in place for several days. In 
most hospitals, a stoma care service is available to offer advice 
to patients, to acquaint them with the latest appliances and 
to provide the appropriate psychological and practical help.
Complications of stomas
Stoma complications are underestimated and common. 
On occasion, these complications require surgical revision. 
Sometimes, this can be achieved with an incision immedi -
ately around the stoma, but on occasion reopening the abdo-
men and freeing up the stoma may be necessary. Repair of 
parastomal hernias is particularly technically challenging and 
the recurrence rate is high. Simple suture of the parastomal 
hernia is associated with an almost 100% risk of recurrence 
and transfer to the opposite side of the abdomen, or insertion 
of a piece of prosthetic material within the abdominal wall 
around the stoma may be necessary.
thought that the loss of surface area and brush border enzymes 
results in malabsorption.
Coeliac disease is caused by an abnormal immune response 
to gluten, a cereal protein, although the exact mechanism 
remains unclear. There is a genetic component, as the disease 
is more common in first-degree relatives and has an associa-
tion with HLA B8. In children, coeliac disease presents with 
steatorrhoea and growth retardation. In adults, it may result 
in diarrhoea and weight loss but many patients simply present 
with an iron deficiency anaemia. Some patients develop a 
characteristic skin rash (dermatitis herpetiformis)
The diagnosis is usually made after an endoscopic duode -
nal biopsy allows pathological examination of mucosa. The 
antiendomysial antibody tests have a very high sensitivity and 
specificity for coeliac disease, but a duodenal biopsy is usually 
indicated to confirm the diagnosis. The biopsy usually shows 
flattening of the mucosa, marked inflammatory changes and 
characteristic findings of intraepithelial lymphocytes.
Patients with coeliac disease may develop an acute inflam-
matory condition of the small intestine (ulcerative jejunoil-
eitis) and have an increased risk of small bowel lymphoma 
and adenocarcinoma.
The main treatment for coeliac disease is the withdrawal 
of gluten from the diet by avoiding wheat, rye and barley. Sur-
gery does not usually play a role in the management of coeliac 
disease and is primarily reserved for resection of malignancy.
Bacterial overgrowth
The small intestine can become colonised with bacteria nor -
mally confined to the colon if there is stasis resulting in delayed 
bacterial clearance (blind loop syndrome, Figure 69.15). 
Similar complications may result from chronic small bowel 
obstruction, jejunal diverticulosis and ileosigmoid fistulation 
Summary box 69.9
Stoma complications
●● Skin irritation
●● Prolapse
●● Retraction
●● Ischaemia
●● Stenosis
●● Parastomal hernia
●● Bleeding
●● Fistulation
CONDITIONS CAUSING 
MALABSORPTION
Coeliac disease
Coeliac disease is the most common cause of malabsorption 
in the UK with a stated prevalence of 1:1800, although this 
may be an underestimate. It is characterised by a hypertrophic 
small bowel mucosa with atrophic villi and deep crypts. It is 
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
Figure 69.15 Common types of blind loop: (a) self-filling: deficiency 
occurs; (b) self-emptying: no deficiency occurs; (c) long afferent loop 
stasis in Pólya gastrectomy; (d) jejunal diverticula; (e) intestinal stric-
ture causing stasis; (f) ‘stenosis–anastomosis loop’ syndrome.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1255 25/10/2017   09:57CHAPTER 69  The small intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1256
(see above). If overgrowth occurs in the upper small intestine, 
the defect is chiefly of fat absorption; if in the lower intestine, 
there is vitamin B12 deficiency . There is usually relatively 
little effect on carbohydrate or protein metabolism. Stasis 
results in an abnormal bacterial flora, which prevents ade -
quate breakdown of fat. Sometimes, the only manifestation is 
anaemia, resulting from vitamin B12 deficiency but, if steator-
rhoea occurs, other serious malabsorption features may follow, 
including glossitis, osteomalacia, paraesthesia and peripheral 
neuropathy.
Improvement normally follows after intermittent therapy 
with oral antibiotics; metronidazole, ciprofloxacin, tetracy -
cline and rifaximin are commonly used. Definitive treatment 
is surgical when the anatomical abnormality can be corrected, 
but this is not always possible.
ENTEROCUTANEOUS FISTULA
An abnormal connection between the small intestine and the 
skin can occur as a result of fistulating CD, radiotherapy or 
abdominal trauma, but the condition most commonly follows 
a surgical complication – either a leak from an anastomosis or 
an inadvertent enterotomy during dissection. At least 50% of 
small bowel enterocutaneous fistulae develop after surgery in 
which no small bowel has been resected, as a result of injury to 
the intestine following division of adhesions. The frequency of 
this complication has been shown to increase with the num -
ber of previous laparotomies. Management of patients with 
enterocutaneous fistulae can be very challenging, especially 
when the fistula output is high (usually defined as >500  mL 
of effluent/day). The majority of fistulae can be expected to 
heal spontaneously, provided there is no distal obstruction or 
disease at the fistula site. Reasons for failure of spontaneous 
healing also include epithelial continuity between the gut 
and the skin and an associated complex abscess.
The management of fistulas is based on well-established 
principles (‘SNAP’, see Summary box 69.10). An early return 
to theatre to try and treat the problem definitively in a septic, 
malnourished patient is doomed to failure.
parenteral nutrition will be required. Defining anatomy is best 
done after careful discussion with the radiologist – a sequence 
of contrast studies (follow-through, fistulogram and enema) 
may well be required to define bowel length and plan a surgi-
cal strategy. Surgery can be extremely technically demanding, 
and an anastomosis should not be fashioned in the presence 
of continuing intra-abdominal sepsis or when the patient is 
hypoalbuminaemic (<32 g/dL).
SHORT BOWEL SYNDROME
Intractable diarrhoea with impaired absorption of nutrients 
following resection or bypass of the small intestine, ulti -
mately leading to progressive malnutrition, is referred to as 
‘short bowel syndrome’. The most common causes of short 
bowel syndrome are resection resulting from the management 
of CD and its complications (which accounts for almost half 
of cases), mesenteric vascular thrombosis, radiation enteritis 
and tumours. Although features of short bowel syndrome usu-
ally appear when there is less than 200 cm of small bowel, the 
length and nature of the remaining intestine are also import-
ant. In general, diseases which result in short bowel syn-
drome tend to preferentially affect the distal small intestine, 
and there is some evidence that the ileum, with its tighter 
intercellular junctions and consequently better fluid absorp -
tive capacity, can assume the functions of a missing jejunum, 
but not vice versa. While the ileocaecal valve used to be con-
sidered important with regard to preservation of absorptive 
function, it is more likely that this is a reflection of the asso-
ciated preservation of the distal ileum and right colon than 
the valve itself.
Patients with an intact colon are relatively protected from 
the effects of massive small bowel resection because of the 
ability of the colon to absorb not only fluid and electrolytes, 
but a modest amount of nutrient energy. Patients with as little 
as 100–200  cm of jejunum anastomosed to an intact colon 
may therefore be able to maintain satisfactory macronutrient, 
fluid and electrolyte status, although they will, of course, be at 
risk of fat-soluble and B12 vitamin deficiencies and will also 
generally need oral nutritional supplements of trace elements, 
vitamins and minerals. Some (but not all) patients with 
Infected collections are best identified at CT (Figure 
69.16) and can be drained percutaneously. Skin protection 
is important, as small bowel effluent is caustic. Nutritional 
support must include fluid and electrolytes, which can be lost 
in high quantities from a proximal fistula, as well as carbohy -
drates, protein, fat and vitamins. Judgements have to be made 
between enteral and parenteral feeding – enteral feeding has 
advantages but if the fistula is proximal or high output, total 
Summary box 69.10
Principles of management of enterocutaneous fistulae 
(SNAP)
●● S, elimination of Sepsis and skin protection
●● N, Nutrition – a period of parenteral nutrition may well be 
required
●● A, Anatomical assessment
●● P, definitive Planned surgery
Figure 69.16 Computed tomography (CT) scan in a patient with a 
complex enter ocutaneous fistula and an intra-abdominal abscess 
being drained with a CT-guided catheter.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1256 25/10/2017   09:58Further reading 1257
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
50–100 cm of small intestine and an intact colon will need 
long-term parenteral nutrition, as will almost all patients with 
50 cm or less of jejunum anastomosed to an intact colon. In 
contrast, most patients with less than 200  cm of small intes -
tine ending in a jejunostomy will require regular infusions of 
parenteral fluid and electrolytes, and almost all of those with 
less than 100 cm of small bowel ending in a jejunostomy will 
require long-term parenteral nutrition.
Medical management of patients with short bowel syn-
drome relies on the use of antidiarrhoeal agents (loperamide 
and codeine phosphate), drugs to reduce diarrhoea related 
to bile-salt malabsorption (colestyramine) and enteral and 
 parenteral vitamin and trace element supplements. Although 
there has also been interest in the use of drugs to promote 
intestinal adaptation, such as growth hormone, glutamine 
and, most recently, glucagon-like peptide 2 agonists, the main-
stay of treatment for short bowel syndrome remains home par-
enteral nutrition (HPN). The development of this treatment 
in the late 1960s enabled the majority of patients with short 
bowel syndrome to enjoy a reasonably good quality of life, 
with long-term survival related principally to the underly-
ing disease. HPN is, however, expensive and demanding and 
patients with short bowel syndrome receiving HPN are at risk 
from catheter-related complications (notably  catheter-related 
sepsis and occlusion), as well as metabolic complications 
(fibrotic liver disease, gallstones, metabolic bone disease and 
kidney stones).
Surgical procedures designed to improve the surface area 
or reduce the speed of transit of the remaining small intes -
tine (and thus improve absorptive capacity) have shown some 
promise in children, but their place in managing adults with 
established short bowel syndrome is currently unclear. In some 
patients, the loss of venous access resulting from the compli -
cations of long-term intravenous feeding or the development 
of progressive liver dysfunction may represent indications for 
small bowel transplantation. The results of small bowel trans-
plantation have progressively improved and 5-year patient 
survival now exceeds 80% in some centres.
FURTHER READING
Bland KI, Sarr MG, Büchler MW , Csendes A, Garden OJ, Wong J (eds). 
Surgery of the small bowel. Handbooks in general surgery. London: 
Springer-Verlag, 2011.
Gionchetti P , Dignass A, Danese S et al. 3rd European Evidence-based 
Consensus on the Diagnosis and Management of Crohn’s Disease 2016: 
Part 2: Surgical Management and Special Situations. ECCO Guideline/
Consensus Paper. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Keighley MRB, Williams NS. Surgery of the anus rectum and colon . 3rd 
edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, 2008.
Mowat C, Cole A, Windsor A et al. Guidelines for the management of 
inflammatory bowel disease in adults. Gut 2011; 60: 571–607.
Slade DAJ, Carlson GL. Takedown of enterocutaneous fistula and com-
plex abdominal wall reconstruction. Surg Clin N Am 2013; 93: 
1163–83.
11_69-B&L27_Pt11_Ch69.indd   1257 25/10/2017   09:58Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To appreciate:
 • The basic anatomy and physiology of the large intestine
 • The range of conditions that may affect the large 
intestine
To understand:
 • The aetiology and pathology of common large intestinal 
conditions
 • The principles of investigation of large intestinal 
symptoms
 • The importance of non-surgical management of large 
intestinal problems
 • The principles of colonic surgery
 • That complex intestinal problems are best managed by 
a multidisciplinary team
 • The management of acute surgical problems of the 
intestines
ANATOMY OF THE LARGE 
INTESTINE
The large intestine begins at the ileocaecal valve and extends 
to the anus. It is divided into the caecum, ascending colon, 
hepatic flexure, transverse colon with attached greater omen-
tum, splenic flexure, descending colon, sigmoid and rectum. 
The large intestine is approximately 1.5  m long, but can be 
straightened at endoscopy so the caecum can be reached with 
70 cm of colonoscope.
The colon is distinguished from the small bowel by hav -
ing fat-filled peritoneal tags known as appendices epiploicae 
and the taenia coli. These are three flat bands of longitudinal 
muscle that run from the appendix base to the rectosigmoid 
junction. They act to pull the colon into its sacculated state, 
producing a series of haustrations. Distended small and large 
intestine can be distinguished on an abdominal radiograph 
as the small bowel has complete transverse markings caused 
by the valvulae conniventes, while the colon has incom -
plete lines from the sacculation caused by the taeniae. The 
important posterior relations of the caecum and ascending 
colon are the right ureter, right gonadal vessels and duode -
num and these must be protected at surgery. The left ureter, 
left gonadal vessels and tail of the pancreas must be protected 
when operating on the left colon.
The blood supply of the large intestine is derived from 
branches of the superior mesenteric artery from the caecum 
to the distal transverse colon and the inferior mesenteric 
artery and its branches more distally. Adjacent branches 
anastomose so there is usually a complete vascular supply 
along the colon, named the marginal artery of Drummond. 
This vessel is often the key blood supply to the vascular 
arcades, ensuring adequate perfusion of a colonic anasto -
mosis, but blood flow in the ‘watershed’ area of the splenic 
flexure representing the junction between the superior and 
inferior mesenteric supply may be tenuous. Sudden occlu -
sion of the inferior mesenteric artery may leave the area of 
the splenic flexure poorly perfused, leading to an ischaemic 
colitis. Venous and lymphatic drainage of the colon follows 
the arterial supply and venous drainage is into the portal 
system. High ligation of the artery supplying a segment of 
colon will therefore also remove the draining lymph nodes, 
a key technical point in cancer surgery. The nerve supply 
to the large intestine is derived from the splanchnic nerves 
via a dense sympathetic plexus surrounding the superior and 
inferior mesenteric arteries. Visceral pain from the part of 
the colon supplied by the superior mesenteric artery is thus 
felt, like that of the small intestine, in the periumbilical 
region, while pain from the colon distal to that point is felt 
suprapubically.
Valvulae conniventes  describes a fold of mucous membrane that passes across two-thirds of the bowel circumference.
David Drummond , 1852–1932, English physician.
70Chapter
The large intestine
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1258 25/10/2017   09:59Tumours of the l arge intestine 1259
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE LARGE 
INTESTINE
The principle function of the colon is absorption of water; 
1000 mL of ileal content enters the caecum every 24 hours, 
of which only approximately 200  mL is excreted as faeces. 
Sodium absorption is efficiently accomplished by an active 
transport system, while chloride and water are absorbed pas-
sively. Fermentation of dietary fibre in the colon by the nor -
mal colonic microflora leads to the generation of short chain 
fatty acids, which are an important metabolic fuel for the 
colonic mucosa. Diversion of the faecal stream may lead to 
inflammatory changes in the colon downstream (diversion 
colitis). Absorption of nutrients including glucose, fatty acids, 
amino acids and vitamins can also take place in the colon.
Colonic motility is variable. In general, faecal residue 
reaches the caecum 4 hours after a meal and the rectum after 
24 hours. Passage of stool is not orderly because of mixing 
within the colon, so it is not uncommon for residue from a 
single meal to still be passed 4 days later.
TUMOURS OF THE LARGE 
INTESTINE
Benign
The term ‘polyp’ is a clinical description of any protrusion of 
the mucosa. It encompasses a variety of histologically differ -
ent tumours (Table 70.1). Polyps can occur singly, synchro-
nously in small numbers or as part of a polyposis syndrome.
Adenomatous polyps
Adenomatous polyps vary from a tubular adenoma (Figure 
70.1), rather like a berry on a stalk, to the villous adenoma, 
a flat spreading lesion. Villous tumours can cause diarrhoea, 
mucus discharge and, occasionally hypokalaemia and hypo -
albuminaemia. The risk of malignancy developing in an ade -
noma increases with size; there is a 10% risk of cancer in a 
1-cm diameter tubular adenoma, whereas almost one-third of 
large (>3  cm) colonic adenomas will have an area of inva -
sive malignancy within them. Adenomas larger than 5  mm 
in diameter are usually excised because of their malignant 
potential. Snare polypectomy is usually possible for colonic 
polyps but larger sessile polyps may require endoscopic muco-
sal resection after infiltration of a solution containing dilute 
adrenaline. Larger rectal adenomas may require transanal 
resection or, where the adenoma is too high, transanal endo-
scopic microsurgery or resection via transanal placement of 
laparoscopic instruments. Extensive villous lesions of the rec-
tum may require argon beam ablation when the patient is frail 
but symptomatic.
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is defined clinically 
by the presence of more than 100 colorectal adenomas, but 
is also characterised by duodenal adenomas and multiple 
extraintestinal manifestations ( Summary box 70.1 ). Over 
80% of cases come from patients with a positive family his -
tory. The remainder arise as a result of new mutations in the 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene on the short arm 
of chromosome 5. FAP is inherited as an autosomal domi -
nant condition and is consequently equally likely in men 
and women. The lifetime risk of colorectal cancer is 100% 
in patients with FAP . FAP can also be associated with benign 
mesodermal tumours such as desmoid tumours and osteomas. 
Epidermoid cysts can also occur (Gardner’s syndrome); des -
moid tumours in the abdomen spread locally to involve the 
intestinal mesentery and, although non-metastasising, they 
may become unresectable. Up to 50% of patients with FAP 
have congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithe-
lium (CHRPE), which can be used to screen affected families 
if genetic testing is unavailable.
TABLE 70.1 Classification of intestinal polyps.
Inflammatory Inflammatory polyps (pseudopolyps in UC)
Metaplastic Metaplastic or hyperplastic polyps
Hamartomatous Peutz–Jeghers polyp
Juvenile polyp
Neoplastic Adenoma Tubular
Tubulovillous
Villous
Adenocarcinoma
Carcinoid tumour
UC, ulcerative colitis.
Figure 70.1 Pedunculated adenomatous polyp of the large intestine, 
longitudinal section (courtesy of Dr P Millard, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
Oxford, UK).
Eldon John Gardner , 1909–1989, geneticist, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, described this syndrome in 1950.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Polyps are usually visible on sigmoidoscopy by the age of 15 
years and will almost always be visible by the age of 30 years. 
Carcinoma of the large bowel develops 10–20 years after the 
onset of the polyposis. If there are no adenomas by the age 
of 30 years, FAP is unlikely. If the diagnosis is made during 
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1259 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1260
adolescence, surgery is usually deferred to the age of 17 or 
18 years unless symptoms develop. Malignant change is rare 
before the age of 20 years. Examination of blood relatives, 
including cousins, nephews and nieces, is essential; a family 
tree should be constructed and a register of affected families 
maintained. Referral to a medical geneticist is essential. If 
over 100 adenomas are present at colonoscopy, the diagnosis 
can be made confidently (Figure 70.2).
TREATMENT
The aim of surgery in FAP is to prevent the development of 
colorectal cancer. The surgical options are:
1 colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA);
2 restorative proctocolectomy with an ileal pouch–anal 
anastomosis (RPC);
3 total proctectomy and end ileostomy.
The patient is almost always young and likely to prefer 
to avoid a permanent stoma and so the choice is normally 
between the first two options. The advantage of an IRA is 
that it avoids the temporary stoma frequently required for an 
RPC and avoids the potential compromise to sexual func-
tion accompanying proctectomy. It is also has a lower mor -
bidity and mortality. However, the rectum requires regular 
surveillance. Even with optimal surveillance of the rectal 
remnant, up to 10% of patients will develop invasive malig -
nancy within a 30-year follow up period. Restorative procto -
colectomy has the advantage of removing the whole colon 
and rectum. However, there is a pouch failure rate of approx-
imately 10%. In addition, and particularly where a stapled 
anastomosis has been created, there remains a small but defi -
nite incidence of cancer developing in the small strip of rec -
tal mucosa between the pouch and the dentate line. Some 
advocate complete mucosectomy of the residual cuff and 
a transanal anastomosis, although this may result in worse 
function. In experienced hands a laparoscopic approach to 
these operations can be successful, with swifter recovery and 
improved cosmesis.
POSTOPERATIVE SURVEILLANCE
Because of the risk of further tumour formation, follow-up is 
important and takes the form of rectal/pouch surveillance, 
with biopsy of the cuff recommended yearly. Gastroscopies 
are also carried out to detect upper gastrointestinal tumours 
(notably duodenal adenomas). Despite this, lifespan is reduced 
because of the development of duodenal and  ampullary can-
cers and complications of desmoid tumours.
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer 
(Lynch syndrome)
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is 
characterised by an increased risk of colorectal cancer and 
also cancers of the endometrium, ovary, stomach and small 
intestine. It is an autosomal dominant condition caused by 
a mutation in one of the DNA mismatch repair genes. The 
most commonly affected genes are MLH1 and MSH2. The 
lifetime risk of developing colorectal cancer is 80%, and the 
mean age of diagnosis is 45 years. Most cancers develop in 
the proximal colon. Females have a 30–50% lifetime risk of 
developing endometrial cancer.
DIAGNOSIS
HNPCC can be diagnosed by genetic testing or by the 
Amsterdam II criteria:
 ● three or more family members with an HNPCC-related 
cancer (colorectal, endometrial, small bowel, ureter, renal 
Summary box 70.1
Extracolonic manifestations of FAP
●● Endodermal derivatives
Adenomas and carcinomas of the duodenum, stomach, 
small intestine, thyroid and biliary tree
Fundic gland polyps
Hepatoblastoma
●● Ectodermal derivatives
Epidermoid cysts
Pilomatrixoma
Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium 
(CHRPE)
Brain tumours
●● Mesodermal derivatives
Desmoid tumours
Osteomas
Dental problems
Figure 70.2 Familial adenomatous polyposis.
Summary box 70.2
Features of FAP
●● Autosomal dominant inherited disease due to mutation of the 
APC gene
●● More than 100 colonic adenomas are diagnostic
●● Prophylactic surgery is indicated to preventing colorectal 
cancer
●● Polyps and malignant tumours can develop in the duodenum 
and small bowel
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1260 25/10/2017   09:59Tumours of the l arge intestine 1261
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
pelvis), one of whom is a first-degree relative of the other 
two;
 ● two successive affected generations;
 ● at least one colorectal cancer diagnosed before the age of 
50 years;
 ● FAP excluded;
 ● tumours verified by pathological examination.
Patients with HNPCC are offered regular endoscopic 
surveillance. The small intestine may also be radiologically 
assessed but this is of unproven benefit.
Malignant – colorectal cancer
Epidemiology
In the UK, colorectal cancer is the second most common 
cause of cancer death. Approximately 35  000 patients are 
diagnosed with colorectal cancer every year in the UK. 
Approximately one-third of these tumours are in the rectum 
and two-thirds in the colon. The burden of disease is similar 
in men and women. Colorectal cancer occurs less frequently 
in the resource-poor world than in resource-rich countries.
Aetiology
The accepted model of colorectal cancer development is that 
it arises from adenomatous polyps after a sequence of genetic 
muta tions influenced by environmental factors. This adenoma– 
carcinoma sequence is based on strong observational evidence 
as outlined in Summary box 70.3. The adenoma–carcinoma 
sequence is not a simple stepwise progression of mutations 
but a complicated array of multiple genetic alterations, ulti -
mately resulting in an invasive tumour. Mutations of the 
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene occur in two-thirds 
of colonic adenomas and are thought to develop early in the 
carcinogenesis pathway. K-ras mutations result in activation 
of cell signalling pathways and are more common in larger 
lesions, suggesting that that they are later events in muta -
genesis. The p53 gene is frequently mutated in carcinomas 
but not in adenomas and therefore thought to be a marker of 
invasion.
There has been much interest in the association between 
diet and colon cancer. Worldwide, the prevalence of colorec-
tal cancer is closely associated with intake of red meat and 
particularly processed meat products (haem and N-nitroso 
compounds). These adversely affect DNA in the colorectal 
mucosa. A protective effect of dietary fibre is also suggested 
by epidemiological studies. The hypothesis is that increased 
roughage is associated with reduced colonic transit times, and 
this in turn reduces the exposure of the mucosa to dietary car-
cinogens. Increased risk for colorectal cancer has also been 
associated with dietary animal fat, smoking and alcohol. 
Cholecystectomy may marginally increase the risk of right-
sided colon cancer and inflammatory bowel disease is a well-  
recognized risk factor (see below).
Pathology
Macroscopically, the tumour may take one of four forms (Fig-
ure 70.3). The annular variety tends to give rise to obstruc -
tive symptoms, whereas the others present more commonly 
with bleeding. Most large bowel cancers arise from the left 
colon, notably the rectum (38%), sigmoid (21%), and 
descending colon (4%). Cancer of the caecum (12%) and 
ascending colon (5%) are less common, but may be gradu-
ally increasing in incidence. Cancer of the transverse colon 
(5.5%), flexures (2–3%) and appendix (0.5%) are relatively 
uncommon. Microscopically, the neoplasm is a columnar cell 
adenocarcinoma. Origin from a benign polyp may be evident 
in early cases, before the benign architecture is destroyed by 
malignant infiltration.
Summary box 70.3
Evidence for adenoma–carcinoma sequence
●● The prevalence of adenomas and carcinomas is very similar – 
carcinoma patients are about 5 years older
●● The distribution of adenomas in the colon is the same as that 
of cancers (70% left sided)
●● When small cancers are studied they almost always have 
adjacent adenomatous tissue
●● Adenomas are found in one-third of specimens resected for 
colorectal cancer
●● Sporadic adenomas are identical to the adenomas of FAP , 
which is associated with a 100% chance of colorectal 
adenocarcinoma unless treated
●● Larger adenomas are more likely to be dysplastic and to have 
higher grades of dysplasia than small adenomas
●● Incidence of colorectal cancer falls within a screening 
programme that involves colonoscopy and polypectomy
 Figure 70.3 The four common macr oscopic varieties of car cinoma 
of the colon: (1) annular; (2) tubular; (3) ulcer; (4) cauliflower.
(3)
(1) (2)
(4)
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1261 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1262
Spread
Colonic cancer can spread locally or via the lymphatics, 
bloodstream or transcoelomically across the peritoneal cav-
ity. Direct spread may be longitudinal or radial. Radial spread 
may be retroperitoneal into the ureter, duodenum and poste -
rior abdominal wall muscles or intraperitoneal into adjacent 
organs or the anterior abdominal wall.
In general, involvement of the lymph nodes by the tumour 
progresses from those closest to the bowel along the course 
of lymphatics to central nodes. However, this orderly process 
does not always occur. Haematogenous spread is most com -
monly to the liver via the portal vein. One-third of patients 
will have liver metastases at the time of diagnosis and 50% 
will develop them at some point, accounting for the majority 
of deaths. The lung is the next most common site; metastasis 
to ovary, brain, kidney and bone is less common. Colorectal 
cancer can spread from the serosa of the bowel or via subperi-
toneal lymphatics to other structures within the peritoneal 
cavity, including peritoneum, ovary and omentum.
Staging colon cancer
A variety of staging systems are described for colorectal can -
cer based on pathological reporting to predict prognosis and 
guide adjuvant treatment. Dukes’ classification was origi -
nally described for rectal tumours but has been adopted for 
histopathological reporting of colon cancer. Although it is 
simple and widely recognised (Summary box 70.4) the more 
detailed TNM system is regarded as the international stan -
dard  (Summary box 70.5).
Clinical features
Carcinoma of the colon typically occurs in patients over 
50 years of age and is most common in the 8th decade of 
life. Emergency presentation occurs in 20% of cases and is 
associated with a considerably worse prognosis, even when 
matched for disease stage. A careful family history should be 
taken. Those with first-degree relatives who have developed 
colorectal cancer before the age of 45 years may be part of 
one of the colorectal cancer familial syndromes. Tumours of 
the left side of the colon usually present with a change in 
bowel habit or rectal bleeding, while proximal lesions typ -
ically present later, with iron deficiency anaemia or a mass 
(Figure 70.4). Patients commonly present with metastatic 
disease. Lesions of the flexures may present with vague upper 
abdominal symptoms for many months before symptoms sug -
gestive of colonic disease appear.
Investigation of colon cancer
SCREENING
Colon cancer is suited to screening as prognosis is better for 
early stage disease and polypectomy allows the prevention 
of cancer development. In the UK, a screening programme 
has been introduced based on faecal occult blood testing of 
people aged 60–69 years, followed by colonoscopy in those 
who test positive. A guaiac-based test is used, which detects  
peroxidase-like activity of faecal haematin. Studies have 
suggested a 15–20% reduction in colorectal cancer specific 
mortality in the screened population. Flexible sigmoidoscopy 
can also be used as the initial screening tool, with a similar 
reduction in colorectal cancer specific mortality.
ENDOSCOPY
The 60-cm, fibreoptic, flexible sigmoidoscope is increasingly 
being used in ‘one-stop’ rectal bleeding clinics. The patient 
is prepared with an enema and sedation is not usually neces -
sary. It is usually possible to assess the bowel up to the splenic 
flexure, which will detect up to 70% of cancers and almost all 
that cause fresh rectal bleeding (Figure 70.5). Colonoscopy 
is the investigation of choice if colorectal cancer is suspected, 
Cuthbert Esquire Dukes , 1890–1977, pathologist, St Mark’s Hospital, London, UK. The original Dukes’ classification in 1932 gave three stages, A–C.
Summary box 70.4
Dukes’ staging for colorectal cancer
●● A: invasion of but not breaching the muscularis propria
●● B: breaching the muscularis propria but not involving lymph 
nodes
●● C: lymph nodes involved.
Dukes himself never described a stage D, but this is often used 
to describe metastatic disease
Summary box 70.5
TNM classification for colonic cancer
●● T Tumour stage
T1 Into submucosa
T2 Into muscularis propria
T3 Into pericolic fat or subserosa but not breaching serosa
T4 Breaches serosa or directly involving another organ
●● N Nodal stage
N0 No nodes involved
N1 1-3 nodes involved
N2 Four or more nodes involved
●● M Metastases
M0 No metastases
M1 Metastases
Hepatic ﬂexure
2%
Splenic ﬂexure
3%
Transverse colon
5.5%
Transverse colon
5.5%
Anus
2%
Ascending
colon
5%
Caecum
12%
Appendix
0.5%
Descending
colon
4%
Sigmoid colon
21%
Rectum
38%
Figure 70.4 Distribution of colorectal cancer by site.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1262 25/10/2017   09:59Tumours of the l arge intestine 1263
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
provided the patient is fit enough to undergo the mechani -
cal bowel preparation required. It has the advantage of not 
only picking up a primary cancer but also having the ability to 
detect synchronous polyps or other carcinomas, which occur 
in 3–5% of cases. There is a small risk of perforation (1:1000).
RADIOLOGY
Double-contrast barium enema has traditionally been used 
and shows a cancer of the colon as a constant irregular fill-
ing defect, often described as looking like an apple-core (Fig-
ure 70.6). False positives occur in 1–2% of cases and false 
negatives in 7–9% of cases. It has now been largely replaced 
by computed tomography (CT) virtual colonoscopy, which 
is extremely sensitive in picking up polyps down to a size 
of 6  mm (Figure 70.7 ). It has the advantage of being less 
 invasive than colonoscopy but if a biopsy is required, an 
endoscopy will still be needed. CT is used as a diagnostic tool 
in patients with palpable abdominal masses. Spiral CT of the 
chest, abdomen and pelvis now represents the standard means 
of staging colorectal cancer, although chest x-ray and liver 
ultrasound are alternatives if CT is not readily available. Rec-
tal cancer usually requires additional staging for local spread, 
using magnetic resonance imaging.
Surgical treatment
PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION
Mechanical bowel preparation has fallen out of favour in sur-
gery for colon cancer, with little evidence of benefit and some 
of an increased rate of wound infection. It currently remains 
in use largely for low rectal resection, where unprepared 
bowel may be associated with a higher infection rate. Anti-  
embolism stockings should be fitted and the patient started on 
prophylactic subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin. If 
available, manual compression boots are used perioperatively. 
Intravenous prophylactic antibiotics are given immediately 
Figure 70.5 A cancer seen at colonoscopy.
Figure 70.6  Barium enema showing a car cinoma of the sigmoid 
colon. It may have an ‘apple cor e’ appearance (i.e. a short, irr egular 
stenosis with sharp shoulders at each end).
Figure 70.7 Virtual colonoscopy of the right colon. (a) Computed 
tomography scan of the abdomen showing a caecal tumour (arrow). 
(b) Formatted ‘virtual’ image of the same lesion as in (a) (courtesy of 
Dr A Slater, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK).
(a)
(b)
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1263 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1264
before the start of surgery, to reduce the risk of surgical site 
infection. A single dose of antibiotics covering bowel organ -
isms is as effective as multiple doses. In all cases where a stoma 
seems likely, careful preoperative counselling and marking of 
an appropriate site by an enterostomal therapist is essential.
OPERATIONS
The operations described are designed to remove the pri-
mary tumour and its draining locoregional lymph nodes. It 
is unusual to find unsuspected metastases at laparotomy (or 
laparoscopy) after CT staging, but the presence of peritoneal 
metastases may predicate a palliative strategy with a segmen-
tal resection and less aggressive lymphadenectomy. The use of 
stapling and hand-suturing techniques for colonic anastomo-
ses have been compared, and there is probably little difference 
in leak rate. It is more important that healthy bowel, free of 
tension or distal obstruction, is used to construct an anas -
tomosis and that patients are adequately nourished and free 
from active infection if anastomotic leakage is to be avoided.
Right hemicolectomy   Carcinoma of the caecum or 
ascending colon (Figure 70.8) is treated by right hemicolec -
tomy (Figure 70.9). At open surgery the peritoneum lateral 
to the ascending colon is incised, and the incision is carried 
around the hepatic flexure. The right colon and mesentery 
are elevated, taking care not to injure the ureter, gonadal 
vessels or the duodenum. The ileocolic artery is ligated close 
to its origin from the superior mesenteric artery (‘high-tie’) 
and divided. Where the right colic artery has a separate origin 
from the superior mesenteric artery (around 10% of patients) 
this is separately ligated. The mesentery of the distal 20 cm of 
ileum and the mesocolon as far as the proximal third of the 
transverse colon is divided. The greater omentum is divided 
up to the point of intended division of the transverse colon. 
When it is clear that there is an adequate blood supply at the 
resection margins, the right colon is resected, and an anas -
tomosis is fashioned between the ileum and the transverse 
colon. If the tumour is at the hepatic flexure the resection 
must be extended further along the transverse colon and will 
involve dividing the right branch of the middle colic artery.
Extended right hemicolectomy  Carcinomas of the trans-
verse colon and splenic flexure are most commonly treated by 
an extended right hemicolectomy. The extent of the resection 
is from the right colon to the descending colon. The mobili -
sation is as for a right hemicolectomy but dissection contin -
ues to take down the splenic flexure and the whole transverse 
mesocolon is ligated. Some surgeons prefer to perform a left 
hemicolectomy for a splenic flexure cancer.
Left hemicolectomy   This is the operation of choice for 
descending colon and sigmoid cancers (Figure 70.10). The 
left half of the colon is mobilised completely along the ‘white 
line’ that marks the lateral attachment of the mesocolon. 
As the sigmoid mesentery is mobilised, the left ureter and 
gonadal vessels must be identified and protected. The splenic 
flexure may be mobilised by extending the lateral dissection 
Figure 70.8  Large villous tumour of the caecum with malignant 
change.
Figure 70.9 Schematic showing right hemicolectomy.
Figure 70.10 Schematic showing left hemicolectomy.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1264 25/10/2017   09:59Tumours of the l arge intestine 1265
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
from below and completed by entering the lesser sac. The 
inferior mesenteric artery below its left colic branch, together 
with the related paracolic lymph nodes, is included in the 
resection by ligating the inferior mesenteric artery close to 
its origin (‘high-tie’). For full mobility the inferior mesenteric 
vein is also ligated and divided at the lower border of the pan-
creas. The bowel and mesentery can then be resected to allow 
a tension-free anastomosis. A temporary diverting stoma may 
be fashioned upstream, usually by formation of a loop ileos -
tomy. This is usually undertaken if the anastomosis is below 
the peritoneal reflection of the rectum, because healing is 
more likely to be impaired distally.
Laparoscopic surgery  Laparoscopic surgery for colon can-
cer has been shown to have equivalent overall and cancer-  
related outcomes to open surgery . Lymph node harvests are 
equivalent to open surgery and initial concerns about reports 
of port site recurrence have been dispelled as the world experi-
ence has grown. In the UK, the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence has stated that laparoscopic colorectal 
surgery should be offered to suitable patients. Operation times 
are longer but wound infection rates, blood loss and postop-
erative pain scores are lower than for open surgery. The costs 
of laparoscopic surgery are, however, generally higher and this 
may particularly relevant where funds are limited.
It is not possible to palpate lesions, so if laparoscopic sur -
gery is planned it is useful to tattoo the lesion at prior colonos-
copy. The laparoscopic operation has particular advantages if 
performed in a medial to lateral manner – that is starting the 
dissection by controlling and dividing the major vascular ped-
icles and only taking the lateral peritoneal reflection once the 
mesocolon is completely free. Specimen retrieval and bowel 
anastomosis can then be performed via small incisions. Dedi-
cated training in laparoscopic colorectal surgery is important, 
as there is a relatively long learning curve.
Emergency surgery
In the UK, 20% of patients with colonic cancer will present 
as an emergency, the majority with obstruction, but occasion-
ally with haemorrhage or perforation. If the lesion is right 
sided, it is usually possible to perform a right hemicolectomy 
and anastomosis in the usual manner . If there has been per -
foration with substantial contamination or if the patient is 
unstable, it may be advisable to bring out an ileocolostomy 
rather than forming an anastomosis. For a left-sided lesion 
the decision lies between a Hartmann’s procedure or resec -
tion and anastomosis. Where endoscopic and radiological 
facilities are present an obstructing left-sided lesion can be 
treated with an expanding metal stent (Figure 70.11). This 
has the advantage of converting an emergency operation with 
a high chance of a stoma to a situation that can be managed 
semi-electively by resection and anastomosis. Although early 
studies cast doubt on the benefits of colorectal stenting, more 
recently evidence has emerged that stenting leads to a reduc-
tion in stoma rates.
Postoperative care
After colonic surgery patients should be closely monitored, 
as there is a small incidence of postoperative bleeding. Anti -
thrombosis measures should be continued as discussed in 
the preoperative section and are currently recommended for 
28 days postoperatively. There is no advantage to placing 
intra-abdominal drains after colonic surgery. Wound infec -
tions are relatively common after colonic surgery and may 
well be more frequent than the 10% usually quoted. Anas -
tomotic leaks occur in 4–8% of ileocolic or colocolic anas -
tomoses. The possibility should be borne in mind in any 
patient not progressing as expected or with unexplained car -
diac abnormalities, fever or worsening abdominal pain. Early 
investigation with contrast enhanced CT scan is appropriate. 
In the presence of sepsis or peritonitis, early return to theatre 
and taking down the leaking anastomosis with the formation 
of stomas is usually advised.
Prolonged nasogastric drainage, intravenous fluid therapy 
and cautious introduction of oral fluid and diet represented 
traditional postoperative practice. Enhanced recovery pro -
grammes have been shown to reduce length of hospital stay 
from 10–14 days to as little as 2–3 days, by modulating the 
surgical stress response and reducing post-operative ileus. 
It is important to appreciate that these programmes require 
 multiple interventions to be instituted and considerable 
time, effort and education from the surgical, anaesthetic and 
ward teams.
Henri Albert Antoine Hartmann , 1860–1952, Professor of Clinical Surgery in the Faculty of Medicine, University of Paris, France.
Figure 70.11 Abdominal radiograph demonstrating a colonic stent 
in position ((arrow) courtesy of Dr D Kasir, Hope Hospital, Salford, UK)
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1265 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1266
Adjuvant therapy
In most patients with colon cancer there is little clear bene-
fit of preoperative chemotherapy, although trials in selected 
patient groups with locally advanced disease are ongoing. 
There is evidence that adjuvant chemotherapy improves 
outcome after surgery in patients with node-positive disease 
(Dukes C).
Metastatic disease
Hepatic metastases can be resected and series have demon -
strated 5-year survival of over 30% in resectable disease. Liver 
surgeons are increasingly aggressive in treatment and the only 
absolute limitation on what can be resected relates to leav -
ing behind sufficient functioning liver, although this clearly 
has to be moderated by patient factors. It is important not to 
biopsy potentially resectable hepatic metastases as this may 
cause tumour dissemination. Imaging will usually correctly 
identify colorectal metastases and assess patients suitable for 
liver resection (Figure 70.12). The role of chemotherapy 
and the timing of colonic and hepatic surgery in synchronous 
metastases is still a matter of debate and such cases should be 
carefully discussed by a multidisciplinary team. Isolated lung 
metastases may occasionally be suitable for resection but they 
are more commonly accompanied by metastases elsewhere. 
In patients with widespread disease, palliative chemotherapy 
is offered alongside symptomatic treatment and support by a 
palliative care team.
Prognosis
Overall 5-year survival for colorectal cancer is approximately 
50%. The most important determinant of prognosis is tumour 
stage and, in particular, lymph node status. Patients with dis-
ease confined to the bowel wall (Dukes stage A) will usually 
have cure by surgical resection alone and over 90% will have 
disease-free survival at 5 years. Spread beyond the bowel wall 
(Dukes B) reduces 5-year survival to approximately 60–70%. 
Patients with lymph node metastases (Dukes C) have a 5-year 
survival of 30%, while fewer than 10% of patients presenting 
with metastatic disease at the outset will be alive 5 years later.
Colorectal cancer follow-up
Since the advent of safe liver resection for metastases the 
outcome benefit of follow-up has been clearly demonstrated.  
Follow-up aims to identify synchronous bowel tumours (pres-
ent in 3%) that were not picked up at the time of original 
diagnosis due to emergency presentation or incomplete assess-
ment. Similarly, 3% of patients will develop a metachronous 
(at a different time) colonic cancer and surveillance colonos-
copy is designed to diagnose these. Up to a half of all patients 
with colorectal cancer will develop liver metastases at some 
point and regular imaging of the liver (by ultrasound and CT 
scan) and measurement of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 
is designed to diagnose this early, in order to allow curative 
metastectomy. Trials of the optimum follow-up pathway have 
suggested that CEA measurement alone can be as effective as 
regular imaging.
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL 
DISEASE
The term ‘inflammatory bowel disease’ is reserved for condi -
tions characterised by the presence of idiopathic intestinal 
inflammation (i.e. ulcerative colitis [UC] and Crohn’s disease 
[CD]. Although the availability of population genetics and 
Summary box 70.6
Key elements of an enhanced recovery programme
●● Preadmission counselling
●● Avoidance of mechanical bowel preparation
●● Preoperative carbohydrate loading
●● Avoidance of preoperative dehydration
●● No nasogastric tubes
●● Short, transverse incisions (or laparoscopic procedure)
●● Short-acting anaesthetic drugs
●● Avoidance of perioperative fluid/salt overload
●● Thoracic epidurals
●● Avoidance of opiate analgesia
●● Maintenance of perioperative temperature
●● Prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting
●● Early mobilisation
●● Early introduction of oral fluids/diets/supplements
●● Early removal of urinary catheters
●● Continual audit of outcomes
Figure 70.12 Computed tomography scan of the liver showing mul-
tiple metastases from carcinoma of the colon.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1266 25/10/2017   09:59Inflammatory bowel disease 1267
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
molecular biology has contributed to our understanding of 
the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease, the aetiology 
remains unclear.
Ulcerative colitis
UC is a disease of the rectum and colon with extraintestinal 
manifestations. The incidence is 10 per 100  000 per year in 
the UK with a prevalence of 160 per 100 000 population. UC 
affects men and women equally in early life, although it is said 
to be more common in males in later life. It is most commonly 
diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 40. UC is far more com-
mon in the USA and Western Europe but relatively rare in 
the Far East and tropics. Asians who spent their childhoo d 
before the age of 14 in Asia have a much lower incidence of 
UC than Asians born and raised in the UK, suggesting an 
important effect of environmental exposure in childhood.
Aetiology
The cause of UC is unknown. There is clearly a genetic con -
tribution, as 10–20% of patients have a first-degree relative 
with inflammatory bowel disease. Patients with severe colitis 
have a reduction in the number of anaerobic bacteria and in 
the variability of bacterial strains in the colon, but no caus-
ative link with any specific organism has been identified. 
Unlike CD, smoking seems to have a protective effect in UC 
and has even been the basis of therapeutic trials of nicotine. 
Relapses are occasionally said to be associated with periods of 
stress, but personality and psychiatric profiles in patients with 
UC are the same as those of the normal population.
Pathology
In virtually all cases the disease starts in the rectum and 
extends proximally in continuity. Colonic inflammation 
is diffuse, confluent and superficial, primarily affecting the 
mucosa and superficial submucosa. ‘Pseudopolyposis’ occurs in 
almost one-quarter of cases. Stricturing in UC is very unusual 
(unlike CD) and should prompt urgent assessment because of 
the possibility of coexisting carcinoma. A small proportion 
of patients develop irregular mucosal swellings (dysplasia-  
associated lesions or mass [DALMs]), which are highly pre -
dictive of coexisting carcinoma.
Histological examination reveals an increase in inflamma-
tory cells in the lamina propria and the crypts of Lieberkuhn 
and there are ‘crypt abscesses’. There is depletion of goblet 
cell mucin. With time, precancerous changes can develop 
(dysplasia). High-grade dysplasia is regarded as an indication 
for surgery as 40% of colectomy specimens in which high-
grade dysplasia was detected will have evidence of a colorec -
tal cancer. In contrast, optimum management of low-grade 
dysplasia is currently controversial. Ten to twenty per cent of 
patients with low-grade dysplasia will have a cancer at colec-
tomy. The progression rate of low-grade dysplasia to invasive 
cancer is unclear and many cancers in patients with low-grade 
dysplasia probably develop without high-grade dysplasia.
Symptoms
Clinical presentation depends in large part on the extent of 
disease. If confined to the rectum (proctitis), there is  usually 
no systemic upset and extra-alimentary manifestations are 
rare. The main symptoms are rectal bleeding, tenesmus and 
mucous discharge. The disease remains confined to the rec-
tum in 90% of cases but proctitis may extend proximally. 
Colitis is almost always associated with bloody diarrhoea and 
urgency. Severe and/or extensive colitis may result in anae -
mia, hypoproteinaemia and electrolyte disturbances. Pain is 
unusual. Children with poorly controlled colitis may have 
impaired growth. The more extensive the disease the more 
likely extraintestinal manifestations are to occur. Extensive 
colitis is also associated with systemic illness, characterised by 
malaise, loss of appetite, and fever.
Classification of colitis severity
The assessment of severity of UC is determined by frequency 
of bowel action and the presence of systemic signs of illness:
 ● Mild disease is characterized by fewer than four stools 
daily, with or without bleeding. There are no systemic 
signs of toxicity.
 ● Moderate disease corresponds to more than four stools 
daily, but with few signs of systemic illness. There may be 
mild anaemia. Abdominal pain may occur. Inflammatory 
markers, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate and  
C-reactive protein, are often raised.
 ● Severe disease corresponds to more than six bloody stools 
a day and evidence of systemic illness, with fever , tachy-
cardia, anaemia and raised inflammatory markers. Hypoal-
buminaemia is common and an ominous finding.
 ● Fulminant disease is associated with more than 10 bowel 
movements daily, fever, tachycardia, continuous bleeding, 
anaemia, hypoalbuminaemia, abdominal tenderness and 
distension, the need for blood transfusion and, in the most 
severe cases, progressive colonic dilation (‘toxic megaco -
lon’). This is a very significant finding, suggestive of disin-
tegrative colitis, and an indication for emergency surgery 
if colonic perforation is to be avoided.
Extraintestinal manifestations
Arthritis occurs in around 15% of patients and is typically 
a large joint polyarthropathy, affecting knees, ankles, elbows 
and wrists. Sacroiliitis and ankylosing spondylitis are 20 
times more common in patients with UC than the general 
population and are associated with the HLA-B27 genotype. 
Sclerosing cholangitis is associated with UC and can progress 
to cirrhosis and hepatocellular failure. Patients with UC and 
sclerosing cholangitis are also at a significantly greater risk of 
development of large bowel cancer . Cholangiocarcinoma is 
an extremely rare association and its frequency is not influ -
enced by colectomy. The skin lesions erythema nodosum and 
pyoderma gangrenosum are associated with UC and both nor-
mally resolve with good colitis control. The eyes can also be 
affected by uveitis and episcleritis.
Acute colitis
Approximately 5% of patients present with severe acute (ful-
minant) colitis. Intensive medical treatment leads to remis -
sion in 70% but the remainder require urgent surgery . Toxic 
dilatation should be suspected in patients who develop severe 
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1267 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1268
abdominal pain and confirmed by the presence on a plain 
abdominal radiograph of a colon with a diameter of more than 
6 cm (Figure 70.13). A reduction in stool frequency is not 
always a sign of improvement in patients with severe UC, and 
a falling stool frequency, abdominal distension and abdominal 
pain (resulting from progression of the inflammatory process 
through the colonic wall) are strongly suggestive of disinte -
grative colitis and impending perforation. Plain abdominal 
radiographs should be obtained daily in patients with severe 
colitis, and a progressive increase in colon diameter despite 
medical therapy is an indication for urgent surgery. Colonic 
perforation is a grave complication with a mortality rate of 
40%. Steroids may mask the physical signs. Severe haem-
orrhage is uncommon (1–2%) but may occasionally require 
urgent surgical intervention.
Cancer risk in colitis
The risk of cancer in ulcerative colitis increases with dura -
tion of disease. At 10 years from diagnosis it is approximately 
1%, increasing to 10–15% at 20 years and 20% at 30 years. 
Patients with pancolitis (defined as the presence of inflamma-
tion proximal to the splenic flexure) of more than ten years 
duration should be entered into screening programmes in 
order to detect clinically silent dysplasia, which is predictive 
of increased cancer risk. The value of screening programmes 
remains somewhat controversial, however, with most UC 
patients who develop cancer (approximately 3.5% of all 
patients) presenting with their tumours in-between atten -
dances for screening colonoscopy. Carcinoma is more likely 
to occur if the whole colon is involved (Figure 70.14) or if 
the disease started early in life. Malignant change, often atyp-
ical and high grade, may occur at many sites at once. Colo -
noscopic surveillance with dye-spray (chromo-endoscopy) or 
multiple biopsies every 10 cm is undertaken to look for subtle 
mucosal abnormalities, which can occur in flat mucosa, or a 
DALM.
Investigations
ENDOSCOPY AND BIOPSY
Rigid/flexible sigmoidoscopy can detect proctitis in the clinic; 
the mucosa is hyperaemic and bleeds on touch, and there 
may be a purulent exudate. Where there has been remission 
and relapse, there may be regenerative mucosal nodules or 
pseudopolyps. Later, tiny ulcers may be seen that appear to 
coalesce. Colonoscopy and biopsy has a key role in diagnosis 
and management:
1 to establish the extent of inflammation, although colonos-
copy is contraindicated in severe acute colitis because of 
the risk of colonic perforation;
2 to distinguish between UC and Crohn’s colitis (although 
this can be exceptionally difficult, Table 70.2);
3 to monitor the response to treatment;
4 to assess longstanding cases for malignant change.
RADIOLOGY
A plain abdominal film may indicate the severity of disease in 
the acute setting and is particularly valuable in demonstrat -
ing the development of toxic megacolon. Barium enema has 
largely been replaced by CT, although a contrast study will 
Figure 70.13 Fulminating ulcerative colitis with toxic dilatation of the 
transverse colon.
Figure 70.14 Resection specimen from a patient with long-standing 
ulcerative colitis showing a narrow tubular colon with areas of cancer-
ous change in the rectum and sigmoid (courtesy of Dr B Warren, John 
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK).
TABLE 70.2 Distinguishing ulcerative colitis (UC) and 
Crohn’s disease (CD).
UC CD
Macroscopic
Distribution Colon/rectum Anywhere in the 
gastrointestinal tract
Rectum Always involved Often spared
Perianal disease Rare Common
Fistula formation Rare Common
Stricture Rare Common
Microscopic
Layers involved Mucosa/submucosa Full thickness
Granulomas No Common
Fissuring No Common
Crypt abscesses Common Rare
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1268 25/10/2017   09:59Inflammatory bowel disease 1269
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
show a featureless colon. CT findings in pancolitis may show 
significant thickening of the colonic wall, as well as inflam -
matory stranding in the colonic mesentery (Figure 70.15).
BACTERIOLOGY
A stool specimen should be sent for microbiological analysis 
when UC is suspected, in order to exclude infective colitides, 
notably Campylobacter, which may be very difficult to distin -
guish from acute severe UC. Clostridium difficile colitis may 
need to be considered in populations at risk of this disease 
(see below).
Treatment
Effective treatment of UC requires a multidisciplinary 
approach to management. This involves the gastroenterolo -
gist, nurses, nutritionist, enterostomal therapists and, occa -
sionally, clinical psychologists and social workers as well as 
the surgeon.
Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment for ‘flare-
ups’, either topically or systemically, and have a widespread 
anti-inflammatory action. The immunosuppressive drugs aza-
thioprine and cyclosporin can be used to maintain remission 
and as ‘steroid-sparing’ agents. The monoclonal antibod -
ies infliximab and adalimumab both act against antitumour 
necrosis factor alpha, which has a central role in inflamma -
tory cascades. Most recently, vedolizumab, which blocks inte-
grins, has been used as ‘rescue therapy’ for severe colitis, to try 
and avoid emergency colectomy.
ACUTE COLITIS
Patients with a mild attack usually respond to a course of oral 
prednisolone. A moderate attack often responds to oral pred-
nisolone, twice-daily steroid enemas and 5-ASA. Failure to 
achieve remission as an outpatient is an indication for admis-
sion. Severe attacks of UC occur in up to 10% of patients and 
are emergencies, requiring hospital admission. Regular assess-
ment of vital signs, weight and the abdomen is required. A 
stool chart should be kept and a plain abdominal radiograph 
is taken daily and inspected for dilatation of the transverse 
colon. The presence of mucosal islands or intramural gas on 
plain radiographs, increasing colonic diameter or a sudden 
increase in pulse and temperature may indicate a colonic per-
foration. Fluid and electrolyte balance is maintained, anae-
mia corrected and adequate nutrition is provided, sometimes 
intravenously in severe cases. The patient is treated with 
intravenous hydrocortisone four times daily, as well as rectal 
steroids. If there is failure to gain an improvement within 48 
hours of commencing high-dose intravenous steroids, then 
surgery should be considered and it is certainly advisable if 
there has been no improvement within 3–5 days. Regular and 
joint review by gastroenterologist and surgeon is essential to 
identify patients who are failing to make anticipated progress 
and to ensure that surgery is neither inappropriately delayed 
nor undertaken. Gastroenterologists will use azathioprine, 
cyclosporin or infliximab in severe acute attacks to attempt 
to induce remission.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGERY
The greatest likelihood of a patient with UC requiring surgery 
is during the first year after diagnosis. The overall risk of col -
ectomy is 20%. Indications for surgery in UC are:
 ● severe or fulminating disease failing to respond to medical 
therapy;
 ● chronic disease with anaemia, frequent stools, urgency 
and tenesmus;
 ● steroid-dependent disease – here, the disease is not severe 
but remission cannot be maintained without substantial 
doses of steroids;
 ● inability of the patient to tolerate medical therapy 
required to control the disease (steroid psychosis or other 
side effects, azathioprine-induced pancreatitis), such that 
remission cannot be maintained;
 ● neoplastic change: patients who have severe dysplasia or 
carcinoma on review colonoscopy;
 ● extraintestinal manifestations;
 ● rarely, severe haemorrhage or stenosis causing obstruction.
Figure 70.15  Computed tomography scan demonstrating colitis 
with thickened colonic wall and inflammatory stranding in the mes -
entery (courtesy of Dr D Kasir, Hope Hospital, Salford, UK).
Summary box 70.7
Principles of management of ulcerative colitis
●● Many patients can be adequately maintained for years on 
medical therapy
●● Toxic dilatation must be suspected in any colitic patient who 
develops severe abdominal pain; missed colonic perforation is 
associated with a high mortality
●● Colitic patients are at increased risk of developing cancer; 
those with pancolitis of long duration are most at risk
MEDICAL TREATMENT
Medical therapy is based on anti-inflammatory agents. The 
5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) derivatives can be given topi-
cally (per rectum) or systemically. They act as inhibitors of the 
cyclo-oxygenase enzyme system and are formulated to protect 
the aspirin-related drug from degradation before reaching the 
colon. They can be used long term as maintenance  therapy. 
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1269 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1270
OPERATIVE TREATMENT FOR UC
Emergency  In the emergency situation, (or for a patient 
who is malnourished or on steroids), the ‘first aid’ procedure 
is a subtotal colectomy and end ileostomy. The rectosigmoid 
stump is left long and can either be brought out as a mucous 
fistula or closed just beneath the skin. This operation has the 
advantages that the patient avoids a pelvic operation while 
unwell, that colonic histology can be assessed and restorative 
surgery can be contemplated at a later date when the patient is 
no longer on steroids and has fully recovered. The mesentery 
is divided close to the bowel and the omentum should be pre-
served if possible. Dissection of the left colon is continued to 
divide the sigmoid at a level that will comfortably reach the 
skin as a mucous fistula. The temptation to close the rectal 
stump and leave it stapled off in the pelvis should be avoided if 
at all possible. The diseased rectum may disintegrate, causing 
a pelvic abscess and severe sepsis, with potentially fatal con-
sequences. Allowing the rectal remnant to discharge through 
the mucous fistula not only minimises the risk of this serious 
complication but may also allow the delivery of a high-dose 
topical steroid or 5-ASA compound, via the mucous fistula, 
into the isolated rectum. An emergency subtotal colectomy 
can be performed laparoscopically, provided the surgeon and 
theatre team has adequate experience.
Elective surgery   The indications for elective surgery 
include:
1 failure of medical therapy/steroid dependence;
2 growth retardation in the young;
3 extraintestinal disease (polyarthropathy and pyoderma 
gangrenosum respond to colectomy);
4 malignant change.
In the elective setting four operations are available – all of 
these can be successfully performed laparoscopically in expe -
rienced hands:
1 subtotal colectomy and ileostomy (as in an emergency);
2 proctocolectomy and permanent end ileostomy;
3 restorative proctocolectomy with ileoanal pouch;
4 subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis.
Segmental resections are not recommended as even when 
the right side is not obviously involved there is a high recur -
rence rate in the remaining colon. Subtotal colectomy with 
ileostomy is performed electively for a frail patient, a patient 
who cannot be weaned from steroids and when there is doubt 
as to whether the colitis may represent CD. A pouch, a com-
pletion proctectomy and even an ileorectal anastomosis can 
be considered at a future date.
Proctocolectomy and ileostomy  This operation removes 
all the colon and rectum, removing any risk of colorectal neo-
plasia or colitic symptoms, but it leaves a permanent stoma. It 
has a lower complication rate compared with a pouch proce -
dure, although the perineal wound can be problematic (10% 
fail to heal) and stoma problems are common. It is indicated 
for patients who are not candidates for restorative surgery due 
to sphincter problems or patient preference. The colectomy 
is performed as above. Provided there is no concern regard -
ing rectal cancer, a close rectal dissection may be performed 
to minimise damage to the pelvic nerves, avoiding erectile 
and bladder dysfunction. An intersphincteric excision of the 
anus is undertaken, which results in a smaller perineal wound 
and fewer healing problems. A permanent end ileostomy is 
formed. The position of the ileostomy should be carefully 
chosen by the patient with the help of a stoma care nurse 
specialist.
Restorative proctocolectomy with an ileoanal pouch 
(Parks)  In this operation, a pouch is made out of ileum 
(Figure 70.16) as a substitute for the rectum and sewn or 
stapled to the anal canal. This avoids a permanent stoma. 
It is reserved for patients with adequate anal sphincters and 
(a) (b)
(c)
15 cm
Figure 70.16 Ileoanal anastomosis with pouch. A substitute rectum 
is made from joined folds of ileum to form an expanded pouch of 
small intestine. The pouch is then joined dir ectly to the anus at the 
level of the dentate line, all other rectal mucosa having been removed. 
Three ways of forming a pouch are illustrated: (a) a simple reversed 
‘J’; (b) an ‘S’ pouch; (c) a ‘W’ pouch.
Sir Alan Guyatt Parks , 1920–1982, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital and the London Hospital, London, UK, former President of the Royal College of Surgeons of 
England.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1270 25/10/2017   09:59Inflammatory bowel disease 1271
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
should be avoided if CD is a possibility. Various pouch designs 
have been described, but the ‘J’ is the most popular and the 
most easily made using staplers (Figure 70.17). There is some 
controversy over the correct technique for ileoanal anasto -
mosis. In the earliest operations, the mucosa from the dentate 
line up to mid-rectum was stripped off the underlying muscle, 
but it is now known that a long muscle cuff is not needed. 
Although mucosectomy of the upper anal canal with an anas-
tomosis at the dentate line is claimed to remove all of the 
at-risk mucosa and any problem of subsequent cancer, it may 
also increase the risk of incontinence with nocturnal seepage. 
The alternative is an anastomosis double-stapled to the top of 
the anal canal, preserving the upper anal mucosa. Continence 
appears to be better, but there is a theoretical risk of leaving 
inflamed mucosa behind. The procedure can be carried out in 
stages and a covering loop ileostomy is virtually always used.
Complications include pelvic infection (usually result -
ing from a leak at the ileoanal anastomosis or, in a J pouch, 
from the top of the ‘J’), postoperative small bowel obstruc -
tion (which may occur in as many as 10–15% of patients) 
and pouch vaginal fistula. Frequency of evacuation is deter -
mined by pouch volume, completeness of emptying, reservoir 
inflammation and intrinsic small bowel motility, but is typ-
ically between three and eight evacuations in each 24-hour 
period. Increased frequency, urgency and faecal incontinence 
are common (20%, 5% and 5%, respectively), but usually 
reduce with time. Approximately 50% of patients with ileo -
anal pouches have a very good quality of life, whereas 35% of 
patients are less satisfied but choose to retain their pouches. 
Pouch function is so poor in 15% that the pouch is removed. 
The main reasons for failure are pelvic infection (50%), poor 
function (30%) and pouchitis or inflammation of the pouch 
(10%). It is also important for women of reproductive age to 
be advised that they may suffer from reduced fertility, as well 
as vaginal dryness, due to denervation of the secretory glands 
of the vaginal mucosa. Women who have not completed 
their families may elect for a colectomy with ileostomy and 
a pouch later.
Pouchitis describes an inflammatory condition, which 
may affect 30% of patients with an ileoanal pouch for colitis. 
It is characterised not only by the presence of inflammation 
in the pouch (which is common and frequently asymptom -
atic) but also by symptoms of pouch dysfunction (increased 
frequency, tenesmus, bleeding, purulent discharge) and sys -
temic illness (malaise, fever, raised inflammatory markers). 
The cause of pouchitis is unknown but it appears to relate to 
inflammatory bowel disease (pouchitis does not usually occur 
in pouches created for other indications). Alterations in bac-
teria flora may be relevant as pouchitis usually responds to a 
short course of antibiotic therapy, notably with metronidazole 
or ciprofloxacin and can be followed by maintenance with 
probiotics.
Colectomy and ileor ectal anastomosis   This proce -
dure is occasionally performed in UC if there is minimal 
rectal inflammation. A very considerable percentage (at 
least 50%) of patients with a quiescent rectum after total 
colectomy will develop significant mucosal inflammation in 
the rectum once the faecal stream has been re-established. 
Although rectal inflammation can be controlled with medi -
cal treatment, functional results may be disappointing. If the 
rectum is preserved, then annual rectal inspection is advo-
cated. Although this procedure has the advantage of avoid -
ing a stoma and the risk to sexual function associated with 
rectal dissection, it has largely fallen out of favour due to the 
ongoing risk of persisting inflammation and malignancy in 
the retained rectum.
Indeterminate colitis
Ten percent of patients with colitis present with histologi -
cal features that make their disease difficult to characterise. 
Such patients may be said to have an ‘indeterminate colitis’. 
Indeterminate colitis is, therefore, an indication by a pathol -
ogist that the nature of the underlying colitis (and therefore 
the likely course of the illness) is unclear. While the clinical 
history may suggest the diagnosis in some cases (for example, 
a history of recurrent perianal sepsis and fistulation would 
make a diagnosis of CD more likely), in others it may remain 
unclear whether a patient has UC or CD. In such cases, 
it may still be appropriate to offer a pouch after detailed 
informed consent, but the risks of pouch failure appear to be 
significantly higher (up to 25–30%) and patients should be 
advised accordingly.
Crohn’s disease of the colon
CD affecting the small bowel is discussed in Chapter 69. 
Colonic involvement is found in 30% of patients with CD, 
frequently in association with perianal disease and it may 
coexist with small bowel pathology . Colonic CD presents 
Figure 70.17 Stapled ‘J’ pouch with stapler creating a pouch–anus 
anastomosis.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1271 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1272
with symptoms of colitis and proctitis as described for UC, 
although toxic megacolon is much less common (Figure 
70.18). Colonic strictures may form just as are seen in small 
bowel CD. Endoscopic dilatation may be performed in expert 
hands as an alternative to surgical resection. Distinguishing 
between CD and UC is often difficult and requires clinical 
and pathological patterns to be combined. The presence of 
skip lesions, rectal sparing, non-caseating granulomas or peri-
anal disease will point to CD.
Colonoscopic examination may be normal or show patchy 
inflammation. There will be areas of normal colon or rectum 
in between areas of inflamed mucosa that are irregular and 
ulcerated, with a mucopurulent exudate. The earliest appear-
ances are aphthous ulcers surrounded by a rim of erythema -
tous mucosa. These become larger and deeper with increasing 
severity of disease. There may be stricturing, and it is import-
ant to exclude malignancy in these sites. An irregular Crohn’s 
stricture with polypoid mucosa may be almost indistinguish -
able from malignancy.
Treatment
There is great overlap in the treatment of Crohn’s colitis and 
UC. Disease activity can be controlled with 5-ASA com -
pounds and flare-ups treated with steroids. Rectal agents can 
be particularly effective if the disease activity is localised to 
the rectum. Immunomodulatory agents are frequently used, 
particularly if there is evidence of CD activity in large and 
small bowel.
Although CD is usually regarded as a contraindication 
to pouch surgery, the other options (panproctocolectomy or 
total colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis) are frequently 
appropriate and there may be considerable rectal sparing in 
CD, justifying the latter. Where the diagnosis of CD is firmly 
established, segmental rather than total colectomy may be 
appropriate.
INFECTIONS OF THE LARGE 
INTESTINE
Campylobacter
Infection with Campylobacter jejuni (a gram-negative rod with 
a distinctive spiral shape) is the commonest form of gastro -
enteritis in the UK, typically acquired from eating infected 
poultry. It causes diarrhoea and abdominal pain. Severe cases 
may resemble UC. The organism may take several days to 
isolate on stool culture. Treatment is supportive as it usually 
resolves without antibiotics, but severe colitis and even per -
foration may occur. It is a notifiable disease.
Intestinal amoebiasis
Entamoeba histolytica  has a worldwide distribution and is 
transmitted mainly in contaminated drinking water. It can 
cause colonic ulcers, which are described as ‘bottlenecked’ 
because they have considerably undermined edges. The ulcers 
typically also have a yellow necrotic floor, from which blood 
and pus exude. In the majority of cases they are confined to 
the distal sigmoid colon and the rectum. Clinically amoebia -
sis can mimic UC, most commonly causing bloody diarrhoea, 
but more severe colonic complications can occur, including 
severe haemorrhage, stricture formation or perforation. A 
pericolitis is not uncommon and results in adhesions and 
may cause intestinal obstruction. Amoebiasis may cause liver 
abscesses or an amoebic mass (‘amoeboma’) of the caecum 
or sigmoid which is difficult to distinguish from a carcinoma. 
Surgery is fraught with danger as the bowel is extremely  
friable.
Endoscopic biopsies or fresh hot stools are examined to 
look for the presence of amoebae (Figure 70.19). It is import-
ant to emphasise, however, that the presence of the parasite 
does not indicate that it is pathogenic. It is especially import-
ant to exclude amoebic infection in patients suspected of hav-
ing UC. Treatment is by metronidazole in the acute setting, 
Figure 70.18  Colonic Crohn’ s disease. Note the normal mucosa 
on either side of the inflammatory stricture (courtesy of Dr B W arren, 
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK).
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New Y ork, NY, USA, along with Leon Ginzburg and Gordon Oppenheimer  
described regional ileitis in 1932.
Figure 70.19 An amoeba in a rectal biopsy.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1272 25/10/2017   09:59Infections of the lar ge intestine 1273
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
three times daily for 7–10 days. Diloxanide furoate is effective 
against chronic infections associated with the passage of cysts 
in stools.
Salmonellosis, typhoid and 
paratyphoid
Salmonella are a family of gram-negative rods that can cause 
a range of enteric infections. Salmonella gastroenteritis is typ-
ically caused by S. enteritidis from poultry, and is most often 
a self-limiting illness comprising headache, fever and watery 
diarrhoea. When severe, antibiotics and indeed hospitalisa-
tion and intravenous fluids may be needed. The diagnosis is 
based on stool culture. Shigella and enteropathogenic strains 
of E. coli may cause similar diarrhoeal illnesses.
Typhoid fever is caused by S. typhi and presents with fever 
and abdominal pain after a 10–20-day incubation period. 
Over the next week, the patient can develop distension, 
diarrhoea, splenomegaly and characteristic ‘rose spots’ on the 
abdomen caused by a vasculitis. A number of surgical compli-
cations can result:
 ● paralytic ileus;
 ● intestinal haemorrhage;
 ● perforation;
 ● cholecystitis.
In addition, invasion of the systemic circulation, which 
is a characteristic feature of salmonellosis, may cause severe 
gram-negative sepsis and septic shock may develop. Some 
patients may develop metastatic sepsis, including septic 
arthritis and osteomyelitis, meningitis, encephalitis and pan -
creatitis.
Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV)
Intestinal complications are common after the development 
of AIDS when opportunistic organisms can cause gastro -
enteritis (Summary box 70.8). HIV1 may also cause a specific 
enteropathy. Treatment is directed towards the responsible 
organism and surgery should be avoided.
If the colitis does not settle, an emergency subtotal colectomy 
and ileostomy may be necessary.
Colonic diverticula
Diverticula (hollow out-pouchings) are a common structural 
abnormality. They can be classified as:
1 Congenital. All three coats of the bowel are present in 
the wall of the diverticulum (e.g. Meckel’s diverticulum).
2 Acquired. There is no muscularis layer present in the 
diverticulum (e.g. sigmoid diverticular disease).
Diverticula are found in the left colon in around 75% 
of over 70 year olds in the Western world. The condition 
is overwhelmingly found in the sigmoid but can affect the 
whole colon. Interestingly, in South-East Asia right-sided 
diverticular disease is more common. Diverticula are most 
often asymptomatic (diverticulosis) and found incidentally, 
but they can present clinically with sepsis or haemorrhage.
Aetiology
Epidemiological studies indicate that diverticular disease is a 
consequence of a refined Western diet, deficient in dietary 
fibre. The combination of altered collagen structure with age-
ing, disordered motility and increased intraluminal pressure, 
most notably in the narrow sigmoid colon, results in herni -
ation of mucosa through the circular muscle at the points 
where blood vessels penetrate the bowel wall. The rectum has 
a complete muscular coat and a wider lumen and is thus very 
rarely affected. Diverticular disease is rare in Africa and Asia 
where the diet is high in natural fibre.
Complications of diverticular disease
The majority of patients with diverticula are asymptomatic 
but historical studies suggest that somewhere between 10 and 
30% will have symptomatic complications ( Summary box 
70.9). These complications are:
Johann Friedrich Meckel  (the younger), 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany, described the diverticulum in 1809.
Summary box 70.8
Opportunistic intestinal infections in patients with AIDS
●● Bacteria
Salmonella
Shigella
Yersinia
Campylobacter
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare (MAI)
●● Viral
Cytomegalovirus
●● Protozoa
Cryptosporidium
Giardia
●● Fungal
Candida albicans
Clostridium difficile
Clostridium difficile is a toxin-producing gram-positive bacillus 
that is an increasing concern in many hospitals. Although 
normally present in around 2% of the population, it prolif -
erates after antibiotic treatment (especially cephalosporins). 
Clinically, C. difficile infection presents with diarrhoea, 
abdominal pain and fever. Infection may progress to pseudo-
membranous colitis, so called because on visualisation of the 
bowel, plaques of inflammatory exudate between oedematous 
mucosa are seen. Diagnosis is usually made by detection of 
the toxin in stool samples, rather than by culture. Treatment 
is by metronidazole or vancomycin alongside supportive care. 
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1273 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1274
1 Pain and inflammation (diverticulitis).
2 Perforation: most often contained leading to pericolic 
abscess formation but occasionally leading to generalised 
peritonitis.
3 Intestinal obstruction: progressive fibrosis can cause ste -
nosis of the sigmoid and large bowel obstruction or loops 
of small intestine can adhere to an inflamed sigmoid, 
resulting in small bowel obstruction.
4 Haemorrhage: diverticular disease may present with pro -
fuse and recurrent) colonic haemorrhage due to erosion of 
vessels adjacent to a diverticulum.
5 Fistula formation (colovesical, colovaginal, enterocolic, 
colocutaneous): occurs in 5% of cases, colovesical fistula-
tion is most commonly seen.
drainage). Rarely, diverticular disease may perforate into the 
retroperitoneum, leading to a psoas abscess, and even groin 
fistulation.
Classification of contamination
The degree of infection has a major impact on outcome in 
acute diverticulitis. Patients with inflammatory masses have 
a lower mortality than those with perforation (3% versus. 
33%). Classification systems have been developed for acute 
diverticulitis to try and rationalise the literature, the most 
commonly used being the Hinchey classification (Table 70.3).
Radiology
Plain radiographs can demonstrate a pneumoperitoneum. 
Spiral CT has excellent sensitivity and specificity for iden -
tifying bowel wall thickening, abscess formation and extra -
luminal disease and has revolutionised the assessment of 
complicated diverticular disease (Figure 70.20). On identifi-
cation of abscesses in stable patients, drainage may be carried 
out percutaneously, avoiding the need for laparotomy/laparos-
copy. Contrast studies and endoscopy are usually avoided for 
6 weeks after an acute attack for fear of causing perforation. 
They are used subsequently, however, to exclude a coexisting 
carcinoma and assess the extent of diverticular disease. Con -
trast examination or CT can demonstrate a fistula.
Colonoscopy
Endoscopic assessment may demonstrate the necks of diver -
ticula within the bowel lumen (Figure 70.21). A narrowed 
Clinical features
In mild cases, symptoms such as distension, flatulence and a 
sensation of heaviness in the lower abdomen may be indistin-
guishable from those of irritable bowel syndrome. These symp-
toms are thought to result from a combination of increased 
luminal pressure affecting wall tension and increased visceral 
hypersensitivity. Surgical treatment is rarely, if ever appropri-
ate for diverticular disease in the absence of complications.
Diverticulitis typically presents as persistent lower abdom-
inal pain, usually in the left iliac fossa. There may be accom -
panying diarrhoea or constipation. The lower abdomen is 
tender, especially on the left, but occasionally also in the 
right iliac fossa if the sigmoid loop lies across the midline. 
The sigmoid colon may be tender and thickened on palpation 
and rectal examination may reveal a tender mass if an abscess 
has formed. Distinguishing between diverticulitis and abscess 
formation is difficult on clinical grounds alone and radiolog-
ical imaging is essential. Generalised peritonitis as a result of 
free perforation presents in the typical manner with systemic 
upset and generalised tenderness and guarding.
Haemorrhage from colonic diverticula is typically painless 
and profuse. Bleeding from the sigmoid will be bright red with 
clots, whereas right-sided bleeding will be darker. Torrential 
bleeding is fortunately rare and, in fact, more commonly due 
to angiodysplasia, but diverticular bleeding may persist or 
recur requiring transfusion and resection. The presentation 
of a fistula resulting from diverticular disease depends on the 
site. The most common colovesical fistula results in recur -
rent urinary tract infections and pneumaturia (flatus in the 
urine) or even faeces in the urine. Colovaginal fistulae are 
more common after hysterectomy. Colocutaneous fistulation 
is rare in the absence of prior intervention (e.g. radiological 
Summary box 70.9
Complications of diverticular disease
●● Diverticulitis
●● Abscess
●● Peritonitis
●● Intestinal obstruction
●● Haemorrhage
●● Fistula formation
TABLE 70.3 Hinchey classification of complicated 
diverticulitis.
Grade I Mesenteric or pericolic abscess
Grade II Pelvic abscess
Grade III Purulent peritonitis
Grade IV Faecal peritonitis
Figure 70.20  Computed tomography scan demonstrating an 
abscess associated with diverticulitis (arrow) (courtesy of Dr D Kasir, 
Hope Hospital, Salford, UK)
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1274 25/10/2017   09:59Infections of the lar ge intestine 1275
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
area of diverticular disease may be impassable because of the 
severity of disease and there is a significant risk of endoscopic 
perforation. Colonoscopy in these circumstances requires 
judgement and experience. Biopsies may be taken if possible 
and corroboration with barium enema or CT virtual colonos-
copy is required. Excluding a carcinoma may not always be 
possible and may represent an indication for resection.
Management
Patients are frequently recommended to take a high-fibre diet 
and bulk-forming laxatives, although the evidence for their 
effectiveness in diverticulosis or after an attack of divertic -
ulitis is limited. Antispasmodics may have a role if recurrent 
pain is a problem. Acute diverticulitis is treated by intrave -
nous antibiotics (to cover gram-negative bacilli and anaer -
obes) alongside appropriate resuscitation and analgesia. Nil 
by mouth to ‘rest the bowel’ and catheterisation to reduce the 
risk of colovesical fistulation are often advocated, but there 
is little evidence to support these practices. A CT scan can 
confirm the diagnosis and assess for complications. After the 
acute attack has subsided the bowel should be investigated by 
endoscopy, barium enema or CT virtual colonoscopy. Some 
pericolic abscesses can be drained percutaneously. A diam-
eter of 5  cm is frequently regarded as the cut off between 
an abscess likely to settle with antibiotics and one likely to 
require  intervention.
Operative procedures for diverticular 
disease
The aim of emergency surgery is to control peritoneal infec -
tion; indications are generalised peritonitis and failure to 
respond to optimum medical management. Laparotomy for 
diverticular disease in the acute setting has considerable risk 
with mortality in most series of 15% and, in the case of faecal 
peritonitis, mortality approaches 50%. Alongside operative 
technique, resuscitation, anaesthesia and postoperative man-
agement should be optimised.
Laparotomy and thorough washout of contamination 
are performed and then a choice has to be made between a 
Hartmann’s procedure (sigmoid resection with formation 
of left iliac fossa colostomy and closure of the rectal stump) 
and resection with colonic washout and anastomosis (with 
consideration of a defunctioning loop ileostomy). Primary 
anastomosis should be used selectively but is appealing in a 
young fit patient without gross contamination or overwhelm-
ing sepsis. However, this is a relatively rare scenario and the 
majority of emergency operations for perforated diverticular 
disease are Hartmann’s procedures (Figure 70.22). There 
is good evidence that simple defunctioning with a proximal 
stoma is associated with higher mortality than a resection. 
There may be a role for emergency laparoscopy in divertic -
ular disease with washout if there is no faecal contamination 
(i.e. Hinchey grade III or less), allowing sigmoid resection to 
be avoided, but this remains somewhat controversial as some 
trials have suggested a higher mortality.
Elective surgery is usually undertaken for management 
of complications. Diverticular fistulae can only be cured by 
resecting the affected bowel, although a defunctioning stoma 
can ameliorate symptoms. In colovesical fistula the sigmoid 
can often be pinched off the bladder and the sigmoid resected. 
If an anastomosis is performed, it is wise to place an omental 
pedicle between the bowel and bladder to prevent recurrent 
Figure 70.21 Colonoscopic view of sigmoid diverticula. Note the 
mouths of diverticula between the hypertrophied colonic walls.
(a)
(b)
Figure 70.22 (a) Perforated sigmoid diverticular disease. (b) The 
Hartmann pr ocedure – oversewn rectal stump and left iliac fossa 
colostomy.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1275 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1276
fistulation. These procedures can be technically challenging 
and ureteric stents are commonly required to reduce the risk 
of ureteric injury. Partial cystectomy may be required and 
assistance from a urological surgeon is often very helpful
Haemorrhage from diverticular disease should be distin -
guished from angiodysplasia. It usually responds to conserva-
tive management and only occasionally requires resection. 
Where available, angiography is helpful to localise bleeding 
points. On-table lavage and colonoscopy may be necessary to 
localise the bleeding site. If the source cannot be located, then 
subtotal colectomy and ileostomy may be the safest option.
Indications for surgery in an elective setting, in the absence 
of complications of the disease, are controversial. There 
are undoubtedly a small number of patients with recurrent 
attacks who should be offered an elective sigmoid colectomy 
(with anastomosis). This could be performed laparoscopically 
in experienced hands with a likely swifter recovery as well 
as improved cosmesis. Cohort studies suggest that in patients 
under 50 years old admitted with diverticulitis, 25% will have 
a further episode. This may be used as an argument for offering 
elective resection but equally suggests that 75% will not get 
another severe attack. Many surgeons would discuss the pros 
and cons of elective surgery after two emergency admissions, 
although general health must be carefully considered. There 
has been an increasing tendency, in recent years, to treat even 
patients with recurrent attacks of diverticulitis conservatively 
in the absence of complications.
angio dysplasia. There is an association with aortic stenosis 
(Heyde’s  syndrome).
Investigation
Colonoscopy may show the characteristic lesion in the right 
colon. The lesions are only a few millimetres in size and 
appear as reddish, raised areas at endoscopy. Selective supe -
rior and inferior mesenteric angiography shows the site and 
extent of the lesion by a ‘blush’ of contrast, provided bleed-
ing is above 1  mL/minute. If this fails, a technetium-99m 
(99mTc)-labelled red cell scan may confirm and localise the 
source of haemorrhage.
Treatment
The first principle is to stabilise the patient. Following this, 
the bleeding needs to be localised. Colonoscopy may allow 
cauterisation to be carried out and an argon laser can be 
helpful. In severe uncontrolled bleeding, surgery becomes 
necessary. On-table colonoscopy is carried out to confirm 
the site of bleeding. Angiodysplastic lesions are sometimes 
demonstrated by transillumination through the caecum 
(Figure 70.23). If it is still not clear exactly which segment 
of the colon is involved, then a subtotal colectomy may be  
necessary.
Ischaemic colitis
Ischaemia of the colon typically results from thrombosis or 
embolism. Sudden embolic events present with severe pain 
out of proportion to the degree of peritonism, bloody diar -
rhoea, haemodynamic instability and shock. Resuscitation 
and laparotomy are required with resection of gangrenous 
VASCULAR ANOMALIES OF THE 
INTESTINE
Angiodysplasia
Angiodysplasia is a vascular malformation that commonly 
causes haemorrhage from the colon in patients over the age 
of 60. The malformations consist of dilated tortuous submu -
cosal veins.
Clinical features
In the majority of cases, the symptoms are subtle and patients 
can present with anaemia. About 10–15% have brisk 
bleeds, which may present as melaena or significant rectal 
bleeding. Many patients in whom rectal bleeding has been 
attributed to diverticular disease have probably bled from 
Edward Heyde , American internist, published his findings on the association between aortic valve stenosis and angiodysplasia in a letter to the New England 
Journal of Medicine in 1958.
Summary box 70.10
Principles of surgical management of diverticular 
disease
●● Hartmann’s procedure is the safest option in emergency 
surgery
●● Primary anastomosis can be considered in selected patients
●● Elective resection may be offered for recurrent attacks
●● Definitive treatment of colovesical fistula will require resection
Figure 70.23 Angiodysplasia of the caecum demonstrated by trans-
illumination with a colonoscope intraoperatively.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1276 25/10/2017   09:59Colostomies 1277
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
bowel and exteriorisation of viable bowel ends. Mortality is 
extremely high. Thrombotic occlusion usually occurs in the 
context of global atherosclerosis and the presentation tends 
to be less dramatic with abdominal pain and rectal bleeding. 
A plain abdominal radiograph may show ‘thumb-printing’ 
and endoscopy may demonstrate haemorrhagic oedema. The 
left colon and, in particular, the splenic flexure are usually 
the worst affected. Symptoms usually settle spontaneously. In 
some cases, ulceration at the splenic flexure associated with 
ischaemic colitis may heal with stricturing and present with 
subsequent large bowel obstruction.
COLOSTOMIES
A colostomy (or ileostomy) stoma is a planned opening made 
in the colon (or small intestine) to divert faeces and flatus 
to the abdominal wall where they can be collected in an 
external appliance. Depending on the purpose for which the 
diversion has been necessary, a stoma may be temporary or 
permanent. End colostomy
This is formed after an abdominoperineal excision of the 
rectum or as part of a Hartmann’s procedure, bringing the 
divided colon through a left iliac fossa trephine in rectus 
abdominis and skin. The colonic margin is then sutured to the  
 adjoining skin.
The point at which the colon is brought to the surface 
must be carefully selected to allow a colostomy bag to be 
applied without impinging on the anterior-superior iliac 
spine. The best site is usually through the lateral edge of the 
rectus sheath (Figure 70.25).
Stoma bags and appliances
Stoma output is collected in disposable adhesive bags. Colos-
tomy appliances are simply changed two or three times each 
day. A wide range of such bags is currently available. In most 
hospitals, a stoma care service is available to offer advice to 
patients, to acquaint them with the latest appliances and to 
provide the appropriate psychological and practical help.
Summary box 70.11
Stomas
●● May be colostomy or ileostomy
●● May be temporary or permanent
●● Temporary or defunctioning stomas are usually fashioned as 
loop stomas
●● An ileostomy is spouted; a colostomy is flush
●● Ileostomy effluent is usually liquid whereas colostomy effluent 
is usually solid
●● Ileostomy patients are more likely to develop fluid and 
electrolyte problems
●● An ileostomy is usually sited in the right iliac fossa
●● End-colostomy is usually sited in the left iliac fossa
●● Whenever possible patients should be counselled and sited 
by a stoma care nurse before operation
Loop colostomy
A transverse loop colostomy has in the past been used to 
defunction an anastomosis after an anterior resection. It is 
now less commonly employed, as it is difficult to manage 
and potentially disrupts the marginal arterial supply to the 
anastomosis. Loop transverse colostomies are also particu-
larly prone to prolapse. A loop ileostomy is now more com -
monly used.
A loop left iliac fossa colostomy is still sometimes used 
to prevent faecal peritonitis developing following traumatic 
injury to the rectum, to facilitate the operative treatment 
of a high anal fistula, for incontinence and to defunction an 
obstructing low rectal cancer prior to long course chemo-  
radiotherapy.
A temporary loop colostomy is made by bringing a mobil-
ised loop of colon to the surface, where it is held in place by a 
plastic bridge passed through a mesenteric window. Once the 
abdomen has been closed, the colostomy is opened, and the 
edges of the colonic incision are sutured to the adjacent skin 
margin (Figure 70.24). When firm adhesion of the colos-
tomy to the abdominal wall has taken place, the bridge can 
be removed.
Following healing of the distal lesion for which the tem -
porary stoma was constructed, the colostomy can be closed. 
It is usual to perform a contrast examination (proctogram) 
to check that there is no distal obstruction or continuing 
problem at the site of previous surgery. Colostomy closure is 
most easily and safely accomplished if the stoma is mature, 
typically after the colostomy has been established for at least 
2 months. Closure is usually possible with a circumstomal 
incision, which avoids a full laparotomy, but it is import-
ant for patient and surgeon to consider the risks of closure 
carefully as it does involve a bowel anastomosis. In some 
cases, a full laparotomy may be required for safe closure of 
the stoma.
Figure 70.24 Temporary (loop) colostomy opened over a rod, and 
immediate suture of the colon wall to surrounding skin (alternatively, 
a skin bridge is used).
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1277 25/10/2017   09:59CHAPTER 70  The large intestine
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1278
Complications of stomas
Stoma complications are underestimated and common (Sum-
mary box 70.12 ). On occasion these complications may 
require surgical treatment. Sometimes, this can be achieved 
with an incision immediately around the stoma but on occa -
sion reopening the abdomen and freeing up the stoma may be 
necessary. Repair of parastomal hernias is particularly tech -
nically challenging and the recurrence rate is high. Simple 
suture is associated with an almost 100% risk of recurrence 
and transfer to the opposite side of the abdomen, or inser -
tion of a piece of prosthetic material within the abdominal 
wall around the stoma may be necessary. There is some evi-
dence that stoma trephine reinforcement with mesh at the 
time of initial stoma formation may reduce the incidence of 
parastomal herniation, which may be as high as 50% over the 
long term.
Drugs and a range of illnesses can result in constipation 
(Summary boxes 70.13, 70.14). Altering medication or addi -
tion of laxatives can be helpful for drug-related constipation 
and correction of underlying illness is clearly ideal where 
 possible.
Summary box 70.12
Stoma complications
●● Skin irritation
●● Prolapse
●● Retraction
●● Ischaemia
●● Stenosis
●● Parastomal hernia
●● Bleeding
●● Fistulation
Summary box 70.13
Drugs that can cause constipation
●● Benzodiazepines
●● Carbamazepine
●● Chlorpromazine
●● Cholestyramine
●● Iron
●● Opiates, particularly codeine and morphine
●● Tricyclic antidepressants
●● Statins
Summary box 70.14
Illnesses associated with constipation
●● Neurological conditions
●● Parkinson’s disease
●● Multiple sclerosis
●● Diabetic nephropathy
●● Spinal cord lesion
●● Endocrine conditions
●● Hypothyroidism
●● Hypercalcaemia
Figure 70.25 A colostomy in the left iliac fossa.
FUNCTIONAL ABNORMALITIES
Constipation
There is no single definition of constipation; however, a bowel 
frequency of less than one every 3 days is commonly consid-
ered to be abnormal. Constipation is an extremely prevalent 
complaint in western society and some patients are greatly 
disabled by abdominal pain, distension, reliance on laxatives 
and difficulty with defaecation.
There remains a group of patients with constipation who 
do not have any structural, pharmacological or other pathol-
ogy to explain their symptoms. Some will have obstructed 
defaecation (a syndrome of impaired rectal emptying asso -
ciated with pelvic floor dysfunction). Others will have slow 
colonic transit, a disorder usually seen in women, which may 
have been present since childhood or may suddenly follow 
abdominal or pelvic surgery. Some patients have a combina-
tion of both conditions.
Investigation
It is important to exclude a structural abnormality (notably 
large bowel obstruction) by conventional investigation (colo-
noscopy, CT virtual colonoscopy or barium enema) before 
diagnosing a functional bowel disorder.
Whole-gut transit time can be measured by asking the 
patient to stop all laxatives and take a capsule containing 
radiopaque markers (Figure 70.26). Retention of more than 
80% of the shapes, 120 hours after ingestion, is abnormal.
Defaecating proctography may demonstrate impaired pel-
vic floor relaxation, rectal intussusception and/or rectocoele if 
they are causing obstructed defaecation. Anorectal manome-
try may confirm an abnormal pattern of straining in patients 
with obstructed defaecation, with failure to reduce (or even 
inappropriately increase) anal canal pressures on bearing 
down.
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1278 25/10/2017   09:59Further reading 1279
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Treatment of slow colonic transit and 
obstructed defaecation
Dietary fibre  This is the first-line treatment for mild consti-
pation. Constipation only resolves after several weeks of ther-
apy, which usually needs to be continued in the long term.
Laxatives  It is important that patients do not fall into 
a cycle of laxative abuse. A number of types are available 
including bulk, osmotic and stimulant agents.
New agents   Newer agents such as prucalopride, which 
selectively activates serotonin (5HT-4) receptors, may have 
a role in chronic constipation.
Rectal irrigation  Rectal irrigation may improve quality of 
life in some patients, who can be trained to do this for them -
selves using commercially available kits.
Biofeedback  This involves training in pelvic floor function. 
It has been shown to be effective in up to 50% of patients 
with obstructed defaecation.
Sacral nerve stimulation  Although primarily used for the 
treatment of faecal incontinence, sacral neuromodulation 
has recently been suggested to be of value in the treatment of 
obstructed defaecation.
Surgery  The results of surgery are relatively poor. Surgery is 
justified only after careful evaluation and when appropriate 
medical options have been exhausted. Total colectomy and 
ileorectal anastomosis is the preferred procedure for slow tran-
sit constipation but the results are unpredictable.
Complications include intermittent small bowel obstruc -
tion (60%), further surgery (30%), constipation (25%), diar-
rhoea (25%) and incontinence (10%). Patients need to be 
carefully selected for surgery and psychological evaluation 
may be of benefit. An ileostomy may be required in some 
cases.
Obstructed defaecation may be amenable to surgical treat-
ment if there is evidence of rectal intussusception or a sizeable 
rectocele. These can be corrected by a ventral mesh rectopexy 
and repair (transrectal or transvaginal), respectively. If there 
is coexisting evidence of impaired pelvic floor relaxation, the 
results of surgical treatment tend to be disappointing.
Irritable bowel syndrome
The term irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) covers a range of 
symptoms with a functional basis. Clinical features are vari-
able but abdominal discomfort, bloating, irregularity of bowel 
habit and passage of mucus are common. By definition, the 
symptoms of pain have to have been present for at least 3 days 
per month for at least the 3 previous months in the 6-month 
period prior to diagnosis (Rome criteria). IBS is common 
and symptoms have been said to occur in up to 20% of the  
population.
Colonic investigations are typically performed to rule out 
organic disease (colonoscopy , barium enema or CT virtual 
colonoscopy) but are, by definition, normal.
Treatment of IBS is difficult. Many patients benefit from 
reassurance and symptomatic treatment; dietary modifica-
tions, including fibre for constipation and avoidance of fer -
mentable carbohydrates, reduction of caffeine and nicotine 
intake, may be of value. Antidiarrhoeals and antispasmodic 
agents are commonly prescribed, but the evidence of benefit 
is poor. There is some evidence of benefit for low-dose tri-
cyclic antidepressants but patients are often reluctant to use 
them. Psychological treatments, including hypnotherapy and 
cognitive behavioural therapy, may be beneficial. Surgery is 
contraindicated.
FURTHER READING
Herold A, Lehur P-A, Matzel KE, O’Connell PR (eds). European manual 
of medicine: coloproctology, 2nd edn. New York: Springer, 2017.
Phillips RKS, Clark S Colorectal surgery: a companion to specialist surgical 
practice, 4th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, 2013.
Figure 70.26 Whole-gut transit studied using radiopaque markers. 
More than 80% should have passed by day 5, demonstrating delayed 
transit here (courtesy of Dr D Nolan, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 
UK).
11_70-B&L27_Pt11_Ch70.indd   1279 25/10/2017   09:59Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The pathophysiology of dynamic and adynamic 
intestinal obstruction
 • The cardinal features on history and examination
 • The causes of small and large bowel obstruction
 • The indications for surgery and other treatment options 
in bowel obstruction
Intestinal obstruction
71
CLASSIFICATION
Intestinal obstruction may be classified into two types:
 ● Dynamic, in which peristalsis is working against a 
mechanical obstruction. It may occur in an acute or a 
chronic form (Figure 71.1).
 ● Adynamic, in which there is no mechanical obstruction; 
peristalsis is absent or inadequate (e.g. paralytic ileus or 
pseudo-obstruction).
Summary box 71.1
Causes of intestinal obstruction
Dynamic
●● Intraluminal
Faecal impaction
Foreign bodies
Bezoars
Gallstones
●● Intramural
Stricture
Malignancy
Intussusception
Volvulus
●● Extramural
Bands/adhesions
Hernia
Adynamic
●● Paralytic ileus
●● Pseudo-obstruction
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Irrespective of aetiology or acuteness of onset, in dynamic 
(mechanical) obstruction the bowel proximal to the obstruc-
tion dilates and the bowel below the obstruction exhibits 
nor mal peristalsis and absorption until it becomes empty and 
collapses. Initially, proximal peristalsis is increased in an attempt 
to overcome the obstruction. If the obstruction is not relieved, 
the bowel continues to dilate; ultimately there is a reduction 
in peristaltic strength, resulting in flaccidity and paralysis.
The distension proximal to an obstruction is caused by 
two factors:
 ● Gas: there is a significant overgrowth of both aerobic 
and anaerobic organisms, resulting in considerable gas 
Adhesions
40%
Miscellaneous
5%
Pseudo-
obstruction
5%
Faecal
impaction
8%
Carcinoma
15%
In/f_lammatory
15%
Obstructed
hernia
12%
Figure 71.1  Pie chart showing the common causes of intestinal 
obstruction and their relative frequencies.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1280 25/10/2017   10:00Strangulation 1281
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
 production. Following the reabsorption of oxygen and car-
bon dioxide, the majority is made up of nitrogen (90%) 
and hydrogen sulphide.
 ● Fluid: this is made up of the various digestive juices. 
(saliva 500 mL, bile 500 mL, pancreatic secretions 500 mL, 
gastric secretions 1 litre – all per 24 hours). This accumu-
lates in the gut lumen as absorption by the obstucted gut 
is retarded. Dehydration and electrolyte loss are therefore 
due to:
 ● reduced oral intake;
 ● defective intestinal absorption;
 ● losses as a result of vomiting;
 ● sequestration in the bowel lumen;
 ● transudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity.
STRANGULATION
It is important to appreciate that the consequences of intes -
tinal obstruction are not immediately life-threatening unless 
there is superimposed strangulation. When strangulation 
occurs, the blood supply is compromised and the bowel 
becomes ischaemic.
secondary to sepsis and obstruction proximal to the obstruc -
tion can result in significant dehydration. When bowel 
involvement is extensive circulatory failure is common.
Closed-loop obstruction
This occurs when the bowel is obstructed at both the proxi-
mal and distal points (Figure 71.2). The distension is princi-
pally confined to the closed loop; distension proximal to the 
obstructed segment is not typically marked.
August Gottlieb Richter , 1742–1812, lecturer in surgery, Göttingen, Germany, described this form of hernia in 1777.
Summary box 71.2
Causes of strangulation
Direct pressure on the bowel wall
●● Hernial orifices
●● Adhesions/bands
Interrupted mesenteric blood flow
●● Volvulus
●● Intussusception
Increased intraluminal pressure
●● Closed-loop obstruction
Ischaemia from direct pressure on the bowel wall from a 
constricting band such as a hernial orifice is easy to understand.
Distension of the obstructed segment of bowel results in 
high pressure within the bowel wall. This can happen when 
only part of the bowel wall is obstructed as seen in  Richter’s 
hernias. Venous return is compromised before the arterial 
supply. The resultant increase in capillary pressure leads 
to impaired local perfusion and once the arterial supply is 
impaired, haemorrhagic infarction occurs. As the viability of 
the bowel is compromised, translocation and systemic expo-
sure to anaerobic organisms and endotoxin occurs.
The morbidity and mortality associated with strangulation 
are largely dependent on the duration of the ischaemia and 
its extent. Elderly patients and those with comorbidities are 
more vulnerable to its effects. Although in strangulated exter-
nal hernias the segment involved is often short, any length 
of ischaemic bowel can cause significant systemic effects 
B
A C
Figure 71.2 Distension. Closed-loop obstruction with no proximal 
(A) or distal (C) distension and impending strangulation (B).
X
Figure 71.3  Carcinomatous stricture (X) of the hepatic flexur e: 
closed-loop obstruction.
A classic form of closed-loop obstruction is seen in the 
presence of a malignant stricture of the colon with a compe -
tent ileocaecal valve (present in up to one-third of individu -
als). This can occur with lesions as far distally as the rectum. 
The inability of the distended colon to decompress itself into 
the small bowel results in an increase in luminal pressure, 
which is greatest at the caecum, with subsequent impairment 
of blood flow in the wall. Unrelieved, this results in necrosis 
and perforation (Figure 71.3).
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1281 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1282
SPECIAL TYPES OF 
MECHANICAL INTESTINAL 
OBSTRUCTION
Internal hernia
Internal herniation occurs when a portion of the small intes -
tine becomes entrapped in one of the retroperitoneal fossae or 
in a congenital mesenteric defect.
The following are potential sites of internal herniation 
(all are rare):
 ● the foramen of Winslow;
 ● a defect in the mesentery;
 ● a defect in the transverse mesocolon;
 ● defects in the broad ligament;
 ● congenital or acquired diaphragmatic hernia;
 ● duodenal retroperitoneal fossae – left paraduo denal and 
right duodenojejunal;
 ● caecal/appendiceal retroperitoneal fossae – superior, 
inferior and retrocaecal;
 ● intersigmoid fossa.
Internal herniation in the absence of adhesions is rare and 
a preoperative diagnosis is unusual. The standard treatment 
of an obstructed hernia is to release the constricting agent by 
division. This should not be undertaken in cases of herniation 
involving the foramen of Winslow, mesenteric defects and the 
paraduodenal/duodenojejunal fossae as major blood vessels 
run in the edge of the constriction ring. The distended loop 
in such circumstances must first be decompressed (minimising 
contamination) and then reduced.
Obstruction from enteric strictures
Small bowel strictures usually occur secondary to tuberculosis 
or Crohn’s disease. Malignant strictures associated with lym-
phoma are uncommon, whereas carcinoma and sarcoma are 
rare. Presentation is usually subacute or chronic. Standard 
surgical management consists of resection and anastomosis. 
Resection is important to establish a histological diagnosis as 
this can be uncertain clinically. In Crohn’s disease, stricture-
plasty may be considered in the presence of short multiple 
strictures without active sepsis.
Bolus obstruction
Bolus obstruction in the small bowel may be caused by gall -
stones, food, trichobezoar, phytobezoar, stercoliths and worms.
Gallstones
This type of obstruction tends to occur in the elderly second-
ary to erosion of a large gallstone directly through the gall 
bladder into the duodenum. Classically, there is impaction 
about 60  cm proximal to the ileocaecal valve. The patient 
may have recurrent attacks as the obstruction is frequently 
incomplete or relapsing as a result of a ball-valve effect. The 
characteristic radiological sign of gallstone ileus is Rigler’s 
triad, comprising: small bowel obstruction, pneumobilia and 
an atypical mineral shadow on radiographs of the abdomen. 
The presence of two of these radiological signs has been con-
sidered pathognomic of gallstone ileus and is encountered 
in 40–50% of the cases (note than pneumobilia is common 
following endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP) with sphincterotomy). At laparotomy, the stone is 
milked proximally away from the site of impaction. It may be 
possible to crush the stone within the bowel lumen; if not, the 
intestine is opened at this point and the gallstone removed. 
If the gallstone is faceted, a careful check for other enteric 
stones should be made. The region of the gall bladder should 
not be explored.
Food
Bolus obstruction may occur after partial or total gastrec -
tomy when unchewed articles can pass directly into the small 
bowel. Fruit and vegetables are particularly liable to cause 
obstruction. The management is similar to that for gallstone, 
with intraluminal crushing usually being successful.
Trychobezoars and phytobezoars
These are firm masses of undigested hair ball and fruit/ 
vegetable fibre respectively. The former is due to persistent 
hair chewing or sucking, and may be associated with an under-
lying psychiatric abnormality. Predisposition to phytobezoars 
results from a high fibre intake, inadequate chewing, previous 
gastric surgery, hypochlorhydria and loss of the gastric pump 
mechanism. When possible, the lesion may be kneaded into 
the caecum; otherwise open removal is required. A preopera-
tive diagnosis is difficult even with high-resolution computed 
tomography (CT) scanning.
Stercoliths
These are usually found in the small bowel in association 
with a jejunal diverticulum or ileal stricture. Presentation and 
management are identical to that of gallstones.
Worms
Ascaris lumbricoides may cause low small bowel obstruction, 
particularly in children, the institutionalised and those near 
the tropics (Figure 71.4). An attack may follow the initiation 
of antihelminthic therapy. Debility is frequently out of pro -
portion to that produced by the obstruction. If worms are not 
seen in the stool or vomitus the diagnosis may be indicated 
by eosinophilia or the sight of worms within gas-filled small 
bowel loops on a plain radiograph (Naik). At laparotomy it 
may be possible to knead the tangled mass into the caecum; 
if not it should be removed. Occasionally, worms may cause 
Jacob Benignus Winslow , 1669–1760, Professor of Anatomy, Physic and Surgery, Paris, France.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described regional ileitis in 1932.
Leo George Rigler , 1896–1979, Professor of Radiology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Vinod C Naik , a doctor from Nansari, India.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1282 25/10/2017   10:00Special types of mechanical intestinal obstruction 1283
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
a perforation and peritonitis, especially if the enteric wall is 
weakened by such conditions as ameobiasis.
Obstruction by adhesions and bands
Adhesions
In Western countries where abdominal operations are com -
mon, adhesions and bands are the most common cause of 
intestinal obstruction. The lifetime risk of requiring an 
admission to hospital for adhesional small bowel obstruction 
susequent to abdominal surgery is around 4% and the risk of 
requiring a laparotomy around 2%. Adhesions start to form 
within hours of abdominal surgery. In the early postoperative 
period, the onset of such a mechanical obstruction may be 
difficult to differentiate from paralytic ileus.
The causes of intraperitoneal adhesions are shown in Table 
71.1. Any source of peritoneal irritation results in local fibrin 
production, which produces adhesions between apposed sur -
faces. Early fibrinous adhesions may disappear when the cause 
is removed or they may become vascularised and be replaced 
by mature fibrous tissue.
There are several factors that may limit adhesion forma-
tion.
Laparoscopic technique
Numerous substances have been instilled in the peritoneal 
cavity to prevent adhesion formation, including hyaluroni -
dase, hydrocortisone, silicone, dextran, polyvinylpropylene 
(PVP), chondroitin and streptomycin, anticoagulants, anti -
histamines, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and strep-
tokinase. Currently, no single agent or combination of agents 
has been convincingly shown to be effective.It is hoped that 
with the more widespread use of laparoscopic surgery the inci-
dence of intra-abdominal adhesions will reduce.
Adhesions may be classified into various types by virtue 
of whether they are early (fibrinous) or late (fibrous) or by 
underlying aetiology. From a practical perspective there are 
only two types – ‘easy’ flimsy ones and ‘difficult’ dense ones.
Postoperative adhesions giving rise to intestinal obstruc -
tion usually involve the lower small bowel and almost never 
involve the large bowel.
Bands
Usually only one band is culpable. This may be:
 ● congenital, e.g. obliterated vitellointestinal duct;
 ● a string band following previous bacterial peritonitis;
 ● a portion of greater omentum, usually adherent to the 
parietes.
Acute intussusception
This occurs when one portion of the gut invaginates into an 
immediately adjacent segment; almost invariably, it is the 
proximal into the distal.
The condition is encountered most commonly in chil -
dren, with a peak incidence between 5 and 10 months of age. 
About 90% of cases are idiopathic but an associated upper 
respiratory tract infection or gastroenteritis may precede the 
condition. It is believed that hyperplasia of Peyer’s patches in 
the terminal ileum may be the initiating event. Weaning, loss 
of passively acquired maternal immunity and common viral 
pathogens have all been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
intussusception in infancy.
Children with intussusception associated with a patholog-
ical lead point such as Meckel’s diverticulum, polyp, dupli -
cation, Henoch–Schönlein purpura or appendix are usually 
older than those with idiopathic disease. After the age of 
Figure 71.4 Obstruction of the small intestine due to Ascaris lumbri-
coides (courtesy of Asal Y Izzidien, Nenavah, Iraq).
TABLE 71.1 The common causes of intra-abdominal 
adhesions.
Acute inflammation Sites of anastomoses, 
reperitonealisation of raw 
areas, trauma, ischaemia
Foreign material Talc, starch, gauze, silk
Infection Peritonitis, tuberculosis
Chronic inflammatory conditions Crohn’s disease
Radiation enteritis
Summary box 71.3
Prevention of adhesions
Factors that may limit adhesion formation include:
●● Good surgical technique
●● Washing of the peritoneal cavity with saline to remove clots
●● Minimising contact with gauze
●● Covering anastomosis and raw peritoneal surfaces
Johann Conrad Peyer , 1653–1712, Professor of Logic, Rhetoric and Medicine, Schaffhausen, Switzerland, described the lymph follicles in the intestine in 1677.
Johann Friedrich Meckel, (The Younger) , 1781–1833, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany, described the diverticulum in 1809.
Eduard Heinrich Henoch , 1820–1910, Professor of Diseases of Children, Berlin, Germany, described this form of purpura in 1868.
Johann Lucas Schönlein , 1793–1864, Professor of Medicine, Berlin, Germany, gave his account of this disease in 1837.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1283 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1284
2 years, a pathological lead point is found in at least one-third 
of affected children. Adult cases are invariably associated 
with a lead point, which is usually a polyp (e.g. Peutz–Jeghers 
syndrome), a submucosal lipoma or other tumour.
Pathology
An intussusception is composed of three parts (Figure 71.5):
 ● the entering or inner tube (intussusceptum);
 ● the returning or middle tube;
 ● the sheath or outer tube (intussuscipiens).
The part that advances is the apex, the mass is the intus -
susception and the neck is the junction of the entering layer 
with the mass. Volvulus
A volvulus is a twisting or axial rotation of a portion of bowel 
about its mesentery. The rotation causes obstruction to the 
lumen (>180° torsion) and if tight enough also causes vascu -
lar occlusion in the mesentery (>360° torsion). Bacterial fer -
mentation adds to the distension and increasing intraluminal 
pressure impairs capillary perfusion. Mesenteric veins become 
obstructed as a result of the mechanical twisting and throm -
bosis results and contributes to the ischaemia.
Volvuli may be primary or secondary. The primary form 
occurs secondary to congenital malrotation of the gut, abnor-
mal mesenteric attachments or congenital bands. Examples 
include volvulus neonatorum, caecal volvulus and sigmoid 
volvulus. A secondary volvulus, which is the more common 
variety, is due to rotation of a segment of bowel around an 
acquired adhesion or stoma.
John Law Augustine Peutz , 1886–1968, Chief Specialist for Internal Medicine, St. John’s Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands.
Harold Joseph Jeghers , 1904–1990, Professor of Internal Medicine, New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, Jersey City, NJ, USA.
Intussuscipiens
Intussusceptum
Apex Neck
Intussusception
Figure 71.5 Mechanism and nomenclature of intussusception.
Summary box 71.4
Intussusception
●● Most common in children
●● Adult cases are secondary to intestinal pathology, e.g. polyp, 
Meckel’s diverticulum
●● Ileocolic is the commonest variety
●● Can lead to an ischaemic segment
●● Radiological reduction is indicated in most paediatric cases
●● Adults require surgery
TABLE 71.2 Types of intussusception in children (after 
RE Gross) (n = 702).
Percentage of series
Ileoileal 5
Ileocolic 77
Ileoileocolic 12
Colocolic 2
Multiple 1
Retrograde 0.2
Others 2.8
Intussusception may be anatomically defined according 
to the site and extent of invagination (Table 71.2). In most 
children, the intussusception is ileocolic. In adults, colocolic 
intussusception is more common. The degree of ischaemia 
is dependent on the tightness of the invagination, which is 
usually greatest as it passes through the ileocaecal valve. On 
CT scanning the target sign may be evident and if present is 
pathognomonic. It is worth noting that, rarely, intussuception 
has been noted on CT scanning in asymptomatic adults.
Summary box 71.5
Volvulus
●● May involve the small intestine, caecum or sigmoid colon; 
neonatal midgut volvulus secondary to midgut malrotation is 
life-threatening
●● The commonest spontaneous type in adults is sigmoid
●● Sigmoid volvulus can be relieved by decompression per anum
●● Surgery is required to prevent or relieve ischaemia
Volvulus neonatorum
This occurs secondary to intestinal malrotation (see Chapter 
9) and is potentially catastrophic.
Sigmoid volvulus
This is uncommon in Europe and the USA but more com -
mon in Eastern Europe and Africa. Indeed, it is the most 
common cause of large bowel obstruction in the indigenous 
black African population. Rotation nearly always occurs in 
the anticlockwise direction. The predisposing clinical fea-
tures are summarised in Figure 71.6. Other predisposing 
factors include a high-residue diet and constipation. In 
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1284 25/10/2017   10:00Clinical features of int estinal obstruction 1285
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
western populations, the condition is seen most often in 
elderly patients with chronic constipation; comorbidities are 
common and chronic psychotropic drug use is associated with 
this condition. Younger patients present earlier and the prog-
nosis is inversely related to the duration of symptoms. Presen-
tation can be classified as:
 ● Fulminant: sudden onset, severe pain, early vomiting, rap-
idly deteriorating clinical course;
 ● Indolent: insidious onset, slow progressive course, less 
pain, late vomiting.
Compound volvulus
This is a rare condition also known as ileosigmoid knotting. 
The long pelvic mesocolon allows the ileum to twist around 
the sigmoid colon, resulting in gangrene of either or both seg-
ments of bowel. The patient presents with acute intestinal 
obstruction, but distension is comparatively mild. Plain radi-
ography reveals distended ileal loops in a distended sigmoid 
colon. At operation, decompression, resection and anastomo-
sis are required.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF 
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
Dynamic obstruction
The diagnosis of dynamic intestinal obstruction is based on 
the classic quartet of pain, distension, vomiting and absolute 
constipation. Obstruction may be classified clinically into two 
types:
 ● small bowel obstruction – high or low;
 ● large bowel obstruction.
The nature of the presentation will also be influenced by 
whether the obstruction is:
 ● complete;
 ● incomplete.
A complete small bowel obstruction has all the cardinal 
features. In cases of complete large bowel obstruction there 
is often a surprising lack of preceeding symptoms. Both small 
and large bowel obstruction can present with more chronic 
symptoms in which the symptoms are intermittent or the 
obstruction is incomplete. Incomplete obstruction is also 
referred to as partial or subacute.
Band of adhesions
(peridiverticulitis)
Overloaded
pelvic colon
Long pelvic
mesocolon
Narrow attachment
of pelvic mesocolon
Figure 71.6 Causes predisposing to volvulus of the sigmoid colon. 
Idiopathic megacolon usually precedes the volvulus in African people.
Summary box 71.6
Features of obstruction
●● In high small bowel obstruction, vomiting occurs early, is 
profuse and causes rapid dehydration. Distension is minimal 
with little evidence of dilated small bowel loops on abdominal 
radiography
●● In low small bowel obstruction, pain is predominant with 
central distension. Vomiting is delayed. Multiple dilated small 
bowel loops are seen on radiography
●● In large bowel obstruction, distension is early and 
pronounced. Pain is less severe and vomiting and dehydration 
are later features. The colon proximal to the obstruction is 
distended on abdominal radiography. The small bowel will be 
dilated if the ileocaecal valve is incompetent.
Summary box 71.7
Cardinal clinical features of acute obstruction
●● Abdominal pain
●● Distension
●● Vomiting
●● Absolute constipation
Presentation will be further influenced by whether the 
obstruction is:
 ● simple – in which the blood supply is intact;
 ● strangulating/strangulated – in which there is interference 
to blood flow.
The common causes of intestinal obstruction in Western 
countries and their relative frequencies are shown in Figure 
71.1. The underlying mechanisms are shown in Summary 
box 71.2.
The clinical features vary according to:
 ● the location of the obstruction;
 ● the duration of the obstruction;
 ● the underlying pathology;
 ● the presence or absence of intestinal ischaemia.
Late manifestations of intestinal obstruction that may be 
encountered include dehydration, oliguria, hypovolaemic 
shock, pyrexia, septicaemia, respiratory embarrassment and 
peritonism. In all cases of suspected intestinal obstruction, 
the hernial orifices must be examined.
Pain
Pain is the first symptom encountered; it occurs suddenly and 
is usually severe. It is colicky in nature and usually centred on 
the umbilicus (small bowel) or lower abdomen (large bowel). 
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1285 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1286
The pain coincides with increased peristaltic activity. W ith 
increasing distension, the colicky pain is replaced by a mild 
and more constant diffuse pain. If there is no ischaemia and 
the obstruction persists over several days, pain reduces and 
can disappear.
The development of severe pain is suggestive of the pres -
ence of strangulation, especially if that severe pain is contin -
uous. Beware the patient whose pain is not controlled with 
intravenous opiates. Colicky pain may not be a significant 
feature in postoperative simple mechanical obstruction and 
pain does not usually occur in paralytic ileus.
Vomiting
The more distal the obstruction, the longer the interval 
between the onset of symptoms and the appearance of nausea 
and vomiting. As obstruction progresses the character of the 
vomitus alters from digested food to faeculent material, as a 
result of the presence of enteric bacterial overgrowth.
Distension
In the small bowel the degree of distension is dependent on the 
site of the obstruction and is greater the more distal the lesion. 
Visible peristalsis may be present (Figure 71.7). This can some-
times be provoked by ‘flicking’ the abdominal wall. Distension 
is a later feature in colonic obstruction and may be minimal or 
absent in the presence of mesenteric vascular occlusion.
Constipation
This may be classified as absolute (i.e. neither faeces nor fla -
tus is passed) or relative (where only flatus is passed). Abso-
lute constipation is a cardinal feature of complete intestinal 
obstruction. Some patients may pass flatus or faeces after the 
onset of obstruction as a result of the evacuation of the dis -
tal bowel contents. The administration of enemas should be 
avoided in cases of suspected obstruction. This merely stim-
ulates evacuation of bowel contents distal to the obstruction 
and confuses the clinical picture.
The rule that absolute constipation is present in intestinal 
obstruction does not apply in:
 ● Richter’s hernia;
 ● gallstone ileus;
 ● mesenteric vascular occlusion;
 ● functional obstruction associated with pelvic abscess;
 ● all cases of partial obstruction (in which diarrhoea may 
occur).
Other manifestations
Dehydration
Dehydration is seen most commonly in small bowel obstruc-
tion because of repeated vomiting and fluid sequestration. It 
results in dry skin and tongue, poor venous filling and sunken 
eyes with oliguria. The blood urea level and haematocrit rise, 
giving a secondary polycythaemia.
Hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemia is not a common feature in simple mechani -
cal obstruction. An increase in serum potassium, amylase or 
lactate dehydrogenase may be associated with the presence of 
strangulation, as may leucocytosis or leucopenia.
Pyrexia
Pyrexia in the presence of obstruction is rare and may indicate:
 ● the onset of ischaemia;
 ● intestinal perforation;
 ● inflammation or abscess associated with the obstructing 
disease.
Hypothermia indicates septicaemic shock or neglected 
cases of long duration.
Abdominal tenderness
Localised tenderness indicates impending or established isch-
aemia. The development of peritonism or peritonitis indicates 
overt infarction and/or perforation. In cases of large bowel 
obstruction, it is important to elicit these findings in the right 
iliac fossa as the caecum is most vulnerable to ischaemia.
Bowel sounds
High-pitched bowel sounds are present in the vast majority of 
patients with intestinal obstruction. Normal bowel sounds are 
of negative predictive value. Bowel sounds may be scanty or 
absent if the obstruction is longstanding and the small bowel 
has become inactive.
Clinical features of strangulation
It is vital to distinguish strangulating from non-strangulating 
intestinal obstruction because the former is a surgical emer -
gency. The diagnosis is almost entirely clinical.
Figure 71.7 Visible peristalsis. Intestinal obstruction due to a stran-
gulated right femoral hernia, to which the arrow points.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1286 25/10/2017   10:00Clinical features of int estinal obstruction 1287
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
In addition to the features above, it should be noted that:
 ● The presence of shock suggests underlying ischaemia, 
especially if the shock is resistant to simple fluid resusci -
tation.
 ● In impending or established strangulation, pain is never 
completely absent.
 ● The presence and character of any local tenderness are of 
great significance and, however mild, tenderness requires 
frequent reassessment.
 ● Generalised tenderness and the presence of rigidity indi-
cate the need for early laparotomy.
 ● In cases of intestinal obstruction in which pain persists 
despite conservative management, even in the absence of 
the above signs, strangulation should be presumed.
 ● When strangulation occurs in an external hernia, the lump 
is tense, tender and irreducible and there is no expansile 
cough impulse. Skin changes with erythema or purplish 
discolouration are associated with underlying ischaemia 
(Figures 71.8 and 71.9).
Clinical features of intussusception
The classical presentation of intussusception is with episodes 
of screaming and drawing up of the legs in a previously well 
male infant. The attacks last for a few minutes and recur 
repeatedly. During attacks the child appears pale; between 
episodes he may be listless. Vomiting may or may not occur 
at the outset but becomes conspicuous and bile-stained with 
time. Initially, the passage of stool may be normal, whereas, 
later, blood and mucus are evacuated – the ‘redcurrant jelly’ 
stool.
Whenever possible, examination should be undertaken 
between episodes of colic, without disturbing the child. Clas-
sically, the abdomen is not initially distended; a lump that 
hardens on palpation may be discerned but this is present in 
only 60% of cases (Figure 71.10). There may be an associ -
ated feeling of emptiness in the right iliac fossa (the sign of 
Dance). On rectal examination, blood-stained mucus may be 
found on the finger. Occasionally, in extensive ileocolic or 
colocolic intussusception, the apex may be palpable or even 
protrude from the anus.
Unrelieved, progressive dehydration and abdominal dis-
tension from small bowel obstruction will occur, followed by 
peritonitis secondary to gangrene. Rarely, natural cure may 
occur as a result of sloughing of the intussusception.
Summary box 71.8
Clinical features of strangulation
●● Constant pain, severe pain
●● Tenderness with rigidity and peritonism
●● Shock
Figure 71.8 Skin discolouration over a strangulated incisional hernia.
Henry Hamilton Bailey , 1894–1961, surgeon, The Royal Northern Hospital, London, UK.
Jean Baptiste Hippolyte Dance , 1797–1832, physician, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
Figure 71.9  Ischaemic small and large bowel in a strangulated 
incisional hernia.
Sausage-shaped lump.
Concavity towards the
umbilicus
Figure 71.10 The physical signs as recorded by Hamilton Bailey in a 
typical case of intussusception in an infant.
Differential diagnosis
ACUTE GASTROENTERITIS
Although abdominal pain and vomiting are common in acute 
gastroenteritis, with occasional blood and mucus in the stool, 
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1287 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1288
diarrhoea is a leading symptom and faecal matter or bile is 
always present in the stool.
HENOCH–SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA
Henoch–Schönlein purpura is associated with a characteristic 
rash and abdominal pain; intussusception may occur.
RECTAL PROLAPSE
This may be easily differentiated by the fact that the project-
ing mucosa can be felt in continuity with the perianal skin 
whereas in intussusception the finger may pass indefinitely 
into the depths of a sulcus.
Clinical features of volvulus
Volvulus of the small intestine
This may be primary or secondary and usually occurs in the 
lower ileum. It may occur spontaneously in African people, 
particularly following the consumption of a large volume of 
vegetable matter, whereas in western countries it is usually 
secondary to adhesions passing to the parietes or female 
pelvic organs.
Caecal volvulus
This may occur as part of volvulus neonatorum or de novo 
and is usually a clockwise twist. It is more common in females 
in the 4th and 5th decades and usually presents acutely with 
the classic features of obstruction. Ischaemia is common. 
At first the obstruction may be partial, with the passage of 
flatus and faeces. In 25% of cases, examination may reveal a 
palpable tympanic swelling in the midline or left side of the 
abdomen. The volvulus typically results in the caecum lying 
in the left upper quadrant. The diagnosis is not usually made 
preoperatively.
Sigmoid volvulus
The symptoms are of large bowel obstruction. Presenta-
tion varies in severity and acuteness, with younger patients 
appearing to develop the more acute form. Abdominal disten-
sion is an early and progressive sign, which may be associated 
with hiccough and retching. Constipation is absolute. In the 
elderly, a more chronic form may be seen. In some patients 
the grossly distended torted left colon is visible through the 
abdominal wall
IMAGING
Erect abdominal films are no longer routinely obtained and 
the radiological diagnosis is based on a supine abdominal film 
(Figure 71.11). An erect film may subsequently be requested 
when further doubt exists.
When distended with gas, the jejunum, ileum, caecum 
and remaining colon have a characteristic appearance in 
adults and older children that allows them to be distinguished 
radiologically.
In intestinal obstruction, fluid levels appear later than gas 
shadows as it takes time for gas and fluid to separate (Figure 
71.12). These are most prominent on an erect film. In adults, 
two inconstant fluid levels – one at the duodenal cap and the 
other in the terminal ileum – may be regarded as normal. In 
infants (less than 1 year old), a few fluid levels in the small 
bowel may be physiological. In this age group it is difficult to 
distinguish large from small bowel in the presence of obstruc-
tion, because the characteristic features seen in adults are not 
present or are unreliable.
During the obstructive process, fluid levels become 
more conspicuous and more numerous when paralysis has 
occurred. When fluid levels are pronounced, the obstruction 
is advanced. In the small bowel, the number of fluid levels is 
directly proportional to the degree of obstruction and to its 
site, the number increasing the more distal the lesion.
Figure 71.11 Gas-filled small bowel loop; patient supine.
Summary box 71.9
Radiological features of obstruction (on plain x-ray)
●● The obstructed small bowel is characterised by straight 
segments that are generally central and lie transversely. No/
minimal gas is seen in the colon
●● The jejunum is characterised by its valvulae conniventes, 
which completely pass across the width of the bowel and are 
regularly spaced, giving a ‘concertina’ or ladder effect
●● Ileum – the distal ileum has been piquantly described by 
Wangensteen as featureless
●● Caecum – a distended caecum is shown by a rounded gas 
shadow in the right iliac fossa
●● Large bowel, except for the caecum, shows haustral folds, 
which, unlike valvulae conniventes, are spaced irregularly, do 
not cross the whole diameter of the bowel and do not have 
indentations placed opposite one another
Owen Harding Wangensteen , 1898–1981, Professor of Surgery, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1288 25/10/2017   10:00Imaging 1289
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
In patients without evidence of strangulation there is a 
role for other imaging modalities. A recent systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the diagnostic and therapeutic role of 
50–100mL water-soluble contrast agent in adhesive small 
bowel obstruction included 14 prospective studies. The 
appearance of contrast in the colon 4–24 hours after admin -
istration had a sensitivity of 96% and a specificity of 98% in 
predicting resolution of small bowel obstruction. If contrast 
does not reach the colon, sugery is required in about 90% of 
patients. Administration of a water-soluble agent was also 
effective in reducing the need for surgey (OR 0.62; p = 0.007) 
and shortening hospital stay.
In contrast, low colonic obstruction does not commonly 
give rise to small bowel fluid levels unless advanced, whereas 
high colonic obstruction may do so in the presence of an 
incompetent ileocaecal valve. Colonic obstruction is usu-
ally associated with a large amount of gas in the caecum. A 
limited water-soluble enema should be undertaken to differ -
entiate large bowel obstruction from pseudo-obstruction. A 
barium follow-through is contraindicated in the presence of 
acute obstruction and may be life-threatening.
The CT scan is now used very widely to investigate all 
forms of intestinal obstruction. It is highly accurate and its 
only limitations are in diagnosing ischaemia. T wo CT scan 
findings may be used in clinical practice when looking for 
intestinal ischaemia: reduced enhanced bowel wall is highly 
predictive of ischaemia and absence of mesenteric fluid is a 
reliable finding to rule out strangulation. It is important to 
remember that even with the best imaging techniques, the 
diagnosis of strangulation remains a clinical one.
Key points:
 ● Reduced bowel wall enhancement on CT increases the 
probability of strangulation 11-fold.
 ● Absence of mesenteric fluid on CT decreases the probabil-
ity of strangulation 6-fold.
 ● The clinical reliability of other CT signs is doubtful for 
predicting strangulation.
Impacted foreign bodies may be seen on abdominal radio-
graphs. It is noteworthy that gas-filled loops and fluid levels in 
the small and large bowel can also be seen in established par-
alytic ileus and pseudo-obstruction. The former can, however, 
normally be distinguished on clinical grounds whereas the 
latter can be confirmed radiologically. Fluid levels may also 
be seen in nonobstructing conditions such as gastroenteritis, 
acute pancreatitis and intra-abdominal sepsis.
Imaging in intussusception
A plain abdominal field usually reveals evidence of small or 
large bowel obstruction with an absent caecal gas shadow in 
ileocolic cases. A soft tissue opacity is often visible in chil -
dren. A barium enema may be used to diagnose the presence 
of an ileocolic intussusception (the claw sign) (Figure 71.13) 
but does not demonstrate small bowel intussusception. An 
abdominal ultrasound scan has a high diagnostic sensitivity 
in children, demonstrating the typical doughnut appearance 
of concentric rings in transverse section. CT scanning is cur-
rently considered the most sensitive radiological method to 
confirm intussusception, with a reported diagnostic accuracy 
of 58–100%. The characteristic features of CT scan include 
a ‘target’- or ‘sausage’- shaped soft-tissue mass with a layer -
ing effect; mesenteric vessels within the bowel lumen are also 
typical.
Imaging in volvulus
 ● In caecal volvulus , radiological abnormalities are iden -
tifiable in nearly all patients, but are often nonspecific, 
with caecal dilatation (98–100%), single air-fluid level 
Figure 71.12 Fluid levels with gas above; ‘stepladder pattern’. Ileal 
obstruction by adhesions; patient erect.
Figure 71.13 ‘Claw’ sign of iliac intussusception. The barium in the 
intussusception is seen as a claw ar ound a negative shadow of the 
intussusception (courtesy of RS Naik, Durg, India).
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1289 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1290
(72–88%), small bowel dilatation (42–55%) and absence 
of gas in distal colon (82–91%) reported as the most 
common abnormalities. A barium enema may be used 
to confirm the diagnosis if there are no concerns about 
ischaemia, with an absence of barium in the caecum and 
a bird beak deformity. CT scanning is replacing barium 
enema as the imaging of choice in these less urgent cases.
 ● In sigmoid volvulus, a plain radiograph shows massive 
colonic distension. The classic appearance is of a dilated 
loop of bowel; the two limbs are seen running diagonally 
across the abdomen from right to left, with two fluid levels 
seen, one within each loop of bowel (if an erect film is 
taken).
 ● In volvulus neonatorium , the abdominal radiograph 
shows a variable appearance. Initially, it may appear nor -
mal or show evidence of duodenal obstruction but, as the 
intestinal strangulation progresses, the abdomen becomes 
relatively gasless.
TREATMENT OF ACUTE 
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
There are three main measures used to treat acute intestinal 
obstruction.
The first two steps are always necessary before attempting 
the surgical relief of obstruction and are the mainstay of post-
operative management.
Summary box 71.10
Treatment of acute intestinal obstruction
●● Gastrointestinal drainage via a nasogastric tube
●● Fluid and electrolyte replacement
●● Relief of obstruction
●● Surgical treatment is necessary for most cases of intestinal 
obstruction but should be delayed until resuscitation is 
complete, provided there is no sign of strangulation or 
evidence of closed-loop obstruction
Summary box 71.11
Principles of surgical intervention for obstruction
Management of:
●● The segment at the site of obstruction
●● The distended proximal bowel
●● The underlying cause of obstruction
Supportive management
Nasogastric decompression is achieved by the passage of 
a nonvented (Ryle) or vented (Salem) tube. The tubes are 
normally placed on free drainage with 4-hourly aspiration but 
may be placed on continuous or intermittent suction. As well 
as facilitating decompression proximal to the obstruction, 
they are essential to reduce the risk of subsequent aspiration 
during induction of anaesthesia and post-extubation.
The basic biochemical abnormality in intestinal obstruc -
tion is sodium and water loss, and therefore the appropriate 
replacement is Hartmann’s solution or normal saline. The 
volume required varies and should be determined by clinical 
haematological and biochemical criteria.
Antibiotics are not mandatory but many clinicians ini -
tiate broad-spectrum antibiotics early in therapy because of 
bacterial overgrowth. Antibiotic therapy is mandatory for all 
patients undergoing surgery for intestinal obstruction.
Surgical treatment
The timing of surgical intervention is dependent on the clin-
ical picture. There are several indications for early surgical 
intervention.
John Alfred Ryle , 1889–1950, Regius Professor of Physic, The University of Cambridge, and later Professor of Social Medicine, The University of Oxford, UK, 
introduced the Ryle’s tube in 1921.
Henri Albert Charles Antoine Hartmann , 1860–1952, Professor of Clinical Surgery, The Faculty of Medicine, The University of Paris, France.
Summary box 71.12
Indications for early surgical intervention
●● Obstructed external hernia
●● Clinical features suspicious of intestinal strangulation
●● Obstruction in a ‘virgin’ abdomen
The classic clinical advice that ‘the sun should not both 
rise and set’ on a case of unrelieved acute intestinal obstruc -
tion was based on the concern that intestinal ischaemia would 
develop while the patient was waiting for surgery. If there is 
complete obstruction, but no evidence of intestinal ischaemia, 
it is reasonable to defer surgery until the patient has been ade-
quately resuscitated. Where obstruction is likely to be second-
ary to adhesions, conservative management may be continued 
for up to 72 hours in the hope of spontaneous resolution.
If the site of obstruction is unknown, adequate exposure is 
best achieved by a midline incision. Assessment is directed to:
 ● the site of the obstruction;
 ● the nature of the obstruction;
 ● the viability of the gut.
In cases of small bowel obstruction, the first manoeuvre 
is to deliver the distended small bowel into the wound. This 
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1290 25/10/2017   10:00Treatment of acute intestinal obstruction 1291
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
permits access to the site of obstruction. The small bowel 
should be covered with moist swabs and the weight of the 
fluid-filled bowel supported such that the blood supply to the 
mesentery is not impaired.
Operative decompression should be performed whenever 
possible. This reduces pressure on the abdominal wound, 
reducing pain and improving diaphragmatic movement. The 
simplest and safest method is to insert a large-bore orogastric 
tube and to milk the small bowel contents in a retrograde 
manner to the stomach for aspiration. All volumes of fluid 
removed should be accurately measured and appropriately 
replaced. It is important to ensure that the stomach is empty at 
the end of the procedure to prevent postoperative aspiration.
Rarely, decompression using Savage’s decompressor 
within a seromuscular purse-string suture may be required. Its 
benefits should be balanced against the potential risk of sep -
tic complications from spillage and the risk of leakage from 
the suture line postoperatively. The type of surgical procedure 
required will depend upon the cause of obstruction – divi -
sion of adhesions (enterolysis), excision, bypass or proximal 
decompression.
Following relief of obstruction, the viability of the 
involved bowel should be carefully assessed (Table 71.3). 
Although frankly infarcted bowel is obvious, the viability 
status in many cases may be difficult to discern. If in doubt, 
the bowel should be wrapped in hot packs for 10 minutes with 
increased oxygenation and then reassessed. The state of the 
mesenteric vessels and pulsation in adjacent arcades should 
be sought. Viability is also confirmed by colour, sheen and 
peristalsis. If, at the end of this period, there is still uncertainty 
about gut viability, the gut should be resected if this does 
not result in short bowel syndrome. If the patient is septic 
such that they require inotropic therapy or would require 
postoperative level 3 intensive care treatment following 
resection, consideration should be given to raising both ends 
of the bowel as stomas. This is not only safe but also allows 
regular assessment of the bowel.
Intestinal ischaemia/reperfusion injury has been described 
following reperfusion of ischaemic bowel with remote lung 
injury resulting from the release of inflammatory mediators. 
This should be borne in mind when dealing with ischaemic 
bowel. For example if there is a volvulus with established 
infarction, detorsion should be avoided until the affected 
mesentery has been clamped and thus reperfusion injury pre -
vented. When no resection has been undertaken or there are 
multiple ischaemic areas (mesenteric vascular occlusion), a 
second-look laparotomy at 24–48 hours may be required.
Special attention should always be paid to the sites of con-
striction at each end of an obstructed segment. If of doubtful 
viability they should be infolded by the use of a seromuscular 
suture and can also be covered with omentum (Figures 71.14 
and 71.15).
The surgical management of massive infarction is depen-
dent on the patient’s overall prognostic criteria. In the elderly, 
infarction of the small bowel from the duodenojejunal flexure 
to the right colon may be considered incurable, whereas in 
the young, with the potential for long-term intravenous ali -
mentation and small bowel transplantation, a policy of exci -
sion may be justified.
Whenever the small bowel is resected, the exact site of 
resection, the length of the resected segment and that of the 
residual bowel should be recorded.
As laparoscopic surgery is now so common, it is import -
ant to note that small bowel obstruction and strangulation 
occur in relation to port site hernias. The risk of port site 
herniation is related to older age, higher body mass, trocar 
diameter and extension of the port site for tissue extraction. 
For laparoscopic cholecystectomy, the hernia rate is reported 
to be around 2%. Obstruction and strangulation have even 
been reported through 5-mm port sites. Complications from 
these hernias may present in the early postoperative period 
and as a Richter’s hernia. They can be easily overlooked and 
careful examination of port sites in patients with small bowel 
obstruction is essential.
Paul Thwaites Savage , formerly surgeon, The Whittington Hospital, London, UK.
TABLE 71.3 Differentiation between viable and non-viable 
intestine.
Viable Non-viable
Circulation Dark colour 
becomes lighter
Visible pulsation in 
mesenteric arteries
Dark colour remains
No detectable 
pulsation
General appearance Shiny Dull and lustreless
Intestinal 
musculature
Firm Flabby, thin and 
friable
Peristalsis may be 
observed
No peristalsis
Figure 71.14 Band adhesion causing closed-loop obstruction.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1291 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1292
Treatment of adhesions
Initial management is based on intravenous rehydration and 
nasogastric decompression; occasionally, this treatment is 
curative. Although an initial conservative regimen is consid-
ered appropriate, regular assessment is mandatory to ensure 
that strangulation does not occur. Conservative treatment 
should not usually be prolonged beyond 72 hours.
When laparotomy is required, although multiple adhe-
sions may be found, only one may be causative. If there is 
absolute certainty that this is the cause of the obstruction, 
this should be divided and the remaining adhesions can be 
left in situ unless severe angulation is present. Division of 
these adhesions will only cause further adhesion formation.
When obstruction is caused by an area of multiple adhe-
sions, the adhesions should be freed by sharp dissection from 
the duodenojejunal junction to the caecum. Following the 
release of band obstruction, the constriction sites that have 
suffered direct compression should be carefully assessed and, 
if they show residual colour changes, invaginated with a sero-
muscular suture (Figure 71.15).
Laparoscopic adhesiolysis may be considered in highly 
selected cases of small bowel obstruction. This is classed as an 
advanced laparoscopic procedure and should only be under -
taken by surgeons with advanced laparoscopic skills.
Figure 71.15 (a, b) Wall injury r esulting from band compression, 
oversewn with an absorbable seromuscular suture.
(a)
(b)
Thomas Benjamin Noble , 1895–1965, surgeon, The Community Hospital, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
Richard V Phillips , surgeon, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
Summary box 71.13
Treatment of adhesive obstruction
●● Initially treat conservatively provided there are no signs of 
strangulation; should rarely continue conservative treatment 
for longer than 72 hours
●● At operation, divide only the causative adhesion(s) and limit 
dissection
●● Repair serosal tears; invaginate (or resect) areas of doubtful 
viability
●● Laparoscopic adhesiolysis in the hands of advanced 
laparoscopic practitioners
Treatment of recurrent intestinal 
obstruction caused by adhesions
Several procedures may be considered in the presence of 
recurrent obstruction including:
 ● repeat adhesiolysis (enterolysis) alone;
 ● Noble’s plication operation;
 ● Child–Phillips transmesenteric plication;
 ● intestinal intubation.
The latter three operations are now very rarely performed 
and can probably be consigned to the history books (they 
have never been required by the author).
Postoperative intestinal obstruction
Differentiation between persistent paralytic ileus and early 
mechanical obstruction may be difficult in the early postop-
erative period. Mechanical obstruction is more likely if the 
patient has regained bowel function postoperatively which 
subsequently stops. Obstruction is usually incomplete and the 
majority settle with continued conservative management. 
Postoperative intra-abdominal sepsis is a potent cause of post-
operative obstruction; CT scanning with oral contrast is of 
particular value in the assessment of the postoperative abdo-
men. Instant gastrografin enemas are also of value.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1292 25/10/2017   10:00Treatment of acute intestinal obstruction 1293
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Treatment of intussusception
In the infant with ileocolic intussusception, after resusci -
tation with intravenous fluids, broad-spectrum antibiotics 
and nasogastric drainage, non-operative reduction can be 
attempted using an air or barium enema. Successful reduction 
can only be accepted if there is free reflux of air or barium into 
the small bowel, together with resolution of symptoms and 
signs in the patient. Non-operative reduction is contraindi-
cated if there are signs of peritonitis or perforation, there is a 
known pathological lead point or in the presence of profound 
shock. In experienced units, more than 70% of intussuscep -
tions can be reduced non-operatively. Strangulated bowel and 
pathological lead points are unlikely to reduce. Perforation of 
the colon during pneumatic or hydrostatic reduction is a rec-
ognised hazard but is rare. Recurrent intussusception occurs 
in up to 10% of patients after non-operative reduction.
Surgery is required when radiological reduction has failed 
or is contraindicated. After resuscitation, a transverse right-
sided abdominal incision provides good access. Reduction is 
achieved by gently compressing the most distal part of the 
intussusception toward its origin (Figure 71.16), making sure 
not to pull. The last part of the reduction is the most dif-
ficult (Figure 71.17). After reduction, the terminal part of 
the small bowel and the appendix will be seen to be bruised 
and oedematous. The viability of the whole bowel should be 
checked carefully. An irreducible intussusception or one com-
plicated by infarction or a pathological lead point requires 
resection and primary anastomosis.
Acute intestinal obstruction of the 
newborn
Neonatal intestinal obstruction has many potential causes. 
Congenital atresia and stenosis are the most common. Intes-
tinal malrotation with midgut volvulus, meconium ileus, 
Hirschprung’s disease, imperforate anus, necrotising enteroco-
litis and an incarcerated inguinal hernia may also be respon -
sible. Many of these conditions are discussed in Chapter 9.
Intestinal atresia
Duodenal atresia and stenosis are the commonest forms of 
intestinal obstruction in the newborn (see Chapter 9). Jejunal 
or ileal atresias are next in frequency whereas colonic atresia is 
rare. The possibility of multiple atresias makes intraoperative 
assessment of the whole small and large bowel mandatory. As 
with all congenital anomalies, associated malformations are 
common and should be excluded.
There are four main types of jejunal/ileal atresia, ranging 
from an obstructing membrane with continuity of the bowel 
wall, through blind-ended segments of bowel separated by a 
fibrous cord or V-shaped mesenteric defect (including the so 
called apple-peel atresia) (Figure 71.18), to multiple atresias 
(‘string of sausages’). The obstructed proximal bowel is at risk 
of perforation, which may happen prenatally causing meco-
nium peritonitis in the fetus.
Small bowel atresias present with intestinal obstruction 
soon after birth. Bilious vomiting is the dominant feature 
in jejunal atresia whereas abdominal distension is more 
Harald Hirschsprung , 1830–1916, physician, The Queen Louise Hospital for Children, Copenhagen, Denmark, described congenital megacolon in 1887.
Contracted
entering
layer
Squeeze
Figure 71.16 Diagram showing the method used to reduce an intus-
susception.
Figure 71.17  Reducing the terminal part of the intussusception 
(after RE Gross).
Figure 71.18 Apple-peel jejunal bowel atresia with obstructed prox-
imal jejunum and collapsed distal ileum coiled round a r emnant ileo-
colic artery (courtesy of MD Stringer, Leeds, UK).
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1293 25/10/2017   10:00CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1294
prominent with ileal atresia. A small amount of pale 
meconium may be passed despite the atresia.
Plain abdominal radiographs show a variable number of 
dilated loops of bowel and fluid levels according to the level 
of obstruction. In a stable infant, a contrast enema may be 
required to clarify the cause of a distal bowel obstruction.
SURGERY
Duodenal atresia is corrected by a duodenoduodenostomy. In 
most cases of jejunal/ileal atresia, the distal end of the dilated 
proximal small bowel is resected and a primary end-to-end 
anastomosis is possible. If the proximal bowel is extremely 
dilated it may need to be tapered to the distal bowel before 
anastomosis. Occasionally, a temporary stoma is required 
before definitive repair.
Meconium ileus
Cystic fibrosis is almost always the underlying cause of this 
condition. Meconium is normally kept fluid by the action of 
pancreatic enzymes. In meconium ileus the terminal ileum 
becomes filled with thick viscid meconium, resulting in pro -
gressive intestinal obstruction. A sterile meconium peritoni -
tis may have occurred in utero.
Visibly dilated loops of bowel are often palpable in the 
newborn with meconium ileus. An abdominal radiograph 
may show a dilated small intestine with mottling. Fluid levels 
are generally not seen. Unlike ileal atresia there is no abrupt 
termination of the gas-filled intestine. A contrast enema 
shows an unused microcolon. As the condition is caused by 
an autosomal recessive genetic defect, a family history may be 
present. Further assessment includes gene mutation analysis 
and, beyond the neonatal period, a sweat test, which shows 
elevated sodium and chloride levels (>70 mmol/L).
Uncomplicated meconium ileus may respond to treatment 
with a hyperosmolar gastrografin enema; this draws fluid into 
the gut lumen and also has detergent properties, which help 
to liquefy the meconium. Infants treated in this way need 
extra intravenous fluids to compensate for fluid shifts. Meco -
nium ileus complicated by intestinal perforation, volvulus or 
atresia, or unresponsive to enemas, demands surgery. Various 
surgical procedures are used including intestinal resection and 
temporary stoma formation, resection and primary anastomo-
sis, and, in uncomplicated cases, enterotomy and irrigation of 
the bowel. The Bishop–Koop operation (Figure 71.19) with 
its irrigating stoma is now only rarely used.
TREATMENT OF ACUTE LARGE 
BOWEL OBSTRUCTION
Large bowel obstruction is usually caused by an underlying 
carcinoma or occasionally diverticular disease, and presents 
in an acute or chronic form. The condition of pseudo-  
obstruction should always be considered and excluded by 
a limited contrast study or CT scan to confirm organic 
obstruction.
After full resuscitation, the abdomen should be opened 
through a midline incision. Care should be taken to ensure 
that the loss of tamponade of the abdominal wall does not 
lead to increased caecal distension and rupture (this starts 
with splitting along the line of the taenia coli on the antimes-
enteric border). Distension of the caecum will confirm large 
bowel involvement. Identification of a collapsed distal seg -
ment of the large bowel and its sequential proximal assess -
ment will readily lead to identification of the cause. As 
surgery for malignant bowel cancer is technically challenging, 
wherever possible a suitably trained surgeon should perform 
the procedure. When a removable lesion is found in the cae -
cum, ascending colon, hepatic flexure or proximal transverse 
colon, an emergency right hemicolectomy should be per -
formed. A primary anastomosis is safe if the patient’s general 
condition is reasonable. If the lesion is irremovable (this is 
rarely the case) a proximal stoma (colostomy or ileosotomy if 
the ileocaecal valve is incompetent) or ileotransverse bypass 
should be considered. Obstructing lesions at the splenic flex -
ure should be treated by an extended right hemicolectomy 
with ileodescending colonic anastomosis.
For obstructing lesions of the left colon or rectosigmoid 
junction, immediate resection should be considered unless 
there are clear contraindications.
Harry C Bishop , 1921–2009, Professor of Surgery, University of Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Charles Everett Koop , 1916–2013, paediatric surgeon and public health administrator, served as the 13th Surgeon General of the United States (1982–1989).
Ileostomy
End-to-side
ileoileostomy
Figure 71.19 Bishop–Koop operation. This shows the completed 
procedure after a grossly distended ileum has been resected. Because 
intestinal continuity is preserved, early closure of the ileostomy is not 
essential.
Summary box 71.14
Management of left-sided large bowel obstruction
Contraindications to immediate resection include:
●● Inexperienced surgeon
●● Moribund patient
●● Advanced disease
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1294 25/10/2017   10:00Treatment of acute large bowel obstruction 1295
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
In rare instances, or when caecal perforation is imminent, 
additional time to improve the patient’s clinical condition can 
be bought by performing an emergency caecostomy (or ileo -
sotomy in the presence of an incompetent ileocaecal valve).
In the absence of senior clinical staff it is safest to bring 
the proximal colon to the surface as a colostomy . When pos-
sible the distal bowel should be brought out at the same time 
(Paul–Mikulicz procedure) to facilitate subsequent closure. In 
the majority of cases, the distal bowel will not reach and is 
closed and returned to the abdomen (Hartmann’s procedure). 
A second-stage colorectal anastomosis can be planned when 
the patient is fit.
If an anastomosis is to be considered using the proximal 
colon, in the presence of obstruction, it must be decompressed 
and cleaned by an on-table colonic lavage.
In the palliative situation, where there is advanced incur-
able disease, the patient is unfit for major surgery or a com-
bination of the two, insertion of a self-expanding metal stent 
(SEMS) has been demonstrated to be preferable to surgery; 
there is now good evidence of reduced mortality and morbid-
ity and stoma formation. Technical and clinical success rates 
for stenting are of the order of 80–90%.
For patients with potentially curative disease, stenting as a 
bridge to surgery (usually performed 1–4 weeks poststenting) 
has been shown to reduce stoma formation but not to reduce 
postoperative mortality, and the long-term oncological effects 
of stenting are still uncertain. The current recommendation is 
that stenting as a bridge to surgery in patients with potentially 
curative disease should only be used in patients with a high 
risk of postoperative morbidity and mortality (Figure 71.20).
Treatment of caecal volvulus
At operation the volvulus is usually found to be ischaemic 
and needs resection. If viable, the volvulus should be reduced. 
Sometimes, this can only be achieved after decompression 
of the caecum using a needle. Further management consists 
of fixation of the caecum to the right iliac fossa (caecopexy) 
and/or a caecostomy. Recurrence of volvulus after caecopexy 
has been reported in up to 40% of cases.
Treatment of sigmoid volvulus
Flexible sigmoidoscopy or rigid sigmoidoscopy and insertion 
of a flatus tube should be carried out to allow deflation of the 
gut. The tube should be secured in place with tape for 24 
hours and a repeat x-ray taken to ensure that decompression 
has occurred. Success, as long as ischaemic bowel is excluded, 
will resolve the acute problem.
In young patients, an elective sigmoid colectomy is 
required. It is reasonable not to offer any further treatment 
following successful endoscopic decompression in the elderly 
as there is a high death rate (~80% at two years) from causes 
other than recurrent volvulus. In elderly patients with 
co-morbidities and recurrent episodes of volvulus, the options 
are resection or two-point fixation with combined endo-
scopic/percutaneous tube insertion (gastrostomy tubes are 
frequently used for this purpose). Failure results in an early 
laparotomy, with untwisting of the loop and per anum decom-
pression (Figure 71.21). 
Frank Thomas Paul , 1851–1941, surgeon, The Royal Infirmary, Liverpool, UK.
Johann von Mikulicz-Radecki , 1850–1905, Professor of Surgery, Breslau, Germany, (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Figure 71.20 X-ray of a stent inserted for malignant colonic obstruc-
tion.
(a)
(b)
Figure 71.21 Volvulus of the sigmoid colon (a) before and (b) after 
untwisting (courtesy of SU Rahman, Manchester, UK).
(b)
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1295 25/10/2017   10:01CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1296
When the bowel is viable, fixation of the sigmoid colon 
to the posterior abdominal wall may be a safer manoeuvre 
in inexperienced hands. Resection is preferable if it can be 
achieved safely. A Paul–Mikulicz procedure is useful, par -
ticularly if there is suspicion of impending gangrene (Figure 
71.22); an alternative procedure is a sigmoid colectomy and, 
when anastomosis is considered unwise, a Hartmann’s proce-
dure with subsequent reanastomosis can be carried out.
severe.  Examination is unremarkable, save for confirmation 
of distension, which can be profound (Figure 71.23) and the 
onset of peritonism in late cases. Rectal examination may 
confirm the presence of faecal impaction or a tumour.
Investigation
Plain abdominal radiography confirms the presence of large 
bowel distension. All such cases should be investigated by 
a subsequent single-contrast water-soluble enema study , CT 
scan or endoscopic assessment to rule out functional disease.
Organic disease requires decompression with either a lap-
arotomy or stent. Stomal stenosis can usually be managed at 
the abdominal wall level (Figure 71.24). Surgical manage-
ment after resuscitation depends on the underlying cause and 
the relevant chapters in this book should be consulted.
Functional disease requires colonoscopic decompression 
in the first instance and conservative management. Intestinal 
perforation can occur in patients with functional obstruction. 
Those at risk have such gross distension that the abomen is 
rigid on palpation.
Figure 71.22 The Paul–Mikulicz operation applied to volvulus of the 
pelvic colon.
CHRONIC LARGE BOWEL 
OBSTRUCTION
The symptoms of chronic intestinal obstruction may arise 
from two sources – the cause and the subsequent obstruction.
The causes of obstruction may be organic:
 ● intraluminal (rare) – faecal impaction;
 ● intrinsic intramural – strictures (Crohn’s disease, isch -
aemia, diverticular), anastomotic stenosis;
 ● extrinsic intramural (rare) – metastatic deposits (ovar -
ian), endometriosis, stomal stenosis;
or functional:
 ● Hirschsprung’s disease, idiopathic megacolon, pseudo-  
obstruction.
The symptoms of chronic obstruction differ in their 
predominance, timing and degree from acute obstruction. 
In functional cases, the symptoms may have been present 
for months or years. Constipation appears first. It is initially 
relative and then absolute, associated with distension. In the 
presence of large bowel disease, the point of greatest distension 
is in the caecum, and this is heralded by the onset of pain. 
Vomiting is a late feature and therefore dehydration is less 
Figure 71.23 Gross functional distension.
Summary box 71.15
Principles of investigation of possible large bowel 
obstruction
●● In the presence of large bowel obstruction, a single-contrast 
water-soluble enema or CT should be undertaken to exclude 
a functional cause
ADYNAMIC OBSTRUCTION
Paralytic ileus
This may be defined as a state in which there is failure of 
transmission of peristaltic waves secondary to neuromuscu-
lar failure (i.e. in the myenteric (Auerbach’s) and submucous 
Leopold Auerbach , 1828–1897, Professor of Neuropathology, Breslau, Germany, (now Wroclaw, Poland), described the myenteric plexus in 1862.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1296 25/10/2017   10:01Adynamic obstruction 1297
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
(Meissner’s) plexuses). The resultant stasis leads to accu -
mulation of fluid and gas within the bowel, with associated 
distension, vomiting, absence of bowel sounds and absolute 
constipation.
Varieties
The following varieties are recognised:
 ● Postoperative: a degree of ileus usually occurs after any 
abdominal procedure and is self-limiting, with a variable 
duration of 24–72 hours. Postoperative ileus may be pro -
longed in the presence of hypoproteinaemia or metabolic 
abnormality (see below).
 ● Infection: intra-abdominal sepsis may give rise to local-
ised or generalised ileus.
 ● Reflex ileus: this may occur following fractures of the 
spine or ribs, retroperitoneal haemorrhage or even the 
application of a plaster jacket.
 ● Metabolic: uraemia and hypokalaemia are the most com -
mon contributory factors.
Clinical features
Paralytic ileus takes on a clinical significance if, 72 hours after 
laparotomy:
 ● there has been no return of bowel sounds on auscultation;
 ● there has been no passage of flatus.
Abdominal distension becomes more marked and tympa-
nitic. Colicky pain is not a feature. Distension increases pain 
from the abdominal wound. In the absence of gastric aspira-
tion, effortless vomiting may occur. Radiologically, the abdo-
men shows gas-filled loops of intestine with multiple fluid 
levels (if an erect film is felt necessary).
Management
Nasogastric tubes are not required routinely after elective 
intra-abdominal surgery. Paralytic ileus is managed with the 
use of nasogastric suction and restriction of oral intake until 
bowel sounds and the passage of flatus return. Electrolyte bal-
ance must be maintained. The use of an enhanced recovery 
programme with early introduction of fluids and solids is, 
however, becoming increasingly popular.
Specific treatment is directed towards the cause, but the 
following general principles apply:
 ● If a primary cause is identified this must be treated.
 ● Gastrointestinal distension must be relieved by decom -
pression.
 ● Close attention to fluid and electrolyte balance is essen -
tial.
 ● There is no convincing evidence for the use of prokinetic 
drugs to treat postoperative adynamic ileus.
 ● If paralytic ileus is prolonged CT scanning is the most 
effective investigation; it will demonstrate any intra- 
abdominal sepsis or mechanical obstruction and there-
fore guide any requirement for laparotomy. Otherwise 
the decision to take a patient back to theatre in these cir-
cumstances is always difficult. The need for a laparotomy 
becomes increasingly likely the longer the bowel inactiv -
ity persists, particularly if it lasts for more than seven days 
or if bowel activity recommences following surgery and 
then stops again.
Pseudo-obstruction
This condition describes an obstruction, usually of the colon, 
that occurs in the absence of a mechanical cause or acute 
intra-abdominal disease. It is associated with a variety of syn-
dromes in which there is an underlying neuropathy and/or 
myopathy and a range of other factors.
Small intestinal pseudo-obstruction
This condition may be primary (i.e. idiopathic or associated 
with familial visceral myopathy) or secondary. The clinical 
picture consists of recurrent subacute obstruction. The diag -
nosis is made by the exclusion of a mechanical cause. Treat -
ment consists of initial correction of any underlying disorder. 
Metoclopramide and erythromycin may be of use.
Colonic pseudo-obstruction
This may occur in an acute or a chronic form. The former, 
also known as Ogilvie’ s syndrome, presents as acute large 
bowel obstruction. Abdominal radiographs show evidence 
of colonic obstruction, with marked caecal distension being 
a common feature. Indeed, caecal perforation is a well-  
recognised complication. The absence of a mechanical cause 
requires urgent confirmation by colonoscopy or a single-  
contrast water-soluble barium enema or CT. Once confirmed, 
pseudo-obstruction requires treatment of any identifiable 
cause. If this is ineffective, intravenous neostigmine should 
be given (1  mg intravenously), with a further 1 mg given 
intravenously within a few minutes if the first dose is ineffec-
tive. During this procedure, it is best to sit the patient on a 
Georg Meissner , 1829–1905, Professor of Physiology, Gottingen, Germany, described the submucous plexus of the alimentary tract in 1852.
Sir William Heneage Ogilvie , 1887–1971, surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 71.24 Stomal stenosis causing large bowel obstruction.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1297 25/10/2017   10:01CHAPTER 71  Intestinal obstruction
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1298
commode. Electrocardiograph (ECG) monitoring is required 
and atropine should be available. If neostigmine is not effec -
tive, colonoscopic decompression should be peformed. Caecal 
perforation can occur in pseudo-obstruction. Abdominal 
examination should pay attention to tenderness and peri -
tonism over the caecum and as with mechanical obstruction, 
caecal perforation is more likely if the caecal diameter is 
14 cm or greater. Surgery is associated with high morbidity and 
mortality and should be reserved for those with impending 
perforation when other treatments have failed or perforation 
has occurred.
Rarely, an endoscopically placed tube colostomy is used 
as a vent for patients with a chronic unremitting condition.
FURTHER READING
Becker JM, Stucchi AF . Intra-abdominal adhesion prevention: are we 
getting any closer? Ann Surg 2004: 240: 202–4.
Bickell NA, Federman AD, Aufses AH. Influence of time on risk of 
bowel resection in complete small bowel obstruction. J Am Coll Surg 
2005; 201: 847–54.
Branco BC, Barmparas G, Schnuriger B et al . Systematic review and 
meta-analyis of the diagnostic and therapeutic role of water-soluble 
contrast agent in adhesive small bowel obstruction. Br J Surg 2010; 
97:470–8.
ten Broek RP , Stommel MW , Strik C, van Laarhoven CJ, Keus F , 
van Goor H. Benefits and harms of adhesion barriers for abdom -
inal surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2014; 
383(9911):48–59.
Ceresoli M, Coccolini F , Catena F , Montori G, Di Saverio S, Sartelli M, 
Ansaloni L. Water-soluble contrast agent in adhesive small bowel 
obstruction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic and 
therapeutic value. Am J Surg 2016; 211(6):1114–25.
Fazio VW , Cohen Z, Fleshman JW et al. Reduction in adhesive small-
bowel obstruction by Seprafilm ® stop adhesion barrier after intesti-
nal resection. Dis Colon Rectum 2006; 49: 1–11.
Fevang BT, Fevang J, Lie S, Soreide O, Svanes K, Viste A. Long-term 
prognosis after operation for adhesive small bowel obstruction. Ann 
Surg 2004; 240: 193–201.
Ha GW , Lee MR, Kim JH. Adhesive small bowel obstruction after 
laparoscopic and open colorectal surgery: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Am J Surg 2016; 212(3):527–36.
Raveenthiran V , Madiba TE, Atamanalp SS. Volvulus of the sigmoid 
colon. Colorectal Dis 2010;12:1–17.
Sajja SB, Schein M. Early postoperative small bowel obstruction. Br J 
Surg 2004; 91: 683–91.
Stenberg E, Szabo E, Ågren G et al. Closure of mesenteric defects in lap-
aroscopic gastric bypass: a multicentre, randomised, parallel, open-  
label trial. Lancet 2016; 387(10026):1397–404.
Williams SB, Greenspon J, Young HA, Orkin BA. Small bowel obstruc-
tion: conservative vs. surgical management. Dis Colon Rectum 2005; 
48: 1140–6.
Wolthuis AM, Bislenghi G, Fieuws S et al. (2016) Incidence of prolonged 
postoperative ileus after colorectal surgery: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Colorectal Dis 2016; 18(1):O1-9.
Summary box 71.16
Factors associated with pseudo-obstruction
●● Metabolic
Diabetes
Hypokalaemia
Uraemia
Myxodoema
Intermittent porphyria
●● Severe trauma (especially to the lumbar spine and pelvis)
●● Shock
Burns
Myocardial infarction
Stroke
●● Idiopathic
●● Septicaemia
●● Postoperative (for example fractured neck of femur)
●● Retroperitoneal irritation
Blood
Urine
Enzymes (pancreatitis)
Tumour
●● Drugs
Tricyclic antidepressants
Phenothiazines
Laxatives
●● Secondary gastrointestinal involvement
Scleroderma
Chagas’ disease
Carlos Justiniano Ribeiro Chagas , 1879–1934, Director of The Oswald Cruz Institute, and Professor of Tropical Medicine, The University of Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
11_71-B&L27_Pt11_Ch71.indd   1298 25/10/2017   10:01Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The aetiology and surgical anatomy of acute 
appendicitis
 • The clinical signs and differential diagnoses of 
appendicitis
 • The investigation of suspected appendicitis
 • Evolving concepts in management of acute appendicitis
 • Basic surgical techniques, both open and laparoscopic
 • The management of postoperative problems
 • Tumours of the appendix and pseudomyxoma peritonei
Chapter
The vermiform appendix
72
INTRODUCTION
The importance of the vermiform appendix in surgery results 
primarily from its propensity for inflammation, which results 
in the clinical syndrome known as acute appendicitis. Acute 
appendicitis is the most common cause of an ‘acute abdomen’ 
in young adults and, as such, the associated symptoms and 
signs have become a paradigm for clinical teaching. Appen -
dicitis is sufficiently common that appendicectomy (termed 
appendectomy in North America) is the most frequently per-
formed urgent abdominal operation and is often the first major 
procedure performed by a surgeon in training. Advances in 
modern radiographic imaging have improved diagnostic 
accuracy; however, the diagnosis of appendicitis remains 
essentially clinical, requiring a mixture of observation, 
clinical acumen and surgical science and as such it remains an 
enigmatic challenge and a reminder of the art of surgical diag-
nosis. Although much more uncommon, the appendix also 
has a propensity to the formation of tumours which, despite 
humble and innocuous beginnings, may disseminate widely 
with dramatic clinical consequences.
Aside from its tendancy to cause surgical pathology the 
appendix, long thought to be a vistigial organ, may also have 
important roles in both immune function and maintaining 
the gut microbiota. The putative role of the appendix in the 
pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis (appendicectomy seems to 
be protective) for example, may be explained by its interac -
tion with the intestinal flora and gut immune function.
ANATOMY
The vermiform appendix is present only in humans, certain 
anthropoid apes and the wombat. It is a blind muscular tube 
with mucosal, submucosal, muscular and serosal layers. Mor -
phologically, it is the undeveloped distal end of the large cae-
cum found in many lower animals. At birth, the appendix 
is short and broad at its junction with the caecum, but dif -
ferential growth of the caecum produces the typical tubular 
structure by about the age of 2 years (Condon). During child-
hood, continued growth of the caecum commonly rotates 
the appendix into a retrocaecal but intraperitoneal position  
(Figure 72.1). In approximately one-quarter of cases, rota -
tion of the appendix does not occur, resulting in a pelvic, 
subcaecal or paracaecal position. Occasionally, the tip of the 
appendix becomes extraperitoneal, lying behind the caecum 
or ascending colon. Rarely, the caecum does not migrate 
Retrocaecal 74%
Paracaecal 2%
Subcaecal 1.5%
Preileal 1%
Pelvic 21%
Postileal 0.5%
Figure 72.1 The various positions of the appendix (after Sir 
C Wakeley, London, formerly PRCS).
A wombat  is a nocturnal, burrowing Australian marsupial.
Robert E Condon , 1929–2015, Emeritus Professor of Surgery, The Medical College of Wisconsin, WI, USA.
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1299 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1300
during development to its normal position in the right lower 
quadrant of the abdomen. In these circumstances, the appen-
dix can be found near the gall bladder or, in the case of intes-
tinal malrotation, in the left iliac fossa, causing diagnostic 
difficulty if appendicitis develops (Figure 72.2).
The position of the base of the appendix is constant, being 
found at the confluence of the three taeniae coli of the cae -
cum, which fuse to form the outer longitudinal muscle coat of 
the appendix. At operation, use can be made of this to find 
an elusive appendix, as gentle traction on the taeniae coli, 
particularly the anterior taenia, will lead the operator to the 
base of the appendix.
The mesentery of the appendix or mesoappendix arises 
from the lower surface of the mesentery or the terminal ileum 
and is itself subject to great variation. Sometimes, as much as 
the distal one-third of the appendix is bereft of mesoappen-
dix. Especially in childhood, the mesoappendix is so trans -
parent that the contained blood vessels can be seen (Figure 
72.3). In many adults, it becomes laden with fat, which 
obscures these vessels. The appendicular artery, a branch of 
the lower division of the ileocolic artery, passes behind the 
terminal ileum to enter the mesoappendix a short distance 
from the base of the appendix. It then comes to lie in the 
free border of the mesoappendix. An accessory appendicular 
artery may be present but, in most people, the appendicular 
artery is an ‘end-artery’, thrombosis of which results in necro-
sis of the appendix (synonym: gangrenous appendicitis). Four, 
six or more lymphatic channels traverse the mesoappendix to 
empty into the ileocaecal lymph nodes.
Microscopic anatomy
The appendix varies considerably in length and circumfer -
ence. The average length is between 7.5 and 10  cm. The 
lumen is irregular, being encroached on by multiple longitudi-
nal folds of mucous membrane lined by columnar cell intesti-
nal mucosa of colonic type (Figure 72.4). Crypts are present 
but are not numerous. In the base of the crypts lie argentaf -
fin cells (Kulchitsky cells), which may give rise to carcinoid 
tumours (see below). The appendix is the most frequent site 
for carcinoid tumours, which may present with appendici -
tis due to occlusion of the appendiceal lumen. The submu -
cosa contains numerous lymphatic aggregations or follicles. 
While no discernible change in immune function results from 
appendicectomy, the prominence of lymphatic tissue in the 
appendix of young adults seems to be important in the aetiol-
ogy of appendicitis (see below).
Figure 72.2 Left-sided caecum and appendix due to intestinal mal -
rotation (after Findley and Humphreys).
Figure 72.3 Laparoscopic view of a normal appendix with meso -
appendix displaying the appendicular artery.
Nikolai Kulchitsky , 1856–1925, Professor of Histology, Kharkov, Ukraine, who left Russia after the Revolution of 1917 and later worked at University College, 
London, UK. He described these cells in 1897.
Figure 72.4  Normal vermiform appendix. The narrow lumen is 
bounded by mucosa, which may be arranged in folds. There is usu -
ally abundant lymphoid tissue in the mucosa, especially in younger 
individuals. This may encroach on and further narrow the lumen. The 
mucosa is bounded by a relatively thin muscularis mucosa (courtesy 
of Dr P Kelly, FRCPath, Dublin, Ireland).
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1300 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1301
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
ACUTE APPENDICITIS
While there are isolated reports of perityphlitis (fatal inflam -
mation of the caecal region) from the late 1500s, recogni -
tion of acute appendicitis as a clinical entity is attributed to 
Reginald Fitz, who presented a paper to the first meeting of 
the Association of American Physicians in 1886 entitled 
‘Perforating inflammation of the vermiform appendix’. Soon 
afterwards, Charles McBurney described the clinical manifes-
tations of acute appendicitis including the point of maximum 
tenderness in the right iliac fossa that now bears his name.
The incidence of appendicitis seems to have risen greatly 
in the first half of this century, particularly in Europe, Amer -
ica and Australasia, with up to 16% of the population under-
going appendicectomy. In the past 30 years, the incidence has 
fallen dramatically in these countries, such that the individ -
ual lifetime risk of appendicectomy is 8.6% and 6.7% among 
males and females, respectively.
Acute appendicitis is relatively rare in infants and 
becomes increasingly common in childhood and early adult 
life, reaching a peak incidence in the teens and early 20s. 
After middle age, the risk of developing appendicitis is quite 
small. The incidence of appendicitis is equal among males 
and females before puberty. In teenagers and young adults, 
the male–female ratio increases to 3:2 at age 25; thereafter, 
the greater incidence in males declines.
Aetiology
There is no unifying hypothesis regarding the aetiology of acute 
appendicitis. Decreased dietary fibre and increased consump -
tion of refined carbohydrates may be important. As with colonic 
diverticulitis, the incidence of appendicitis is lowest in societies 
with a high dietary fibre intake. In resource-poor countries that 
are adopting a more refined western-type diet, the incidence 
continues to rise. This is in contrast to the dramatic decrease 
in the incidence of appendicitis in western countries observed 
in the past 30 years. No reason has been established for these 
paradoxical changes; however, improved hygiene and a change 
in the pattern of childhood gastrointestinal infection related to 
the increased use of antibiotics may be responsible.
While appendicitis is clearly associated with bacterial pro-
liferation within the appendix, no single organism is respon -
sible. A mixed growth of aerobic and anaerobic organisms 
is usual. The initiating event causing bacterial proliferation 
is controversial. Obstruction of the appendix lumen has 
been widely held to be important, and some form of luminal 
obstruction, either by a faecolith (Figure 72.5) or a stricture, 
is found in the majority of cases.
A faecolith (sometimes refered to as an appendicolith) 
is composed of inspissated faecal material, calcium phos-
phates, bacteria and epithelial debris (Figure 72.6). Rarely, 
a foreign body is incorporated into the mass. The incidental 
finding of a faecolith is a relative indication for prophylactic 
Reginald Heber Fitz , 1843–1913, Professor of Medicine, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
Charles McBurney , 1854–1913, Professor of Surgery, Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA. In 1889 McBurney published a paper 
on appendicitis in which he stated ‘I believe that in every case the seat of greatest pain “determined by the pressure of one finger” has been very exactly between 
an inch and a half and two inches from the anterior spirious process of the ilium on a straight line drawn from that process to the umbilicus.’
Figure 72.6 Colonoscopic view of the lumen of the appendix show-
ing intraluminal debris (courtesy of Professor D Winter, FRCSI, Dublin, 
Ireland).
Figure 72.5 Coronal reformat of a computed tomography scan of 
the abdomen obtained with oral and intravenous contrast, demon -
strating an inflamed, enhancing and enlarged appendix that is curled 
in the midline extending towar ds the pelvis (arrow). It contains multi -
ple radiopaque appendicoliths. There is extensive periappendiceal fat 
stranding (courtesy of Dr P MacMahon, FRCR, Dublin, Ireland).
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1301 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1302
appendicectomy or an interval appendicetomy in a patient 
treated conservatively. A fibrotic stricture of the appendix usu-
ally indicates previous appendicitis that resolved without sur-
gical intervention. Obstruction of the appendiceal orifice by 
tumour, particularly carcinoma of the caecum, is an occasional 
cause of acute appendicitis in middle-aged and elderly patients. 
Intestinal parasites, particularly Oxyuris vermicularis (pin-
worm), can proliferate in the appendix and occlude the lumen.
Pathology
Obstruction of the appendiceal lumen seems to be essential 
for the development of appendiceal gangrene and perforation. 
However, in many cases of early appendicitis, the appendix 
lumen is patent despite the presence of mucosal inflamma -
tion and lymphoid hyperplasia. Occasional clustering of cases 
among children and young adults suggests an infective agent, 
possibly viral, which initiates an inflammatory response. Sea-
sonal variation in the incidence is also observed, with more 
cases occurring between May and August in northern Europe 
than at other times of the year.
Lymphoid hyperplasia narrows the lumen of the appendix, 
leading to luminal obstruction. Once obstruction occurs, con-
tinued mucus secretion and inflammatory exudation increase 
intraluminal pressure, obstructing lymphatic drainage. 
Oedema and mucosal ulceration develop with bacterial trans-
location to the submucosa. Resolution may occur at this point 
either spontaneously or in response to antibiotic therapy. If 
the condition progresses, further distension of the appendix 
may cause venous obstruction and ischaemia of the appendix 
wall. With ischaemia, bacterial invasion occurs through the 
muscularis propria and submucosa, producing acute appendi -
citis (Figure 72.7). Finally, ischaemic necrosis of the appen -
dix wall produces gangrenous appendicitis, with free bacterial 
contamination of the peritoneal cavity. Alternatively, the 
greater omentum and loops of small bowel become adherent 
to the inflamed appendix, walling off the spread of peritoneal 
contamination and resulting in a phlegmonous mass or para -
caecal abscess. Rarely, appendiceal inflammation resolves, 
leaving a distended mucus-filled organ termed a mucocele of 
the appendix.
It is the potential for diffuse peritonitis that is the great 
threat of acute appendicitis. Peritonitis occurs as a result of 
free migration of bacteria through an ischaemic appendicular 
wall, frank perforation of a gangrenous appendix or delayed 
perforation of an appendix abscess. Factors that promote this 
process include extremes of age, immunosuppression, diabe -
tes mellitus and faecolith obstruction of the appendix lumen, 
a free-lying pelvic appendix and previous abdominal surgery 
that limits the ability of the greater omentum to wall off the 
spread of peritoneal contamination. In these situations, a rap-
idly deteriorating clinical course is accompanied by signs of 
diffuse peritonitis and systemic sepsis syndrome.
Figure 72.7 Acutely inflammed appendix with purulent exudate extending to the mesoappendix in a 28-year-old male as seen at laparoscopy 
(a) and a photomicrograph (original magnification ×20) from the same patient showing the appendix with pus-filled lumen (L) and inflammation 
extending to inflamed serosa (S) (courtesy of Professor C O’Keane, FFPath, FRCPI, Dublin, Ireland).
Summary box 72.1
Risk factors for perforation of the appendix
●● Extremes of age
●● Immunosuppression
●● Diabetes mellitus
●● Faecolith obstruction
●● Pelvic appendix
●● Previous abdominal surgery
Clinical diagnosis
History
The classical features of acute appendicitis begin with poorly 
localised colicky abdominal pain. This is due to mid-gut vis -
ceral discomfort in response to appendiceal inflammation 
and obstruction. The pain is frequently first noticed in the 
periumbilical region and is similar to, but less intense than, 
(a)
 (b)
S
L
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1302 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1303
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
the colic of small bowel obstruction. Central abdominal pain 
is associated with anorexia, nausea and usually one or two 
episodes of vomiting that follow the onset of pain (Murphy). 
Anorexia is a useful and constant clinical feature, particularly 
in children. The patient often gives a history of similar dis -
comfort that settled spontaneously . A family history is also 
useful as up to one-third of children with appendicitis have a 
first-degree relative with a similar history.
Signs
The diagnosis of appendicitis rests more on thorough clinical 
examination of the abdomen than on any aspect of the history 
or laboratory investigation. The cardinal features are those of 
an unwell patient with low-grade pyrexia, localised abdom-
inal tenderness, muscle guarding and rebound tenderness. 
Inspection of the abdomen may show limitation of respiratory 
movement in the lower abdomen. The patient is then asked 
to point to where the pain began and where it moved (the 
pointing sign). Gentle superficial palpation of the abdomen, 
beginning in the left iliac fossa and moving anticlockwise 
to the right iliac fossa, will detect muscle guarding over the 
point of maximum tenderness, classically McBurney’s point. 
Asking the patient to cough or gentle percussion over the site 
of maximum tenderness will elicit rebound tenderness.
Summary box 72.2
Symptoms of appendicitis
●● Periumbilical colic
●● Pain shifting to the right iliac fossa
●● Anorexia
●● Nausea
With progressive inflammation of the appendix, the parietal 
peritoneum in the right iliac fossa becomes irritated, producing 
more intense, constant and localised somatic pain that begins 
to predominate. Patients often report this as an abdominal pain 
that has shifted and changed in character. Typically, coughing 
or sudden movement exacerbates the right iliac fossa pain.
The classic visceral–somatic sequence of pain is present in 
only about half of those patients subsequently proven to have 
acute appendicitis. Atypical presentations include pain that is 
predominantly somatic or visceral and poorly localised. Atyp-
ical pain is more common in the elderly, in whom localisation 
to the right iliac fossa is unusual. An inflamed appendix in the 
pelvis may never produce somatic pain involving the anterior 
abdominal wall, but may instead cause suprapubic discomfort 
and tenesmus. In this circumstance, tenderness may be elic -
ited only on rectal examination and is the basis for the recom-
mendation that a rectal examination should be performed on 
every patient who presents with acute lower abdominal pain.
During the first 6 hours, there is rarely any alteration 
in temperature or pulse rate. After that time, slight pyrexia 
(37.2–37.7ºC) with a corresponding increase in the pulse 
rate to 80 or 90 is usual. However, in 20% of patients there 
is no pyrexia or tachycardia in the early stages. In children, a 
temperature greater than 38.5ºC suggests other causes (e.g. 
mesenteric adenitis [see below]).
Typically, two clinical syndromes of acute appendicitis 
can be discerned, acute catarrhal (non-obstructive) appendicitis 
and acute obstructive appendicitis, the latter characterised by 
a more acute course. The onset of symptoms is abrupt and 
there may be generalised abdominal pain from the start. The 
temperature may be normal and vomiting is common, so the 
clinical picture may mimic acute intestinal obstruction.
Summary box 72.3
Clinical signs in appendicitis
●● Pyrexia
●● Localised tenderness in the right iliac fossa
●● Muscle guarding
●● Rebound tenderness
John Benjamin Murphy , 1857–1916, Professor of Surgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
Neils Thorkild Rovsing , 1862–1937, Professor of Surgery, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Sir Vincent Zachary Cope , 1881–1975, surgeon, St. Mary’s Hospital, London, UK.
Deep palpation of the left iliac fossa may cause pain in the 
right iliac fossa, Rovsing’s sign, which is helpful in supporting 
a clinical diagnosis of appendicitis. Occasionally, an inflamed 
appendix lies on the psoas muscle, and the patient, often a 
young adult, will lie with the right hip flexed for pain relief 
(the psoas sign). Spasm of the obturator internus is sometimes 
demonstrable when the hip is flexed and internally rotated. If 
an inflamed appendix is in contact with the obturator inter -
nus, this manoeuvre will cause pain in the hypogastrium (the 
obturator test; Zachary Cope). Cutaneous hyperaesthesia may 
be demonstrable in the right iliac fossa, but is rarely of diag -
nostic value.
Summary box 72.4
Signs to elicit in appendicitis
●● Pointing sign
●● Rovsing’s sign
●● Psoas sign
●● Obturator sign
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1303 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1304
Special features, according to 
position of the appendix
Retrocaecal
Rigidity is often absent, and even application of deep pres-
sure may fail to elicit tenderness (silent appendix), the reason 
being that the caecum, distended with gas, prevents the pres-
sure exerted by the hand from reaching the inflamed struc-
ture. However, deep tenderness is often present in the loin, 
and rigidity of the quadratus lumborum may be in evidence. 
Psoas spasm, due to the inflamed appendix being in contact 
with that muscle, may be sufficient to cause flexion of the hip 
joint. Hyperextension of the hip joint may induce abdominal 
pain when the degree of psoas spasm is insufficient to cause 
flexion of the hip.
Pelvic
Occasionally, early diarrhoea results from an inflamed appen-
dix being in contact with the rectum. When the appendix lies 
entirely within the pelvis, there is usually complete absence 
of abdominal rigidity, and often tenderness over McBurney’s 
point is also lacking. In some instances, deep tenderness can 
be made out just above and to the right of the symphysis 
pubis. In either event, a rectal examination reveals tenderness 
in the rectovesical pouch or the pouch of Douglas, especially 
on the right side. Spasm of the psoas and obturator internus 
muscles may be present when the appendix is in this position. 
An inflamed appendix in contact with the bladder may cause 
frequency of micturition. This is more common in children.
Postileal
In this case, the inflamed appendix lies behind the terminal 
ileum. It presents the greatest difficulty in diagnosis because 
the pain may not shift, diarrhoea is a feature and marked 
retching may occur. Tenderness, if any, is ill defined, although 
it may be present immediately to the right of the umbilicus.
Special features, according to age
Infants
Appendicitis is relatively rare in infants under 36 months of 
age and, for obvious reasons, the patient is unable to give a 
history. Because of this, diagnosis is often delayed, and thus 
the incidence of perforation and postoperative morbidity is 
considerably higher than in older children. Diffuse peritoni-
tis can develop rapidly because of the underdeveloped greater 
omentum, which is unable to give much assistance in localis-
ing the infection.
Children
It is rare to find a child with appendicitis who has not vom -
ited. Children with appendicitis usually have complete aver -
sion to food.
The elderly
Gangrene and perforation occur much more frequently in 
elderly patients. Elderly patients with a lax abdominal wall 
or obesity may harbour a gangrenous appendix with little evi-
dence of it, and the clinical picture may simulate subacute 
intestinal obstruction. These features, coupled with coinci -
dent medical conditions, produce a much higher mortality for 
acute appendicitis in the elderly.
The obese
Obesity can obscure and diminish all the local signs of acute 
appendicitis and the clinician may have to rely on imaging 
to establish the diagnosis. Laparoscopy is particularly useful 
in the obese patient as it may obviate the need for a large 
abdominal incision.
Pregnancy
Appendicitis is the most common extrauterine acute abdomi-
nal condition in pregnancy, with a frequency of 1:1500–2000 
pregnancies. Diagnosis is complicated by delay in presenta -
tion as early non-specific symptoms are often attributed to the 
pregnancy. Obstetric teaching has been that the caecum and 
appendix are progressively pushed to the right upper quadrant 
of the abdomen as pregnancy develops during the second and 
third trimesters. However, pain in the right lower quadrant of 
the abdomen remains the cardinal feature of appendicitis in 
pregnancy. Fetal loss occurs in 3–5% of cases, increasing to 
20% if perforation is found at operation.
Differential diagnosis
Although acute appendicitis is the most common abdominal 
surgical emergency, the diagnosis can be extremely difficult 
at times. There are a number of common conditions that it is 
wise to consider carefully and, if possible, exclude. The differ-
ential diagnosis differs in patients of different ages; in women, 
additional differential diagnoses are diseases of the female 
genital tract (Table 72.1).
Children
The diseases most commonly mistaken for acute appendicitis 
are acute gastroenteritis and mesenteric lymphadenitis. In mes-
enteric lymphadenitis, the pain is colicky in nature and cer -
vical lymph nodes may be enlarged. It may be impossible to 
clinically distinguish Meckel’s diverticulitis from acute appen-
dicitis. The pain is similar; however, signs may be central or left 
sided. Occasionally, there is a history of antecedent abdominal 
pain or intermittent lower gastrointestinal bleeding.
It is important to distinguish between acute appendicitis 
and intussusception. Appendicitis is uncommon before the 
age of 2 years, whereas the median age for intussusception is 
18 months. A mass may be palpable in the right lower quad -
rant, and the preferred treatment of intussusception is reduc -
tion by careful barium enema.
James Douglas , 1715–1742, anatomist and midwife who practised in London, UK, described this pouch in 1730.
Johann Friedrich Meckel , 1781–1883, Professor of Anatomy and Surgery, Halle, Germany.
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1304 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1305
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Henoch–Schönlein purpura is often preceded by a sore 
throat or respiratory infection. Abdominal pain can be severe 
and can be confused with intussusception or appendicitis. 
There is nearly always an ecchymotic rash, typically affecting 
the extensor surfaces of the limbs and on the buttocks. The 
face is usually spared. The platelet count and bleeding time 
are within normal limits. Microscopic haematuria is common.
Lobar pneumonia and pleurisy, especially at the right base, 
may give rise to right-sided abdominal pain and mimic appen-
dicitis. Abdominal tenderness is minimal, pyrexia is marked 
and chest examination may reveal a pleural friction rub or 
altered breath sounds on auscultation. A chest radiograph is 
diagnostic.
Adults
Terminal ileitis in its acute form may be clinically indistin-
guishable from acute appendicitis unless a doughy mass of 
inflamed ileum can be felt. An antecedent history of abdomi-
nal cramping, weight loss and diarrhoea suggests regional ile-
itis rather than appendicitis. The ileitis may be non-specific, 
due to Crohn’s disease (Figure 72.8) or Yersinia infection. 
Yersinia enterocolitica causes inflammation of the terminal 
ileum, appendix and caecum with mesenteric adenopathy. 
If suspected, serum antibody titres are diagnostic, and treat -
ment with intravenous tetracycline is appropriate. If Yersinia 
infection is suspected at operation, a mesenteric lymph node 
should be excised and divided, with half submitted for micro-
biological culture (including tuberculosis) and half for histo -
logical examination.
Ureteric colic does not commonly cause diagnostic diffi -
culty, as the character and radiation of pain differs from that 
of appendicitis. Urinalysis should always be performed, and 
the presence of red cells should prompt a supine abdominal 
radiograph. Renal ultrasound or intravenous urogram is  
diagnostic.
Right-sided acute pyelonephritis is accompanied and 
often preceded by increased frequency of micturition. It may 
cause difficulty in diagnosis, especially in women. The leading 
features are tenderness confined to the loin, fever (tempera -
ture 39ºC) and possibly rigors and pyuria.
In perforated peptic ulcer, the duodenal contents pass 
along the paracolic gutter to the right iliac fossa. As a rule, 
there is a history of dyspepsia and a very sudden onset of 
pain that starts in the epigastrium and passes down the right 
paracolic gutter. In appendicitis, the pain starts classically in 
the umbilical region. Rigidity and tenderness in the right iliac 
fossa are present in both conditions but, in perforated duo-
denal ulcer, the rigidity is usually greater in the right hypo -
chondrium. An erect chest radiograph will show gas under 
the diaphragm in 70% of patients. An abdominal computed 
tomography (CT) examination is valuable when there is diag-
nostic difficulty.
TABLE 72.1 Differential diagnosis of acute appendicitis.
Children Adult Adult female Elderly
Gastroenteritis Regional enteritis Mittelschmerz Diverticulitis
Mesenteric adenitis Ureteric colic Pelvic inflammatory disease Intestinal obstruction
Meckel’s diverticulitis Perforated peptic ulcer Pyelonephritis Colonic carcinoma
Intussusception Torsion of testis Ectopic pregnancy Torsion appendix epiploicae
Henoch–Schönlein purpura Pancreatitis Torsion/rupture of ovarian cyst Mesenteric infarction
Lobar pneumonia Rectus sheath haematoma Endometriosis Leaking aortic aneurysm
Eduard Heinrich Henoch , 1820–1910, Professor of Diseases of Children, Berlin, Germany, described this form of purpura in 1868.
Johann Lucas Schönlein , 1793–1864, Professor of Medicine, Berlin, Germany, described this form of purpura in 1837.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described regional ileitis in 1932.
Alexandre Emile Yersin , 1863–1943, bacteriologist, Paris, France.
Figure 72.8 First presentation in a 19-year-old male with terminal ile-
itis, later confirmed to be Crohn’s disease. Short arrow demonstrates 
abnormally thickened and inflamed terminal ileum. Long arrow indi-
cates wall enhancement and enlargement of the appendix, indicating 
secondary acute appendicitis (courtesy of Dr P MacMahon, FRCR, 
Dublin, Ireland).
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1305 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1306
Testicular torsion in a teenage or young adult male is eas-
ily missed. Pain can be referred to the right iliac fossa, and 
shyness on the part of the patient may lead the unwary to sus-
pect appendicitis unless the scrotum is examined in all cases.
Acute pancreatitis should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of all adults suspected of having acute appendicitis 
and, when appropriate, should be excluded by serum or uri -
nary amylase measurement.
Rectus sheath haematoma is a relatively rare but easily 
missed differential diagnosis. It usually presents with acute 
pain and localised tenderness in the right iliac fossa, often 
after an episode of strenuous physical exercise. Localised pain 
without gastrointestinal upset is the rule. Occasionally, in an 
elderly patient, particularly one taking anticoagulant therapy, 
a rectus sheath haematoma may present as a mass and tender-
ness in the right iliac fossa after minor trauma.
Adult female
It is in women of childbearing age that pelvic disease most 
often mimics acute appendicitis. A careful gynaecological his-
tory should be taken in all women with suspected appendici -
tis, concentrating on menstrual cycle, vaginal discharge and 
possible pregnancy. The most common diagnostic mimics are 
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), Mittelschmerz, torsion or 
haemorrhage of an ovarian cyst and ectopic pregnancy.
PEL VIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASE
PID comprises a spectrum of diseases that include salpingitis, 
endometritis and tubo-ovarian sepsis. The incidence of these 
conditions is increasing, and the diagnosis should be consid -
ered in every young adult female. Typically, the pain is lower 
than in appendicitis and is bilateral. A history of vaginal dis -
charge, dysmenorrhoea and burning pain on micturition is a 
helpful differential diagnostic point. The physical findings 
include adenexal and cervical tenderness on vaginal examina-
tion. When suspected, a high vaginal swab should be taken for 
Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae  culture, and 
the opinion of a gynaecologist should be obtained. Treatment 
is usually a combination of ofloxacin and metronidazole for 
14 days. Transvaginal ultrasound can be particularly helpful 
in establishing the diagnosis. When serious diagnostic uncer-
tainty persists, diagnostic laparoscopy should be undertaken.
MITTELSCHMERZ
Midcycle rupture of a follicular cyst with bleeding produces 
lower abdominal and pelvic pain, typically midcycle. Sys-
temic upset is rare, a pregnancy test is negative and symp -
toms usually subside within hours. Occasionally, diagnostic 
laparoscopy is required. Retrograde menstruation may cause 
similar symptoms.
TORSION/HAEMORRHAGE OF AN OVARIAN CYST
This can prove a difficult differential diagnosis. When sus -
pected, pelvic ultrasound and a gynaecological opinion should 
be sought. If encountered at operation, untwisting of the 
involved adnexa and ovarian cystectomy should be performed, 
if necessary, in women of childbearing years. Documented visu-
alisation of the contralateral ovary is an essential medico-legal 
precaution prior to oophorectomy for any reason.
ECTOPIC PREGNANCY
It is unlikely that a ruptured ectopic pregnancy, with its 
well-defined signs of haemoperitoneum, will be mistaken for 
acute appendicitis, but the same cannot be said for a right-
sided tubal abortion or, still more, for a right-sided unruptured 
tubal pregnancy. In the latter, the signs are very similar to 
those of acute appendicitis except that the pain commences 
on the right side and stays there. The pain is severe and con -
tinues unabated until operation. Usually, there is a history of 
a missed menstrual period, and a urinary pregnancy test may 
be positive. Severe pain is felt when the cervix is moved on 
vaginal examination. Signs of intraperitoneal bleeding usu -
ally become apparent, and the patient should be questioned 
specifically regarding referred pain in the shoulder. Pelvic 
ultrasonography should be carried out in all cases in which an 
ectopic pregnancy is a possible diagnosis.
Elderly
DIVERTICULITIS
In some patients with a long sigmoid loop, the colon lies to 
the right of the midline and it may be impossible to differen -
tiate between diverticulitis and appendicitis. Abdominal CT 
scanning is particularly useful in this setting and should be 
considered in the management of all patients over the age 
of 60 years. A trial of conservative management with intra -
venous fluids and antibiotics is often appropriate, with a low 
threshold for laparoscopy or exploratory laparotomy in the 
face of deterioration or lack of clinical response. Right-sided 
diverticulitis is unusual and may be clinically indistinguish -
able from appendicitis. Abdominal CT scanning is partic -
ularly useful in making the distinction. As with left-sided 
diverticulatis, treament should be conservative with intrave -
nous antibiotics with recourse to laparoscopy or laparotomy 
in the face of clinical deterioration
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
The diagnosis of intestinal obstruction is usually clear; the 
subtlety lies in recognising acute appendicitis as the occa-
sional cause in the elderly. As with diverticulitis, intravenous 
fluids, antibiotics and nasogastric decompression should be 
instigated, with early resort to laparotomy.
CARCINOMA OF THE CAECUM
When obstructed or locally perforated, carcinoma of the cae-
cum may mimic or cause obstructive appendicitis in adults. 
A history of antecedent discomfort, altered bowel habit or 
unexplained anaemia should raise suspicion. A mass may be 
palpable (see below) and an abdominal CT scan diagnostic.
Rare differential diagnoses
Preherpetic pain of the right 10th and 11th dorsal nerves is 
localised over the same area as that of appendicitis. It does 
not shift and is associated with marked hyperaesthesia. There 
is no intestinal upset or rigidity. The herpetic eruption may be 
delayed for 3–8 hours.
Tabetic crises are now rare. Severe abdominal pain and 
vomiting usher in the crisis. Other signs of tabes confirm the 
diagnosis.
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1306 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1307
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Spinal conditions are sometimes associated with acute 
abdominal pain, especially in children and the elderly. These 
may include tuberculosis of the spine, metastatic carcinoma, 
osteoporotic vertebral collapse and multiple myeloma. The 
pain is due to compression of nerve roots and may be aggra -
vated by movement. There is rigidity of the lumbar spine and 
intestinal symptoms are absent.
The abdominal crises of porphyria and diabetes melli -
tus need to be remembered. A urinalysis should be under -
taken in every abdominal emergency. In cyclical vomiting 
of infants or young children, there is a history of previous 
similar attacks and abdominal rigidity is absent. Acetone is 
found in the urine but is not diagnostic as it may accompany 
starvation.
Typhlitis or leukaemic ileocaecal syndrome is a rare but 
potentially fatal enterocolitis occurring in immunosuppressed 
patients. Gram-negative or clostridial (especially Clostridium 
septicum) septicaemia can be rapidly progressive. Treatment is 
with appropriate antibiotics and haematopoietic factors. Sur-
gical intervention is rarely indicated.
Investigation
The diagnosis of acute appendicitis is essentially clinical; how-
ever, a decision to operate based on clinical suspicion alone 
can lead to the removal of a normal appendix in 15–30% of 
cases. The premise that it is better to remove a normal appen-
dix than to delay diagnosis does not stand up to close scrutiny, 
particularly in the elderly. A number of clinical and laborato-
ry-based scoring systems have been devised to assist diagnosis. 
The most widely used is the Alvarado score (Table 72.2). A 
score of 7 or more is strongly predictive of acute appendicitis.
In patients with an equivocal score (5–6), abdominal 
ultrasound or contrast-enhanced CT examination further 
reduces the rate of negative appendicectomy. Abdominal 
ultrasound examination is more useful in children and thin 
adults, particularly if gynaecological pathology is suspected, 
with a diagnostic accuracy in excess of 90% (Figure 72.9). 
Modern CT is both sensitive and specific (approximately 
95%) in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis (Figure 72.10) 
and worldwide there has been a steady increase in its use for 
this purpose. In the United States, for example, the major -
ity of patients will undergo CT prior to surgery. CT has been 
shown to reduce the rate of negative appendicectomy without 
an associated increased perforation rate (due to delay in diag-
nosis) and may be cost-effective due to shorter hospital stay. 
While the diagnostic accuracy of modern CT scanning for 
appendicitis is well established, radiation exposure and the 
theoretical carcinogenic effect are a concern. Low-dose pro -
tocols, which reduce the radiation dose to the patient by up 
to 80%, can be as reliable as standard dose scanning and may 
be more appropriately applied when considering a diagnosis 
of acute appendicitis, particularly in the younger adult (Kim).
Contrast-enhanced standard dose CT is especially useful 
in patients in whom there is diagnostic uncertainty, partic -
ularly older patients, where acute diverticulitis, intestinal 
obstruction and neoplasm are likely differential diagnoses.
Alfredo Alvarado , contemporary, surgeon, Plantation, FL, USA.
TABLE 72.2 The Alvarado (MANTRELS) score.
Score
Symptoms
Migratory RIF pain
 1
Anorexia  1
Nausea and vomiting  1
Signs
Tenderness (RIF)  2
Rebound tenderness  1
Elevated temperature  1
Laboratory
Leucocytosis  2
Shift to left  1
Total 10
RIF , right iliac fossa; MANTRELS, Migration of pain, Anorexia, Nausea 
or vomiting, Tenderness, Rebound pain, Elevation of temperature, 
Leucocytosis, Shift to left (segmented neutrophils).
Summary box 72.5
Preoperative investigations in appendicitis
●● Routine
Full blood count
Urinalysis
●● Selective
Pregnancy test
Urea and electrolytes
Supine abdominal radiograph
Ultrasound of the abdomen/pelvis
Contrast-enhanced abdomen and pelvic computed 
tomography scan
Consider low-dose protocol in young adults
Figure 72.9 Ultrasound image of the right iliac fossa (RIF) demon -
strating a mildly enlarged appendix, measuring 8  mm in diameter , 
consistent with acute appendicitis in a 40-year-old male. Arr ow indi-
cates small pocket of free fluid more inferiorly in the RIF (courtesy of 
Dr D Byrne, MB, Dublin, Ireland).
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1307 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1308
Treatment
Non-operative management
While surgery remains the standard teaching, there is an 
emerging body of literature to support a trial of conserva -
tive mangement in patients with uncomplicated (absence of 
appendicolith, perforation or abscess) appendicitis. Treatment 
is bowel rest and intravenous antibiotics, often metronidazole 
and 3rd generation cephalosprin. More recently, ertapenem has 
been used in this setting and has the benefit of broad antimi-
crobial cover administered as a single daily dose. The available 
data indicate initial successful outcomes in more than 90% of 
patients with CT confirmed appendicitis; however, approxi-
mately one-quarter of patients initially treated conservatively 
will require surgery within 1 year for recurrent appendicitis 
(Salminen). Subsequent surgery, if needed, tends to be uncom-
plicated. This approach may be considered in the well patient 
with limited signs or those with high operative risk (multiple 
co-morbidities). As with conservative treatment of an appen-
dix mass, patients over the age of 40 should be followed up to 
ensure there is no underlying malignancy (see below).
Operative management
The traditional treatment for acute appendicitis is appen-
dicectomy. While there should be no unnecessary delay, all 
patients, particularly those most at risk of serious morbidity, 
benefit by a short period of intensive preoperative prepara-
tion. Intravenous fluids, sufficient to establish adequate urine 
output (catheterisation is needed only in the very ill), and 
appropriate antibiotics should be given. There is ample evi -
dence that in the absence of purulent peritonitis, a single 
peroperative dose of antibiotics reduces the incidence of post-
operative wound infection. When peritonitis is suspected, 
therapeutic intravenous antibiotics to cover gram-negative 
bacilli as well as anaerobic cocci should be given. Hyperpy-
rexia in children should be treated with salicylates in addi -
tion to antibiotics and intravenous fluids. With appropriate 
use of intravenous fluids and parenteral antibiotics, a policy of 
deferring appendicectomy after midnight to the first case on 
the following morning does not increase morbidity. However, 
when acute obstructive appendicitis is recognised, operation 
should not be deferred longer than it takes to optimise the 
patient’s condition.
Appendicectomy
Claudius Amyand successfully removed an acutely inflamed 
appendix from the hernial sac of a boy in 1736. The first sur -
geon to perform deliberate appendicectomy for acute appen-
dicitis was Lawson Tait in May 1880. The patient recovered; 
however, the case was not reported until 1890. Meanwhile, 
Claudius Amyand , 1685–1740, surgeon, St. George’s Hospital, London, UK.
Robert Lawson Tait , 1845–1899, surgeon, The Hospital for Diseases of Women, Birmingham, UK.
Figure 72.10 Coronal (a) and sagittal (b) reformat of a computed 
tomography scan of the abdomen obtained with oral and intravenous 
contrast, demonstrating an enlarged (10 mm), enhancing retrocaecal 
appendix with periappendiceal fat stranding. No evidence of necrosis, 
perforation or collection. No radiopaque appendicolith seen. Images 
in Figure 72.7 refer to the same patient (courtesy of Dr P MacMahon, 
FRCR, Dublin, Ireland).
(a)
 (b)
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1308 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1309
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Thomas Morton was the first to diagnose appendicitis, drain 
the abscess and remove the appendix with recovery, publish -
ing his findings in 1887.
Appendicectomy should be performed under general 
anaesthetic with the patient supine on the operating table 
and may be undertaken using either an open or laparoscopic 
approach. When the appropriate equipment and expertise 
are available and cost allows, the laparoscopic approach is 
advantageous. The initial laparoscopy allows the diagnosis 
to be established and may reduce the negative appendicec-
tomy rate. Furthermore, the patient may benefit from the 
quicker recovery afforded by a minimally invasive approach, 
the rate of wound infection is lower (when compared with 
open surgery) and, contrary to initial concerns, the inci-
dence of postoperative pelvic collection does not appear to be 
increased (van Rossem). There remains much variability in 
the operative approach to appendicitis. In the United King -
dom, for example, despite the widespread familiarity with and 
availability of laparoscopy, an initial laparoscopic approach 
is performed in only two-thirds of patients and the negative 
appendicectomy rate remains high (20%).
When a laparoscopic technique is used, the bladder must 
be empty (ensure that the patient has voided before leaving 
the ward). Prior to preparing the entire abdomen with an 
appropriate antiseptic solution, the right iliac fossa should 
be palpated for a mass. If a mass is felt, it may, on occasion, 
be preferable to adopt a conservative approach (see below). 
Draping of the abdomen is in accordance with the planned 
operative technique, taking account of any requirement to 
extend the incision or convert a laparoscopic technique to an 
open operation.
CONVENTIONAL APPENDICECTOMY
When the preoperative diagnosis is considered reasonably 
certain, the incision that is widely used for appendicectomy 
is the so-called gridiron incision (gridiron: a frame of cross-
beams to support a ship during repairs). The gridiron inci -
sion (described first by McArthur) is made at right angles to a 
line joining the anterior superior iliac spine to the umbilicus, 
its centre being along the line at McBurney’s point (Figure 
72.11). If better access is required, it is possible to convert 
the gridiron to a Rutherford Morison incision (see below) by 
cutting the internal oblique and transversus muscles in the 
line of the incision.
In recent years, a transverse skin crease (Lanz) incision 
has become more popular, as the exposure is better and 
extension, when needed, is easier. The incision, appropriate 
in length to the size and obesity of the patient, is made 
approximately 2 cm below the umbilicus centred on the mid- 
clavicular–mid-inguinal line (Figure 72.12) When necessary, 
the incision may be extended medially, with retraction or 
suitable division of the rectus abdominis muscle.
When the diagnosis is in doubt, particularly in the pres -
ence of intestinal obstruction, a lower midline abdominal 
incision is to be preferred over a right lower paramedian inci-
sion. The latter, although widely practised in the past, is dif -
ficult to extend, more difficult to close and provides poorer 
access to the pelvis and peritoneal cavity.
Rutherford Morison’s incision is useful if the appendix is 
para- or retrocaecal and fixed. It is essentially an oblique mus-
cle-cutting incision with its lower end over McBurney’s point 
and extending obliquely upwards and laterally as necessary. 
All layers are divided in the line of the incision.
Thomas George Morton , 1835–1903, surgeon, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Lewis Linn McArthur , 1858–1934, surgeon, St. Luke’s Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA.
James Rutherford Morison , 1853–1939, Professor of Surgery, The University of Durham, Durham, UK.
Otto Lanz , 1865–1935, surgeon, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
1/3
2/3
Figure 72.11 Gridiron incision for appendicitis, at right angles to a 
line joining the anterior superior iliac spine and umbilicus, centred on 
McBurney’s point (courtesy of Professor M Earley, FRSCI, Dublin, Ire-
land).
Figure 72.12 Transverse or skin crease (Lanz) incision for appen -
dicitis, 2 cm below the umbilicus, centred on the mid-clavicular–
mid-inguinal line (courtesy of Pr ofessor M Earley, FRSCI, Dublin, 
Ireland).
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1309 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1310
REMOVAL OF THE APPENDIX
The caecum is identified by the presence of taeniae coli 
and, using a finger or a swab, the caecum is withdrawn. A 
turgid appendix may be felt at the base of the caecum. 
Inflammatory adhesions must be gently broken with a fin-
ger, which is then hooked around the appendix to deliver 
it into the wound. The appendix is conveniently controlled 
using a Babcock or Lane’s forceps applied in such a way as 
to encircle the appendix and yet not damage it. The base of 
the mesoappendix is clamped in artery forceps, divided and 
ligated (Figure 72.13a). When the mesoappendix is broad, 
the procedure must be repeated with a second or, rarely, a 
third artery forceps. The appendix, now completely freed, is 
crushed near its junction with the caecum in artery forceps, 
which is removed and reapplied just distal to the crushed 
portion. An absorbable 2/0 ligature is tied around the 
crushed portion close to the caecum. The appendix is ampu -
tated between the artery forceps and the ligature (Figure 
72.13b). An absorbable 2/0 or 3/0 purse-string or ‘Z’ suture 
may then be inserted into the caecum about 1.25 cm from 
the base (Figure 72.13c). The stitch should pass through 
the muscle coat, picking up the taeniae coli. The stump of 
the appendix is invaginated (Figure 72.13d) while the 
purse-string or ’Z’ suture is tied, thus burying the appendix 
stump. Many surgeons believe invagination of the appendi -
ceal stump is unnecessary.
METHODS TO BE ADOPTED IN SPECIAL 
CIRCUMSTANCES
When the caecal wall is oedematous, the purse-string suture is 
in danger of cutting out. If the oedema is of limited extent, this 
can be overcome by inserting the purse-string suture into more 
healthy caecal wall at a greater distance from the base of the 
appendix. Occasions may arise when, because of the extensive 
oedema of the caecal wall, it is better not to attempt invagination.
When the base of the appendix is inflamed, it should not 
be crushed, but ligated close to the caecal wall just tightly 
enough to occlude the lumen, after which the appendix is 
amputated and the stump invaginated. Should the base of the 
appendix be gangrenous, neither crushing nor ligation should 
be attempted. T wo stitches are placed through the caecal wall 
close to the base of the gangrenous appendix, which is ampu-
tated flush with the caecal wall, after which these stitches are 
tied. Further closure is effected by means of a second layer 
of interrupted seromuscular sutures. An alternative but more 
costly option when the appendix base is compromised is to 
resect the appendix with a cuff of healthy caecum using a sin-
gle firing of a linear stapling device.
Figure 72.13 Appendicectomy. (a) The mesoappendix divided between artery forceps and ligated. (b) The appendix crushed and ligated at 
its base and about to be divided. (c) ‘Z’ suture inserted prior to inversion of the appendiceal stump. (d) The appendiceal stump inverted, the 
‘Z’ suture having been tied.
William Wayne Babcock , 1872–1963, surgeon, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
Sir William Arbuthnot Lane , 1856–1943, surgeon, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1310 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1311
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
RETROGRADE APPENDICECTOMY
When the appendix is retrocaecal and adherent, it is an advan-
tage to divide the base between artery forceps. The appendiceal 
vessels are then ligated, the stump ligated and invaginated, 
and gentle traction on the caecum will enable the surgeon to 
deliver the body of the appendix, which is then removed from 
base to tip. Occasionally, this manoeuvre requires division of 
the lateral peritoneal attachments of the caecum.
LAPAROSCOPIC APPENDICECTOMY
The most valuable aspect of laparoscopy in the management 
of suspected appendicitis is as a diagnostic tool, particularly 
in women of childbearing age. The placement of operating 
ports may vary according to operator preference and previ-
ous abdominal scars. Typically, a pneumoperitoneum is estab-
lished using an open infraumbilical approach. This umbilical 
port serves as the camera port with two working ports inserted 
under direct vision, the first suprapublically and second in 
the left lower quadrant. An alternative to this standard mul -
tiport approach is single incision laparoscopic appendicec -
tomy (SILA) using a single multiple access port inserted at 
Figure 72.14 Laparoscopic appendicectomy. (a) Hook diathermy dissection of the mesoappendix. (b) The appendicular artery, ligated with 
clips, is divided. (c) The appendix base is ligated with absorbable ties. (d) Appendicectomy complete.
the umbilicus. SILA is associated with longer operating times 
and has not been shown to offer an advantage with respect 
to postoperative pain or hospital stay when compared with 
standard techniques, but may have a superior cosmetic out-
come. Irrespective of the approach, the operator stands to the 
patient’s left and faces a screen placed at the patient’s right. A 
moderate Trendelenburg tilt with elevation of the right side 
of the operating table improves exposure and assists delivery 
of loops of small bowel from the pelvis. The appendix is found 
in the conventional manner by identification of the caecal 
taeniae and is controlled using a laparoscopic tissue-holding 
forceps. Occassionally, it is necessary to divide the peritoneal 
attachments and mobilise the caecum in order to adequately 
expose the appendix. By elevating the appendix, the mesoap-
pendix is then displayed. A dissecting forceps, hook or scis -
sors diathermy is used to dissect the mesoappendix (Figure 
72.14a) and expose the appendicular vessels, which may be 
coagulated or ligated using a clip applicator (Figure 72.14b). 
The appendix, free of its mesentery, can be ligated at its base 
with an absorbable loop ligature (Figure 72.14c) or a linear 
stapling device, divided (Fig. 72.14d) and removed in a 
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1311 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1312
specimen bag through one of the operating ports. It is not 
usual to invert the stump of the appendix. Absorbable sutures 
are used to close the fascia at the umbilicus and at any port 
sites greater than 5 mm, and the small skin incisions may be 
closed with subcuticular sutures.
Problems encountered during 
appendicectomy
A NORMAL APPENDIX IS FOUND
This demands careful exclusion of other possible diagno -
ses, particularly terminal ileitis, Meckel’s diverticulitis and 
tubal or ovarian causes in women. It is usual to remove the 
appendix to avoid future diagnostic difficulties, even though 
the appendix is macroscopically normal, particularly if a skin 
crease or gridiron incision has been made. A case can be made 
for preserving the macroscopically normal appendix seen at 
diagnostic laparoscopy, although approximately one-quarter 
of seemingly normal appendices show microscopic evidence 
of inflammation.
THE APPENDIX CANNOT BE FOUND
The caecum should be mobilised, and the taeniae coli should 
be traced to their confluence on the caecum before the diag -
nosis of ‘absent appendix’ is made.
AN APPENDICULAR TUMOUR IS FOUND
Small tumours (under 2.0 cm in diameter) can be removed by 
appendicectomy; larger tumours should be treated by a right 
hemicolectomy (see below).
AN APPENDIX ABSCESS IS FOUND AND THE 
APPENDIX CANNOT BE REMOVED EASIL Y
This eventuality is rare in the era of modern diagnositic imag-
ing. Percutaneous drainage of the abscess and intravenous anti-
biotic treatment is to be preferred. If found at operation, the 
abscess should be drained and intravenous antibiotics admin-
istered. Very rarely in the face of a frankly necrotic appendix, 
a caecectomy or partial right hemicolectomy is required. (The 
first recorded operation for an appendix abscess was by Henry 
Hancock of Charing Cross Hospital, London, in 1848.)
Appendicitis complicating Crohn’s disease
Occasionally, a patient undergoing surgery for acute appen -
dicitis is found to have concomitant Crohn’ s disease of the 
ileocaecal region. Providing that the caecal wall is healthy at 
the base of the appendix, appendicectomy can be performed 
without increasing the risk of an enterocutaneous fistula. 
Rarely, the appendix is involved with the Crohn’s disease. In 
this situation, a conservative approach may be warranted, and 
a trial of intravenous corticosteroids and systemic antibiotics 
can be used to resolve the acute inflammatory process.
Appendix abscess
Failure of resolution of an appendix mass or continued 
spiking pyrexia usually indicates that there is pus within the 
phlegmonous appendix mass. Ultrasound or abdominal CT 
scan may identify an area suitable for the insertion of a per -
cutaneous drain. Rarely this is unsuccessful and laparotomy 
though a midline incision is indicated.
Pelvic abscess
Pelvic abscess formation is an occasional complication of 
appendicitis and can occur irrespective of the position of the 
appendix within the peritoneal cavity. The most common pre-
sentation is a spiking pyrexia several days after appendicitis; 
indeed, the patient may already have been discharged from 
hospital. Pelvic pressure or discomfort associated with loose 
stool or tenesmus is common. Rectal examination reveals a 
boggy mass in the pelvis, anterior to the rectum, at the level 
of the peritoneal reflection. Pelvic ultrasound or CT scan will 
confirm. Traditionally, treatment has been through transrec -
tal drainage under general anaesthetic; however, increasing 
availablity of radiologically guided percutaneous drainage has 
reduced the need considerably.
Management of an appendix mass
If an appendix mass is present and the condition of the 
patient is satisfactory, the standard treatment is the conser -
vative Ochsner–Sherren regime. This strategy is based on the 
premise that the inflammatory process is already localised and 
that inadvertent surgery is difficult and may be dangerous. It 
may be impossible to find the appendix and, occasionally, a 
faecal fistula may form. For these reasons, it is wise to observe 
a non-operative programme but to be prepared to operate 
should clinical deterioration occur.
Albert John Ochsner , 1858–1925, Professor of Clinical Surgery, The University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
James Sherren , 1872–1945, surgeon, The London Hospital, London, UK.
Summary box 72.6
Criteria for stopping conservative treatment of an 
appendix mass
●● A rising pulse rate
●● Increasing or spreading abdominal pain
●● Increasing size of the mass
Careful recording of the patient’s condition and the 
extent of the mass should be made and the abdomen regularly 
re-examined. It is helpful to mark the limits of the mass on 
the abdominal wall using a skin pencil. A contrast-enhanced 
CT examination of the abdomen should be performed and 
antibiotic therapy instigated. An abscess, if present, should 
be drained radiologically. Temperature and pulse rate should 
be recorded 4-hourly and a fluid balance record maintained. 
Clinical deterioration or evidence of peritonitis is an indi -
cation for early laparotomy. Clinical improvement is usually 
evident within 24–48 hours. Failure of the mass to resolve 
should raise suspicion of a carcinoma or Crohn’s disease. 
Using this regime, approximately 90% of cases resolve with -
out incident. The need for interval appendicectomy in this 
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1312 25/10/2017   10:02Acute appendicitis 1313
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
cohort is much debated. The great majority of patients will 
not develop recurrent appendicitis; however; recently pub-
lished studies have identified higher than expected rates of 
underlying appendiceal neoplasm in those patients who do 
go on to interval appendicectomy, particularly those patients 
over the age of 40. At the very least, follow-up CT should 
be performed to ensure complete resolution of findings and 
patients should undergo colonoscopy.
Postoperative complications
Postoperative complications following appendicectomy are 
relatively uncommon and reflect the degree of peritonitis that 
was present at the time of operation and intercurrent diseases 
that may predispose to complications.
Wound infection
Wound infection is the most common postoperative compli -
cation, occurring in 5–10% of all patients. This usually pres -
ents with pain and erythema of the wound on the fourth or 
fifth postoperative day, often soon after hospital discharge. 
Treatment is by wound drainage and antibiotics when 
required. The organisms responsible are usually a mixture of 
gram-negative bacilli and anaerobic bacteria, predominantly 
Bacteroides species and anaerobic streptococci.
Intra-abdominal abscess
Approximately 8% of patients following appendectomy will 
develop a postoperative intra-abdominal abscess. In an era 
of hospital discharge 24–48 hours following appendectomy, 
patients should be advised prior to discharge that a spik -
ing fever , malaise and anorexia developing 5–7 days after 
operation is suggestive of an intraperitoneal collection and 
that urgent medical advice should be obtained. Interloop, 
paracolic, pelvic and subphrenic sites should be considered. 
Abdominal ultrasonography and CT scanning greatly facil-
itate diagnosis and allow percutaneous drainage (Figure 
72.15). Laparotomy should be considered in patients sus -
pected of having intra-abdominal sepsis but in whom 
imaging fails to show a collection, particularly those with  
continuing ileus.
Ileus
A period of adynamic ileus is to be expected after appendicec-
tomy, and this may last a number of days following removal 
of a gangrenous appendix. Ileus persisting for more than 4 or 
5 days, particularly in the presence of a fever, is indicative of 
Summary box 72.7
Check-list for unwell patient following 
appendicectomy
●● Examine the wound and abdomen for an abscess
●● Consider a pelvic abscess and perform a rectal examination
●● Examine the lungs – pneumonitis or collapse
●● Examine the legs – consider venous thrombosis
●● Examine the conjunctivae for an icteric tinge and the liver for 
enlargement, and enquire whether the patient has had rigors 
(pylephlebitis)
●● Examine the urine for organisms (pyelonephritis)
●● Suspect subphrenic abscess
Figure 72.15 (a) Rim enhancing collection in the right iliac fossa, 1 week following open appendicectomy for perforated appendicitis. 
(b) Successful radiological drainage with resolution of the abscess (courtesy of Dr P MacMahon, FRCR, Dublin, Ireland).
(a)
 (b)
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1313 25/10/2017   10:02CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1314
continuing intra-abdominal sepsis and should prompt further 
investigation (see above). Rarely , early during postoperative 
recovery, a Richter’s type of hernia may occur at the site of a 
laparoscopic port insertion and may be confused with a post -
operative ileus. A CT scan is usually definitive.
Respiratory
In the absence of concurrent pulmonary disease, respiratory 
complications are rare following appendicectomy. Adequate 
postoperative analgesia and physiotherapy, when appropriate, 
reduce the incidence.
Venous thrombosis and embolism
These conditions are rare after appendicectomy, except in the 
elderly and in women taking the oral contraceptive pill. Appro-
priate prophylactic measures should be taken in such cases.
Portal pyaemia (pylephlebitis)
This is a rare but very serious complication of gangrenous 
appendicitis associated with high fever, rigors and jaundice. 
It is caused by septicaemia in the portal venous system and 
leads to the development of intrahepatic abscesses (often 
multiple). Treatment is with systemic antibiotics and percu -
taneous drainage of hepatic abscesses as appropriate. A screen 
for underlying thrombophilia should be considered.
Faecal fistula
Leakage from the appendicular stump occurs rarely, but may 
follow if the encircling stitch has been put in too deeply or 
if the caecal wall was involved by oedema or inflammation. 
Occasionally, a fistula may result following appendicectomy 
in Crohn’s disease.
Adhesive intestinal obstruction
This is the most common late complication of appendicec -
tomy. At operation, a single band adhesion is often found to 
be responsible. Occasionally, chronic pain in the right iliac 
fossa is attributed to adhesion formation after appendicec -
tomy. In such cases, laparoscopy is of value in confirming the 
presence of adhesions and allowing division.
RECURRENT ACUTE 
APPENDICITIS
Rarely, inflammation of the appendix may present as a 
chronic condition characterised by recurrent episo des of 
lower abdominal pain. Recurrent appendicitis is thought to 
arise as a consequence of incomplete self-limiting obstruc -
tion of the appendix lumen (Figure 72.16). The attacks 
vary in intensity and may occur every few months, and the 
majority of cases ultimately culminate in severe acute appen-
dicitis. If a careful history is taken from patients with acute 
appendicitis, many remember having had milder but similar 
attacks of pain. The appendix in these cases is thickened and 
shows fibrosis indicative of previous inflammation (Figure 
72.17).
NEOPLASMS OF THE APPENDIX 
AND PSEUDOMYXOMA 
PERITONEI
Neoplasms of the appendix are found in 1% of appendicec -
tomy specimens, with the vast majority being an incidental 
finding. Most tumours involving the appendix may be clas -
sified as either carcinoid or epithelial, with the latter group 
accounting for approximately three-quarters of all cases.
Figure 72.17  Excised appendix showing the point of luminal 
obstruction with distal fibrosis.
Figure 72.16  Axial computed tomography in a 20-year-old male 
with recurr ent lower abdominal pain, demonstrating some fatty 
submucosal deposition in a thickened mildly enlarged appendix but 
without surrounding inflammatory change (arrow), findings suggestive 
of chronic appendicitis (courtesy of Dr P MacMahon, FRCR, Dublin, 
Ireland).
August Gottlieb Richter , 1742–1812, lecturer in Surgery, Göttingen, Germany.
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1314 25/10/2017   10:02Neoplasms of the appendix and pseudomyx oma peritonei 1315
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Carcinoid tumour (synonym: 
argentaffinoma):
Carcinoid tumours arise in argentaffin tissue (Kulchitsky 
cells of the crypts of Lieberkühn) and are most common in 
the vermiform appendix. Carcinoid tumour is found once in 
every 300–400 appendices subjected to histological exam -
ination. In many instances, the appendix had been removed 
because of symptoms of subacute or recurrent appendicitis. 
The tumour can occur in any part of the appendix, but it is 
frequently found in the distal third. The neoplasm feels mod-
erately hard and, on sectioning the appendix, it can be seen 
as a yellow tumour between the intact mucosa and the peri -
toneum. Microscopically, the tumour cells are small, arranged 
in small nests within the muscle and have a characteristic 
pattern using immunohistochemical stain for chromogranin 
B (Figure 72.18). Unlike carcinoid tumours arising in other 
parts of the intestinal tract, carcinoid tumour of the appendix 
rarely gives rise to metastases.
Treatment
Appendicectomy has been shown to be sufficient treatment 
unless the caecal wall is involved, the tumour is 2 cm or more 
in size or involved lymph nodes are found, when right hemi -
colectomy is indicated.
Epithelial tumours of the appendix:
Epithelial neoplasms are found in 0.6% of appendicectomy 
specimens. Numerous classifications systems have been 
proposed leading to much confusion and difficulty when 
comparing treatment modalities and outcomes. Recently, 
following a modified Delphi consultation process, a group of 
international experts proposed an updated classification system 
for appendiceal epithelial neoplasms (Carr). Tumours may be 
classified as mucinous or non-mucinous (intestinal type) and 
according to the degree of cytologic atypia and architectural 
features (infiltrative versus pushing invasion) (Table 72.3). 
Goblet cell carcinoid, a rare tumour of the appendix, which 
shows both gland forming and neuroendocrine features, 
has now been reclassified as goblet cell tumour and may 
be of a mucinous or non-mucinous subtype. The relevance 
of appendiceal epithelial tumours, particularly when of the 
mucinous subtype (Figure 72.19), lies in their propensity to 
disseminate causing the syndrome known as pseudomyxoma 
peritonei (PMP).
Johann Nathaniel Lieberkühn , 1711–1756, physician and anatomist, Berlin, Germany, described these glands in 1745.
Figure 72.18  Carcinoid tumour. A small incidental carcinoid 
tumour of the appendix. The tumour cells infiltrate the muscle 
arranged in small nests and trabeculae (arrows). Tumour cells are 
small and have inconspicuous nuclei. Inset: higher magnification of 
an immunohistochemical stain for chromogranin B shows a strong 
positive reaction (brown) of tumour cells (courtesy of Dr P Kelly, 
FRCPath, Dublin, Ireland).
Figure 72.19  Low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm with 
mucoceole formation that had redistributed causing secondary low-
grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei, mainly of the ovary.
TABLE 72.3 Classification of epithelial neoplasia of the 
appendix (adapted from Carr et al., 2016).
Adenoma (tubular, tubulovillous, 
villous)
Serrated polyp
Non-mucinous adenocarcinoma
Mucinous neoplasm Low-grade appendiceal 
mucinous neoplasm (LAMN)
High-grade appendiceal 
mucinous neoplasm (HAMN)
Mucinous adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma with signet ring 
cells (<50%)
Signet ring (>50%) carcinoma
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1315 25/10/2017   10:03CHAPTER 72  The vermiform appendix
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1316
Pseudomyxoma peritonei
PMP is a rare condition typified by progressive peritoneal 
tumour deposits, mucinous ascites, omental cake and ovarian 
involvement in females (Figure 72.20). The vast majority of 
cases arise as a result of perforation of a mucinous appendiceal 
tumour. This association was first described by Fraenkel in 
1901. Patients typically present with progressive and massive 
abdominal distension, anorexia and symptoms of bowel dys-
function. The condition is invariably fatal without interven-
tion. Traditionally, PMP was thought to have an incidence 
of one per million per year, but it is now thought to be at 
least double that. The overall risk of developing pseudomyx-
oma following removal of an appendix harbouring epithelial 
tumour is approximately 9%, with the risk varying according 
to the tumour subtype and the mode of presentation. Follow-
ing removal of a non-mucinous neoplasm the risk of PMP is as 
low as 3%, while it may be as high as 30–50% in the case of a 
mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix. PMP is classified 
according to the degree of cytological atypia within the peri -
toneal deposits (Table 72.4) and its grading may differ from 
that of the causative appendiceal tumour.
TREATMENT – APPENDICEAL EPITHELIAL TUMOUR 
WITHOUT PMP
In patients with an incidental finding of an epithelial neo -
plasm and no current evidence of established PMP , subse-
quent treatment is dependent on the degree of cytological 
atypia within the primary tumour and the estimated future 
risk of developing PMP .
Patients with low-grade epithelial neoplasms and no evi -
dence of mucin or epithelial cells beyond the appendix are 
thought to be at low, but not negligible, risk of future PMP 
development. A colonoscopy should be performed to exclude 
associated colonic epithelial lesions and patients entered into 
TABLE 72.4 Classification of pseudomyxoma peritonei 
(adapted from Carr et al., 2016).
Acellular mucin
Low-grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei
High-grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei
High-grade mucinous carcinoma peritonei with signet ring cells
Figure 72.20 Pseudomyxoma peritonei secondary to a high-grade mucinous neoplasm of the appendix as seen at laparoscopy and computed 
tomography (CT). (a, b) Mucinous tumour of the right hemidiaphragm (D) and liver capsule (L) causing characteristic scalloping (S) at CT . 
(c, d) Mucinous tumour filling the pelvis posterior to the uterus (U) with the corresponding CT findings (courtesy of Dr C Cronin, FRCR, Dublin, 
Ireland).
(d)
(b)
S
(c)
U
(a)
D
L
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1316 25/10/2017   10:03Further reading 1317
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
a surveillance protocol for at least 5 years. Surveillance may 
take the form of clinical review, annual low-dose abdom -
inopelvic CT scan and appendix-related tumour markers 
(CEA, CA 199, CA 125).
Patients with high-grade tumour , invasive adenocar -
cinoma or goblet cell tumour and/or those with epithelial 
cell containing mucin outside the appendix are at higher 
risk of nodal involvement and subsequent development of 
PMP . According to current paradigms, such patients should 
be approached in a similar fashion to patients with estab -
lished PMP and consideration given to right hemicolectomy 
with prophylactic regional (right parietal) peritonectomy, 
omentectomy and intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Consider -
ation should also be given to performing bilaterral salpingo-  
ophorectomy, although in patients of childbearing age the 
decision making is complex.
TREATMENT – ESTABLISHED PMP
The standard accepted treatment for established PMP is 
cytoreductive surgery (CRS) combined with heated intraper-
itoneal chemotherapy HIPEC (Sugarbaker). This approach 
combines multiple peritonectomy procedures with multiv-
isceral resections as required to achieve a complete surgical 
clearance of the tumour (complete cytoreduction), which 
is augmented by HIPEC to eradicate presumed residual 
microscopic disease. The combined operation can take in 
excess of 10 hours and may require total abdominopelvic 
peritonectomy, greater and lesser omentectomy, bilaterral 
salpingo-ophorectomy, hysterectomy, cholecystectomy, sple-
nectomy, partial gastrectomy, colectomy and anterior resec-
tion of the rectum. The largest reported series of CRS/HIPEC 
for PMP comes from Basingstoke, UK (Moran). In their 
experience involving more than 1000 patients, a complete 
cytoreduction was achieved in approximately 75% of patients 
with the remainder undergoing maximal tumour debulking. 
Although a potentially morbid procedure, in experienced 
centres the operative mortality rate following CRS/HIPEC is 
less than 2% with major postoperative morbidity occuring in 
15% of patients. Following a complete cytoreduction 5- and 
10-year survival rates of 87% and 70%, respectively, can be 
achieved. Poorer outcomes are seen in males, patients with 
elevated tumour markers and following resection of tumour 
showing high-grade or invasive features.
FURTHER READING
Andersen BR, Kallehave FL, Andersen HK. Antibiotics versus placebo 
for prevention of postoperative infection after appendicectomy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005; Issue 3, Art. No. CD001439. 
Ansari N, Chandrakumaran K, Dayal S et al. Cytoreductive surgery and 
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy in 1000 patients with 
perforated appendiceal epithelial tumours. Eur J Surg Oncol  2016; 
42(7): 1035–41.
Berry J, Malt RA. Appendicitis near its centenary. Am J Surg 1984; 
2000: 567–75.
Carr NJ, Cecil TD, Mohamed F et al. (2016) A consensus for classifica-
tion and pathologic reporting of pseudomyxoma peritonei and asso-
ciated appendiceal neoplasia. The Results of the Peritoneal Surface 
Oncology Group International (PSOGI) Modified Delphi Process. 
Am J Surg Pathol 2016; 40: 14–26.
Ingraham AM, Cohen ME, Bilimoria KY et al. Effect of delay to opera -
tion on outcomes in adults with acute appendicitis. Arch Surg 2010; 
145: 886–92.
Kim K, Kim YH, Kim Sy et al. Low-dose abdominal CT for evaluating 
suspected appendicitis. N Engl J Med 2012; 366: 1596–1605.
Murphy EMA, Farquharson SM, Moran BJ. Management of an unex -
pected appendiceal neoplasm. Br J Surg 2006; 93: 783–92.
National Surgical Research Collaborative. Multicentre observational 
study of performance variation in provision and outcome of emer -
gency appendicectomy. Br J Surg 2013; 100: 1240–52.
Salminen P , Paajanen H, Rautio T et al. Antibiotic therapy vs appen-
dectomy for treatment of uncomplicated acute appendicitis. The 
APPAC randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015; 313: 2340–8.
Sauerland S, Jaschinski T, Neugebauer EA. Laparoscopic versus open 
surgery for suspected appendicitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 
CD001546.
van Rossem CC, Bolmers MD, Schreinemacher MH et al. Prospective 
nationwide outcome audit of surgery for suspected acute appendici -
tis. Br J Surg 2016; 103: 144–51
Wright GP, Mater ME, Carroll JT et al. Is there truly an oncologic indica-
tion for interval appendectomy? Am J Surg 2015; 209: 442–6.
Paul H. Sugarbaker , contemporary, surgeon, Washingon DC, USA
Brendan J. Moran , contemporary, surgeon, Basingstoke, UK
11_72-B&L27_Pt11_Ch72.indd   1317 25/10/2017   10:03Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy of the rectum and its relationship to 
surgical disease and its treatment
 • The pathology, clinical presentation, investigation, 
differential diagnosis and treatment of diseases that 
affect the rectum
To appreciate:
 • That carcinoma of the rectum is common and can 
present with symptoms similar to benign disease. 
Careful evaluation is required
 • The principles involved in the management of rectal 
pathologies
The rectum
73
ANATOMY
Surgical anatomy
The rectum begins where the tinea coli of the sigmoid colon 
join to form a continuous outer longitudinal muscle layer at 
the level of the sacral promontory. The rectum follows the 
curve of the sacrum, and ends at the anorectal junction. The 
puborectalis muscle encircles the posterior and lateral aspects 
of the junction, creating the anorectal angle (normally 120°). 
The rectum has three lateral curvatures; the upper and lower 
are convex to the right, and the middle is convex to the left. 
On the luminal aspect, these three curves are marked by semi-
circular folds (Houston’s valves).
The adult rectum is approximately 12–18  cm in length 
and is conventionally divided into three equal parts: the 
upper third, which is mobile and has a peritoneal covering 
anteriorly and laterally; the middle third, where the perito-
neum covers only the anterior and part of the lateral surfaces; 
and the lowest third, which lies deep in the pelvis below the 
peritoneal reflection.
The lower third of the rectum is separated by distinct fas -
cial layers from the prostate/vagina anteriorly (Denonvilliers’ 
fascia), and from the coccyx and lower two sacral vertebrae 
posteriorly (Waldeyer’s fascia) (Table 73.1). These fascial lay-
ers are surgically important as they act as barriers to malignant 
invasion and form the anatomical envelope for total mesorec-
tal excision (TME) to achieve complete oncological clear -
ance of rectal cancer.
Summary box 73.1
Anatomy of the rectum
●● The rectum measures approximately 15 cm in length
●● It is divided into lower, middle and upper thirds
●● The blood supply consists of superior, middle and inferior 
rectal vessels
●● The lymphatic drainage follows the blood supply. The principal 
route of drainage is upwards along the superior rectal vessels 
to the para-aortic nodes, although the lower rectum can drain 
to lymphatics along the lateral pelvic side walls
John Houston , 1802–1845, physician, City of Dublin Hospital and Lecturer in Surgery, Dublin, Ireland.
Charles Pierre Denonvilliers , 1808–1872, Professor of Anatomy and later of Surgery, Paris, France.
Heinrich Wilhelm Gottfried Waldeyer-Hartz , 1836–1921, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Berlin, Germany.
TABLE 73.1 Anatomical relations of the rectum.
Relation
Anterior Bladder
Seminal vesicles and prostate (males)
Denonvillier’s fascia (males)
Pouch of Douglas and rectovaginal septum (females)
Uterus and cervix (females)
Ureters
Lateral Lateral ligaments and middle rectal artery
Obturator internus muscle and side wall of pelvis
Pelvic autonomic plexus
Levator ani muscle
Posterior Sacrum and coccyx
Waldeyer’s fascial condensation
Superior rectal artery and lymphatics
Hypogastric nerves
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1318 25/10/2017   10:04Clinical features of r ectal disease 1319
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Embryology
The embryological hindgut forms the upper rectum, while the 
lower rectum is derived from the cloaca and is surrounded by 
extraperitoneal connective tissue. The primitive gut tube is 
suspended dorsally by a mesentry throughout its length, to 
form the mesorectum. The muscular layers of the rectum are 
derived from the mesenchyme that accompanies the endo -
dermal part of the anorectum, with the inner circular layer 
preceding the outer longitudinal layer in the 7th week of 
embryonic development.
The levator ani muscles and external anal sphincter mus-
cles form within the surrounding mesenchyme and grow to 
make contact with each other and with bundles of smooth 
muscle cells from the outer longitudinal layer of the rectal 
wall. A layer of undifferentiated mesenchyme separates the 
rectal muscle layers from the levator ani muscle and the mus-
cle layer of the future anal canal.
Blood supply
The superior rectal artery is the direct continuation of the 
inferior mesenteric artery and is the main arterial supply of 
the rectum (Figure 73.1). The arteries and their accom -
panying lymphatics lie within the loose fatty tissue in the 
mesorectum, surrounded by a sheath of connective tissue (the 
mesorectal fascia). The middle rectal artery arises on each 
side from the internal iliac artery and passes to the rectum in 
the lateral ligaments. It is usually small and often only present 
on one side, and divides into several branches. The inferior 
rectal artery arises on each side from the internal pudendal 
artery as it enters Alcock’s canal. It hugs the inferior surface of 
the levator ani muscle as it crosses the roof of the ischiorectal 
fossa to enter the anal muscles.
Venous drainage
The superior haemorrhoidal veins draining the upper half of 
the anal canal above the dentate line pass upwards to become 
the rectal veins; these unite to form the superior rectal vein, 
which later becomes the inferior mesenteric vein. This forms 
part of the portal venous system and ultimately drains into the 
splenic vein. Middle rectal veins exist but are small, unim-
portant channels unless the normal paths are blocked.
Lymphatic drainage
The lymphatics of the rectal mucosa communicate freely with 
those of the muscle layers. The usual drainage flow is upwards, 
and only to a limited extent laterally and downwards. For this 
reason, surgical clearance of malignant disease concentrates 
mainly on achieving wide resection of proximal lymph nodes. 
However, if the usual upward routes are blocked, for example 
by metastatic disease, the flow can reverse and it is possible 
to find involved lymph nodes on the side walls of the pel-
vis (along the middle rectal vessels) or even in the inguinal 
region (along the inferior rectal artery).
CLINICAL FEATURES OF RECTAL 
DISEASE
Symptoms
Rectal diseases are common and can occur at any age. The 
symptoms of many of them overlap. In general, inflammatory 
conditions affect younger age groups, while tumours occur in 
the middle-aged and elderly.
Middle
sacral artery
Internal
iliac artery
Superior
rectal artery
Middle
rectal artery
Inferior
rectal artery
Inferior
mesenteric
artery
Levator
ani muscle
Figure 73.1 Blood supply to the rectum. The main blood supply 
comes from the superior rectal arteries, supplemented by middle rec-
tal arteries in 20% of cases. The inferior rectal arteries are derived from 
the pudendal vessels and supply the anal canal and lower rectum.
Bleeding
This is often painless and bright red in colour and should be 
carefully investigated at any age.
Altered bowel habit
Early morning stool frequency (spurious diarrhoea) is a symp-
tom of rectal carcinoma, while blood-stained, frequent, loose 
stools characterise the inflammatory diseases.
Discharge
Mucus and pus are associated with rectal inflammation.
Tenesmus
Often described by the patient as ‘I feel I want to go but noth-
ing happens’, this is normally an ominous symptom of rectal 
Summary box 73.2
Main symptoms of rectal disease
●● Fresh bleeding per rectum
●● Altered bowel habit with loose stool
●● Mucus discharge
●● Tenesmus
●● Prolapse
●● Proctalgia (pain)
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1319 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1320
cancer, but can occur with other rectal conditions and is a 
common symptom of rectal prolapse.
Prolapse
This usually indicates either mucosal or full-thickness rectal 
wall protrusion from the anus. Internal prolapse or intussus -
ception refers to a telescoping of the rectum into itself with -
out protrusion from the anus.
Pain: ‘proctalgia’
This is usually a severe and episodic pain resulting from spasm 
of the levator ani muscle. It may last for a few seconds to min-
utes then recur, or it can be constant.
Signs
To examine the rectum the patient is most conveniently posi-
tioned in the left lateral (Sims) position.
Inspection
Visual examination of the anus precedes rectal examination, 
to exclude the presence of anal disease, e.g. fissure or fistula. 
Evidence of rectal prolapse or abnormal pelvic floor descent 
can be elicited by asking the patient to strain.
Digital examination
The index finger used with gentleness and precision remains 
a valuable test for rectal disease (Figure 73.2). The anal 
sphincters are assessed for anatomical integrity, resting tone 
and squeeze. In females, a rectocoele may be palpable as a her-
niation of the anterior rectal wall into the vagina. Tumours in 
the lower and middle thirds of the rectum can usually be felt. 
On removal, the finger should be examined for mucus, pus or 
blood. It is useful to note the normal, as well as the abnormal, 
findings on digital examination e.g. the prostate in the male. 
Digital findings can be recorded as intraluminal (e.g. blood, 
pus), intramural (e.g. tumours, granular areas, strictures) or 
extramural (e.g. enlarged prostate, uterine fibroids). Intramu-
ral lesions can be described as fixed, tethered or mobile.
Proctoscopy
This procedure can be used to inspect the anus, anorec-
tal junction and lower rectum. A lubricated proctoscope is 
inserted through the anus to provide views of the lower rec-
tum and anal canal (Figure 73.3). Biopsy can be performed 
of any suspicious areas, provided it is above the sensitive ano-
derm. Proctoscopy is particularly useful for assessing the pres-
ence of haemorrhoids.
Sigmoidoscopy
In the past, the sigmoidoscope was a rigid stainless steel instru-
ment of variable diameter and normally 25  cm in length, but 
this has been replaced by disposable plastic instruments. The 
rectum must be empty for proper inspection. Direct inspec -
tion of the rectal mucosa may alert the clinician to inflam -
mation or tumours. This procedure can be performed in the 
outpatient setting.
FLEXIBLE SIGMOIDOSCOPE
This is used as a supplement to rigid sigmoidoscopy or when 
views proximal to the rectum are required (Figure 73.4). The 
lower bowel needs to be cleaned out with preliminary enemas. 
In addition to the rectum, the whole sigmoid colon up to the 
splenic flexure is within visual reach. Flexible sigmoidoscopy 
is indicated to investigate underlying causes of fresh rectal 
bleeding or other bowel symptoms when full visualisation of 
the colon by colonoscopy is not required. 
James Marion Sims , 1813–1883, gynaecological surgeon, the State Hospital for Women, New York, NY, USA, introduced this position to give access to the 
anterior vaginal wall during operations for the closure of vaginovesicular fistulae.
Figure 73.2 Digital rectal examination in the male. Assessment of 
the anal sphincter complex, lower rectum and prostate.
Figure 73.3 Above: proctoscope for visualisation of the anor ectum. 
Below: rigid sigmoidscope for visualisation of the rectum.
Summary box 73.3
Examination of the rectum
●● Visual inspection of the perineum
●● Digital examination
●● Proctoscopy
●● Sigmoidoscopy – rigid and/or flexible
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1320 25/10/2017   10:04Prolapse 1321
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
INJURIES
The rectum or anal canal may be injured in a number of ways, 
all of which are uncommon:
 ● by falling in a sitting posture onto a pointed object;
 ● penetrating injury (including gunshots) to the buttocks;
 ● sexual assault or sexual activity involving anal penetration;
 ● by the fetal head during childbirth, especially forceps-  
assisted.
Diagnosis
The anus should be inspected and the abdomen palpated. 
If abdominal rigidity or tenderness is present, early laparos -
copy or laparotomy is indicated. A water-soluble contrast 
enema may help in delineating the injury , but a computed 
tomographic (CT) scan is often preferred and will provide 
additional information on other pelvic injuries, such as 
accompanying urethral injury.
Treatment
The rectum is examined under general anaesthetic with a fin-
ger and a sigmoidoscope. If penetrating injury is confirmed, 
laparotomy or laparoscopy is required. If an intraperitoneal 
rupture of the rectum is found, the perforation is closed with 
sutures and the rectum defunctioned with a stoma. In the 
event that the rectal injury cannot be repaired, a Hartmann’s 
procedure may need to be performed. If the rectal injury is 
below the peritoneal reflection, wide drainage from below is 
indicated, with rectal washout and a defunctioning colostomy. 
Care must be taken to preserve sphincter function during 
debridement of the perineal wounds. Antibiotic cover must 
be provided against both aerobic and anaerobic organisms.
FOREIGN BODIES IN THE 
RECTUM
The variety of foreign bo dies that have found their way into 
the rectum is hardly less remarkable than the ingenuity dis -
played in their removal (Figure 73.5). The difficulty lies in 
the creation of a vacuum effect when trying to extract the 
object through the anus. If insurmountable difficulty is expe -
rienced in grasping any foreign body in the rectum, lapa -
rotomy is usually necessary. The object can be pushed from 
above into the assistant’s fingers in the rectum, or removed 
by means of a rectotomy in a proximal area of the rectum. If 
there is considerable laceration of the mucosa, a temporary 
colostomy is advisable.
Figure 73.4 Flexible sigmoidoscope.
Figure 73.5 Foreign body in r ectum as seen on plain abdominal 
x-ray.
PROLAPSE
Mucosal prolapse
The mucous membrane and submucosa of the rectum pro -
trude outside the anus for approximately 1–4 cm. When the 
prolapsed mucosa is palpated between the finger and the 
thumb, it is evident that it is composed of no more than a 
double layer of mucous membrane. This distinguishes muco -
sal prolapse from full-thickness prolapse where the entire rec-
tal wall exits from the anal canal.
Summary box 73.4
Injuries to the rectum are serious and invariably require 
surgery
●● A temporary colostomy is often necessary
●● There is a serious risk of associated necrotising fasciitis, and 
broad-spectrum antibiotics are mandatory
●● There may be associated bladder or urethral damage
In infants
The direct downward course of the rectum, due to the 
as-yet undeveloped sacral curve, predisposes infants to this 
condition.
In children
Mucosal prolapse often commences after an attack of diar -
rhoea, or from loss of weight and consequent loss of fat in 
the ischiorectal fossa. It may also be associated with cystic 
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1321 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1322
 fibrosis, neurological disorder, Hirschsprung’ s disease, rectal 
polyps and maldevelopment of the pelvis.
In adults
The condition in adults is often associated with third-degree 
haemorrhoids, when it is referred to as mucohaemorrhoidal 
prolapse (Figure 73.6). In the female, a torn perineum, and 
in the male straining from urethral obstruction, predispose to 
mucosal prolapse. In old age, both mucosal and full-thickness 
prolapse are associated with weakness of the sphincter 
mechanism. Partial prolapse may follow an operation for 
fistula-in-ano where a large portion of muscle has been 
divided. Here, the prolapse is usually localised to the damaged 
quadrant and is seldom progressive.
Treatment
IN INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN
 ● Digital repositioning. The parents are taught to replace 
the protrusion, and any underlying causes are addressed.
 ● Submucosal injection or banding. If digital repositioning 
fails after a 6-week trial, injection of 5% phenol in almond 
oil or rubber band ligation is carried out under general 
anaesthetic (Figure 73.7).
IN ADULTS
 ● Local treatments. Submucosal injections of phenol in 
almond oil or the application of rubber bands may be suc-
cessful in cases of mucosal prolapse.
 ● Excision of the prolapsed mucosa. When the prolapse is 
unilateral, the redundant mucosa can be excised or, if cir-
cumferential, an endoluminal stapling technique or inter-
nal Delorme’s procedure can be used.
Full-thickness prolapse
Complete rectal prolapse (synonym: procidentia) is less com-
mon than the mucosal variety. The protrusion consists of all 
layers of the rectal wall and is usually associated with a weak 
pelvic floor and/or chronic straining. The prolapse is thought 
to commence as an intussusception of the rectum, which 
descends to protrude outside the anus. The process starts with 
the anterior wall of the rectum, where the supporting tissues 
are weakest, especially in women. It is more than 4 cm and 
commonly as much as 10–15 cm in length (Figure 73.8). On 
Summary box 73.5
Rectal prolapse
●● It may be mucosal or full thickness
●● If full thickness, the whole wall of the rectum is included
●● It commences as a rectal intussusception
●● In children, the prolapse is usually mucosal and should be 
treated conservatively
●● In the adult, the prolapse is often full thickness and is 
frequently associated with incontinence
●● Surgery is necessary for full-thickness rectal prolapse
●● The operation is performed either via the perineum or via the 
abdomen
Figure 73.6 Mucohaemorrhoidal prolapse of the anorectum.
Figure 73.7 Through a proctoscope, a rubber band is applied to an 
area of mucohaemorrhoidal prolapse.
Figure 73.8 Full-thickness r ectal pr olapse. The whole bowel wall 
protrudes through the anus.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1322 25/10/2017   10:04Prolapse 1323
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
palpation between the finger and thumb, the prolapse feels 
much thicker than mucosal prolapse, and consists of a double 
thickness of the entire wall of the rectum. Any prolapse over 
5 cm in length will contain anteriorly, between its layers, a 
pouch of peritoneum. When large, the peritoneal pouch may 
contain small intestine or bladder. The anal sphincter is char-
acteristically patulous and gapes widely on straining to allow 
the rectum to prolapse. Complete prolapse is uncommon in 
children but may occur as a result of malnutrition. In adults, 
it can occur at any age, but it is more common in the elderly 
and sometimes in patients with anorexia nervosa. Women are 
affected six times more often than men, and it is commonly 
associated with other pelvic organ prolapse. In approximately 
50% of adults, faecal incontinence is also a feature. Compli -
cations of rectal prolapse include rectal ulceration and bleed-
ing, incontinence and even incarceration with strangulation 
of the rectum.
Differential diagnosis
In the case of a child with abdominal pain, the anus should 
be examined to exclude rectal prolapse as a cause. This should 
also be distinguished from intussusception protruding from 
the anus.
Treatment
Surgery is required for full-thickness rectal prolapse, and 
the operation can be performed via a perineal or abdominal 
approach. Abdominal operations can be by an open or lapa -
roscopic approach. Abdominal rectopexy, either laparoscopic 
or open, has a lower rate of recurrence (<10%), but when the 
patient is elderly and very frail a perineal operation is usually 
safer, and if necessary can be performed under regional anaes-
thetic blockade. As an abdominal procedure risks damage to 
the pelvic autonomic nerves, resulting in possible sexual dys-
function, a perineal approach may be preferred in young men.
PERINEAL APPROACH
These procedures have been used most frequently:
 ● Thiersch operation. In this procedure, a steel wire, or silas-
tic or nylon tape, is placed around the anal canal. It has 
become largely obsolete owing to problems with chronic 
perineal sepsis, anal stenosis and obstructed defaecation.
 ● Delorme’s operation. In this procedure, the rectal mucosa 
is stripped circumferentially from the rectum over the 
length of prolapse (Figure 73.9). The underlying muscle 
is plicated with a series of sutures, so that the rectal muscle 
is concertinaed towards the anal canal. The excess rectal 
mucosa is excised and a mucosal anastomosis performed. 
The resulting effect is to reduce the prolapse as a plicated 
ring of muscle above the anal canal. This operation may 
be preferred in patients with short segment full rectal pro-
lapse, but recurrence rates are high, in the region of 30% 
over 5 years.
 ● Altemeier’s procedure. In this procedure, the rectum 
is prolapsed through the anal canal and a full-thickness 
resection performed, incorporating any associated colonic 
prolapse. Restoration of colorectal continuity can be per -
formed by either a hand-sewn or stapled anastomosis. 
This is the procedure of choice in patients presenting 
with incarcerated and strangulated prolapse. It is a good 
alternative perineal procedure to the Delorme’s operation, 
particularly following recurrence. However, it is often 
complicated by poor bowel control with faecal soiling 
secondary to loss of the rectal reservoir. Recurrence rates 
range from 0 to 20%.
The advantages of a perineal approach include minimal 
postoperative pain, early mobility and low levels of morbidity. 
However, given the higher recurrence rates when compared 
with the abdominal operations, it is best reserved for patients 
at high risk of complications when undergoing a major 
operation.
ABDOMINAL APPROACH
The principle of all abdominal operations for rectal prolapse 
is to fix the rectum in its normal anatomical position. Many 
variations have been described, including inserting a sheet 
of polypropylene mesh between the rectum and the sacrum, 
hitching up the rectosigmoid junction with a Teflon sling 
to the front of the sacrum, or simply suturing the mobilised 
rectum to the sacrum using four to six interrupted non- 
absorbable sutures – so-called ‘sutured rectopexy’. Currently, 
the technique is most often performed laparoscopically, 
reducing the operative trauma, limiting the time in hospital 
and broadening its indication for higher-risk patients.
As an abdominal rectopexy may lead to severe constipa -
tion, some surgeons recommend combining this procedure 
Karl Thiersch , 1822–1895, Professor of Surgery, Leipzig, Germany.
Edmond Delorme , 1847–1929, Professor of Surgery, Val-de-Grace Military Hospital, Paris, France.
William Altemeier , 1910–1983, Professor of Surgery, Cincinnati, USA.
(a) (b)
Figure 73.9 Delorme’s procedure for rectal prolapse. (a) The mucosa 
is stripped from the muscular gut tube. (b) Interrupted sutures are 
used to plicate the muscular gut tube and reduce the prolapse. The 
operation is concluded by suturing the mucosa. Redrawn with per -
mission from Keighley MRB, Williams NS. Surgery of the anus, rectum 
and colon. London: WB Saunders, 1999.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1323 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1324
with resection of the sigmoid colon, so-called ‘resection rec-
topexy’. Recently, a laparoscopic anterior mesh rectopexy has 
gained favour. In this procedure, the plane between the rec -
tum and vagina (or prostate) is dissected, and a strip of mesh 
sutured to the anterior rectum and posterior vaginal vault. 
The upper end of the mesh is secured to the sacral promon-
tory with sutures or tacks, thus re-suspending the rectum and 
preventing prolapse (Figure 73.10).
RECTAL EVACUATION 
DISORDER, RECTAL 
INTUSSUSCEPTION AND 
SOLITARY RECTAL ULCER 
SYNDROME (SRUS)
Rectal evacuation disorder (RED) is becoming a more com-
monly diagnosed problem and is complex in aetiology and 
treatment. Symptoms consist of a difficulty in emptying 
despite persistent straining and a feeling of incompleteness 
in the process. Rectal intussusception is often a component 
of RED whereby the rectal wall infolds on itself to produce 
an internal prolapse during straining. Solitary rectal ulcer 
syndrome may also be another associated manifestation of 
RED. Classically, SRUS takes the form of an ulcer on the 
anterior wall of the rectum, situated around 8 cm from the anal 
verge. In this form, it can be mistaken for rectal carcinoma 
or inflammatory bowel disease, particularly Crohn’s disease. 
It may heal, leaving a polypoid appearance. Proctographic 
studies may indicate accompanying rectal intussusception 
or anterior rectal wall prolapse. Histology will confirm the 
diagnosis. The condition is difficult to treat. Symptomatic 
relief from bleeding and discharge may sometimes be achieved 
by controlling any associated straining with recoordination 
of defaecation using biofeedback therapy. Transanal stapled 
resection of the intussusception (STARR procedure) or 
resuspension of the rectum by abdominal rectopexy may be 
beneficial. In rare cases, rectal excision may be required with 
or without stoma.
PROCTITIS
The patient is usually middle-aged and complains of defaeca-
tory frequency with the passage of loose motions, often with 
blood mixed in the stools. Inflammation is sometimes limited 
to the rectum; in other cases, it is associated with a similar 
condition in the colon (proctocolitis). The inflammation can 
be acute or chronic. Although the patient has a frequent, 
intense desire to defaecate, the amount of faeces passed at any 
time is small. Acute proctitis is usually accompanied by mal -
aise and pyrexia. On rectal examination, there may be tender-
ness and blood on the glove. Proctoscopy is seldom sufficient 
and sigmoidoscopy is the more valuable method of examina -
tion. If the diagnosis is confirmed, colonoscopy with multiple 
biopsies is mandatory to determine the extent of the inflam -
matory process. Skilled pathological assessment is required to 
establish and classify the underlying pathology. Stool cultures 
should be sent routinely to exclude infective causes. If biopsy 
and histology are unable to establish an underlying inflamma-
tory aetiology, the condition is frequently termed non-specific 
proctitis, but may herald a subsequent diagnosis of inflamma-
tory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease).
Treatment is usually medical and tailored to the underly -
ing pathology. Non-specific colitis may be self-limiting, but 
treatment with topical 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) com-
pounds in the form of suppositories or foam enemas is usually 
effective. In resistant cases, oral steroids may have to be used. 
Figure 73.10 (a) Laparoscopic ventral mesh rectopexy: a prosthetic 
mesh is sutured to the front of the lower rectum and used to resus -
pend the rectum by securing the proximal end of the mesh to the 
sacral promontory. (b) Intraoperative image of a robotic ventral mesh 
rectopexy showing suturing of the mesh to the anterior rectum after 
dissection of the rectovaginal septum.
(a)
(b)
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1324 25/10/2017   10:04Proctitis 1325
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Ulcerative proctocolitis
Proctitis is present in most cases of ulcerative colitis, and the 
degree of rectal involvement may influence the type of opera-
tive procedure (see Chapter 70).
Proctitis due to Crohn’s disease
Crohn’s disease can occasionally affect the rectum, although 
classically it is spared. Sigmoidoscopic appearances differ from 
those in non-specific proctitis. The inflammatory process 
tends to be patchy rather than confluent, and there may be 
fissuring, ulceration or even a cobblestone appearance. Rectal 
Crohn’s disease is often associated with severe perineal dis -
ease characterised by fistulation, fissuring and haemorrhoids. 
Coexistent disease is often present in the rest of the colon or 
small bowel, or both.
Radiation proctitis
Radiation therapy is used in the treatment of cervical, pros-
tate and rectal cancers. It can produce acute radiation procti-
tis with bleeding, pain, diarrhoea and defaecatory frequency . 
Most symptoms settle within a few weeks, but some patients 
develop chronic proctitis with symptoms appearing months 
or even decades after the radiation exposure.
Proctitis due to specific infections
Clostridium difficile
An acute form of proctocolitis caused by infection with 
Clostridium difficile can follow broad-spectrum antibiotics. A 
membrane can sometimes be seen on sigmoidoscopy (‘pseu -
domembranous’ colitis).
Bacillary dysentery
The appearance is that of an acute purulent proctitis with 
multiple small, shallow ulcers.
Amoebic dysentery
The infection is more likely to be chronic, with exacerbations 
after a long period of symptom improvement.  Proctoscopy 
and sigmoidoscopy are not painful. The appearance of an 
amoebic ulcer is described in Chapter 70.
Tuberculous proctitis
This is nearly always associated with active pulmonary tuber-
culosis or tuberculous ulceration of the anus. Submucous rec-
tal abscesses burst and leave ulcers with an undermined edge. 
A hypertrophic type of tuberculous proctitis occurs in associ-
ation with tuberculous peritonitis or tuberculous salpingitis. 
This type of tuberculous proctitis requires biopsy for confir -
mation of the diagnosis.
Gonococcal proctitis
Gonococcal proctitis occurs in both sexes as the result of rectal 
coitus and, in the female, from direct spread from the vulva. 
In the acute stage, the mucous membrane is hyperaemic, and 
thick pus can be expressed as the proctoscope is withdrawn. 
In the early stages, the diagnosis can be readily established by 
bacteriological examination but, later, when the infection is 
mixed, it is more difficult to recognise. Systemic treatment is 
so effective that local treatment is unnecessary.
Lymphogranuloma venereum
The modes of infection are similar to those of gonococcal 
proctitis but, in the female, chlamydial infection spreading 
from the cervix uteri via lymphatics to the pararectal lymph 
nodes is common. The proctological findings are similar to 
those of gonococcal proctitis. The diagnosis of lymphogranu-
loma venereum should be suspected when the inguinal lymph 
nodes are greatly enlarged, although nodal enlargement may 
be subsiding by the time proctitis commences.
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) due to human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) may present with a particu-
larly florid type of proctitis. In such patients, unusual organ -
isms including cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus 
and parasites such as Cryptosporidium are often found.
‘Strawberry’ lesion of the rectosigmoid
This results from infection by Spirochaeta vincenti and Bacillus 
fusiformis. The leading symptom is diarrhoea, often scantily 
blood stained. Occasionally, the diagnosis can be made by the 
demonstration of the specific organisms in the stools. More 
often, sigmoidoscopy is required. The characteristic lesion 
is a thickened, somewhat raised mucosa, with superficial 
ulceration in the region of the rectosigmoid. The inflamed 
mucous membrane oozes blood at numerous pinpoints, giv -
ing the appearance of an over-ripe strawberry. A swab should 
be taken and examined for Vincent’s and fusiform organisms. 
Swabs from the gums and throat are also advisable.
Summary box 73.6
Proctitis
●● May be non-specific or related to a specific infective agent
●● Non-specific proctitis usually remains confined to the distal 
bowel, but can involve the proximal colon
●● Symptoms include defaecatory frequency, loose stools, 
bleeding and tenesmus
●● Endoscopic assessment with biopsy is required to establish 
the diagnosis
●● Treatment usually involves medical management
Jean Hyacinthe Vincent , 1862–1950, Professor of Epidemiology, Val-de-Grace Military Hospital, Paris, France.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1325 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1326
Rectal bilharziasis
Rectal bilharziasis is caused by Schistosoma mansoni , which 
is endemic in many tropical and subtropical countries, and 
particularly in the Nile Delta. In stage 1, a cutaneous lesion 
develops at the site of entrance of the cercariae (parasites of 
freshwater snails). Stage 2 is characterised by pyrexia, urti-
caria and a high eosinophilia. Both these stages are frequently 
overlooked. Stage 3 results from deposition of the ova in the 
rectum (much more rarely in the bladder; Chapter 77) and 
is manifested by bilharzial dysentery. On examination in the 
later stages, papillomas are frequently seen. The papillomas, 
which are sessile or pedunculated, contain the ova of the 
trematode, the life cycle of which resembles that of Schisto-
soma haematobium. Untreated, the rectum becomes festooned, 
and prolapse of the diseased mucous membrane is usual. Mul-
tiple fistulae-in-ano are prone to develop.
The primary treatment is systemic and should be under -
taken by a specialist in tropical medicine. When the papil -
lomas persist in spite of treatment, they should be treated by 
local destruction.
Proctitis due to herbal enemas
This is a well-known clinical entity to those practising in 
tropical Africa. Following an enema consisting of a concoc -
tion of ginger, pepper and bark, administered by a traditional 
healer, a virulent proctitis sets in. Pelvic peritonitis frequently 
supervenes. Not infrequently, a complete gelatinous cast of 
the mucous membrane of the rectum is extruded. Very large 
doses of morphine, together with antibiotics, often prevent 
a fatal outcome if commenced early. Temporary colostomy is 
often advisable.
RECTAL POL YPS
The rectum, along with the sigmoid colon, is the most fre -
quent site of polyps (and cancers) in the gastrointestinal 
tract. Adenomatous polyps of the colon and rectum have the 
potential to become malignant. The chance of developing 
invasive cancer is enhanced if the polyp is more than 1  cm 
in diameter. Removal of all polyps is recommended to allow 
complete histological diagnosis and exclude carcinoma. This 
is best done using endoscopic biopsy or snare polypectomy 
techniques. If one or more rectal polyps are discovered on sig-
moidoscopic examination, a colonoscopy must be performed 
because further polyps are frequently found in the colon.
The rectum shares the same spectrum of polyps as the 
colon. Polyps are described in terms of their appearance 
(pedunculated, sessile, flat) or histological composition 
(tubular, villous, tubulovillous).
Polyps relevant to the rectum
Hyperplastic polyps
These are small, pinkish, sessile polyps, 2–4  mm in diameter 
and frequently multiple. They are common and generally 
harmless.
Tubular adenomas
Tubular adenomas, or mixed tubulovillous adenomas, are the 
most common type of polyp. They have the potential to turn 
malignant, particularly if over 1 cm in diameter.
Villous adenomas
These have a characteristic frond-like appearance. They 
may be very large, occupying much of the circumference of 
the rectum. These tumours have an increased tendency to 
become malignant. Rarely, the profuse mucus discharge from 
these tumours, which is rich in potassium, causes electrolyte 
and fluid losses (Figure 73.11).
Serrated adenomas
These polyps are more commonly found in the right colon, 
but may be present in the rectum. They are typically sessile 
lesions that have a distinct microscopic architecture and can 
give rise to cancers through an alternative ‘serrated’ pathway.
Familial adenomatous polyposis
This autosomal dominant inherited condition is character -
ised by the development of multiple rectal and colonic adeno-
mas around puberty. It is due to mutation in the adenomatous 
polyposis coli ( APC) gene, allowing genetic testing in the 
75% of families in which a mutation can be identified. A 
colonoscopy and biopsy will confirm the diagnosis. As this 
condition is premalignant, total colectomy is usually rec-
ommended within 10 years of disease onset. This may take 
the form of pan-proctocolectomy with permanent ileostomy. 
Rectal preservation may be an option if the rectal polyp load 
is not too severe, with colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis, 
but continuous rectal surveillance for synchronous polyps will 
Theodor Maximillan Bilharz , 1825–1862, Professor of Zoology, Cairo, Egypt.
Figure 73.11 Large villous adenoma that occupied the lower half of 
the rectum and caused hypokalaemia.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1326 25/10/2017   10:04Benign rectal lesions 1327
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
be required. The alternative, if restoration of gastrointestinal 
continuity is desired, is to undertake restorative proctocolec -
tomy with ileal pouch–anal anastomosis (see Chapter 70).
Inflammatory pseudopolyps
These are oedematous islands of mucosa. They are usually 
associated with colitis in the UK, but most inflammatory dis-
eases (including tropical diseases) can cause them. They are 
more likely to cause radiological difficulty, as the sigmoido -
scopic appearance is usually associated with obvious signs of 
active or quiescent inflammation.
Juvenile polyp
This is a bright red, glistening pedunculated sphere (‘cherry 
tumour’), which is found in infants and children. Occasion -
ally, it persists into adult life. It can cause bleeding, or pain if 
it prolapses during defaecation. It often separates itself, but 
can be removed easily with forceps or a snare. A solitary juve-
nile polyp has virtually no tendency to malignant change, but 
should be treated if it is causing symptoms. It has a unique 
histological structure with large mucus-filled spaces covered 
by a smooth surface of thin rectal cuboidal epithelium (Figure 
73.12). The rare autosomal dominant inherited syndrome 
juvenile polyposis does carry an increased risk of malignancy. 
It is characterised by multiple polyps and a positive family 
history.
Treatment of rectal polyps
All polyps should be biopsied or removed for histological 
analysis to exclude cancer. A range of techniques can be used 
to remove rectal polyps, dependent on their size and loca -
tion. The majority of polyps less than 1  cm in size are benign 
and are amenable to endoscopic polypectomy. Polyps greater 
than 1 cm in size have a 10% chance of harbouring a malig -
nancy. Submucosal infiltration with saline or colloid solution 
can give an indication of invasive malignancy , with cancers 
exhibiting tethering to submucosal tissues and failing to ‘lift’. 
Most polyps of 2  cm in size or less can be safely removed by 
endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) (Figure 73.13). Larger 
polyps are more difficult to remove by EMR and may require 
a transanal procedure, such as transanal endoscopic microsur-
gery (TEMS). 
Figure 73.12 Microscopic appearance of a juvenile polyp.
BENIGN RECTAL LESIONS
Endometrioma
Endometrioma is rare and may be misdiagnosed as a carci -
noma. The focus of the ectopic endometrial tissue produces 
either a constricting lesion of the rectosigmoid or a tumour 
invading the rectum from the rectovaginal septum. The latter 
variety gives rise to a tender submucous elevation of the 
rectal wall. Endometrioma usually occurs between 20 and 40 
years of age. Dysmenorrhoea and rectal bleeding (particularly 
coinciding with the menses) are the main symptoms. On 
sigmoidoscopy, endometriosis involving the rectosigmoid 
junction usually presents as a stricture, with the mucous 
membrane intact. Hormonal manipulation is the first-line 
therapy, but sometimes total abdominal hysterectomy and 
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and even bowel resection 
are required. The laparoscopic approach for resecting 
deep rectal endometriosis is becoming popular. Isolated 
endometrial deposits may be treated by diathermy ablation or 
local ‘discectomy’ incorporating the rectal wall.
Haemangioma
Haemangioma of the rectum is an uncommon cause of serious 
haemorrhage. The symptoms may mimic ulcerative colitis, 
and the diagnosis is often delayed, or it may be mistaken for 
a carcinoma. Selective angiography and embolisation may be 
helpful, but excision of the rectum is sometimes required.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumour 
(GIST)
Smooth-muscle tumours of the rectum are rare. If the mitotic 
rate is high, and if there is variation in nuclear number, size 
Summary box 73.7
Polyps in the rectum
●● Adenomas are the most frequent histological type
●● Villous adenomas may be extensive and undergo malignant 
change more commonly than tubular adenomas
●● All adenomas must be removed to avoid malignant change
●● All patients must undergo colonoscopy to determine whether 
further polyps are present
●● Most polyps can be removed by endoscopic techniques, but 
sometimes major surgery is required
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1327 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1328
and shape, hyperchromasia and frequent bizarre cells, these 
tumours are likely to metastasise. In these circumstances, 
they should be classified as malignant gastrointestinal stro -
mal tumours (formerly leiomyosarcomas). The uncertainty in 
their behaviour means that treatment should, whenever pos -
sible, be radical excision.
Neuroendocrine tumours
Neuroendocrine tumours (NET) of the rectum comprise 
19% of all gastrointestinal NET. They are classified into well- 
differentiated (grades 1 and 2) and poorly differentiated (grade 
3) tumours. Both tumour mitotic index and Ki-67 expression 
are important factors for histopathological classification. 
Grade 3 tumours include both small- and large-cell NET. 
The majority of rectal NET are grade 1, also known as carci -
noid tumours, with relatively good prognosis. These tumours 
are usually small (1–2 cm), solitary and clinically indolent. 
On the contrary, poorly differentiated grade 3 NETs are rare 
but very aggressive and metastasise at an early stage, with 
reported incidence of between 0.1 and 3.9% of all colorectal 
malignancies. Treatment of NET depends on the size of the 
tumour, its depth of invasion and the presence or absence of 
metastasis. Small lesions (1 cm) can often be treated locally, 
either endoscopically or transanally. However, larger lesions 
(> 2 cm) require formal oncological resection. Adjuvant ther-
apy is indicated only for metastatic disease.
CARCINOMAS
Globally, colorectal cancer is the second most common 
malignancy, affecting more than 1 million people every year 
and resulting in around 715,000 deaths. It is the second most 
common cancer in women and the third most common can-
cer in men, being the fourth most common cause of cancer 
death after lung, stomach, and liver cancer. In Western coun-
tries the incidence is rising, with an overall 14% increase 
since the 1970s, but with the largest increase (20%) seen in 
males. Risk factors include diet, obesity, smoking and lack of 
physical exercise. Most colorectal cancers are due to old age, 
with around 60% of cases affecting patients 70 years or older. 
The rectum is the most frequently involved site, accounting 
for approximately one-third of the cancers.
Pathogenesis
Colorectal cancer originates from premalignant precursor 
lesions in the epithelial lining of the colon or rectum in a  
stepwise progression that results in increasing dysplasia due 
to an accumulation of genetic abnormalities. In spontaneous 
colorectal cancer, as compared to hereditary cancers, this is 
referred to as the adenoma–carcinoma sequence. More than 
75–95% of colorectal cancers occur in people with little or no 
genetic risk. People with inflammatory bowel disease are at an 
increased risk, which increases with the duration of the dis -
ease, and accounts for 2% of cancers each year. Those with a 
Mucosa
Lesion
Muscularis
mucosa
Muscularis
propia
Submucosa
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 73.13 Endoscopic mucosal resection. The polyp is identified (a) and infiltration performed (b) to lift it from the underlying muscle layer. 
A diathermy snare is passed over the raised lesion (c) to achieve complete excision (d).
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1328 25/10/2017   10:04Carcinomas 1329
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
family history in two or more first-degree relatives have a two- 
to three-fold greater risk of disease and this group accounts  
for about 20% of all cases. A number of genetic syndromes 
are also associated with higher rates of colorectal cancer. The 
most common is hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal can-
cer (HNPCC or Lynch syndrome), which accounts for 3% 
of  people with colorectal cancer. Other syndromes include  
 Gardner syndrome and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
The most common abnormality found in colorectal cancer 
is mutation in the Wnt signaling pathway, which increases cell 
signalling activity. The mutations can be inherited or acquired. 
The most commonly mutated gene is the APC gene, which 
results in accumulation of the β-catenin protein. β-catenin 
activates the transcription of various proto-oncogenes that 
are responsible for normal cell renewal and differentiation, 
but when overexpressed can cause cancer. Many other muta-
tions, other than in the Wnt signaling pathway, are found in 
colorectal cancer, and include mutations in the TP53 gene 
that controls normal cell division and death, and mutations 
in genes responsible for programmed cell death, such as the 
gene encoding transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and DCC 
(deleted in colorectal cancer). Other genetic abnormalities 
include overexpression of oncogenes, including genes encod-
ing the proteins KRAS (Kirsten rat sarcoma homologue), 
RAF (rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma) and PI3K (phospho -
inositide 3-kinase), which lead to increased cell proliferation, 
and inactivation of tumour suppressor genes, such as PTEN 
(phosphatase and tensin homologue), which normally inacti-
vates the PI3K signalling pathway.
In addition to gene mutations, colorectal cancers fre-
quently exhibit epigenetic alterations – cellular or physiolog-
ical effects resulting from external or environmental factors 
that switch genes on or off. Epigenetic alterations can affect 
hundreds of genes and include changes in the expression of 
microRNAs (miRNA), hypermethylation or hypomethyl -
ation of CpG islands of protein-encoding genes, and alter -
ations in histones and chromosomal architecture, all of which 
can influence gene expression.
Clinical features
Carcinoma of the rectum can occur early in life, but the age 
of presentation is usually above 55 years, when the incidence 
rises rapidly. Often, the early symptoms are so insignificant 
that the patient does not seek advice for 6 months or more, 
and the diagnosis is often delayed in younger patients as the 
symptoms are attributed to benign causes. Initial rectal exam-
ination and a low threshold for investigating persistent symp-
toms are essential.
Bleeding
Bleeding is the earliest and most common symptom. Typi -
cally, the bleeding is bright red in colour and painless. It can 
be mixed with the motions or separate in the toilet bowel. It 
can be indistinguishable from haemorrhoidal bleeding, which 
is the most common differential diagnosis, particularly in 
younger patients.
Tenesmus
The patient experiences a sensation of needing to evacuate 
the rectum but is unable to pass a motion. This is an import -
ant early symptom and is almost invariably present in patients 
with tumours of the lower half of the rectum. The patient may 
endeavour to empty the rectum several times a day (spurious 
diarrhoea), often with the passage of flatus and a little blood-
stained mucus (‘bloody slime’).
Alteration in bowel habit
There is frequently a change in bowel habit, with a tendency 
to more frequent defaecation and the passage of looser stool. 
A patient who has to get up early in order to defaecate, or 
one who passes blood and mucus in addition to faeces (‘early-
morning bloody diarrhoea’), is usually found to be suffering 
from carcinoma of the rectum. Although a change to looser 
stools is more common, patients with a stenosing carcinoma 
at the rectosigmoid junction may complain of increasing 
constipation.
Pain
Pain is a late symptom, but pain of a colicky character may 
accompany advanced tumours of the rectosigmoid, owing to 
a degree of obstruction. Advanced cancers invading outside 
the mesorectum may infiltrate the prostate or bladder ante -
riorly or the sacral plexus posteriorly, giving rise to severe, 
intractable pain.
Weight loss
Weight loss is also a late symptom and is almost always associ-
ated with metastatic disease.
Investigation
Abdominal examination
Abdominal examination is normal in early cases. Occasion -
ally, in patients with stenosing tumours at the rectosigmoid 
junction, signs of subacute large bowel obstruction may be 
present, with abdominal distension. If large-volume liver 
metastases are present, an enlarged liver may be palpable 
along with other signs, such as cachexia. Occasionally, it may 
be possible to elicit ascites if there is widespread peritoneal 
dissemination.
Rectal examination
In many cases where the neoplasm is situated within 7–8  cm 
of the anal verge it can be felt on digital rectal examination as 
an elevated, irregular and hard endoluminal mass. When the 
centre ulcerates, a shallow depression will be felt with raised 
and everted edges. An attempt should be made to determine 
Summary box 73.8
Early symptoms of rectal cancer
●● Bleeding per rectum
●● Tenesmus
●● Early morning diarrhoea
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1329 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1330
whether the neoplasm is mobile, tethered or fixed, and to 
estimate the distance of the lower margin from the top of the 
anal sphincter complex: these factors are important in 
assessing resectablility and methods of reconstruction follow-
ing excisional surgery. In females, a vaginal examination may 
be useful if involvement of the posterior vaginal wall is 
suspected. Digital rectal examination also affords the oppor -
tunity to evaluate the anal sphincter complex, which is 
important in cases where resection and low anastomosis are 
being considered.
Rigid sigmoidoscopy
Rigid sigmoidoscopy can be performed in the outpatient 
clinic and is useful to identify the neoplasm and possibly 
obtain biopsies. However, it requires the rectum to be empty 
of faeces and may require a prior rectal enema, which may 
not be practical in the outpatient setting. As colonoscopy is 
almost always required to visualise the whole colorectum, it is 
often easier and safer to obtain biopsies at this time.
Colonoscopy
A colonoscopy is required in most patients to exclude a syn -
chronous tumour, be it an adenoma or carcinoma. If a prox-
imal adenoma is found, it can be conveniently snared and 
removed via the colonoscope. If a synchronous carcinoma 
is present, the operative strategy is likely to change. If a full 
colonoscopy is not possible, for example where there is a ste-
nosing cancer, a CT colonography or barium enema can be 
performed.
Differential diagnosis
Many colorectal lesions can give rise to diagnostic difficulty. 
For example, it may be difficult to distinguish an inflammatory 
stricture or amoebic granuloma on macroscopic appearance. 
Similarly, endometriomas, carcinoid tumours and solitary rec-
tal ulcers can be mistaken for adenocarcinoma. Benign ade-
nomas can be distinguished from malignant lesions based on 
the appearance of their mucosal ‘pit-patterns’, as highlighted 
with the ‘dye-spray’ colonoscopy technique. Biopsy and his -
tological analysis remain the mainstay of diagnosis, accepting 
that there may be diagnostic limitations caused by sampling 
errors due to small biopsy samples being unrepresentative of 
the larger lesion.
Types of carcinoma spread
Local spread
Local spread occurs circumferentially rather than in a longitu-
dinal direction. After the muscular coat has been penetrated, 
the growth spreads into the surrounding mesorectum, but is 
initially limited by the mesorectal fascia. If penetration occurs 
anteriorly, the prostate, seminal vesicles or bladder become 
involved in the male; in the female, the vagina or the uterus 
is invaded. In either sex, if the penetration is lateral, a ureter 
may become involved, while posterior penetration may reach 
the sacrum and the sacral plexus. Downward spread for more 
than a few centimetres is rare.
Lymphatic spread
Lymphatic spread from a carcinoma of the rectum above the 
peritoneal reflection occurs almost exclusively in an upward 
direction. Below that level, the lymphatic spread is still 
upwards, but when the neoplasm lies within the field of the 
middle rectal artery, primary lateral spread to the pelvic wall 
lymphatics occurs in around 20% of cases. Downward spread 
is exceptional, with drainage along the subcutaneous lym-
phatics to the groins being confined, for practical purposes, to 
the lymph nodes draining the perianal rosette and the epithe-
lial lining of the distal 1–2 cm of the anal canal.
Metastasis at a higher level than the main trunk of the 
superior rectal artery occurs late in the disease. A radical 
operation should ensure that the high-lying lymph nodes are 
removed by ligating the inferior mesenteric artery at its origin 
from the aorta. Atypical and widespread lymphatic perme -
ation can occur with highly undifferentiated neoplasms.
Venous spread
The principal sites for blood-borne metastases are liver 
(34%), lungs (22%) and adrenals (11%). The remaining 33% 
are divided among the many other locations where secondary 
carcinomatous deposits tend to lodge, including the brain.
Peritoneal dissemination
This may follow penetration of the peritoneal coat by a 
high-lying rectal carcinoma.
Stages of progression
Dukes classified carcinoma of the rectum into three stages 
(Figure 73.14).
Dukes’ staging
 ● A: The growth is limited to the rectal wall (15%). The 
prognosis is excellent (>90% 5-year survival).
 ● B: The growth extends to the extrarectal tissues, but with-
out metastasis to the regional lymph nodes (35%). The 
prognosis is reasonable (70% 5-year survival).
 ● C: There are secondary deposits in the regional lymph 
nodes (50%). These are subdivided into C1, in which the 
local pararectal lymph nodes alone are involved, and C2, 
in which the nodes accompanying the supplying blood 
vessels to their origin from the aorta are involved. This 
does not take into account cases that have metastasised 
Summary box 73.9
Diagnosis and assessment of rectal cancer
All patients with suspected rectal cancer should undergo:
●● Digital rectal examination
●● Full colorectal visualisation preferably by colonoscopy with 
biopsy or computed tomography (CT) colonography or barium 
enema
All patients with proven rectal cancer require staging by:
●● Imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, preferably by CT
●● Local pelvic imaging by magnetic resonance imaging and/or 
endoluminal ultrasound
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1330 25/10/2017   10:04Carcinomas 1331
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
beyond the regional lymph nodes or by way of the venous 
system. The prognosis is poor (40% 5-year survival).
A stage D is often included, which was not described 
by Dukes. This stage signifies the presence of widespread 
metastases, usually hepatic. Other staging systems have been 
developed (e.g. Astler–Coller, TNM) to improve prognostic 
accuracy, with the tumour–node–metastasis (TNM) classifi -
cation now recognised internationally as the optimum staging 
classification.
TNM staging – ‘radiological staging’
Pretreatment magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the 
 evaluation of choice in rectal can  cer, helping to guide both 
surgical and oncological manage  ment.
T represents the extent of local spread:
 ● TX: primary tumour cannot be assessed;
 ● T0: no evidence of primary tumour;
 ● Tis: carcinoma in situ – intraepithelial or invasion of lam-
ina propria;
 ● T1: tumour invades submucosa;
 ● T2: tumour invades muscularis propria;
 ● T3: tumour invades through the muscularis propria into 
pericolorectal tissues;
 ● T4a: tumour penetrates to the surface of the visceral peri-
toneum;
 ● T4b: tumour directly invades or is adherent to other 
organs or structures.
N describes nodal involvement:
 ● NX: regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed;
 ● N0: no regional lymph node metastasis;
 ● N1: metastasis in 1–3 regional lymph nodes:
 ● N1a: metastasis in 1 regional lymph node
 ● N1b: metastasis in 2–3 regional lymph nodes
 ● N1c: tumour deposit(s) in the subserosa, mesentery or 
nonperitonealised pericolic or perirectal tissues with -
out regional nodal metastasis;
 ● N2: metastasis in 4 or more regional lymph nodes:
 ● N2a: metastasis in 4–6 regional lymph nodes
 ● N2b: metastasis in 7 or more regional lymph nodes.
M indicates the presence of distant metastases:
 ● M0: no distant metastasis;
 ● M1: distant metastasis:
 ● M1a: metastasis confined to one organ or site (for ex-
ample liver, lung, ovary, non-regional node)
 ● M1b: metastases in more than one organ/site or the 
peritoneum.
Histological grading
In the great majority of cases, carcinoma of the rectum is an 
adenocarcinoma, derived from malignant transformation of 
the columnar rectal epithelium. The more the tumour cells 
retain normal shape and arrangement (well-differentiated), 
the less aggressive the behaviour. Conversely, the more cells of 
an undifferentiated type, the more aggressive the behaviour. 
Other poor prognostic features include vascular and perineu-
ral invasion, the presence of an infiltrating (rather than push-
ing) margin and tumour budding. In a small number of cases, 
the tumour is a primary mucoid carcinoma. The mucus lies 
within the cells, displacing the nucleus to the periphery, like 
the seal of a signet ring. Signet-ring carcinomas are rapidly 
growing, metastasise early and have a poor prognosis.
A B C
Figure 73.14 Dukes’ original classification of colorectal cancer. A: 
the cancer is confined to the submucosa. B: the cancer penetrates 
the muscularis propria. C: involvement of the draining lymph nodes.
Treatment
Surgical excision of the tumour is the conventional man-
agement option, provided this can be achieved with clear 
oncological margins and acceptable risk of morbidity and 
mortality. However, the management of rectal cancer has 
become increasingly complex, because of the various surgical 
techniques available and the range of neoadjuvant and adju -
vant options. As a result, the management of rectal cancer 
needs to be within the multidisciplinary team setting, involv-
ing surgeons, radiologists, oncologists, pathologists and spe -
cialty nurses.
Before treatment can be planned, it is necessary to assess:
 ● the fitness of the patient;
 ● the extent of spread of the tumour.
Assessment of spread should include CT of the chest, 
abdomen and pelvis to exclude distant metastases (Figure 
72.15). Ultrasonography of the liver and a chest radiograph 
Summary box 73.10
Pathology and staging of rectal cancer
●● Tumours are adenocarcinomas and are well, moderately or 
poorly differentiated
●● They spread by local, lymphatic, venous and transperitoneal 
routes
●● Circumferential local spread is the most important and 
dictates management
●● Lymphatic spread follows the blood supply of the rectum in a 
cephalad direction via the superior rectal vessels to the para-
aortic nodes, but in low rectal cancer can also involve the 
lateral pelvic lymph nodes
●● The TNM classification is the internationally recognised 
staging system
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1331 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1332
are decreasingly used alternatives. Positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET) scanning can be helpful in identifying metasta -
ses if imaging is otherwise equivocal.
Endoluminal ultrasound, performed using a probe placed 
in the rectal lumen, can be used to assess the local spread of 
low rectal cancers (Figure 73.16), and is particularly useful 
in patients being considered for transanal endoluminal exci -
sion. CT is not particularly accurate in local staging; this is 
usually performed using MRI, which allows assessment of the 
circumferential resection margin and lymph node status (Fig-
ure 73.17).
Principles of surgical treatment
Radical excision of the rectum, together with the mesorectum 
and associated lymph nodes, should be the aim in most cases. 
In the presence of widespread metastases, other means of pal-
liation should be considered, such as endoluminal stenting or 
external beam radiotherapy, although there may still be a role 
for palliative resection. The presence of liver metastases does 
not necessarily rule out the feasibility of cure: the results of 
surgery for liver metastases have greatly improved, with long-
term survival being achieved in over a third of patients.
When a tumour appears to be locally advanced (i.e. 
invading a neighbouring structure or threatening to breach 
the circumferential resection margin), the use of neoadjuvant 
(preoperative) radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy is usually 
considered. Long-course chemoradiotherapy is given as 5 
fractions of radiotherapy combined with chemotherapy over 
a 6-week period. The aim is to down-stage the cancer and 
increase the chances of a complete resection with clear onco-
logical margins. Alternatively, preoperative ‘short-course’ 
(5 days) radiotherapy can be used if the resection margins are 
not threatened but the cancer is still at high risk for local 
recurrence (e.g. peri-rectal lymph node involvement).
Increasingly, there is a trend for ‘watch-and-wait’ manage-
ment in cancers that have shown a complete clinical response 
to long-course chemoradiotherapy (about 20%). If there is no 
evidence of residual cancer on clinical examination, biopsy or 
radiological imaging, patients are offered intense surveillance 
in the hope that they may have been cured of the disease 
and spared the morbidity of resectional surgery. Some 30% of 
cases will recur on a ‘watch-and-wait’ policy, but most can be 
salvaged by surgical resection.
There is also growing enthusiasm for ‘organ-preserving’ 
surgical techniques in early T1 and even T2 cancers with 
good prognostic features. This usually involves full-thick -
ness excision of the cancer using TEMS (Figure 73.18). 
Alternative ‘organ-preserving’ techniques involve the use of 
brachytherapy and contact radiotherapy, but these are cur -
rently reserved for patients unfit for radical resection, or as a 
means of palliation.
When radical excision is possible, the aim should be to 
restore gastrointestinal continuity and continence by preserv-
ing the anal sphincter whenever feasible. A sphincter-saving 
operation (anterior resection) is usually possible for tumours 
whose lower margin is ≥2 cm above the anorectal junction. 
Although removal of the rectum and anus with a permanent 
Figure 73.15  Computed tomography scan of the abdomen in a 
patient with rectal cancer, showing multiple liver metastases.
Figure 73.16 Endorectal ultrasound. The probe is in the rectal lumen 
and shows a rectal tumour invading through the rectal wall.
Figure 73.17  Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the pelvis 
showing extensive T3 rectal cancer involving the left mesorectum.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1332 25/10/2017   10:04Carcinomas 1333
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
colostomy (abdominoperineal excision) was often required 
for tumours of the lower third of the rectum in the past, the 
introduction of the stapled anastomosis and chemoradio -
therapy down-staging has enabled many more patients to be 
treated by a sphincter -saving procedure. The principles of 
anterior resection involve radical excision of the cancer along 
with its complete mesorectal envelope, combined with high 
proximal ligation of the inferior mesenteric lymphovascular 
pedicle. Once the left colon and rectum have been mobil -
ised, the distal rectum is divided at least 1  cm (and prefera -
bly more) below the distal cancer margin and the specimen 
removed. Rectosigmoid cancers and those in the upper third 
of the rectum are removed by ‘high anterior resection’, in 
which the rectum and mesorectum are taken to a margin of at 
least 3 cm distal to the tumour, and a colorectal anastomosis 
is performed. For tumours in the middle and lower thirds of 
the rectum, complete removal of the rectum and mesorectum 
is required, i.e. total mesorectal excision (TME). Restoration 
of continuity is usually performed using a stapling technique, 
which might involve an end-to-end, side-to-end or colopouch 
construction in low cancers (Figure 73.19). The retention of 
at least a part of the rectum in high anterior resection results 
in better postoperative function, with less risk of anterior 
resection syndrome, a condition characterised by defaecatory 
urgency, incontinence and incomplete evacuation, secondary 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 72.16aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 72.16bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
Figure 73.18  Transanal endoscopic micr osurgery. (a) An operat -
ing sigmoidoscope is inserted through the anal canal to visualise the 
lesion and enable passage of a lapar oscope and instruments. (b) A 
full-thickness local excision is performed. The defect is closed or, 
alternatively, may be left open if the peritoneum is not breached.
(a) (b)
(a) (b)
Figure 73.19 Low anterior resection by the double stapling method. 
The rectum has been excised, and the distal anorectal stump has 
been transected with a transverse stapling device. A circular stapling 
gun is used to construct (a) a straight low coloanal anastomosis, or 
(b) a colopouch–anus anastomosis.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1333 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1334
to removal of the normal rectal reservoir. In cancers situated 
below the peritoneal reflection it is usual practice to defunc -
tion the anastomosis with a temporary stoma because of the 
higher risk of anastomotic leak. Although a defunctioning 
stoma does not prevent anastomotic leak, it does mitigate 
against septic complications should a leak occur.
Local operations
Early rectal cancers (T1 and goo d prognosis T2) may be 
amenable to local transanal excision, preserving much of the 
rectal reservoir and therefore near normal function. Histolog-
ical analysis of the specimen is then used to assess the ade -
quacy of excision with respect to the probability of positive 
lymph nodes being left behind. This may range from 10% 
in T1 cancers to 20% in T2 cancers and clinical judgement, 
along with in-depth conversation with the patient, is required 
to determine whether local excision has achieved a sufficient 
chance of oncological cure or whether a further radical resec-
tion is required.
Local excision is usually performed with one of the com-
mercially available transanal laparoscopic systems or with 
equipment modified from taTME procedures (see below). 
A full-thickness excision of the lesion is performed and the 
defect closed with sutures or else left open. There is a limit to 
the height of lesion that can be resected, with more proximal 
lesions in the upper rectum being difficult.
Anterior resection
There has been a move to extend sphincter-saving operations 
to treat most tumours of the middle and lower thirds of the 
rectum, thus lowering the abdominoperineal excision rate and 
the need for permanent colostomy. There is also an increasing 
trend to use laparoscopic techniques for anterior resection, 
with patient benefits including less pain, quicker recovery 
from surgery and improved cosmesis. The evidence suggests 
that laparoscopic anterior resection is as safe as open surgery 
in terms of short- and long-term complications and onco -
logical outcomes. More recently, robotic assistance has been 
employed with the da Vinci robotic surgical system (Intui -
tive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) (Figure 73.20). 
Although this adds significant cost to the procedure, there 
may be some benefit in terms of a reduced need to convert 
to open surgery, and therefore more patients benefiting from 
a minimally invasive approach. The operation performed is 
the same whether the procedure is undertaken by open, lap-
aroscopic or robotic surgery, with the difference being in the 
extent of abdominal access trauma (laparotomy wound versus 
‘keyhole’ incisions).
In open surgery, a midline abdominal incision is made and 
full laparotomy performed to detect synchronous pathologies, 
including evidence of intra-abdominal cancer spread. The 
sigmoid and descending colon are freed by dividing the peri -
toneal reflection on the left side, and mobilised to the midline 
on their mesentery, protecting the left ureter and testicular/
ovarian vessels. The splenic flexure is mobilised to gain suf -
ficient left colonic length to allow tension-free colorectal 
anastomosis. Rectal dissection is performed in the embryo -
logical planes (total mesorectal excision, TME) with preser -
vation of the autonomic nerves, which course over the pelvic 
brim (sympathetic nerves) and exit from the pelvic plexuses 
(parasympathetic nerves) to supply the pelvic floor, and the 
urogenital organs (Figure 73.21). Once rectal dissection has 
reached the anorectal junction (low anterior resection), or 
at least 3 cm below the cancer (high anterior resection), the 
rectum is divided, usually with the aid of a stapling device. 
Preoperative preparation
The bowel is usually prepared by mechanical cleansing using 
a combination of diet, purgatives and enemas to reduce intra-
operative contamination and the risk of surgical site infec -
tion. This approach is now used more selectively, with many 
surgeons reserving full bowel preparation for those undergo-
ing a low anterior resection.
All patients should see a stoma care nurse preoperatively 
and be sited for a temporary or permanent ileostomy or colos-
tomy. They must also be counselled as to the complications of 
the procedure, and particularly about the risks of pelvic auto-
nomic nerve damage causing bladder and sexual disturbance, 
especially impotence in males.
Prophylactic systemic antibiotics are usually given periop-
eratively to reduce the risk of surgical site infection. In Europe, 
this usually takes the form of broad-spectrum antibiotics given 
intravenously at induction of anaesthesia. In the USA, anti-
biotic prophylaxis is more frequently administered as a course 
of oral antibiotics given preoperatively, and there is some evi-
dence to suggest that this may be beneficial in reducing the 
risk of septic complications, including anastomotic leak. 
Summary box 73.11
Surgery for rectal cancer
●● Surgery is the mainstay of curative therapy
●● The primary resection consists of rectal resection performed 
by total mesorectal excision
●● Most cases can be treated by anterior resection, with the 
colorectal anastomosis being achieved with a circular stapling 
gun
●● A smaller group of low, extensive tumours require an 
abdominoperineal excision with a permanent colostomy
●● Preoperative radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy 
can be used to down-stage the cancer and reduce local 
recurrence
●● Adjuvant chemotherapy can improve survival in node-positive 
disease
●● Liver resection in carefully selected patients offers the best 
chance of cure for single or well-localised liver metastases
Summary box 73.12
Preoperative preparation
●● Counselling and siting of stomas
●● Correction of anaemia and electrolyte disturbance
●● Group and save of blood
●● Bowel preparation
●● Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis
●● Prophylactic antibiotics
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1334 25/10/2017   10:04Carcinomas 1335
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Restoration of bowel continuity is usually achieved by 
means of a stapled anastomosis. The simplest way of achiev -
ing this is by using a ‘double stapling’ technique, whereby a 
stapling gun is passed transanally to anastomose the stapled 
ends of the proximal colon and rectal stump. Alternatively, a 
‘single stapled’ anastomosis may be performed in which purse-
string sutures are applied to the proximal colon and rectal 
stump and anastomosed using a single firing of a staple gun 
inserted transanally. In cases where the anastomosis is very 
low (coloanal anastomosis) it may be necessary to perform a 
hand-sewn anastomosis.
Laparoscopic and robotic anterior resection follow 
the above general principles, but with abdominal access 
through the use of four or five abdominal ports and carbon 
dioxide pneumoperitoneum. The dissection usually follows a 
medial-to-lateral approach, i.e. dissection and high ligation 
of the vascular pedicle followed by lateral mobilisation of the 
colon, then rectal resection. A small laparotomy wound is still 
required to extract the specimen, unless transanal specimen 
extraction is possible, and restoration of bowel continuity is 
performed by the usual stapling techniques.
Transanal total mesorectal excision (taTME)
There is growing interest in reducing the trauma of anterior 
resection by undertaking total endoluminal excision of the 
rectum: transanal TME (taTME). This builds on the princi -
ples of laparoscopic surgery, with an air-tight anal device used 
to provide transanal insufflation and access for laparoscopic 
instruments. The operation proceeds by placing a purse-string 
suture below the distal level of the tumour and incising the 
bowel wall to enter the mesorectal plane. Dissection then 
proceeds using a ‘bottom-up’ approach to accomplish TME. 
It is usual for this procedure to be undertaken as a combined 
operation, with synchronous ‘top-down’ laparoscopic resec-
tion by an abdominal operator who mobilises the left colon, 
takes down the splenic flexure and does some of the upper 
rectal dissection.
Figure 73.20 da Vinci Xi Robotic Surgical System: (a) surgeon con-
sole; (b) patient cart. Reproduced with kind permission from Intu -
itive Surgical Inc. http://www.intuitivesurgical.com/company/media/
images/da-vinci-xi/
(a)
(b)
Figure 73.21 Plane of dissection for total mesorectal excision.
The mesocolon is divided at the site of the proposed division 
of the colon and the trunk of the inferior mesenteric artery 
is ligated and divided at its origin from the aorta (high-tie). 
Resection of the specimen is completed by division of the 
bowel at the point to be used for the proximal anastomosis.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1335 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1336
Initial results have shown that taTME is safe, with short-
term oncological outcomes, in terms of pathological qual -
ity of the resection specimen and circumferential resection 
margins, comparable to those of traditional laparoscopic and 
open techniques.
Hartmann’s operation
This is an option in elderly and frail patients in whom there 
is concern about poor anal sphincter function and postoper -
ative incontinence or the viability of an anastomosis. Colo -
rectal excision follows the same principles as outlined above, 
but the rectal stump is stapled closed and the proximal colon 
exteriorised as a permanent end colostomy.
Abdominoperineal excision of the rectum
This operation is still required for some tumours of the lower 
third of the rectum which are unsuitable for a sphincter-saving 
procedure. Traditionally, the procedure was performed by two 
surgeons operating simultaneously, one via the abdomen and 
the other via the perineum, with the patient in the Trendelen-
burg lithotomy position. More recently, there has been a shift 
to completing the abdominal procedure first (with the patient 
in the Lloyd-Davies position, in which the legs are in supports 
set lower than the lithotomy position), and then placing the 
patient either in a prone jack-knife or Lloyd-Davies position 
and completing the operation via the perineum. The aim is to 
produce a complete resection of the rectum and mesorectum 
along with cylindrical excision of the extralevator compo-
nent. This achieves wide excision at the level of the pelvic 
floor, increasing complete resection rates and reducing local 
perforation and the risk of local recurrence.
The abdominal procedure is carried out laparoscopically 
or via a midline laparotomy, and is performed in the same way 
as an anterior resection, except that dissection stops before 
the pelvic floor is reached (at the level of the seminal vesicles 
in men or the cervix in women), to avoid ‘coning down’ onto 
the tumour at the level of the pelvic floor. Perineal dissection 
is achieved through a circumanal incision which is deepened 
into the ischiorectal fossae and out towards the attachment 
of the levator muscles to the pelvic side wall (Figure 73.22). 
The dissection is extended posteriorly by incising Waldeyer’s 
fascia, which is a thick condensation of pelvic fascia lying 
between the rectum and the sacrum. Some surgeons routinely 
remove the coccyx to improve access and surgical margins. 
Anteriorly, the plane between the rectum and the prostate in 
the male or between the rectum and the vagina in the female 
is developed, with particular care to avoid the membranous 
urethra in the male. A catheter within it should be palpated 
so that it can be avoided. The posterior wall of the vagina can 
be excised with the rectum if an advanced anterior tumour 
is present. Resection is completed when the perineal dissec-
tion reaches the abdominal dissection, with the specimen 
retrieved through the perineal wound. An end colostomy 
is formed in the left iliac fossa and the wounds closed with 
drains to the pelvis.
Friedrich Trendelenburg , 1844–1924, Professor of Surgery successively at Rostock (1875–1882), Bonn (1882–1895) and Leipzig (1895–1911), Germany. The 
Trendelenburg position was first described in 1885.
Oswald Vaughan Lloyd-Davies , 1905–1987, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital and The Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 73.22 (a, b) Separation and division of the pubococcygeus 
and puborectalis muscles in the course of the perineal phase of an 
abdominoperineal excision of the rectum. Redrawn with permission 
from Keighley MRB, Williams NS. Surgery of the anus, rectum and 
colon. London: WB Saunders, 1999.
(a)
(b)
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1336 25/10/2017   10:04Carcinomas 1337
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Endoluminal stenting
An increasingly used alternative for patients with an obstruct-
ing carcinoma is placement of an endoluminal stent, which 
can be done endoscopically, often with fluoroscopic guidance. 
This can either be used as a palliative procedure, or to relieve 
obstruction and permit elective rather than emergency sur -
gery to be undertaken. Only rectosigmoid and upper rectal 
tumours are suitable for stenting, because stent impinge-
ment on the anorectum in low cancers causes symptoms of 
tenesmus.
Palliative colostomy
This is indicated only in cases giving rise to intestinal obstruc-
tion, or where the rectal cancer is not resectable. It can be 
performed by either an open or laparoscopic approach. In 
some cases a defunctioning colostomy is required in advanced 
cancers to prevent obstruction during down-staging chemo -
radiotherapy.
More extensive operations
When carcinoma of the rectum has spread to contigu -
ous organs, the radical operation can often be extended to 
remove these structures en bloc. Thus, in the male, in whom 
spread is usually to the bladder or prostate, a cystectomy or 
prostatectomy may be required in combination with anterior 
resection to achieve complete oncological clearance. In the 
female, the uterus acts as an oncological barrier, preventing 
spread from the rectum to the bladder. Accordingly, a hys -
terectomy can be undertaken in addition to excision of the 
rectum. Pelvic evisceration for carcinoma of the rectum is 
usually only justifiable when the surgeon is confident that 
the cancer can be completely removed with negative resec -
tion margins.
Pelvic exenteration
The aim is to remove pelvic organs involved in the malig -
nant process, and may involve a partial exenteration (pos-
terior exenteration, including rectum and posterior vagina/
uterus) or complete (including rectum and urogenital organs) 
(Figure 73.23). Exenteration may be necessary for advanced 
local disease, but more commonly for disease recurrence. It 
involves a large excision of the pelvic floor, leaving a sizeable 
perineal defect that has to be reconstructed using a plastic sur-
gical procedure. Rectus abdominus or gluteal flaps can be used 
to fill the empty pelvis. Special care must be taken to suture 
the perineal skin accurately, and to avoid pressure necrosis by 
nursing the patient on alternate sides. Excision of the bladder 
will require the formation of an ileal conduit in addition to a 
colostomy.
Liver resection
Single or multiple well-localised liver metastases can now be 
resected with relatively low mortality and morbidity. Provided 
the patients are carefully selected, a reasonable long-term sur-
vival rate can be achieved (approximately 40%). Such sur -
gery is usually carried out in a specialised liver unit, and may 
be performed synchronously at the time of anterior resection 
or else as a delayed procedure.
Radiotherapy
Adjuvant radiotherapy is now commonly used in the treat -
ment of rectal cancer. It may be given preoperatively (neoad-
juvant) and less commonly postoperatively (adjuvant). In the 
neoadjuvant setting, radiotherapy is used to either ‘sterilise’ 
the operative field in cancers with suspected lymphovascular 
involvement, or to down-stage locally advanced cancers with 
threatened circumferential resection margins. In the former 
instance, radiotherapy is often given as a ‘short course’ over 
5 days with immediate surgery some 7–10 days later. On occa-
sion, short-course radiotherapy can be combined with a delay 
before surgery (up to 12 weeks) to allow cancer regression. 
When radiotherapy is used to down-stage a cancer, it is often 
combined with chemotherapy (chemoradiotherapy) and 
given over a period of 6 weeks with a 6-week recovery period 
before surgery. Some 20% of cancers treated with chemo -
radiotherapy will show a complete pathological response, 
with a further 25–30% showing a partial response. Unfortu -
nately, it is not yet possible to determine prior to treatment 
which patients will respond and therefore to tailor treatment 
accordingly.
Occasionally, radiotherapy is used to palliate unresectable 
cancers that are causing symptoms due to pain, obstruction 
or bleeding.
Alternative radiotherapy regimens include the Papillon 
technique in which intracavity radiation is directed to the 
cancer in the form of ‘contact radiotherapy’ or else delivered 
by brachytherapy techniques. To date, the application of 
these techniques has been restricted to selected cases, usually 
in patients unfit for more radical surgery.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is either given in combination with radio -
therapy (chemoradiotherapy) to down-stage a cancer prior 
Figure 73.23 Radical pelvic exenteration, indicating the extent of 
the dissection and the viscera removed (shaded dark pink). Redrawn 
with permission from Keighley MRB, Williams NS. Surgery of the 
anus, rectum and colon. London: WB Saunders, 1999.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1337 25/10/2017   10:04CHAPTER 73  The rectum
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1338
to surgical resection, or else in the postoperative setting to 
reduce the risk of disseminated disease. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) 
based regimens remain the first-line therapy and are asso -
ciated with a 10% improvement in disease-free survival in 
patients with node-positive rectal cancer. Second-line thera-
pies include oxaliplatin and irinotecan, and biological agents 
such as cetuximab.
Results of surgery for rectal cancer
In specialised centres, the resectability rate for rectal can -
cer may be as high as 95%, with an operative mortality of 
less than 5%. Overall, the 5-year survival rate is about 50% 
and has not changed appreciably over the last decade. Sur -
vival rates are influenced by TNM/Dukes’ stage, with node-  
positive patients doing worse than those with node-negative 
lesions. However, with the introduction of national bowel 
cancer screening programmes, there is a shift to an earlier 
stage of disease presentation and consequently improved 
survival.
LOCAL RECURRENCE
Local recurrence after rectal excision is a major problem. 
The patient may be asymptomatic with recurrence diagnosed 
as part of a surveillance programme, including regular mea -
surements of blood carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and 
cross-sectional radiological imaging. The presence of symp -
toms is often a poor prognostic feature. Persistent pelvic 
pain, which may radiate down the legs, is indicative of nerve 
root involvement and will preclude further surgery. Bladder 
symptoms may occur or there may be fistulating disease onto 
the perineum. Most local recurrences are situated extrarec -
tally and are therefore not readily diagnosed on endoscopy 
 examination and biopsy. CT and MRI scan are the best means 
for detecting local recurrence, but PET-CT is increasingly 
being used to differentiate metabolically active cancer recur -
rence from metabolically inactive scar tissue. Local recurrence 
rates vary between 2 and 25% and are higher after abdomino-
perineal excision than after sphincter-saving resection. High 
quality primary surgery with preservation of the mesorectal 
‘package’ and a clear circumferential resection margin are the 
most important factors in preventing local recurrence.
Overall, 80% of local recurrences develop within 2 years 
following surgery, and are very difficult to treat. If the patient 
is radiotherapy naïve then preoperative chemoradiotherapy 
will be beneficial. Surgical exenteration offers the only hope 
of cure and may involve a partial sacrectomy, with significant 
morbidity.
FURTHER READING
Cancer Research UK, Cancer Statistics. www.cancerresearchuk.org/
health-professional/cancer -statistics/statistics-by-cancer-type/bow -
el-cancer
Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. 
Cell 1990; 61(5): 759–67.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. 
Cell 2011; 144(5): 646–74. 
Keighley MRB, Williams NS (eds). Surgery of the anus, rectum and colon, 
3rd edn. London: WB Saunders, 2008.
Phillips RKS (ed.). A companion to specialist surgical practice: colorectal 
surgery, 4th edn. London: Elsevier, 2009.
Valenti V , Schmoll H-J, van de Velde CJH (eds). Multidisciplinary man-
agement of rectal cancer. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2012. 
Wolthuis AM, Bislenghi G, de Buck van Overstraeten A, D’Hoore A. 
Transanal total mesorectal excision: Towards standardization of 
technique. World J Gastroenterol 2015; 21(44): 12686–95.
11_73-B&L27_Pt11_Ch73.indd   1338 25/10/2017   10:04Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand
 • The anatomy of the anus and anal canal and their 
relationship to surgical disease and its treatment
 • The pathology, clinical presentation, investigation, 
differential diagnosis and treatment of diseases that 
affect the anus and anal canal
 • That anal disease is common and its treatment tends to 
be conservative, although surgery may be required
 • That any damage to the anus, including too aggressive 
or inappropriate surgery, may render the patient 
permanently disabled
Chapter
The anus and anal canal
74
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Surgical anatomy
The anal canal commences at the level where the rectum 
passes through the pelvic diaphragm and ends at the anal 
verge. The muscular junction between the rectum and anal 
canal can be felt with the finger as a thickened ridge – the 
anorectal ‘bundle’ or ‘ring’.
Anal canal anatomy
The anorectal ring
The anorectal ring marks the junction between the rectum 
and the anal canal (Figure 74.1). It is formed by the joining 
of the puborectalis muscle (Figure 74.2), the deep external 
sphincter, conjoined longitudinal muscle and the highest part 
of the internal sphincter. The anorectal ring can be clearly 
felt digitally, especially on its posterior and lateral aspects.
The puborectalis muscle
Puborectalis, part of the funnel-shaped muscular pelvic dia -
phragm, maintains the angle between the anal canal and rec-
tum and hence is an important component in the continence 
mechanism (Figure 74.2). The muscle derives its nerve supply 
from the sacral somatic nerves, and is functionally indistinct 
from the external anal sphincter. The position and length of 
the anal canal, as well as the angle of the anorectal junction, 
depend to a major extent on the integrity and strength of the 
puborectalis muscle sling. It gives off fibres that contribute to 
the longitudinal muscle layer.
The external sphincter
The external sphincter forms the bulk of the anal sphincter com-
plex and, although traditionally it has been subdivided into deep, 
superficial and subcutaneous portions, it is a single muscle (Goli-
gher), which is variably divided by lateral extensions from the 
longitudinal muscle layer. Some of its fibres are attached posteri-
orly to the coccyx, whereas anteriorly they fuse with the perineal 
muscles. Being a somatic voluntary muscle, the external sphinc-
ter is red in colour and is innervated by the pudendal nerve.
Longitudinal
muscle of rectum
Circular muscle
of rectum
Rectal mucosa
Anal cushion
Internal anal
sphincter
Musculus
submucosae ani
Dentate line
Mucosal
suspensory
ligament
Anal
intermuscular
septum
Inferior
haemorrhoidal
plexus
Puborectalis
Conjoined
logitudinal muscle
of the anal canal
External sphincter
muscle
Subcutaneous
external anal
sphincter
Figure 74.1 Relevant anatomy of the anus. (Redrawn with permis -
sion from Mann CV . Surgical treatment of haemorrhoids. London: 
Springer, 2002.)
John Cedric Goligher , 1912–1998, Professor of Surgery, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1339 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1340
The intersphincteric plane
Between the external sphincter muscle laterally and the lon -
gitudinal muscle medially exists a potential space, the inter -
sphincteric plane. This plane is important as it contains 
intersphincteric anal glands (see below) and is also a route for 
the spread of pus, which occurs along the extensions from the 
longitudinal muscle layer. The plane can be opened up surgi-
cally to provide access for operations on the sphincter muscles.
The longitudinal muscle
The longitudinal muscle is a direct continuation of the smooth 
muscle of the outer muscle coat of the rectum, augmented in 
its upper part by striated muscle fibres originating from the 
medial components of the pelvic floor. Most of the muscle 
continues caudally before splitting into multiple terminal 
septa that surround the muscle bundles of the subcutaneous 
portion of the external sphincter, to insert into the skin of the 
lowermost part of the anal canal and adjacent perianal skin. 
Milligan and Morgan named the most medial of these septa, 
passing around the inferior border of the internal sphincter, 
the ‘anal intermuscular septum’. As it descends, however, it 
gives off fibres that pass medially across the internal sphincter 
to reach the submucosal space, and laterally across the exter-
nal sphincter and ischiorectal space to reach the fascia of the 
pelvic side walls. As well as providing a supportive mesh for 
the anal canal and other muscular components, its ramifica-
tions provide potential pathways for the spread of infection. 
During defaecation, its contraction widens the anal lumen, 
flattens the anal cushions, shortens the anal canal and everts 
the anal margin; subsequent relaxation allows the anal cush-
ions to distend and thus contribute to an airtight seal.
The internal sphincter
The internal sphincter is the thickened (2–5 mm) distal con-
tinuation of the circular muscle coat of the rectum, which has 
developed special properties and which is in a tonic state of 
contraction. This involuntary muscle commences where the 
rectum passes through the pelvic diaphragm and ends above 
the anal orifice, its lower border palpable at the intersphinc -
teric groove, below which lie the most medial fibres of the 
subcutaneous external sphincter, and separated from it by the 
anal intermuscular septum. When exposed during life, it is 
pearly-white in colour and its circumferentially placed fibres 
can be seen clearly . Although innervated by the autonomic 
nervous system, it receives intrinsic non-adrenergic and 
non-cholinergic (NANC) fibres, stimulation of which causes 
release of the neurotransmitter nitric oxide, which induces 
internal sphincter relaxation.
The epithelium and subepithelial 
structures
The pink columnar epithelium lining the rectum extends 
through the anorectal ring into the surgical anal canal. Passing 
downwards the mucous membrane becomes cuboidal and red-
der in colour (Figure 74.3), whereas above the anal valves it is 
plum coloured. Just below the level of the anal valves there is 
an abrupt, albeit wavy, transition to stratified squamous epithe-
lium, which is parchment coloured. This wavy junction con -
stitutes the dentate line. The dentate line is a most important 
landmark both morphologically and surgically, representing 
the site of fusion of the proctodaeum and postallantoic gut, and 
being the site of the crypts of Morgagni (synonym: anal crypts, 
sinuses). The latter are small pockets between the inferior 
extremities of the columns of Morgagni through which anal 
ducts that communicate with deeper placed anal glands open 
into the anal lumen. The squamous epithelium lining the lower 
anal canal is thin and shiny and is known as the anoderm; it dif-
fers from the true skin in that it has no epidermal appendages, 
i.e. hair and sweat glands. At the dentate line, the  anoderm is 
Surgery Fig 60.02
Figure 74.2 The disposition of the puborectalis muscle. Note how it 
maintains the rectoanal angle.
Edward Thomas Campbell Milligan , 1886–1972, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital, London, UK.
Sir Clifford Naughton Morgan , 1901–1986, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital and St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK.
Dentate
line
Rectal
mucosa
Anal mucosa
(red)
Anal mucosa
(plum coloured)
Anal canal skin
(white)
True anal skin
(pigmented)
Figure 74.3 The lining membrane of the anal canal (after Sir Clifford 
Naunton Morgan, London).
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1340 25/10/2017   10:06Anatomy and physiology 1341
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
attached more firmly to deeper structures. The mucosa and sub-
mucosa above the dentate line is uneven and thrown into folds, 
the so called anal cushions. There are variations in the num -
bers and positions of these cushions but there are usually three, 
corresponding to those seen in later life. These are described 
classically as occupying the left lateral, right posterior and right 
anterior positions, and they continue proximally as the pri -
mary rectal foldings. Secondary foldings (the rectal columns of 
Morgagni) lie both over and between the primary folds. This 
area is the caudal limit of the so-called epithelial transitional 
zone, below which the stratified squamous epithelium is richly 
innervated by sensory nerve endings serving several modali-
ties including touch, pain and temperature. The bulk of the 
anal cushions themselves, situated in the upper part of the anal 
canal, receive only visceral afferent innervation and, although 
there is perception of stretching, sensitivity to noxious stimuli 
is much more blunted than distally.
Between the epithelial layer and the internal sphincter 
lies the submucosa, consisting of vascular, muscular and con-
nective tissue supportive elements. From the longitudinal 
muscle, medial extensions cross the internal anal sphincter 
and form part of the supporting meshwork of the submucosa, 
blending with the true submucosal smooth muscle layer and 
thereby supporting the mucosa itself. Parks described the 
increased density of fibres that insert into the mucosa of 
the anal crypts at the level of the dentate line, termed the 
‘mucosal suspensory ligament’. One feature of this structure is 
that it separates the superior (portal) and inferior (systemic) 
haemorrhoidal plexuses; another, is that the mucosa is more 
firmly tethered to underlying tissues at this level than above. 
It is important to appreciate that the meshwork of supporting 
tissues (muscle fibres and connective tissue) within the subep-
ithelial space is intimately linked to deeper structures within 
the anal sphincter complex, including the internal sphincter, 
longitudinal muscle layer and external anal sphincter, and 
indeed structures beyond the sphincter complex. With age, 
the smooth muscle component of this mesh is reduced and 
muscle fibres are gradually replaced with fibroelastic connec -
tive tissue, which in turn becomes fragmented.
Blood supply
In addition to the meshwork support of the lining of the anal 
canal, the subepithelial space contains venous dilatations 
supported by the same fibroelastic connective tissue and 
smooth muscle scaffolding. Debate has centred on the nature 
of the vascular component of haemorrhoids, but the semi -
nal anatomical studies of Thomson have clarified this issue. 
Venous dilatations are seen in the submucosa both above 
and below the level of the dentate line; they are much more 
numerous above although tend to be larger below. The histor-
ical description of the blood supply to the upper anal canal as 
constant, with bifurcation of the main trunk of the superior 
rectal artery into right and left branches and with subsequent 
division of the former into anterior and posterior divisions, 
thereby determining the sites of haemorrhoids around the 
anal circumference, was questioned by Thomson. He demon-
strated that the divisions of the superior rectal artery were 
not constant and that, furthermore, the anal submucosa in a 
proportion of his specimens received a blood supply from the 
middle and inferior rectal arteries. He was also able to show 
the presence of free communications between tributaries of 
the superior, middle and inferior rectal veins, as well as tiny 
direct arteriovenous communications with the submucosal 
venous dilatations. These communications have been shown 
both histologically and radiologically, and the oxygen tension 
of the blood contained within the venous dilatations (as well 
as the colour) is more arterial than venous.
Venous drainage
The anal veins are distributed in a similar fashion to the arte-
rial supply. The upper half of the anal canal is drained by the 
superior rectal veins, tributaries of the inferior mesenteric 
vein and thus the portomesenteric venous system, and the 
middle rectal veins, which drain into the internal iliac veins. 
The inferior rectal veins drain the lower half of the anal canal 
and the subcutaneous perianal plexus of veins; they eventu -
ally join the internal iliac vein on each side.
Lymphatic drainage
Lymph from the upper half of the anal canal flows upwards to 
drain into the postrectal lymph nodes and from there goes to 
the para-aortic nodes via the inferior mesenteric chain. Lymph 
from the lower half of the anal canal drains on each side, first 
into the superficial and then into the deep inguinal group of 
lymph glands. However, if the normal flow is blocked, e.g. by 
tumour, the lymph can be diverted into the alternative route.
Giovani Battista Morgagni , 1682–1771, Professor of Anatomy, Padua, Italy, for 59 years. He is regarded as the founder of morbid anatomy.
Sir Alan Guyatt Parks , 1920–1962, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital and the London Hospital, London, UK.
William Hamish Fearon Thomson , surgeon, The Gloucestershire Royal Infirmary, Gloucester, UK.
Summary box 74.1
Anal canal anatomy
●● The internal sphincter is composed of circular, non-striated 
involuntary muscle supplied by autonomic nerves
●● The external sphincter is composed of striated voluntary 
muscle supplied by the pudendal nerve
●● Extensions from the longitudinal muscle layer support the 
sphincter complex
●● The space between sphincters is known as the 
intersphincteric plane
●● The superior part of the external sphincter fuses with the 
puborectalis muscle, which is essential for maintaining the 
anorectal angle, necessary for continence
●● The lower part of the anal canal is lined by sensitive 
squamous epithelium
●● Blood supply to the anal canal is via superior, middle and 
inferior rectal vessels
●● Lymphatic drainage of the lower half of the anal canal goes to 
inguinal lymph nodes
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1341 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1342
The anal glands
Anal glands (which are not vestigial remnants of sexual scent 
glands) may be found in the submucosa and intersphincteric 
space (Figure 74.4), and normally number between 0 and 10 
in an individual. They drain via ducts into the anal sinuses 
at the level of the dentate line. Not all sinuses have a duct 
draining into them and, occasionally, more than one gland 
can discharge into the same sinus. Their function is unknown 
although they secrete mucin (distinct from that secreted by 
the rectal epithelium), which perhaps lubricates the anal 
canal to ease defaecation. The importance of intersphincteric 
anal glands is that they are widely considered to be the poten-
tial source of anal sepsis, either acute, presenting as perianal, 
ischiorectal or even pelvic sepsis, or chronic, presenting as a 
cryptoglandular (non-specific) anal fistula.
EXAMINATION OF THE ANUS
Careful clinical examination will be diagnostic in the vast 
majority of patients complaining of anal symptoms, but it 
requires a relaxed patient who is informed of what the exam-
ination will entail, a private environment, a chaperone (for 
the security of both parties) and good light. Most commonly, 
the patient is examined in the left lateral (Sims) position 
with the buttocks overlying the edge of the examination 
couch and with the axis of the torso crossing, rather than par-
allel with, the edge of the couch. Alternatively, in younger 
patients, the prone jack-knife or knee–elbow positions may 
be used (Figure 74.5). The examining couch should be of 
sufficient height to allow easy inspection and access for any 
necessary manoeuvres. A protective glove should be worn.
Inspection
The buttocks are gently parted to allow inspection of the anus 
and perineum: the presence of any skin lesions and whether 
they are confined to the perineum or evident elsewhere on 
general examination, e.g. psoriasis, lichen planus, or on gen-
ital examination, e.g. warts, candidiasis, lichen sclerosus et 
atrophicus, the vesicles of herpes simplex virus (HSV); evi -
dence of anal leakage; whether the anus is closed or patu -
lous; and the position of the anus and perineum at rest and on 
bearing down (the latter may reveal prolapse of haemorrhoids 
or even the rectum). Pain on parting the buttocks, perhaps 
James Marion Sims , 1813–1883, gynaecological surgeon, the State Hospital for Women, New York, USA, introduced this position to give access to the anterior 
vaginal wall during operations for the closure of vesicovaginal fistulae.
Figure 74.4 Intersphincteric anal gland lying between the voluntary 
muscle of the external sphincter and the longitudinal muscle. The 
internal sphincter is also seen. (Reproduced with permission from 
Nicholls RJ, Dozois RR. Surgery of the colon and rectum. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 1997.)
(a)
(b)
69.5c BAILEY AND LOVE 25E
Figure 74.5  (a) The left lateral; (b) knee–elbow and lithotomy 
(c) positions for examination. (Redrawn with permission from Mann 
CV. Surgical treatment of haemorrhoids. London: Springer, 2002.)
(c)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1342 25/10/2017   10:06Physiological aspects of the anal sphincters and pel vic floor, and special investigations 1343
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
together with the presence of a sentinel tag, may indicate 
the presence of an underlying fissure, but may also prompt 
the need for examination under anaesthesia to exclude more 
suspicious pathology, for example squamous cell carcinoma of 
the anal canal.
Digital examination with the index 
finger
With an adequately lubricated index finger , the soft tissues 
around the anus are palpated for induration, tenderness and 
subcutaneous lesions. The index finger is then introduced 
gently into the anal canal along its posterior aspect. At the 
apex of the canal, the sling of puborectalis is felt posteriorly; 
supralevator induration feels bony hard and is more easily 
appreciated if unilateral. The posterior surface of the pros -
tate gland with its median sulcus can be palpated anteriorly 
in male patients; in female patients, the uterine cervix can be 
palpated. The presence of any distal intrarectal, intra-anal or 
extraluminal mass is recorded. Sphincter length, resting tone 
and voluntary squeeze are assessed. On withdrawal, the exam-
ining finger is inspected for the presence of mucus, blood or 
pus and to identify stool colour.
Proctoscopy
Proctoscopy, performed with the patient in the same position, 
allows a detailed inspection of the distal rectum and anal 
canal (Figure 74.6). Minor procedures can also be carried 
out through this instrument, e.g. treatment of haemorrhoids 
by injection or banding (see below) and biopsy. Asking the 
patient to bear down on slow withdrawal of the proctoscope 
may reveal a descending intussusception.
Sigmoidoscopy
Although sigmoidoscopy is strictly an examination of the rec-
tum (see Chapter 73), it should always be carried out even 
when an anal lesion has been confirmed. Rectal pathology, 
e.g. colitis or carcinoma, is frequently associated with an anal 
lesion, e.g. fissure or haemorrhoids. Not infrequently, rectal 
pathology is found that is independent of the anal lesion and 
which requires treatment.
PHYSIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF 
THE ANAL SPHINCTERS AND 
PEL VIC FLOOR, AND SPECIAL 
INVESTIGATIONS
Anal continence and defaecation are highly complex pro -
cesses that necessitate the structural and functional integrity 
of the cerebral, autonomic and enteric nervous systems, the 
gastrointestinal tract (especially the rectum) and the pel -
vic floor and anal sphincter complex, any of which may be 
compromised and lead to disturbances of function of varying 
severity. The sphincter mechanism provides the ultimate 
barrier to leakage and its integrity can be assessed fairly sim -
ply and objectively in the physiology laboratory (Swash and 
Henry). Perineal position and degree of descent on straining 
(markers of pelvic floor and pudendal nerve function) can 
be quantified, and functional anal canal length, resting tone 
(reflective predominantly of internal sphincter activity) and 
squeeze increment (reflective of external sphincter function) 
Michael Swash , formerly Professor of Neurology, St Bartholomew’s and The Royal London Hospital, London, UK.
Michael Meldrum Henry , surgeon, The Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, UK.
Summary box 74.2
Examination of anal canal
●● A rectal examination is essential for any patient with anorectal 
and/or bowel symptoms – ‘If you don’t put your finger in, you 
might put your foot in it’
●● A proctosigmoidoscopy is essential in any patient with bowel 
symptoms, and particularly if there is rectal bleeding
Figure 74.6 Various types of proctoscope. (Redrawn with permis -
sion from Mann CV . Surgical treatment of haemorrhoids . London: 
Springer, 2002.)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1343 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1344
can be measured by a variety of simple manometric techniques 
(Figure 74.7). The structural integrity of the sphincters can 
be visualised with endoluminal ultrasound (Figure 74.8), and 
neuromuscular function can be measured by assessment of 
conduction velocity along the pudendal nerve on each side, 
or, more painfully, by needle electromyogram (EMG) studies 
(Figures 74.9 and 74.10) . In the elderly especially, but also 
in younger patients, disorders relating to rectal sensorimotor 
dysfunction can lead to ‘overflow’ of rectal contents through 
what may be an otherwise normal sphincter. The dynamics of 
defaecation can also be assessed radiologically by evacuation 
proctography, in which radio-opaque pseudostool is inserted 
into the rectum and the patient asked to rest, squeeze and 
then bear down to evacuate the rectal contents under real-
time imaging. Proctography can be combined with synchro -
nous EMG and pressure studies (Williams) (Figure 74.11) 
to yield more information about possible reasons (mechan -
ical (rectocoele, intussusception) or functional (anismus, 
lack of effort)) for disordered defaecation in an individual. 
More recently, the use of dynamic magnetic resonance (MR) 
proctography has become more widespread, although studies 
in which the subject is asked to evacuate in the supine posi -
tion may be less physiological than those in which the sub-
ject adopts a sitting position within an open magnet. When 
compared with evacuation proctography, MR proctography 
under-reports intussusception and the size of rectocele; also 
significantly fewer patients are able to evacuate the contrast. 
Results of all physiological and imaging tests have to be com-
pared with a robust normal range and within the context of 
the patient’s symptoms, and are used to guide rational rather 
than empirical treatment strategies.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
Early in embryonic life there is a common chamber – the clo-
aca – into which the hind gut and the allantois open. This 
endodermlined chamber is separated from the surface ecto -
derm of the embryo by the cloacal membrane. The cloaca 
becomes divided into two parts, dorsal (rectum) and ventral 
Norman Stanley Williams , contemporary, Emeritus Professor of Surgery, St Bartholomew’s and the Royal London Hospital, London, UK.
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
7654 3 210
Distance from anal verge (cm)
Pressure (cm H2O)
Rectum Anus Air
Figure 74.7 A typical, normal ‘pull-through’ manometric study of the 
anal canal (3.5 cm long; maximal pressure approximately 60 cmH2O).
Figure 74.8 Endoanal ultrasonography: (a) external anal sphincter 
defect caused by obstetric injury; (b) internal anal sphincter defect 
postsphincterotomy.
02 04 06 08 0 100 120 140 160 180
Time (s)
Normal Cough Voluntary squeeze reaction Straining
Figure 74.9 A typical, normal electromyographic study of the exter-
nal sphincter during various activities.
(a)
(b)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1344 25/10/2017   10:06Congenital abnormalities 1345
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Figure 74.11 Integrated dynamic proctography: (a) at rest; (b) during 
evacuation. Visualisation of the rectum is achieved using barium-  
impregnated ‘synthetic stool’. The effects of straining and evacuation 
on the electromyographic activity of the sphincter muscles and intra-
rectal pressure can be simultaneously recorded (Williams).
(urogenital sinus), by the downgrowth of a septum. The dorsal 
part of the cloacal membrane, known as the anal membrane, 
is thus composed of an outer layer of ectoderm and an inner 
layer of endoderm. Resorption of this anal membrane by the 
eighth week of embryonic life creates the anal canal.
Imperforate anus
Imperforate anus (strictly, it should be anal ‘agenesis’ or ‘atre-
sia’) has historically been divided into two main groups – high 
and low – depending on the level of termination of the rec -
tum in relation to the pelvic floor. Treatment and prognosis 
are influenced by any associated abnormalities of the sacrum 
and genitourinary systems. In both sexes, low defects embrace 
rectoperineal fistula (Figure 74.12), covered anus and anal 02 04 06 08 0 100 120 140 160 180
Time (s)
Straining Cough
Figure 74.10 An electromyographic study of the exter nal sphincter 
showing prolonged inhibition on straining and absent cough r eflex. 
This is typical of a denervated patulous sphincter.
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
Figure 74.12 Low anorectal malformations: (a) rectoperineal fistula 
in a boy; (b) rectoperineal fistula in a girl (anterior anus); (c) rectoves-
tibular fistula. (Courtesy of Alberto Pena and Springer-Verlag. From 
Pena A. Atlas of surgical management of anorectal malformations. 
Copyright Springer-Verlag, 1990.)
(c)
Alberto Pena , contemporary, Professor of Pediatric Surgery, Schneider Children’s Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1345 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1346
 membrane. The most frequent defect in boys with imper -
forate anus is one in which the distal rectum is sited within 
the puborectalis sling but terminates as a fistula into the bul -
bar urethra (Figure 74.13) (see also Chapter 9, Figure 9.32) 
or prostatic urethra above the main anal sphincter complex. 
Boys with a fistula into the bladder neck (a high defect) have 
the poorest prognosis because of the underdevelopment of the 
sacrum and pelvic and anal musculature. The most common 
defect in girls is a rectovestibular fistula, in which the fistula 
opens into the posterior vestibule (not the vagina) (Figure 
74.12). The finding of a single perineal orifice indicates a per-
sistent cloaca in which the rectum, vagina and urinary tract 
form a confluence (Figure 74.13); the longer the common 
channel, the greater the likelihood of more complex defects, 
including vaginal and uterine septation, duplication or atresia. 
An anterior anus, although not imperforate, is not fully located 
within the sphincter mechanism and is regarded as part of the 
spectrum of anorectal malformations (Figure 74.12).
Clinical management
Careful perineal examination will usually provide the most 
important clues about the neonate’s type of malformation. The 
presence of meconium on the perineum indicates a low defect 
and meconium in the urine is evidence of a urinary tract fistula. 
During the first 24 hours, the baby should receive intravenous 
fluids and antibiotics, and should be evaluated for associated 
congenital anomalies. By 24 hours, the distal limit of air within 
the rectum, seen on a lateral prone radiograph, indicates the dis-
tance between the rectal stump and perineum (Figure 74.14).
Treatment
Low anomalies with a perineal fistula can be treated by an 
anoplasty. More complex malformations require early colos -
tomy, with definitive repair performed several months later. 
This may involve posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (PSARP , 
Pena), with or without transabdominal mobilisation of the 
left colon and division of any communication with the uri-
nary tract. In girls with a cloaca and long common channel, 
urinary and vaginal reconstruction is also required. Postoper-
atively, a programme of anal dilatation is instituted, and any 
residual colostomy is closed at a later date. Ultimate bowel 
function (voluntary bowel movements, continence, constipa-
tion) is related to the type of anorectal abnormality and the 
presence of associated defects, especially sacral.
(a)
Figure 74.13 More complex anorectal malformations: (a) rectobul-
bar fistula; (b) cloacal malformation. (Courtesy of Alberto Pena and 
Springer-Verlag. From Pena A. Atlas of surgical management of ano -
rectal malformations. Copyright Springer-Verlag, 1990.)
(b)
(a)
Figure 74.14 Lateral prone shoot-through radiograph of a neonate 
with (a) low and (b) high anorectal malformation. A radio-opaque 
marker has been placed on the anal dimple (courtesy of Mark D 
Stringer, Leeds, UK).
(b)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1346 25/10/2017   10:06Congenital abnormalities 1347
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Postanal dermoid
The space in front of the lower part of the sacrum and coccyx 
may be occupied by a soft, cystic swelling – a postanal der -
moid cyst. Hidden in the hollow of the sacrum it is unlikely to 
be discovered unless a sinus communicating with the exterior 
is present or it develops as a result of inflammation. Such a 
cyst usually remains asymptomatic until adult life, when it 
is prone to becoming infected. Exceptionally, because of its 
size, it gives rise to difficulty in defaecation. The cyst is easily 
palpable on rectal examination.
Differential diagnosis
Especially in a child, an anterior sacral meningocele must be 
excluded. This enlarges when the child cries and is frequently 
associated with paralysis of the lower limbs and incontinence. 
When a discharging sinus is present, a postanal dermoid will 
probably be mistaken for a pilonidal sinus or even an anal 
fistula. Pressure over the sacrococcygeal region with a finger 
in the rectum may cause a flow of sebaceous material, and 
injection of contrast media followed by radiography reveals a 
bottle-necked cyst in front of the coccyx.
Treatment
Treatment involves complete excision of the cyst and, if 
present, the sinus. In the case of large cysts, it is necessary to 
remove the coccyx to gain access. The coccyx should also be 
removed en bloc in any child with a presacral dermoid because 
of the risk of sacrococcygeal teratoma.
Postanal dimple (synonym: fovea 
coccygea)
A dimple in the skin beneath the tip of the coccyx, sometimes 
amounting to a short blind pit, is noticed from time to time in 
the course of a clinical examination and is of no consequence.
Pilonidal sinus
The term pilonidal sinus describes a condition found in the 
natal cleft overlying the coccyx, consisting of one or more, 
usually non-infected, midline openings, which communicate 
with a fibrous track lined by granulation tissue and  containing 
hair lying loosely within the lumen. A common affliction 
amongst the military, it has been referred to as ‘jeep disease’.
Aetiology and pathology
Although acquired theories of development are better 
accepted than the more historical congenital theories, exact 
mechanisms of development are speculative. Evidence that 
supports the theory of the origin of pilonidal sinuses as 
acquired, can be summarised as follows:
 ● Interdigital pilonidal sinus is an occupational disease of 
hairdressers, the hair within the interdigital cleft or clefts 
being the customers’. Pilonidal sinuses of the axilla and 
umbilicus have also been reported.
 ● The age incidence of the appearance of pilonidal sinus 
(82% occur between the ages of 20 and 29 years) is at 
variance with the age of onset of congenital lesions.
 ● Hair follicles have almost never been demonstrated in the 
walls of the sinus.
 ● The hairs projecting from the sinus are dead hairs, with 
their pointed ends directed towards the blind end of the 
sinus.
 ● The disease mostly affects men, in particular hairy men.
 ● Recurrence is common, even though adequate excision of 
the track is carried out.
It is thought that the combination of buttock friction and 
shearing forces in that area allows shed hair or broken hairs 
which have collected there to drill through the midline skin, 
or that infection in relation to a hair follicle allows hair to 
enter the skin by the suction created by movement of the 
buttocks, so creating a subcutaneous, chronically infected, 
midline track. From this primary sinus, secondary tracks may 
spread laterally, which may emerge at the skin as granulation 
tissue-lined, discharging openings. Usually, but not invariably 
(when diagnosis may be confused with anal fistula or hidrade-
nitis suppurativa), the sinus runs cephalad. Carcinoma arising 
in chronic pilonidal disease has been described but is exceed-
ingly rare.
Clinical features
The condition is seen much more frequently in men than 
women, usually after puberty and before the fourth decade of 
life, and is characteristically seen in dark-haired individuals 
rather than those with softer blond hair (Oldham). Patients 
complain of intermittent pain, swelling and discharge at the 
base of the spine but little in the way of constitutional symp -
toms. There is often a history of repeated abscesses that have 
burst spontaneously or which have been incised, usually away 
from the midline. The primary sinus may have one or many 
openings, all of which are strictly in the midline between the 
level of the sacrococcygeal joint and the tip of the coccyx.
Conservative treatment
As the natural history of the condition is usually one of regres-
sion, in those whose symptoms are relatively minor, simple 
Summary box 74.3
Imperforate anus
●● A rare congenital disorder
●● Classified as being high or low depending on the site of the 
rectal termination in relation to the pelvic floor
●● Low defects: relatively easy to correct but prone to 
constipation
●● High defects: more difficult to correct and prone to faecal 
incontinence
A jeep  is a small military, general purpose, vehicle with hard springing, which gives its occupants a very bouncy ride when driven over rough terrain.
James Bagot Oldham , 1899–1977, surgeon, the United Liverpool Hospitals, Liverpool, UK.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1347 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1348
cleaning out of the tracks and removal of all hair, with regular 
shaving of the area and strict hygiene, may be recommended.
Treatment of an acute exacerbation (abscess)
If rest, baths, local antiseptic dressings and the administration 
of a broad spectrum antibiotic fail to bring about resolution, 
the abscess should be drained through a small longitudinal 
incision made over the abscess and off the midline, with thor-
ough curettage of granulation tissue and hair. This procedure 
may or may not be associated with complete resolution.
Surgical treatment of chronic pilonidal 
disease
The multitude of surgical procedures advocated to eradicate 
pilonidal disease, combined with the lack of prospective tri -
als, attests to the lack of overall superiority of one method 
over the others. Time spent off work and perceived recurrence 
rates, but more usually surgeon preference, influence the 
choice of method, which includes the laying open of all tracks 
with or without marsupialisation, the excision of all tracks 
with or without primary closure and the excision of all tracks 
and then closure by some other means designed to avoid a 
midline wound (Limberg procedure, Z-plasty, Karydakis pro-
cedure (Figure 74.15)). Bascom’s procedure involves an 
 incision lateral to the midline to gain access to the sinus cav-
ity, which is rid of hair and granulation tissue (Figure 74.16), 
and excision and closure of the midline pits (Figure 74.17). 
The lateral wound is left open (Figure 74.18). Irrespective of 
procedure, postoperative wound care is important and centres 
around elimination of hair (ingrown, local or other) from the 
wound. The search for an ideal surgical treatment modality 
for pilonidal disease is still ongoing, the most essential char -
acteristic being tension-free healing.
Col Dr George E Karydakis , surgeon, Athens, Greece.
John U Bascom , 1925–2013, American surgeon, formerly of Eugene, OR, USA.
Figure 74.15 Karydakis’s operation for pilonidal sinus. A semilateral 
incision is made around the sinus complex, the diseased component 
excised and the flap mobilised to allow tension-fr ee closure of the 
wound off the midline. (Reproduced with permission from Nicholls 
RJ, Dozois RR. Surgery of the colon and rectum. Edinburgh: Churchill 
 Livingstone, 1997.)
Surgery Fig 60.16
Figure 74.16 Bascom’s technique for pilonidal sinus: 1.
Surgery Fig 60.17
Figure 74.17 Bascom’s technique for pilonidal sinus: 2.
Surgery Fig 60.18
Figure 74.18 Bascom’s technique for pilonidal sinus: 3.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1348 25/10/2017   10:06Anal incontinence 1349
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Recurrent pilonidal sinus
Three possibilities account for this disappointment:
 ● part of the sinus complex has been overlooked at the pri -
mary operation;
 ● new hairs enter the skin or the scar;
 ● there is persistence of a midline wound caused by shear -
ing forces and scarring; in this situation, revisional surgery 
may include re-excision followed by wound closure and 
obliteration of the natal cleft, either by myocutaneous 
rotational buttock flap or cleft closure (Bascom).
ANAL INCONTINENCE
Aetiology
As continence is dependent upon the structural and func-
tional integrity of both the neurological pathways and the 
gastrointestinal tract, the risk factors for anal incontinence 
are many. Patients complaining of the involuntary loss of 
rectal contents require a comprehensive assessment of the 
nature and severity of symptoms; past history, especially of 
gastrointestinal disease, neurological conditions, obstetric 
events and anal surgery; and careful clinical examination (in 
the elderly, incontinence is often one of overflow secondary 
to rectal impaction, and proctitis may lead to such an irrita -
ble rectum that even the strongest sphincter is occasionally 
overwhelmed). A combination of history and examination 
will usually be diagnostic, but special investigations are then 
usually required to clarify the exact cause, including exclusion 
of an underlying malignancy, and to direct management.
Sphincteric causes of incontinence may be classified as 
structural, in which there is disruption (or atrophy) of part 
of the sphincter muscles, neuropathic (previously termed 
idiopathic), in which the nerve supply to the sphincters is 
damaged, usually by chronic straining or complicated vagi-
nal delivery (prolonged second stage), or a combination of 
the two. The commonest causes of sphincteric disruption 
are obstetric damage, anal surgery (following haemorrhoid -
ectomy, dilatation or sphincterotomy for anal fissure, and 
fistulotomy for anal fistula) and trauma (including anal inter-
course, forced or otherwise).
In general, conservative measures to reduce symptoms are 
employed initially. These may be in the form of stool bulking 
or constipating agents, nurse-led bowel retraining including 
specific biofeedback programmes, or anal plugs, which expand 
within and thus seal the anal canal. Failure of such measures 
and severity of symptoms may result in selection for surgery.
Operations to reunite divided 
sphincter muscles
In situations in which there is a discrete disruption of the 
sphincters, the ends of the divided muscle are found and 
reunited by a double overlap repair (Figure 74.19). Short-
term results are good, with reports of 75–80% improvement 
in symptoms at first follow–up. This reduces with time to 50% 
or less 5–10 years after surgery.
Operations to reef the external 
sphincter and puborectalis muscle
If the sphincter muscles are stretched and patulous (as they 
often are in old age and in cases of rectal prolapse) they may 
Summary box 74.4
Causes of anal incontinence
Congenital/childhood
●● Anorectal anomalies
●● Spina bifida
●● Hirschsprung’s disease
●● Behavioural
Acquired/adulthood
●● Diabetes mellitus
●● Cerebrovascular accident
●● Parkinson’s disease
●● Multiple sclerosis
●● Spinal cord injury
●● Other neurological conditions:
Myotonic dystrophy
Shy–Drager syndrome
Amyloid neuropathy
●● Gastrointestinal infection
●● Irritable bowel syndrome
●● Metabolic bowel disease
●● Inflammatory bowel disease
●● Megacolon/megarectum
●● Anal trauma
●● Abdominal surgery:
Small bowel resection
Colonic resection
●● Pelvic surgery:
Hysterectomy
Rectal excision
●● Pelvic malignancy
●● Pelvic radiotherapy
●● Rectal prolapse
●● Rectal evacuatory disorder:
Mechanical, e.g. rectocoele, intussusception
Functional, i.e. pelvic floor dyssynergia
●● Anal surgery:
Haemorrhoidectomy
Surgery for fistula
Surgery for fissure
Rectal disimpaction
●● Obstetric events
General
●● Ageing
●● Dependence of nursing care
●● Obesity
●● Psychobehavioural factors
●● Intellectual incapacity
●● Drugs:
Primary constipating and laxative agents
Secondary effects
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1349 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1350
be tightened by a postanal repair, which, through the use of 
darns of absorbable material to narrow down and plicate the 
external sphincter and the puborectalis sling (Figure 74.20), 
aims to recreate the anorectal angle and to restore length 
to the anal canal and strength to the anal sphincter. The 
approach is usually through the intersphincteric plane. The 
operation is now much less popular because long-term out-
comes have been reported as poor.
Operations to augment the anal 
sphincters
If the degree of sphincter disruption or weakness is such that 
restoration of function cannot be achieved by direct means, 
the sphincter can be augmented by using muscle transposed 
from nearby (gluteus maximus or gracilis) or by using an artifi-
cial sphincter. Transposition of the gracilis muscle around the 
anal canal is followed by electrical stimulation, with conver -
sion from a fast-twitch to a less fatiguable slow-twitch mus -
cle by an implanted pacemaker (Williams) (Figure 74.21). 
Because of its magnitude this technique is performed only in 
highly selected and motivated patients, most of whom have 
had more conventional treatment that has failed to cure 
their incontinence; it is effective in approximately 60% of 
patients in the long term. A simpler means of augmenting 
the sphincter, developed initially for urinary incontinence, is 
(a)
(b)
Figure 74.19 Direct sphincter repair in which (a) the sphincter defect 
is excised and (b) the remaining muscle is overlapped. (Redrawn with 
permission from Mann CV, Glass RE. Surgical treatment of anal incon-
tinence. New York: Springer, 1991.)
(a)
(b)
Figure 74.20  Postanal repair in which (a) the sphincter muscle 
is plicated posterior to the anal canal, thus restoring the anor ectal 
angle; (b) the completed repair. (Redrawn with permission from Mann 
CV, Glass RE. Surgical treatment of anal incontinence . New York: 
Springer, 1991.)
the placement of an inflatable silastic cuff around the anal 
canal. When evacuation is required the cuff is deflated by 
squeezing a small balloon positioned in the scrotum or labia, 
the balloon being attached to a subcutaneous reservoir (Fig-
ure 74.22). However, because this device is a foreign bo dy 
that exerts pressure on the bowel wall, erosion and infection 
have been found to be common problems. To reduce the risk 
of septic complications the operation should be covered by 
antibiotics active against both aerobic and anaerobic organ -
isms. A newer magnetic sphincter (Fenix) is being implanted 
as part of a national trial in the UK (Safari trial; Fenix ver -
sus sacral nerve stimulator), the results of which should be 
available within the next 2 years. Paradoxically, all of these 
methods used to treat incontinence may be associated with 
difficulties in rectal evacuation.
Again, as a result of prior use in urinary incontinence, 
sacral nerve stimulation has been used to treat faecal incon-
tinence, with encouraging short- and medium-term results. 
Rather than any direct action on sphincter strength, this 
technique appears to work by sensorimotor neurophysiologi-
cal modulation of the hindgut through electrical stimulation 
of the sacral nerve roots via a needle positioned through one 
of the posterior sacral foramina (Figure 74.23). The advan-
tage of this technique is its relatively non-invasive nature, 
causes no additional damage to the sphincter, as well as the 
fact that its effects can be tested by temporary stimulation 
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1350 25/10/2017   10:06Anal fissure 1351
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
using an external stimulator before the expensive permanent 
pacemaker is implanted. A much cheaper and less invasive 
novel technique to treat faecal incontinence, again mediated 
through neuromodulation, is percutaneous posterior tibial 
nerve stimulation (PTNS). Results from a prospective com-
parative study suggest that there is no benefit in faecal incon-
tinence over placebo effect .
For some patients, and in those in whom quality of life 
remains poor despite attempts at restoring continence, a 
colostomy can provide relief from a condition that is both 
disabling and socially isolating.
ANAL FISSURE
Definition
An anal fissure (synonym: fissure-in-ano) is a longitudinal 
split in the anoderm of the distal anal canal (Figure 74.24), 
which extends from the anal verge proximally towards, but 
not beyond, the dentate line.
Stimulator
implanted in the
abdominal wall
Electrode
plate
Nerve to
gracilis
Gracilis muscle
wrapped around
anusAnal canal
Distal gracilis
tendon fixed
to contralateral
ischial tuberosity
(a)
Figure 74.21 (a) The electrically stimulated gracilis neosphincter or 
dynamic graciloplasty. (b) Hand-held radiotelemetry controller, which 
allows the patient to turn the stimulator on and off.
(b)
Balloon
Cuff
Pum p
(control assembly)
Figure 74.22 Artificial bowel sphincter. A cuff is placed around the 
anal canal. An inflatable pump control assembly is placed in the scro-
tum and the balloon reservoir is placed under the symphysis pubis.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 73.23Title: How to Pass the Safe Road User Award       9781444 122701 Proof Stage:  1ISBN: 9781444 122701
60°
90°
Figure 74.23  Diagram showing the placement of the electrode 
through a sacral foramen in sacral nerve stimulation.
Figure 74.24 The appearance of an anal fissure. If the buttocks ar e 
gently parted, the presence of an anal fissure can usually be detected 
as an ulcer of variable depth with the skin tag and an anal papilla. 
(Redrawn with permission from Keighley MRB, Williams NS. Surgery 
of the anus, colon and rectum , 2nd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 
1999.)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1351 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1352
Aetiology
The cause of an anal fissure, and particularly the reason why 
the posterior midline is so frequently affected, is not com -
pletely understood. Classically, acute anal fissures arise from 
the trauma caused by the strained evacuation of a hard stool 
or, less commonly, from the repeated passage of diarrhoea. The 
location in the posterior midline perhaps relates to the exagger-
ated shearing forces acting at that site at defaecation, combined 
with a less elastic anoderm endowed with an increased density 
of longitudinal muscle extensions in that region of the anal 
circumference. Anterior anal fissure is much more common in 
women and may arise following vaginal delivery. Perpetuation 
and chronicity may result from repeated trauma, anal hyperto-
nicity and vascular insufficiency, either secondary to increased 
sphincter tone or because the posterior commisure is less well 
perfused than the remainder of the anal circumference.
Clinical features
Although simple epithelial splits, acute anal fissures are, 
because of their location involving the exquisitely sensitive 
anoderm, characterised by severe anal pain associated with 
defaecation, which usually resolves spontaneously after a 
variable time only to recur at the next evacuation, as well 
as the passage of fresh bloo d, normally noticed on the tissue 
after wiping. Chronic fissures are characterised by a hyper -
trophied anal papilla internally and a sentinel tag externally 
(both consequent upon attempts at healing and breakdown), 
between which lies the slightly indurated anal ulcer overlying 
the fibres of the internal sphincter. When chronic, patients 
may also complain of itching secondary to irritation from the 
sentinel tag, discharge from the ulcer or discharge from an 
associated intersphincteric fistula, which has arisen through 
infection penetrating via the fissure base. Although most suf-
ferers are young adults, the condition can affect any age, from 
infants to the elderly. Men and women are affected equally. 
Anterior fissures account for about 10% of those encountered 
in women (and many of these may occur postpartum) but only 
1% in men. A fissure sited elsewhere around the anal circum-
ference or with atypical features should raise the suspicion of 
a specific aetiology, and the inability to be able to conduct 
an adequate examination in the clinic should prompt early 
examination under anaesthesia, with biopsy and culture to 
exclude Crohn’s disease, tuberculosis, sexually transmitted or 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related ulcers (syphi-
lis, Chlamydia, chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum, HSV , 
cytomegalovirus, Kaposi’s sarcoma, B-cell lymphoma) and 
squamous cell carcinoma.
Treatment
After confirmation of the diagnosis in the clinic or under 
anaesthesia, with exclusion of secondary causes of anal ulcer-
ation, conservative management should result in the healing of 
almost all acute and the majority of chronic fissures. Emphasis 
must be placed on normalisation of bowel habits such that the 
passage of stool is less traumatic. The addition of fibre to the 
diet to bulk up the stool, stool softeners and adequate water 
intake are simple and helpful measures. Warm baths and top-
ical local anaesthetic agents relieve pain; however, provid -
ing patients with anal dilators is usually associated with low 
compliance and consequently little effect. The mainstay of 
current conservative management is the topical application 
of pharmacological agents that relax the internal sphincter, 
most commonly nitric oxide donors (Scholefield); by reducing 
spasm, pain is relieved, and increased vascular perfusion pro -
motes healing. Such agents include glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) 
0.2% applied two to three times per day to the anal margin 
(although this may cause headaches) and diltiazem 2% applied 
twice daily. An alternative medical treatment is Botox (10–100 
units) in either divided or a single dose. The cure rate using any 
of these options is approximately 50% although the headache 
rate with GTN ointment has been reported to be as high as 
30%, which limits its acceptability by patients.
Operative measures
Historically, under regional or general anaesthesia, forceful 
manual (four - or eight-digit) sphincter dilatation was used 
to reduce sphincter tone; however, this was achieved in an 
uncontrolled fashion with potential disruption at multiple 
sites of the internal (and even external) sphincter. The risk 
of incontinence following this procedure has now made it 
unpopular, although more conservative controlled stretching 
is still practised in young men with very high sphincter tone.
Fissure healing can also be achieved by a posterior division 
of the exposed fibres of the internal sphincter in the fissure 
base, but this is associated with prolonged healing, as well as 
passive anal leakage thought mainly to be due to the result -
ing keyhole gutter deformity; however, it may be indicated if 
there is an associated intersphincteric fistula.
Lateral anal sphincterotomy
In this operation, the internal sphincter is divided away from 
the fissure itself – usually either in the right or the left lat -
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
Moritz Kaposi , 1837–1902, Professor of Dermatology, Vienna, Austria, described pigmented sarcoma of the skin in 1872.
John Howard Scholefield , contemporary, Professor of Surgery, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
Summary box 74.5
Anal fissure
●● Acute or chronic
●● Ischaemic ulcer in the midline of the anal canal
●● Ectopic site suggests a more sinister cause
Symptoms:
●● Pain on defaecation
●● Bright-red bleeding
●● Mucus discharge
●● Constipation
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1352 25/10/2017   10:06Anal fissure 1353
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
eral positions (Notaras). The procedure can be carried out 
using an open or a closed method, under local, regional or 
general anaesthesia, and with the patient in the lithotomy 
or prone jack-knife position. The distal internal sphincter 
is palpated with a bivalved speculum at the intersphincteric 
groove. In the closed method, a small longitudinal incision 
is made over this, and the submucosal and intersphincteric 
planes are carefully developed to allow precise division of the 
internal sphincter with a knife or scissors to the level of the 
apex of the fissure; the wound is then closed with absorbable 
sutures. Alternatively, either plane can be entered using a 
scalpel (no. 11 blade), with the blade advanced parallel to the 
sphincter and then rotated such that the sharp edge faces the 
internal sphincter, which can then be divided along its distal 
third. Pressure should be applied to the wound for a few min-
utes to prevent haematoma formation. In the open technique, 
the anoderm overlying the distal internal sphincter is divided 
longitudinally to expose the sphincter, which is divided, and 
the wound is closed with absorbable sutures. Although the 
fissure needs no specific attention, problematic papillae and 
external tags can be excised concomitantly.
Early complications of sphincterotomy include haemorrhage, 
haematoma, bruising, perianal abscess and fistula. Despite low 
recurrence rates, the most important complication is inconti-
nence of a variable nature and severity, which may affect up to 
30% of patients, particularly women, who have weaker, shorter 
sphincter complexes and in whom there may already have been 
covert sphincter compromise incurred by childbirth.
Anal advancement flap
The recognition of the risk to continence following internal 
sphincterotomy has led some to advocate a different approach, 
especially in women and those with normal or low resting anal 
pressures, developed from the treatment of anal stenosis. After 
excision of the edges of the fissure and, if necessary, its base 
overlying the internal sphincter, an inverted house-shaped 
flap of perianal skin is carefully mobilised on its blood supply 
and advanced without tension to cover the fissure, and then 
sutured with interrupted absorbable sutures (Figure 74.25). 
The patient is maintained on stool softeners and bulking agents 
postoperatively, and usually also on topical sphincter relaxants; 
minor breakdown of one anastomotic edge does not herald 
ultimate failure. The technique appears to work irrespective of 
sphincter hypertonicity or patient gender.
Hypertrophied anal papilla
Anal papillae occur at the dentate line and are remnants of 
the ectodermal membrane that separated the hindgut from 
the procto daeum. As these papillae are present in 60% of 
patients examined proctologically, they should be regarded 
as normal structures. Anal papillae can become elongated, as 
they frequently do in the presence of an anal fissure. Occa -
sionally, an elongated anal papilla may be the cause of pru-
ritus. An elongated anal papilla associated with pain and/or 
bleeding at defaecation is sometimes encountered in infancy. 
Haemorrhage into a hypertrophied anal papilla can cause 
sudden rectal pain. A prolapsed papilla may become nipped 
by contraction of the sphincter mechanism after defaecation. 
Occasionally, a red oedematous papilla is encountered, with 
local pain and a purulent discharge from the associated crypt. 
This condition of ‘cryptitis’ may be cured by laying open the 
mouth of the infected anal gland and excising the papilla. 
Troublesome papillae may be simply excised.
Proctalgia fugax
This problem is characterised by attacks of severe pain arising 
in the rectum, recurring at irregular intervals and apparently 
unrelated to organic disease. The pain is described as cramp-
like, often occurs when the patient is in bed at night, usually 
lasts only for a few minutes and disappears spontaneously. It 
may follow straining at stool, sudden explosive bowel action 
or ejaculation. It seems to occur more commonly in patients 
suffering from anxiety or undue stress, and it is also said to 
afflict young doctors. The pain may be unbearable – it is possi-
bly caused by segmental cramp in the pubococcygeus muscle. 
It is unpleasant and incurable but is fortunately harmless and 
gradually subsides. If patients have frequent attacks, they may 
benefit from amitryptiline. Salbutamol inhalers have been 
Mitchell James Notaras , surgeon, Barnet General Hospital, Barnet, UK.
Summary box 74.6
Treatment of an anal fissure
●● Conservative initially, consisting of stool-bulking agents and 
softeners, and chemical agents in the form of ointments 
designed to relax the anal sphincter and improve blood flow
●● Surgery if above fails, consisting of lateral internal 
sphincterotomy or anal advancement flap
Figure 74.25 Mobilised skin flap prior to suturing intra-anally over 
the debrided and freshened posterior fissure base.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1353 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1354
suggested as treatment for acute attacks. A more chronic form 
of the disease has been termed the ‘levator syndrome’ and can 
be associated with severe evacuatory dysfunction. Biofeed-
back techniques have been used to help such patients; in the 
past, some surgeons tried severing the puborectalis muscle, 
but this can cause incontinence and should never be carried 
out. If this is being consider an acceptable alternative is Botox 
into the puborectalis muscle.
HAEMORRHOIDS
The prevalence of haemorrhoids when patients are assessed 
proctoscopically far outweighs the prevalence of symptoms, 
and the term should only be used when patients have symp -
toms referable to them. Occasionally, patients with portal 
hypertension develop rectal varices, but these should not be 
confused with haemorrhoids as the consquences may be disas-
trous. Internal haemorrhoids (Greek: haima = blood, rhoos = 
flowing; synonym: piles, Latin: pila = a ball) are symptomatic 
anal cushions and characteristically lie in the 3, 7 and 11 
o’clock positions (with the patient in the lithotomy position). 
In addition, haemorrhoids may be observed between the main 
pile masses, in which case they are internal haemorrhoids 
at the secondary position. External haemorrhoids relate to 
venous channels of the inferior haemorrhoidal plexus deep 
in the skin surrounding the anal verge and are not true hae -
morrhoids; they are usually only recognised as a result of a 
complication, which is most typically a painful solitary acute 
thrombosis. External haemorrhoids associated with internal 
haemorrhoids (‘interoexternal piles’) result from progression 
of the latter to involve both haemorrhoidal plexuses, and are 
best thought of as being external extensions of internal haem-
orrhoids. Secondary internal haemorrhoids arise as a result of 
a specific condition, although the mechanisms involved may 
be the same as those involved in the formation of primary 
internal haemorrhoids. The most important cause, albeit rel -
atively uncommon, is carcinoma of the anorectum (Figure 
74.26) but there may be other causes, which may be catego-
rised as follows:
 ● local, e.g. anorectal deformity, hypotonic anal sphincter;
 ● abdominal, e.g. ascites;
 ● pelvic, e.g. gravid uterus, uterine neoplasm (fibroid, carci-
noma of the uterus or cervix), ovarian neoplasm, bladder 
carcinoma;
 ● neurological, e.g. paraplegia, multiple sclerosis.
Primary internal haemorrhoids
Theories of development
PORTAL HYPERTENSION AND VARICOSE VEINS
Misconceptions concerning the vascular anatomy of the anal 
canal (specifically the lack of appreciation of communica -
tions between portal and systemic systems and the ‘normality’ 
of venous dilatations) led to theories of development of pri -
mary internal haemorrhoids that lasted for several centuries. 
Man’s upright posture (we know little about haemorrhoidal 
problems in animals), lack of valves in the portal venous 
 system and raised abdominal pressure were thought to con -
tribute to the development of anal varicosities. If raised portal 
venous pressure were indeed the cause, one would expect a 
high incidence in subjects suffering from portal hypertension; 
however, although such patients have a higher incidence of 
anorectal varices, these are a separate anatomical and clin -
ical entity from haemorrhoids, which are seen no more fre -
quently than in those without cirrhosis, portal hypertension 
and oesophageal varices.
OTHER VASCULAR CAUSES
Historically, some considered haemorrhoids to be haemangi -
omatous or to result from changes in the erectile tissue that 
forms part of the continence mechanism, such as hyperplasia 
of the ‘corpus cavernosum recti’.
INFECTION
Repeated infection of the anal lining, secondary to trauma 
at defaecation, has been postulated as a cause of weakening 
and erosion of the walls of the veins of the submucosa. This 
hypothesis is difficult to accept, as one of the truly incredible 
properties of the anal canal is its resistance to infection, as 
well as the ability of its mucosa to heal after surgical inter -
vention despite the torrent of microorganisms passing over it.
DIET AND STOOL CONSISTENCY
Much emphasis has been placed on the role of constipation 
in the development of haemorrhoids and, indeed, much of 
the management of sufferers involves attempts to ‘normalise’ 
bowel habits. A fibre-deficient diet results in a prolonged gut 
transit time, which is associated with the passage of smaller, 
harder stools that require more straining to expel. The pres -
ence of a hard faecal mass in the rectum could obstruct venous 
Figure 74.26  Carcinoma of the r ectum associated with haemor -
rhoids, a not infrequent diagnostic pitfall.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1354 25/10/2017   10:06Haemorrhoids 1355
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
return, resulting in engorgement of the anal veins with the 
act of straining at stool or sitting for prolonged periods on the 
lavatory with a relaxed perineum, causing a disturbance of 
vascular flow. However, the epidemiological pattern of con -
stipation is different from that of haemorrhoidal disease and, 
indeed, an association has been demonstrated between haem-
orrhoids and diarrhoeal disorders.
ANAL HYPERTONIA
The association between raised anal canal resting pressure 
and haemorhoids is well known, but whether anal hyperto -
nia causes symptoms attributable to haemorrhoids or whether 
anal cushion hypertrophy causes anal hypertonia is a subject 
of debate. The fact that surgical haemorrhoidectomy restores 
resting pressures to the normal range is not absolute evidence 
that the pile masses themselves are the cause of the hyper -
tonia. It should be remembered, however, that there are a 
significant proportion of patients who suffer haemorrhoidal 
symptoms in whom the anal canal is relatively patulous, and 
there is mucosal prolapse, which is associated with perineal 
descent and pudendal neuropathy.
AGEING
In contrast to the anal cushion of early life, with age, the sup-
porting structures show a higher proportion of collagen than 
muscle fibres and are fragmented and disorganised. Presum -
ably, these changes arise over time with continued use of the 
anal canal for defaecation; however, similar changes are noted 
histologically in surgically excised haemorrhoids in younger 
patients.
CURRENT VIEW
Shearing forces acting on the anus (for a variety of reasons) 
lead to caudal displacement of the anal cushions and mucosal 
trauma. With time, fragmentation of the supporting struc -
tures (a normal consequence of ageing but perhaps acceler -
ated in those with haemorrhoids) leads to loss of elasticity 
of the cushions such that they no longer retract following 
defaecation.
Clinical features
Bleeding, as the name haemorrhoid implies, is the principal 
and earliest symptom. The nature of the bleeding is charac -
teristically separate from the motion and is seen either on the 
paper on wiping or as a fresh splash in the pan. Very rarely, the 
bleeding may be sufficient to cause anaemia. Pain is not com-
monly associated with the bleeding and its presence should 
make the clinician alert to the possibility of another diagno -
sis; however, pain may result from congestion of pile masses 
below a hypertonic sphincter. Some patients describe the 
feeling of ‘passing ground glass’ as they are defaecating and 
itching is another common symptom. Piles associated with 
bleeding alone are called first-degree haemorrhoids.
Patients may complain of true ‘piles’, lumps that appear at 
the anal orifice during defaecation and which return sponta-
neously afterwards (second-degree haemorrhoids), piles that 
have to be replaced manually (third-degree haemorrhoids) 
(Figure 74.27) or piles that lie permanently outside (fourth- 
degree haemorrhoids). By this stage there is often a  significant 
cutaneous component to the pile masses, which arise through 
repeated congestion and oedema. In addition to the main 
symptoms of pain and prolapse, patients may complain of anal 
irritation, which may occur as a result of mucus secretion from 
the caudally displaced rectal mucosa, minor leakage through a 
now imperfect anal seal or difficulties in cleaning after defaeca-
tion because of the irregularity of the anal verge.
Complications
Profuse haemorrhage is not rare. The bleeding mainly occurs 
externally but it may continue internally after the bleeding 
haemorrhoid has retracted or has been returned. In these cir-
cumstances the rectum is found to contain blood.
Summary box 74.7
Haemorrhoids: clinical features
●● Haemorrhoids or piles are symptomatic anal cushions
●● They are more common when intra-abdominal pressure is 
raised, e.g. in obesity, constipation and pregnancy
●● Classically, they occur in the 3, 7 and 11 o’clock positions 
with the patient in the lithotomy position
●● Symptoms of haemorrhoids:
Bright-red, painless bleeding
Mucus discharge
Prolapse
Pain only on prolapse
Figure 74.27 Third-degree haemorrhoids (courtesy of CV Mann, The 
Royal London Hospital, London, UK).
Summary box 74.8
Four degrees of haemorrhoids
●● First degree – bleed only, no prolapse
●● Second degree – prolapse but reduce spontaneously
●● Third degree – prolapse and have to be manually reduced
●● Fourth degree – permanently prolapsed
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1355 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1356
TREATMENT OF COMPLICATIONS
Strangulation, thrombosis and gangrene. In these cases, it was 
formerly believed that surgery would promote portal pyaemia. 
However, if adequate antibiotic cover is given from the start, 
this is not found to be so, and immediate surgery can be justi-
fied in some patients. The other risk if surgery is performed at 
this stage, that of postoperative stenosis, has resulted in many 
surgeons adopting a conservative approach, reviewing the situ-
ation much later and carrying out haemorrhoidectomy only if 
necessary. Besides adequate pain relief, bed rest with frequent 
hot baths and warm or cold saline compresses with firm pres -
sure usually cause the pile mass to shrink considerably in 3–4 
days (the author’s preference is shrinkage through external 
application of small bags of frozen peas combined with the use 
of topical anaesthetic agents). An anal dilatation technique 
has in the past been used as an alternative treatment to surgery 
for painful ‘strangulated’ haemorrhoids. However, because of 
the risk of incontinence this is no longer advised.
Severe haemorrhage. The cause usually lies in a bleeding dia-
thesis or the use of anticoagulants. If such causes are excluded, 
a local compress containing adrenaline solution, with an 
injection of morphine and blood transfusion if necessary, will 
usually suffice. However, after adequate blood replacement, 
ligation and excision of the piles may be required.
Management
Exclusion of other causes of rectal bleeding, especially col-
orectal malignancy, is the first priority. In the absence of a spe-
cific predisposing cause, important measures include attempts 
at normalising bowel and defaecatory habits: only evacuating 
when the natural desire to do so arises, adopting a defaecatory 
position to minimise straining, and the addition of stool soft-
eners and bulking agents to ease the defaecatory act. Various 
proprietary creams can be inserted into the rectum from a col-
lapsible tube fitted with a nozzle, at night and before defaeca-
tion. Suppositories are also useful.
In those with first- or second-degree piles whose symptoms 
are not improved by conservative measures, injection sclero -
therapy (Mitchell), the submucosal injection of 5% phenol 
in arachis oil or almond oil, may be used. Any invasive treat-
ment, however, must be with full agreement of the patient, who 
should be informed of the potential risks of such interventions. 
The aim is to create fibrosis, cause obliteration of the vascular 
channels and hitch up the anorectal mucosa. With the awake 
patient in the left lateral position and under direct vision with 
a proctoscope, about 5  mL of sclerosant is injected into the 
apex of the pile pedicle (Figure 74.29) using a disposable nee-
dle and syringe (Figure 74.30). The procedure is repeated for 
each pile and the patient reassessed after 8 weeks; if necessary, 
the injections are repeated. Pain upon injection means that the 
needle is in the wrong place and should be withdrawn. Injec-
tions that are too superficial are heralded by the rapid bulging 
of the musosa, which turns white; this leads to superficial ulcer-
ation but rarely serious septic sequelae. However, injections 
placed too deeply can have disastrous consequences, including 
pelvic sepsis, prostatitis, impotence and rectovaginal fistula.
For more bulky piles, banding has been shown to be effica-
cious, but it is associated with more discomfort. The Barron’s 
bander is a commonly available device used to slip tight elastic 
bands onto the base of the pedicle of each haemorrhoid (Fig-
ure 74.31). The bands cause ischaemic necrosis of the piles, 
which slough off within 10 days; this may be associated with 
bleeding, about which the patient must be warned. As with 
sclerotherapy, three piles may be treated at one session, and 
the process may be repeated after several weeks if necessary. 
The techniques of cryotherapy (Lloyd Williams) and infrared 
photo coagulation (Leicester) are not often used nowadays.
Summary box 74.9
Complications of haemorrhoids
●● Strangulation and thrombosis (Figure 74.28)
●● Ulceration
●● Gangrene
●● Portal pyaemia
●● Fibrosis
Clinton Mitchell , of Illinois, IL, USA was the first to use carbolic acid for injecting haemorrhoids. Itinerant irregular practitioners exploited the method.
John Barron , surgeon, Chicago, IL, USA.
William Bashall Gabriel , 1893–1975, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital and the Royal Northern Hospital, London, UK.
Kenneth Lloyd Williams , d. surgeon, The Royal United Hospitals, Bath, UK.
Roger James Leicester , formerly surgeon, St George’s Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 74.29  Correct site 
(cross) for injecting a hae -
morrhoid (after WB Gabriel, 
London, UK).
Figure 74.28 An attack of piles. Prolapsed strangulated piles, as 
commonly seen, on the left. A less common mass on the right with 
fibrofatty covering.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1356 25/10/2017   10:06Haemorrhoids 1357
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Operations
INDICATIONS
The indications for haemorrhoidectomy include:
 ● third- and fourth-degree haemorrhoids;
 ● second-degree haemorrhoids that have not been cured by 
non-operative treatments;
 ● fibrosed haemorrhoids;
 ● interno-external haemorrhoids when the external haem -
orrhoid is well defined.
If there is any doubt about the diagnosis of haemorrhoids, 
examination under anaesthesia and, if indicated, biopsy , are 
necessary. The other strong indication for surgery is haemor -
rhoidal bleeding sufficient to cause anaemia. Beyond these, the 
indications summarised above are more relative than absolute, 
because in these situations surgery aims simply to improve 
symptoms and, of course, is not without risk. For instance, 
elderly multiparous women with hypotonic sphincters who 
are just continent before haemorrhoidectomy may find that 
the procedure results in frank incontinence, a far worse condi-
tion than that for which they originally sought help.
TECHNIQUE
It is usual for the patient to have been taking stool softeners in 
the days before surgery and a preoperative enema to empty the 
rectum is administered. The procedure is usually  performed 
under general or regional anaesthesia with the patient in the 
lithotomy or prone jack-knife position. The perianal skin is 
shaved and a formal examination performed. Haemorrhoid -
ectomy can be performed using an open or a closed technique. 
The open technique is most commonly used in the UK and is 
known as the Milligan–Morgan operation – named after the 
surgeons who described it. The closed technique is the pop -
ular technique in the USA. Both involve ligation and exci -
sion of the haemorrhoid, but in the open technique the anal 
mucosa and skin are left open to heal by secondary intention, 
and in the closed technique the wound is sutured.
 ● Open technique. The anoderm and subcutaneous tis -
sues between the pile masses may be injected with dilute 
adrenaline (1:300 000 dilution) to reduce bleeding and 
aid preservation of the skin bridges left following excision. 
Artery forceps are applied to the skin-covered external 
components of the piles and traction exerted to reveal the 
internal components, which are also grasped by artery for-
ceps. When held out by the assistant these pairs of artery 
forceps form a triangle (Figure 74.32a). The operator 
takes the left lateral pair of artery forceps in the palm of the 
hand and places the extended forefinger in the anal canal 
to support the internal haemorrhoid. In this way traction 
is applied to the skin of the anal margin. With scissors 
or cutting diathermy, a V-shaped cut is made through the 
skin and those fibres inserting into it around the skin- 
holding artery forceps. Traction by both operator and 
assistant, combined with careful dissection, will expose 
the lower border of the internal sphincter. The dissec -
tion proceeds up the anal canal, with the sides of the 
mucosal dissection converging towards the pile apex and 
with the internal sphincter visible and separate from the 
dissected pile (Figure 74.32b). A transfixion ligature 
of strong Vicryl is applied to the pedicle at this level 
(Figure 74.32c), the pile is excised well distal to the 
ligature and, after ensuring haemostasis, the ligature is 
cut long. Each haemorrhoid is dealt with in this manner, 
taking care to leave mucocutaneous bridges. If there are 
Surgery Fig 60.30
Figure 74.31 Barron’s banding apparatus, with the appearance of a 
typical ‘banded’ haemorrhoid.
(a)
Figure 74.30 Gabriel’s syringe (a) has now been replaced by dis -
posable syringes (b).
(b)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1357 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1358
significant secondary haemorrhoids under these bridges 
they can be filleted out by scissor dissection. Haemostasis 
must be absolute at the end of the procedure, when a soft 
absorbable anal dressing is inserted. The margins of the 
skin wounds are trimmed so as not to leave overhang -
ing edges (Figure 74.33). Bleeding subcutaneous arteries 
having been secured, the areas denuded of skin are dressed 
with three pieces of petroleum jelly gauze. A pad of gauze 
and wool and a firmly applied T-bandage complete the 
 operation.
 ● Closed technique. The haemorrhoid is excised, together 
with the overlying mucosa, as illustrated in Figure 74.34. 
The haemorrhoid is dissected carefully from the underly-
ing sphincter and haemostasis is achieved. The pedicle 
is transfixed and ligated with 3/0 Vicryl or Dexon. Any 
residual small haemorrhoids should be removed by fil -
leting them out after undermining the edges of the cut 
mucosa. The mucosal defect is then closed completely 
with a continuous suture, using the same stitch that was 
employed to ligate the haemorrhoid pedicle. The remain-
ing haemorrhoids are excised and ligated in a similar fash-
ion, ensuring that there are adequate mucosal and skin 
bridges between each area of excision to avoid a subse -
quent stenosis.
Figure 74.32 Ligation and excision of haemorrhoids. Open tech -
nique: (a) the artery forceps have been applied; (b) dissection of the 
left lateral pedicle; (c) transfixion of the pedicle. (Reproduced with 
permission from Nicholls RJ, Dozois RR. Surgery of the colon and 
rectum. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 74.33 The appearance of the anus at the conclusion of the oper -
ation. (Note that to avoid stricture formation it is necessary to ensur e that 
a bridge of skin and mucous membrane remains between each wound.) ‘If 
it looks like a clover the trouble is over, if it looks like a dahlia, it is surely a 
failure.’ (Reproduced with permission from Nicholls RJ, Dozois RR. Surgery 
of the colon and rectum. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1358 25/10/2017   10:06Haemorrhoids 1359
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
In these days of economic stringencies, the patient is dis -
charged from hospital within 1–2 days of the operation. In 
many countries, the procedure is often performed on a day-
care basis. The patient is instructed to take two warm baths 
each day and is given a bulk laxative to take twice daily, 
together with appropriate analgesia. There is some evidence 
that a 5-day course of oral metronidazole may reduce pain. 
Dry dressings are applied as necessary, a sterile sanitary towel 
usually being ideal. The patient is seen again 3–4 weeks after 
discharge and a rectal examination is performed. If there is 
evidence of stenosis, the patient is encouraged to use a dilator.
POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS
Postoperative complications may be early or late. Early com -
plications include pain, which may require opiate analgesia; 
retention of urine, especially in men, which rarely may need 
Antonio Longo , contemporary, surgeon, Sicily, Italy.
 ● Stapled haemorrhoidopexy. With the aim of symptom 
relief but preservation of the anal cushions, the technique 
of stapled haemorrhoidopexy (Longo), which utilises a 
purpose-designed stapling gun (PPH, Ethicon Inc.), has 
also been described and is widely used in Europe. This pro-
cedure excises a strip of mucosa and submucosa (together 
with the vessels travelling within them) circumferentially, 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 74.34 Closed technique of haemorrhoidectomy: (a) the hae-
morrhoidal tissue is excised; (b) bleeding is controlled by diathermy; 
(c) the defect is closed with a continuous suture after first under -
mining the anoderm on each side. (Redrawn with permission from 
Keighley MRB, Williams NS. Surgery of the anus, colon and rectum , 
2nd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999.)
Summary box 74.10
Treatment of haemorrhoids
●● Symptomatic – advice about defaecatory habits, stool 
softeners and bulking agents
●● Injection of sclerosant
●● Banding
●● THD /HALO/ haemorrhoidopexy
●● Haemorrhoidectomy
well above the dentate line. Activation of the gun also 
simultaneously repairs the cut mucosa and submucosa 
by stapling the edges together (Figure 74.35). This pro-
cedure is quick to perform, and controlled trials suggest 
that it is less painful and less traumatic than conven -
tional haemorrhoidectomy and, at least in the short term, 
it seems to be equally efficacious. However, evidence is 
emerging that the technique is associated with higher 
recurrence rates than following conventional haemor -
rhoidectomy, and associated with more additional surgery. 
The patient, after counselling, may or may not choose to 
accept a higher recurrence rate to take advantage of the 
short-term benefits.
TRANSANAL HAEMORRHOIDAL 
DEARTERIALISATION (THD) OR HAEMORRHOID 
ARTERY LIGATION OPERATION (HALO)
For the treatment of second- and third-degree haemorrhoids, 
some have recently advocated transanal Doppler-guided liga-
tion of those vessels feeding the haemorrhoidal masses, to 
which others have added suture ‘mucopexy’ to deal with any 
prolapse. Long-term outcomes are unknown, but recurrence 
rates for fourth-degree haemorrhoids (certainly when addi -
tional procedures are not incorporated) are high. However, 
the complication rate and postoperative pain scores are better 
than with conventional surgery
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1359 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1360
relief by catheterisation; and reactionary haemorrhage, which 
is much more common than secondary haemorrhage. The 
haemorrhage may be mainly or entirely concealed but will 
become evident on examining the rectum. If persistent fol-
lowing adequate analgesia, the patient must be taken to the 
operating theatre and the bleeding point secured by careful 
diathermy or under-running with a ligature on a needle, care 
being taken to avoid damage to the internal sphincter. Should 
a definite bleeding point not be found, the anal canal and 
rectum are packed.
Late postoperative complications include:
 ● Secondary haemorrhage. This is uncommon, occurring 
about the seventh or eighth day after operation. It is usu -
ally controlled by morphine but, if the haemorrhage is 
severe, an anaesthetic should be given and the bleeding 
controlled.
 ● Anal stricture, which must be prevented at all costs. A 
rectal examination at the postoperative review will indi -
cate whether stricturing is to be expected. It may then 
be necessary to give a general anaesthetic and dilate the 
anus. After that, daily use of the dilator should give a sat-
isfactory result.
 ● Anal fissures and submucous abscesses.
 ● Incontinence, especially if there has been inadvertent 
damage to the underlying internal sphincter. Although 
uncommon, this is obviously a very serious problem that 
is difficult to treat.
Figure 74.35  Stapled haemorrhoidectomy: (a) the purse-string 
suture is placed several centimetr es above the dentate line; (b) the 
anvil of the fully opened stapling gun is inserted endoanally so that it 
is above the purse-string suture, which is then tied around the shaft of 
the gun. The gun is closed and fired; (c) after firing, a 3–4 cm strip of 
mucosa and submucosa containing the haemorrhoids is excised and 
the mucosal edges are simultaneously stapled together.
Summary box 74.11
Complications of haemorrhoidectomy
Early
●● Pain
●● Acute retention of urine
●● Reactionary haemorrhage
Late
●● Secondary haemorrhage
●● Anal stricture
●● Anal fissure
●● Incontinence
External haemorrhoids
A thrombosed external haemorrhoid relates anatomically to 
the veins of the superficial or external haemorrhoidal plexus 
and is commonly termed a perianal haematoma. It presents 
as a sudden onset, olive-shaped, painful blue subcutaneous 
swelling at the anal margin and is usually consequent upon 
straining at stool, coughing or lifting a heavy weight (Fig-
ure 74.36). The thrombosis is usually situated in a lateral 
region of the anal margin. If the patient presents within the 
first 48 hours, the clot may be evacuated under local anaes -
thesia. Untreated it may resolve, suppurate, fibrose and give 
rise to a cutaneous tag, burst and the clot extrude, or con -
tinue bleeding. In the majority of cases, resolution or fibrosis 
occurs. Indeed, this condition has been called ‘a 5-day, pain -
ful, self-curing lesion’ (Milligan).
(a)
(b)
(c)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1360 25/10/2017   10:06Pruritus ani 1361
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
PRURITUS ANI
This is intractable itching around the anus, a common and 
embarrassing condition. Usually , the skin is reddened and 
hyperkeratotic and it may become cracked and moist.
Causes
The causes are numerous. A useful mnemonic is ‘pus, polypus, 
parasites, piles, psyche’:
 ● Lack of cleanliness, excessive sweating and wearing rough 
or woollen underclothing.
 ● An anal or perianal discharge that renders the anus moist. 
The causative lesions include an anal fissure, fistula- in-
ano, prolapsed internal or external haemorrhoids, genital 
warts and excessive ingestion of liquid paraffin. A mucous 
discharge is an intense pruritic agent and a polyp can be 
the cause.
 ● A vaginal discharge, especially caused by Trichomonas 
vaginalis infection.
 ● Parasitic causes. Threadworms should be excluded, espe-
cially in young subjects. Children suffering from thread -
worms should wear gloves at night, lest they scratch the 
perianal region and are reinfested with ova by nail biting – 
‘parasites lost, parasites regained’. Scabies and pediculosis 
pubis may infest the anal region.
 ● Epidermophytosis is a common cause, especially if the 
skin between the toes is also infected; microscopic and 
cultural examinations are essential. Half-strength Whit -
field’s ointment quickly gives relief and is the sheet anchor 
of treatment.
 ● Allergy is sometimes the cause, in which case there is 
likely to be a history of other allergic manifestations, such 
as urticaria, asthma or hay fever. Antibiotic therapy may 
be the precipitating factor.
 ● Skin diseases localised to the perianal skin: psoriasis, 
lichen planus and contact dermatitis.
 ● Bacterial infection , such as intertrigo resulting from a 
mixed bacterial infection. Erythrasma caused by Coryne-
bacterium minutissimum is responsible for some cases and 
its presence is detected by ultraviolet light, which induces 
a pink fluorescence.
 ● A psychoneurosis. It is alleged that in a few instances 
neurotic individuals become so immersed in their com -
plaint that a pain–pleasure complex develops, the plea-
sure being the scratching. Possibly this is true, but such a 
syndrome should not be assumed without firm grounds for 
coming to this conclusion.
 ● Diabetes can sometimes present with pruritus ani, and the 
urine should be tested in all patients.
Treatment
The cause is treated. Symptomatic treatment includes the 
following:
 ● Hygiene measures. Cotton wool should be substituted for 
toilet paper. Soap is avoided and replaced by water alone, 
and the area pat-dried rather than rubbed. These measures 
alone, combined with wearing cotton underwear and the 
application of calamine lotion or zinc and castor oil, are 
all that is necessary to cure some cases. If there is much 
anal hair trapping the moisture and discharge, shaving can 
be very helpful.
 ● Hydrocortisone. In patients with dermatitis, and only in 
patients with dermatitis, the topical application of 0.5% 
or 1% prednisolone cream is often beneficial; sometimes 
after discontinuation of the therapy, the pruritus is lia -
ble to return, in which case 5% lidocaine hydrochloride 
(Xylocaine) ointment can be substituted for a time.
 ● Strapping the buttocks keeps moist opposing surfaces 
apart but is not well tolerated. If the moistness originates 
from anal discharge, a cotton wool anal plug will seal the 
anal orifice.
Operative treatment
This may be necessary for a concomitant lesion of the anorec-
tum that is thought to initiate or contribute to the pruritus. 
Otherwise, surgery is not indicated.
Figure 74.36 A thrombosed exter nal haemorrhoid that has burst. 
There is also a mucosal pr olapse, which is separate from the cuta -
neous lesion.
Arthur Whitfield , 1867–1967, Professor of Dermatology, Kings College Hospital, London, UK. Whitfield’s ointment is ‘compound ointment of benzoic acid’.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1361 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1362
ANORECTAL ABSCESSES
Aetiology
Acute sepsis in the region of the anus is common. A funda -
mental distinction that has to be made is whether the sepsis is 
in that area by chance (simple boil, skin appendage infection) 
or whether it has arisen as a consequence of the presence of 
the anorectum, specifically the anal glands. Overall, anorec -
tal sepsis is more common in men than women, although 
infections with skin-type organisms (and thus unrelated to 
fistula) are evenly distributed. The cryptoglandular theory 
of intersphincteric anal gland infection (Parks) holds that, 
upon infection of a gland, pus, which travels along the path 
of least resistance, may spread caudally to present as a peri -
anal abscess, laterally across the external sphincter to form an 
ischiorectal abscess or, rarely, superiorly above the anorectal 
junction to form a supralevator intermuscular or pararectal 
abscess (depending on its relation to the longitudinal mus -
cle), as well as circumferentially in any of the three planes: 
intersphincteric/intermuscular, ischiorectal or pararectal 
supralevator (Figure 74.37). Sepsis unrelated to anal gland 
infection may occur at the same or at other sites (Figure 
74.38), including submucosal abscess (following haemorrh -
oidal sclerotherapy, which usually resolve spontaneously), 
mucocutaneous or marginal abscess (infected haematoma), 
ischiorectal abscess (foreign body, trauma, deep skin-related 
infection) and pelvirectal supralevator sepsis originating in 
pelvic disease. Underlying rectal disease, such as neoplasm 
and particularly Crohn’s disease, may be the cause. Simi -
larly, patients with generalised disorders, such as diabetes and 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), may present 
with an anorectal abscess; in these patients, abscesses may run 
an aggressive course.
Presentation
A perianal abscess, confined by the terminal extensions of the 
longitudinal muscle, is usually associated with a short (2–3 
day) history of increasingly severe, well-localised pain and a 
palpable tender lump at the anal margin. Examination reveals 
an indurated hot, tender perianal swelling. Patients with 
infection in the larger fatty-filled ischiorectal space, in which 
tissue tension is much lower, usually present later, with less 
well localised symptoms but more constitutional upset and 
fever. On examination, the affected buttock is diffusely swol-
len with widespread induration and deep tenderness. If sep -
sis is higher, deep rectal pain, fever and sometimes disturbed 
micturition may be the only features, with nothing evident on 
external examination but tender supralevator induration pal-
pable on digital examination above the anorectal junction.
Summary box 74.12
Pruritus ani
●● Common
●● Numerous causes including skin diseases, parasites 
(threadworm), anal discharge, allergies, diabetes
●● Treat the cause if possible
●● Symptomatic treatment is the mainstay
Caspar Bartholin, (Secundus) , 1655–1709, Professor of Medicine, Anatomy and Physics, Copenhagen, Denmark, described these glands in 1677.
William Cowper , 1666–1709, London surgeon, described these glands in 1697.
Figure 74.37  Axial magnetic resonance imaging scan (STIR 
sequence) showing posterior horseshoe spread of sepsis within the 
intersphincteric space.
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
Coronal
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 74.38 Diagram showing the spaces in relation to the anus 
and types of anorectal abscess in cor onal section: A, pelvirectal 
supralevator space; B, ischiorectal space; C, perianal or superficial 
ischiorectal space; D, marginal or mucocutaneous space; E, sub -
mucous space; F , anorectal intermuscular (intersphincteric) space; 
1, pelvirectal supralevator abscess; 2, submucous abscess; 3, ischi -
orectal abscess; 4, marginal abscess; 5, perianal abscess; 6, inter -
sphincteric abscess. (Reproduced with permission from Nicholls RJ, 
Dozois RR. Surgery of the colon and rectum. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 1997.)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1362 25/10/2017   10:06Fistula-in-ano 1363
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Differential diagnosis
The only conditions with which an anorectal abscess is likely 
to be confused are abscesses connected with a pilonidal sinus, 
Bartholin’s gland or Cowper’s gland.
Management
Management of acute anorectal sepsis is primarily surgical, 
including careful examination under anaesthesia, sigmoidos -
copy and proctoscopy, and adequate drainage of the pus. For 
perianal and ischiorectal sepsis (with an incidence of 60% and 
30%, respectively), drainage is through the perineal skin, usu-
ally through a cruciate incision over the most fluctuant point, 
with excision of the skin edges to deroof the abscess (Fig-
ure 74.39). Pus is sent for microbiological culture (Grace) 
and tissue from the wall is sent for histological appraisal to 
exclude specific causes. With a finger in the anorectum to 
avoid creation of a false opening, the cavity is carefully curet-
ted. A gentle search may be made for an underlying fistula if 
the surgeon is experienced, and, if obvious, a loose draining 
seton may be passed; injudicious probing in the acute stage 
is, however, potentially dangerous and may lead to a much 
more difficult situation. Unless by highly experienced hands, 
immediate fistulotomy should not be performed. After irriga -
tion of the cavity, the wound is lightly tucked; antibiotics are 
prescribed if there is surrounding cellulitis and especially in 
those less resistant to infection, such as diabetics. If the pus 
subsequently cultures skin-type organisms, there will be no 
underlying fistula and the patient can be reassured. If gut flora 
are cultured, it is likely, but not inevitable, that there is an 
underlying fistula.
The management of supralevator sepsis is dependent upon 
its exact anatomy (within or outside the rectal wall) and its 
origin. Sepsis originating in pelvic disease necessitates appro-
priate management of the underlying cause (appendiceal, 
gynaecological, diverticular, Crohn’s disease, malignancy), 
although intrarectal drainage may be apt to avoid creation of 
an extrasphincteric fistula. Cephalad extension of an inter -
sphincteric fistula can be safely drained into the rectum, 
whereas supralevator extension of a transsphincteric fistula 
should be drained via the skin of the buttock. Rarely, a colos-
tomy may be necessary to control severe sepsis, especially in 
the immunocompromised individual.
Roger Hew Grace , formerly Professor of Colorectal Surgery, The Royal Wolverhampton Hospital, Wolverhampton, UK.
Figure 74.39  Incision of an ischiorectal abscess. The cavity is 
explored and, if septa exist, they should be broken down gently with a 
finger and the necrotic tissue lining the walls of the abscess removed 
by the finger wrapped in gauze. It is wise to biopsy the wall and send 
the pus for culture. Nothing further is done at this stage.
FISTULA-IN-ANO
Aetiology
A fistula-in-ano, or anal fistula, is a chronic abnormal commu-
nication, usually lined to some degree by granulation tissue, 
which runs outwards from the anorectal lumen (the internal 
opening) to an external opening on the skin of the perineum 
or buttock (or rarely, in women, to the vagina). Anal fistulae 
may be found in association with specific conditions, such as 
Crohn’s disease, tuberculosis, lymphogranuloma venereum, 
actinomycosis, rectal duplication, foreign body and malig-
nancy (which may also very rarely arise within a longstanding 
fistula), and suspicion of these should be aroused if clini -
cal findings are unusual. However, the majority are termed 
non-specific, idiopathic or cryptoglandular, and intersphinc -
teric anal gland infection is deemed central to them.
Presentation
For reasons that are unknown, non-specific anal fistulae are 
more common in men than women. The overall incidence 
is about 9 cases per 100 000 population per year in western 
Europe, and those in their third, fourth and fifth decades of 
life are most commonly affected. Patients usually complain 
of intermittent purulent discharge (which may be bloody) 
and pain (which increases until temporary relief occurs when 
the pus discharges). There is often, but not invariably, a pre -
vious episode of acute anorectal sepsis that settled (incom-
pletely) spontaneously or with antibiotics, or which was 
surgically drained. The passage of flatus or faeces through the 
external opening is suggestive of a rectal rather than an anal 
 internal opening.
Summary box 74.13
Anorectal abscess
●● Usually produces a painful, throbbing swelling in the anal 
region. The patient often has swinging pyrexia
●● Subdivided according to anatomical site into perianal, 
ischiorectal, submucous and pelvirectal
●● Underlying conditions include fistula-in-ano (most common), 
Crohn’s disease, diabetes, immunosuppression
●● Treatment is drainage of pus in first instance, together with 
appropriate antibiotics
●● Always look for a potential underlying problem
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1363 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1364
Classification
The most widespread and useful classification of anal fistulae is 
that proposed by Parks, based on the centrality of intersphinc-
teric anal gland sepsis (the internal opening is usually at the 
dentate line), which results in a primary track whose relation 
to the external sphincter defines the type of fistula and which 
influences management (Figure 74.40). Classifications based 
simply on level are less practical because they mean different 
things to different people, although the description of a fistula 
as high, indicating a high risk of incontinence if laid open, or 
low, with a lower but still some risk to function, is often used. 
Similarly, ‘simple’ and ‘complex’ are commonly used adjec-
tives – complexity may be endowed by the level at which the 
primary track crosses the sphincters, the presence of second -
ary extensions or the difficulties faced in treatment. The vast 
majority of fistulae are intersphincteric or trans-sphincteric.
Intersphincteric fistulae (45%) do not cross the external 
sphincter (bar, for the purist, the most medial subcutaneous 
fibres running below the distal border of the internal sphinc-
ter); most commonly they run directly from the internal to 
the external openings across the distal internal sphincter, but 
may extend proximally in the intersphincteric plane to end 
blindly with or without an abscess, or enter the rectum at a 
second internal opening.
Trans-sphincteric fistulae (40%) have a primary track that 
crosses both internal and external sphincters (the latter at a 
variable level) and which then passes through the ischiorectal 
fossa to reach the skin of the buttock. The primary track may 
have secondary tracks arising from it, which often reach the 
roof of the ischiorectal fossa, which may rarely pass through 
the levators to reach the pelvis and which may spread circum-
ferentially (horseshoe). Circumferential spread of sepsis may 
occur in the intersphincteric and pararectal planes, as well as 
in the ischiorectal plane.
Suprasphincteric fistulae are very rare, are thought by 
some to be iatrogenic and are difficult to distinguish from 
high-level trans-sphincteric tracks (for which, fortunately, 
management strategies are similar). Extrasphincteric fistulae 
run without specific relation to the sphincters and usually 
result from pelvic disease or trauma.
Clinical assessment
A full medical (including obstetric, gastrointestinal, anal sur-
gical and continence) history and proctosigmoidoscopy are 
necessary to gain information about sphincter strength and to 
exclude associated conditions. The key points to determine 
are the site of the internal opening; the site of the external 
opening(s); the course of the primary track; the presence of 
secondary extensions; and the presence of other conditions 
complicating the fistula. Palpable induration between exter -
nal opening and anal margin suggests a relatively superficial 
track, whereas supralevator induration suggests a primary 
track above the levators or high in the roof of the ischiorectal 
fossa, or a high secondary extension. Intersphincteric fistu-
lae usually have an external opening close to the anal verge. 
Goodsall’s rule (Figure 74.41), used to indicate the likely 
position of the internal opening according to the position of 
the external opening(s), is helpful but not infallible. The site 
of the internal opening may be felt as a point of induration 
or seen as an enlarged papilla. Probing in an awake patient 
is painful, unhelpful and can be dangerous. Full examination 
under anaesthesia should be repeated before surgical inter -
vention. Dilute hydrogen peroxide, instilled via the exter -
nal opening, is a very useful way of demonstrating the site 
of the internal opening; gentle use of probes (Figure 74.42) 
and a finger in the anorectum usually delineates primary and 
secondary tracks and their relations to the sphincters. Any 
concerns about fistula topography at clinical examination or 
examination under anaesthesia (more common after previous 
unsuccessful surgery) should prompt further investigations 
before surgical intervention.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 73.40Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
1 324
Figure 74.40 Types of anal fistula (Parks’ classification): 1, inter -
sphincteric; 2, trans-sphincteric; 3, suprasphincteric; 4, extrasphinc -
teric primary tracks.
David Henry Goodsall , 1843–1906, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital, London, UK.
Anterior
Figure 74.41 Goodsall’s rule.
Figure 74.42  Retrograde pr obing of an anal canal sometimes 
reveals the internal orifice of the fistula.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1364 25/10/2017   10:06Fistula-in-ano 1365
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
Special investigations
A successful outcome after fistula surgery requires an accurate 
assessment of the fistula itself, the sphincter through which 
it passes and patient expectations (especially in terms of risk 
to continence). Clinical examination will give some indi -
cation of functional anal sphincter length, resting tone and 
voluntary squeeze; these may be more objectively assessed by 
manometry, whereas endoanal ultrasound gives useful infor -
mation about sphincter integrity – the knowledge so gained 
may well influence surgical strategy. Endoanal ultrasound, 
especially with hydrogen peroxide, can also be used to delin -
eate fistulae, although definition of sepsis outside or above 
the sphincters is limited by the probe’s focal range and scar -
ring makes interpretation difficult. Nonetheless, ultrasound, 
which is more accurate than clinical examination, is useful 
to determine whether a fistula is relatively straightforward or 
not. MRI is acknowledged to be the ‘gold standard’ for fistula 
imaging but it is limited by availability and cost and is usually 
reserved for difficult recurrent cases. The great advantage of 
MRI is its ability to demonstrate secondary extensions, which 
may be missed at surgery and which are the cause of per -
sistence (Figure 74.43). Fistulography and computed tomog-
raphy (CT) both have limitations but are useful techniques if 
an extrasphincteric fistula is suspected.
Surgical management
Patients with minimal symptoms, especially if they have 
compromised sphincters, may be managed expectantly. Erad-
ication of sepsis requires surgery , the aim of which must be 
 balanced with the preservation of continence. Most fistu -
lae are relatively straightforward to deal with; however, a 
minority are extremely problematic and are not the realm 
of the ‘occasional proctologist’. The multitude of strategies 
advocated attests to these difficult situations; comparisons 
between techniques are difficult to make because of the het -
erogeneity of patient groups, the variability in classification, 
the inapplicability of certain techniques in some situations, 
inadequate reporting of functional outcomes, inadequate fol-
low-up and surgeon preference over-riding entry into prospec-
tive randomised trials.
Fistulotomy
That the fistulous track must be laid open from its termi -
nation to its source was a rule promulgated by John of Ard -
erne more than 600 years ago. Fistulotomy, or laying open, 
is the surest way of getting rid of a fistula, but, by definition, 
it involves division of all those structures lying between 
the external and internal openings. It is therefore applied 
mainly to intersphincteric fistulae and trans-sphincteric fis -
tulae involving less than 30% of the voluntary musculature 
(but not anteriorly-placed fistulae in women); however, even 
then, it is not immune to postoperative defects in continence. 
After full examination under anaesthesia in the lithotomy or 
prone jack-knife position, during which the internal opening 
should have been identified, a grooved fistula probe is passed 
from the external to the internal opening (Figure 74.44), 
the amount of sphincter below and above the probe is noted 
and, if indicated, the track is laid open over the probe. Gran-
ulation tissue is curetted and sent for histological appraisal 
and the wound edges are trimmed. Secondary tracks, often 
identified as granulation tissue that persists despite curettage, 
should be laid open or drained. Marsupialisation reduces 
wound size and speeds up healing. Primary tracks crossing 
the external sphincter more deeply have been managed with 
good outcomes by fistulotomy and immediate reconstitution 
of the divided muscle – failure to eradicate all sepsis and sub-
sequent breakdown of the repair, however, are very problem-
atic. Alternatively, a staged fistulotomy may be carried out 
in which secondary tracks are laid open and only part of the 
sphincter enclosed by the primary track is divided, with the 
remainder encircled by a loose seton. After sufficient time for 
healing of the wound and fibrosis, the seton-enclosed track is 
divided at a second stage.
Fistulectomy
This technique involves coring out of the fistula, usually by 
diathermy cautery; it allows better definition of fistula anat-
omy than fistulotomy, especially the level at which the track 
crosses the sphincters and the presence of secondary exten -
sions. If the sphincteric component of the fistula is deemed 
low enough to allow safe fistulotomy , then this may proceed 
(at the expense of longer healing times than conventional 
fistulotomy). If laying open is not advisable, then the sphinc-
teric component can be managed by another method.
John of Arderne , 1307–1390, was the first English surgeon of note. He practised at Newark-upon-Trent, Nottinghamshire and, from 1370, in London, UK. He 
described his operation for the treatment of fistulae in about 1376.
Figure 74.43  Coronal magnetic r esonance imaging scan (STIR 
sequence) demonstrating a primary track running up the right ischi -
orectal space (short arrow), which then crosses the sphincters to open 
into the anal canal just below the puborectalis. However, there is a 
blind secondary extension (long arrow) passing to the contralateral 
side in the roof of the left ischiorectal fossa (and involving the leva -
tors), which was missed at surgery and which was the cause of fistula 
persistence.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1365 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1366
Ligation of intersphincteric fistula tract
Ligation of intersphincteric fistula tract (LIFT) was first 
described in 2006 for trans-sphincteric fistulae. The tech -
nique involves disconnection of the internal opening from 
the fistula tract at the level of the intersphincteric plane and 
removal of the residual infected glands without diving any 
part of the sphincter complex. The tract is then ligated and 
divided, the internal part is removed and the external part of 
the track is curretted out and drained. Hence it is a sphinc -
ter-preserving procedure, thereby maintaining continence. 
Success in terms of healing have been quoted at anything 
from 47% to 95%.
Setons
Setons (Latin: seta = bristle) have been used in a variety of 
ways in fistula surgery and it is important for surgeons to be 
clear about what they are trying to achieve in a particular 
situation. Loose setons are tied such that there is no tension 
upon the encircled tissue; there is no intent to cut the tissue. 
A variety of materials have been used but the seton should 
be non-absorbable, non-degenerative and comfortable. Tight 
or cutting setons are placed with the intention of cutting 
through the enclosed muscle.
USES OF LOOSE SETONS
 ● For long-term palliation to avoid septic and painful exac-
erbations by establishing effective drainage; most often in 
Crohn’s disease and in those with problematic fistulae not 
wishing to countenance the possibility of incontinence.
 ● Used before ‘advanced’ techniques (fistulectomy, advance-
ment flap, cutting seton); acute sepsis and secondary exten-
sions are eradicated and a loose seton is passed across the 
sphincteric component of the primary track to simplify the 
fistula and allow fibrosis.
 ● As part of a staged fistulotomy.
 ● As part of a therapeutic strategy to preserve the external 
sphincter in trans-sphincteric fistulae. Secondary tracks 
in the ischiorectal fossa are laid open. Access to the site 
Figure 74.44 Fistulotomy. A grooved probe is passed from the external to internal openings (a) and the track laid open over the probe (b). 
The track is cur etted to remove granulation tissue (c), the edges of the wound are trimmed and the wound may then be marsupialised (d). 
(Reproduced with permission from Nicholls RJ, Dozois RR. Surgery of the colon and rectum. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.)
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1366 25/10/2017   10:06Hidradenitis suppurativa 1367
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
where the primary track crosses the external sphincter 
may sometimes necessitate division of the anococcygeal 
ligaments to reach the deep postanal space. The internal 
sphincter is laid open to the level of the internal opening 
(or higher if there is a cephalad intersphincteric exten -
sion) to eradicate the presumed source and the sepsis in 
the intersphincteric space. A seton is then passed along 
the residual track around the denuded external sphincter 
and tied loosely, and the wounds are dressed. Initial post -
operative management includes daily wound irrigation 
and light wound redressing. The seton is left in place for 
3 months and, if there is evidence of good healing, simply 
removed. Such a strategy certainly protects against the 
consequences of external sphincter division, with an inci-
dence of healing in the short term of 50–60%.
USES OF CUTTING SETONS
Cutting setons aim to achieve the high fistula eradication 
rates associated with fistulotomy, but without the degree of 
functional impairment endowed by division of the sphincters 
at a single stage. The enclosed muscle is gradually severed 
(‘cheese wiring through ice’) such that the divided muscles do 
not spring apart, and the site of the fistula track is replaced by 
a thin line of fibrosis as it is brought down. Some recommend 
prior internal sphincter division, others incorporation of 
the internal sphincter within the cutting seton. A variety of 
seton material has been used, either elastic and ‘self-cutting’ 
or non-elastic and tightened at intervals, with the sphincter 
being divided at varying speeds. In eastern parts of the world 
the same aim has been achieved by chemical cautery using an 
Ayurvedic method, known in India as Kshara sutra, in which 
a specially prepared seton thread burns through the enclosed 
tissue. This out-patient method has been shown to be equiva-
lent to one-stage fistulotomy in patients with intersphincteric 
and distal trans-sphincteric fistulae.
Advancement flaps
When the sphincter complex is not too indurated and ade-
quate intra-anal access can be obtained, the advancement 
flap technique can be employed, which aims to preserve both 
anatomy and function. The principles are prior elimination of 
acute sepsis and secondary tracks, with ideally a direct track 
from internal to external openings; coring out of the entire 
track; and closure of the communication with the anal lumen 
with an adequately vascularised flap consisting of mucosa and 
internal sphincter, sutured without tension to the anoderm, 
well distant from the site of the (excised) internal opening. 
Modifications include flap orientation (proximally or distally 
based) and thickness (mucosal, partial or full-thickness inter-
nal sphincter), and treatment of the external wound.
Biological agents
The functional consequences of fistulotomy and the poorer 
eradication rates of sphincter-preserving techniques has led 
to a search for agents that essentially plug and seal the track 
and allow ingrowth of healthy tissue to replace it. Intuitively, 
success must depend on the biomaterial itself and the envi-
ronment into which it is placed. The poor long-term results 
of fibrin glue probably result from its relatively rapid resorp -
tion, and thus inadequate time for host tissue incorporation. 
The variable short-term results associated with porcine small 
intestinal submucosa may reflect early extrusion, premature 
degradation within an infected field, or the protocol advo -
cated for its use, which does not include meticulous eradica -
tion of secondary extensions, or the lining of the primary tack 
itself, whether epithelial or granulation tissue. Cross-linked 
porcine dermal collagen has also, more recently, been studied, 
but only short-term outcomes (albeit optimistic) are known. 
Research into biological agents must continue.
The Ayurvedic method  is derived from the Ayurveda, the most ancient system of Hindu medicine, whose origin is ascribed to Brahma and dates from circa 1400 
to 1200bc.
Summary box 74.14
Anorectal fistulae
●● Are common and may be simple or complex
●● Are classified according to their relationship to the anal 
sphincters
●● May be associated with underlying disease such as 
tuberculosis or Crohn’s disease
●● Laying open is the surest method of eradication, but sphincter 
division may result in incontinence
HIDRADENITIS SUPPURATIVA
This is a chronic suppurative condition of apocrine gland- 
bearing skin, which is found in the axillae, submammary 
regions, nape of the neck, groin, mons pubis, inner thighs and 
sides of the scrotum, as well as the perineum and buttocks, 
and is a source of considerable physical and psychological 
morbidity. There is no confirmatory test or specific charac -
teristic for diagnosis, which makes definition difficult. Acne, 
pilonidal sinus and chronic scalp folliculitis may coexist with 
hidradenitis suppurativa in the condition ‘follicular occlusion 
tetrad’.
Pathology
Occlusion of gland ducts leads to bacterial proliferation, 
gland rupture and spread of infection and epithelial compo -
nents into the surrounding soft tissue and to adjacent glands. 
Secondary infection (with Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococ-
cus milleri and anaerobes) causes further local extension, skin 
damage and deformity, with multiple communicating subcu-
taneous fistulae. There is some evidence that the disease may 
be related to a relative androgen excess.
Presentation
The condition is not seen before puberty and rarely presents 
after the fourth decade of life. Overall, it is three times more 
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1367 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1368
common in women than men, although anogenital disease is 
more common in men, and obesity is a common association. 
When affecting the perineum, lesions begin as multiple raised 
boils, with recurrent lesions within the same vicinity leading 
to sinus tract formation, bridged scarring and multiple points 
of discharge. Rarely, it may involve the anal canal anoderm 
but it does not extend above the dentate line or involve the 
sphincter muscles themselves.
Differential diagnosis
In the early stages distinction from furunculosis can be difficult. 
Crohn’s disease, cryptoglandular fistula, pilonidal sinus, tuber-
culosis, actinomycosis, lymphogranuloma venereum and gran-
uloma inguinale must be considered when later stages present.
Treatment
In the early stages, general measures, including weight reduc-
tion and antiseptic soaps, may be helpful. Antibiotics may 
induce remission but often the disease relapses and progresses, 
at which point surgery is indicated. Inadequate treatment may 
lead to prolonged morbidity, but any surgery should be less 
debilitating than the condition. Surgical intervention ranges 
from simple incision and drainage of acute sepsis to radical 
excision of all apocrine gland-bearing skin. Careful laying open 
of all tracts, possibly as a staged procedure according to ana -
tomical location, is an option that appeals to many patients. 
Radical excision requires closure by skin graft or rotation flap 
and, occasionally, a defunctioning colostomy to allow healing.
CONDYLOMATA ACCUMINATA 
(ANAL WARTS)
There is increasing evidence that sexually-transmitted infec-
tion with human papillomavirus (HPV) forms the aetiological 
basis of anal and perianal warts, anal intraepithelial neoplasia 
(AIN) and squamous cell carcinoma of the anus. In areas of the 
world where sexual promiscuity (especially anal intercourse) 
is more common, and in immunocompromised individuals 
(HIV-infected individuals and transplant recipients), there 
have been dramatic increases in the incidence of these con-
ditions over the last 30 years, most importantly of AIN and 
anal cancers. Similar virally-induced changes have been noted 
in the genital tracts of women (vulval intraepithelial neoplasia 
(VIN), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and cancers). 
It is essential to examine all areas of the genitalia and perineum 
in an affected person as there is often a field change with the 
virus affecting any squamous epithelium in that area. There 
are over 170 subtypes of HPV , but certain subtypes (16, 18, 31, 
33) are associated with a greater risk of progression to dysplasia 
and malignancy. Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is associated 
with HPV (especially subtypes 16, 18, 31 or 33).
Condylomata accuminata is the most common sexually-  
transmitted disease encountered by colorectal surgeons and 
is most frequently observed in homosexual men. Associated 
warts on the penis and along the female genital tract are 
common.
Presentation
Many are asymptomatic but pruritus, discharge, bleeding 
and pain are usual presenting complaints. In the early stages, 
examination reveals separate pinkish-white warts close to the 
anal margin and also often on the anoderm within the distal 
anal canal. Later, the warts enlarge, coalesce and carpet the 
skin. Rarely, relentless growth results in giant condylomata 
(Buschke–Löwenstein tumour), which may obliterate the 
anal orifice. The diagnosis is aided by aceto-whitening upon 
application of acetic acid but confirmed by biopsy, which will 
also indicate the presence or absence of dysplasia.
Treatment
Because of the field effect endowed by viral skin infection, 
long-term resolution can be problematic. Careful serial appli-
cation of 25% podophyllin to discrete warts on the perianal 
skin is often used; however, it cannot be used intra-anally. 
Surgical excision under local, regional or general anaesthesia 
involves raising and separating the lesions with local infiltra-
tion of dilute adrenaline, which allows more accurate scissor 
or electrocautery excision to maximise the preservation of 
normal skin.
ANAL INTRAEPITHELIAL 
NEOPLASIA
AIN (Figure 74.45) is a multifocal virally-induced dysplasia 
of the perianal or intra-anal epidermis, which is associated 
with HPV (most frequently subtypes 6, 11, 16 and 18; sub-
types 6 and 11 are most often associated with warts and early 
AIN, whereas subtypes 16 and 18 account for more than 75% 
of anal cancers). The prevalence is <1% of the population 
Abraham Buschke , 1868–1943, German dermatologist.
LW Löwenstein  described this condition in 1939.
Figure 74.45 Extensive anal intraepithelial neoplasia, which extends 
intra-anally.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1368 25/10/2017   10:06Non-malignant strictures – anal st enosis 1369
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
with a rising incidence especially in those areas where ano-
receptive intercourse and HIV are prevalent. At-risk groups 
include patients with HIV as well as immunocompromised 
patients, women with a history of other genital intraepithlieal 
neoplasia (VIN and CIN) and patients with extensive ano -
genital condylomata. Patients may be asymptomatic and the 
diagnosis is often a histological surprise, although increasing 
numbers in high-risk groups are picked up on anal cytology. It 
is classified according to the degree of dysplasia on biopsy into 
AIN I, AIN II and AIN III, according to the lack of kerato -
cyte maturation and extension of the proliferative zone from 
the lower third (AIN I) to the full thickness of the epithelium 
(AIN III), in the same manner as cervical or vulval dysplasia. 
The natural history is uncertain but progression from AIN II 
to AIN III to invasive carcinoma has been observed, nota -
bly in the immunocompromised. The term Bowen’s disease 
should probably be avoided.
Presentation
Around 10% of AIN lesions are diagnosed by the patholo -
gist after excision of abnormal skin lesions. Low-grade lesions 
may be raised and similar to anal condylomata; however, AIN 
III lesions are more often flat and may be white, grey, purple 
or brown in colour. Ulceration would suggest progression to 
invasive anal carcinoma. Patients’ symptoms include pruritis, 
pain, bleeding and discharge. AIN is present in 28–35% of 
excised anal warts. Approximately 10% of AIN III lesions will 
progress to anal carcinoma at 5 years. Regression of AIN III 
rarely occurs, but AIN I and AIN II may regress. The associ -
ation between AIN III and carcinoma is strengthened by the 
findings of AIN III in 80% of anal cancer biopsies.
Diagnosis and management
A high index of suspicion and targeted biopsy yields the diag-
nosis, whereas multiple (mapping) biopsies give an indication 
of the extent and overall severity of the disease. AIN II and 
III should be regularly monitored clinically and, if necessary, 
by repeat biopsy to exclude invasive disease. Specialised cen-
tres may offer colposcopy of the anus (anoscopy) utilising 
5%acetic acid with Lugol’s iodine to assess in vivo the dys -
plastic areas of the anus. The affected areas show up white 
and can be biopsied. Focal disease may be excised and local 
excision is effective for lesions <30% of the circumference of 
the anus. More widespread disease can be dealt with surgically 
by wide local excision and closure of the resultant defect by 
flap or skin graft, with or without covering colostomy (espe-
cially if there is intra-anal disease). However, for a condition 
with uncertain malignant potential, this approach should be 
used with caution as it carries with it significant morbidity. It 
is important to remember that female patients are at risk of 
other anogenital intraepithlieal neoplasia; it is recommended 
that those with AIN III have a yearly cervical smear test.
Topical imiquimod, 5% or oral retinoids have some effect 
on the progression of dysplasia and can cause regression by 
at least two histological grades. Other newer options may 
include anti-HPV treatment; vaccination may reduce the 
incidence long term.
NON-MALIGNANT STRICTURES 
– ANAL STENOSIS
Spasmodic
An anal fissure causes spasm of the internal sphincter. Rarely, 
a spasmodic stricture accompanies secondary megacolon, pos-
sibly as a result of the chronic use of laxatives.
Organic
Anal stenosis is a rare but serious complication of anorectal 
surgery, 90% are seen after haemorrhoidectomy. Other causes 
included trauma, inflammatory bowel disease, radiation treat-
ment, sexually-transmitted disease, tuberculosis and some 
skin conditions, e.g scleroderma.
Postoperative stricture
This sometimes follows a haemorrhoidectomy performed 
incorrectly. Removal of excess anoderm and mucosa without 
adequate skin bridges can lead to scarring and structuring. 
Stenosis can be seen after stapled haemorrhoidopexy (0.8–
5%) and low coloanal anastomoses, especially if a stapling 
gun is used, but these are really low rectal stenoses.
Irradiation stricture
This is an aftermath of irradiation and is particularly seen 
after chemoradiation for anal carcinoma, when a wide are of 
skin and anoderm are irradiated. It can be seen after irradia -
tion for any pelvic tumours.
Senile anal stenosis
A condition of chronic internal sphincter contraction is 
sometimes seen in the elderly. Increasing constipation is pres-
ent, with pronounced straining at stool. Faecal impaction is 
liable to occur. The muscle is rigid and feels like a tight rubber 
ring. There is no evidence of a fissure-in-ano. The treatment is 
dilatation at frequent intervals.
Lymphogranuloma inguinale
This is by far the most frequent cause of a tubular inflam-
matory stricture of the rectum and 80% of the sufferers are 
women. Frei’s reaction is usually positive. This variety of 
rectal stricture is particularly common in black populations 
and may be accompanied by elephantiasis of the labia majora. 
In the early stages, antibiotic treatment may lead to cure. In 
advanced cases, excision of the rectum is required.
John Templeton Bowen , 1857–1941, Professor of Dermatology, Harvard University Medical School. Boston, MA, USA, described this intradermal precancerous 
skin lesion in 1912.
Wilhelm Sigmund Frei , 1885–1943, Professor of Dermatology, the State Hospital, Spandau, Berlin, who later settled in New York, NY, USA, described his test 
for lymphogranuloma inguinale in 1925.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1369 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1370
Inflammatory bowel disease
Stricture of the anorectum may complicate Crohn’s disease 
and, in this instance, the stricture is annular and often more 
than one is present. These stenoses are characterised by trans-
mural scarring and inflammation. Occasionally, an anal stric-
ture may occur in ulcerative colitis. Until a biopsy is obtained, 
a carcinoma should be suspected if a stricture is found.
Endometriosis
Endometriosis of the rectovaginal septum may present as a 
stricture. There is usually a history of frequent menstrual peri-
ods with severe pain during the first 2 days of the menstrual 
flow.
Neoplastic
When free bleeding occurs after dilatation of a supposed 
inflammatory stricture, carcinoma should be suspected (Grey 
Turner) and a portion of the stricture should be removed for 
biopsy. Sometimes in these cases, repeated biopsies show 
inflammatory tissue only. If, however, the symptoms show a 
marked progression, malignancy should be strongly suspected.
Clinical features
Increasing difficulty in defaecation is the leading symptom. 
The patient finds that increasingly large doses of aperients are 
required and, if the stools are formed, they are ‘pipe-stem’ in 
shape. In cases of inflammatory stricture, tenesmus, bleeding 
and the passage of mucopus are superadded. Sometimes the 
patient comes under observation only when subacute or acute 
intestinal obstruction has supervened.
Rectal examination
The finger encounters a sharply-defined shelf-like interrup -
tion of the lumen. If the calibre is large enough to admit the 
finger, it should be noted whether the stricture is annular or 
tubular. Sometimes this point can be determined only after 
dilatation. A biopsy of the stricture must be taken. Often the 
examination will be painful and needs to be performed under 
general anaesthesia when biopsies and gentle, graduated dila-
tation may be undertaken.
Treatment
Before starting treatment it is important to ascertain the 
cause of the stricture. If associated with Crohn’s disease an 
anoplasty is contraindicated. Non-operative treatment is rec-
ommended for mild stenosis. The use of stool softeners and 
fibre supplements helps aid the passage of stools.
Prophylactic
The passage of an anal dilator during convalescence after 
haemorrhoidectomy greatly reduces the incidence of post-
operative stricture. Efficient treatment of lymphogranuloma 
inguinale in its early stages should lessen the frequency of 
stricture from that cause.
Dilatation
Anal dilatation can be performed under general anaesthesia 
and then, by the patient, using an anal dilator. For anal and 
many rectal strictures, dilatation at regular intervals is all that 
is required.
Anoplasty
For severe anal stenosis, an anoplasty is used to replace loss of 
anal tissue. The stricture is incised and a rotation or advance-
ment flap of skin and subcutaneous tissue replaces the defect 
and enlarges the anal orifice (Figure 74.46). This technique 
is particularly useful for postoperative strictures.
Colostomy
Colostomy must be undertaken when a stricture is causing 
intestinal obstruction and in advanced cases of stricture com-
plicated by fistulae-in-ano. In selected cases, this can be fol -
lowed by restorative resection of the stricture-bearing area. If 
this step is anticipated, a loop ileostomy is constructed.
Rectal excision and coloanal anastomosis
When the strictures are at, or just above, the anorectal junc-
tion and are associated with a normal anal canal, but irre -
versible changes necessitate removal of the area, excision can 
be followed by a coloanal anastomosis, with good functional 
results.
George Grey Turner , 1877–1951, Professor of Surgery, University of Durham, Durham (1927–1934) and then at the Postgraduate Medical School, London, UK 
(1934–1945).
(a) (b) (c) Figure 74.46 (a–c) Y–V advancement flap for 
anal stenosis.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1370 25/10/2017   10:06Malignant tumours 1371
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL
MALIGNANT TUMOURS
Malignant lesions of the anus and 
anal canal
Anal malignancy is rare and accounts for less than 2% of 
all large bowel cancers. The crude incidence rate is 0.65 per 
100  000. Those arising below the dentate line are usually 
squamous, whereas those above are variously termed basaloid, 
cloacogenic or transitional. Collectively they are known as 
epidermoid carcinomas, and account for >70% of anal malig-
nancies; management and prognosis is similar for this group. 
Adenocarcinomas are the next commonest. Other tumours 
include melanoma, lymphoma, and sarcoma.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Although rare, the incidence of anal SCC is rising, with a 
direct association with HPV infection, AIN and immuno-
suppression. In the UK in 2012, there were over 1200 new 
anal cancer cases, with a male:female ratio of 1:2 and 307 
deaths from anal cancer. Anal SCC is associated with HPV 
(especially subtypes 16, 18, 31 or 33) in 70–90% of cases 
(Figure74.47). Patients at increased risk are those with HIV 
infection, recipients of organ transplants (renal transplant 
patients have a 100-fold increased risk) and those with a past 
history of cancers at ‘sexually accessible’ sites (usually geni -
tal). Pain and bleeding are the most common symptoms and 
the disease is thus often initially misdiagnosed as a benign 
condition, highlighting the need for a level of suspicion and 
adequate examination. A mass, pruritus or discharge is less 
common. Advanced tumours may cause faecal incontinence 
by invasion of the sphincters and, in women, anterior exten -
sion may result in anovaginal fistulation. On examination, 
anal margin tumours look like malignant ulcers. There may be 
associated HPV lesions. Anal canal tumours are palpable as 
irregular indurated tender ulceration. Sphincter involvement 
may be evident.
MANAGEMENT
Historically, early anal margin tumours were treated by 
local excision and anal canal tumours by abdominoperineal 
excision of the rectum. Nowadays, primary treatment is by 
chemoradiotherapy (combined modality therapy (CMT); 
Nigro), the chemotherapy usually including a combination of 
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) with mitomycin C or cisplatin. Metas -
tases are rare at presentation (5%) and treatment is aimed at 
local control. Initial staging involves a clinical examination 
and biopsy of the primary tumour as well as examination of 
inguinal nodes. Local staging is by MRI scanning and CT is 
used to assess lungs and abdomen for metasatic spread. Posi -
tron emission tomography (PET) CT may help in equivocal 
inguinal node assessment. The surgeon has an important role 
in management: initial diagnosis is surgical; small marginal 
tumours are still best treated by local excision; radical sur -
gery is indicated in those with persistent or recurrent disease 
following CMT; and a defunctioning stoma may be indicated 
for those in whom treatment and disease regression is asso -
ciated with radionecrosis, incontinence or fistula. Despite 
good results with chemoradiotherapy, 20–25% of patients 
will have local disease relapse. After thorough assessment, 
these patients may require radical abdominoperineal resec-
tion, including excision of the posterior wall of the vagina 
in 70% of women and reconstruction of the perineum using 
myocutaneous flaps.
Other anal malignancies
Adenocarcinomata within the anal canal are usually exten -
sions of distal rectal cancers. Rarely, adenocarcinoma may 
arise from anal glandular epithelium or develop within a long-
standing (usually complex) anal fistula; treatment is as for low 
rectal cancers (i.e. abdominoperineal excision of the rectum 
(APER) with or without previous radiotherapy or chemora-
diotherapy) but prognosis is less good. Melanocytes can be 
found in the transitional zone of the anal canal. Malignant 
melanoma of the anus is very rare and usually presents as a 
bluish-black soft mass that may mimic a thrombosed external 
Summary box 74.15
Benign anal stricture
●● May be spasmodic or organic
●● May be iatrogenic, e.g. after haemorrhoidectomy or repair of 
imperforate anus
●● Biopsy must be taken to rule out malignancy
●● Can usually be managed by regular dilatation
●● Severe anal stenosis may require surgical treatment by an 
anoplasty
Norman D Nigro , 1912–2009, surgeon, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
Figure 74.47 Neglected papillomas of the anus that have become 
malignant.
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1371 25/10/2017   10:06CHAPTER 74  The anus and anal canal
PART 11 | ABDOMINAL1372
pile, although it may be amelanotic (Figure 74.48 ). The 
prognosis, irrespective of treatment, is extremely poor. Peri -
anal Paget’s disease is exceedingly rare.
FURTHER READING
Chu CS, Pfister DG. Opportunities and challenges: human papillomavi-
rus and cancer. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 2017; 15(5S): 726–9.
Cross KL, Massey EJ, Fowler AL  et al. The management of anal fissure: 
ACPGBI position statement. Colorectal Dis 2008; 10 Suppl 3: 1–7. 
Geh I, Gollins S, Renehan A et al. Association of coloproctology of 
Great Britain & Ireland (ACPGBI): Guidelines for the management 
of cancer of the colon, rectum and anus (2017) – Anal Cancer. Col-
orectal Dis 2017; 19 Suppl 1: 82–97.
Keighley MRB, Williams NS, Surgery of the anus, rectum and colon, 3rd 
edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2008.
Williams JG, Farrands PA, Williams AB et al. The treatment of anal 
fistula: ACPGBI position statement. Colorectal Dis 2007; 9 Suppl 
4: 18–50. 
Sir James Paget , 1814–1899, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described this disease in 1874.
Figure 74.48 Malignant melanoma of the anal canal (courtesy of Mr 
B Thomas, Kalushi, Zambia).
Summary box 74.16
Anal cancer
●● Uncommon tumour, which is usually a squamous cell 
carcinoma
●● Associated with human papilloma virus
●● More prevalent in patients with human immunodeficiency 
virus infection
●● May affect the anal verge or anal canal
●● Lymphatic spread is to the inguinal lymph nodes
●● Treatment is by chemoradiotherapy in the first instance
●● Major ablative surgery is required if the above fails
11_74-B&L27_Pt11_Ch74.indd   1372 25/10/2017   10:06PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
75 Urinary symptoms and investigations .............................................1374
76 Kidneys and ureters ................................................................................1398
77 The urinary bladder ................................................................................1423
78 The prostate and seminal vesicles ....................................................1456
79 Urethra and penis ....................................................................................1477
80 Testis and scrotum ..................................................................................1497
81 Gynaecology .............................................................................................1513
Genitourinary
12
12-75A-B&L27_Pt12.indd   1373 25/10/2017   10:08Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • To understand the significance of pain relating to 
urinary tract pathology
 • To understand the difference between renal pain and 
ureteric colic
 • To understand the definitions of common lower urinary 
tract symptoms
 • To be able to select the appropriate diagnostic tests to 
establish a diagnosis of urinary tract disease
Urinary symptoms and investigations
75
PAIN
Pain is a common urological symptom and can be due to 
pathology in any of the component parts of the urinary tract. 
Pain passing urine is called dysuria and refers to the discom-
fort localised to the outlet of the bladder which is experienced 
during voiding – typically described as a sensation akin to 
passing razor blades or glass. Most commonly, dysuria is due 
to an infection in the lower urinary tract but can be a symp-
tom of more serious pathology such as bladder cancer or carci-
noma in situ (CIS) of the bladder especially in an older male 
smoker with haematuria.
Renal pain is usually caused by distension of the renal 
capsule and is felt as a constant, gnawing pain in the loin/
renal angle. Ureteric colic (often incorrectly referred to as 
renal colic) is different from renal pain and is typified by the 
lateralised, colicky pain experienced by someone who has a 
ureteric calculus. Ureteric colic can radiate to the groin or 
lower still to the testicle/labium but does not radiate to the 
back of the leg. Ureteric colic can be caused by something 
other than a stone in the ureter, such as a blood clot or, rarely, 
a sloughed renal papilla. If the history is carefully taken, it will 
be apparent that some patients simultaneously experience 
both ureteric colic and renal pain.
Disease processes in the bladder, e.g. infection or inflam -
mation, can produce suprapubic pain. Suprapubic bladder 
pain, which is experienced when the bladder is full and is 
relieved by micturition, is typical of interstitial cystitis, an 
idiopathic benign inflammatory disorder of the bladder typi -
cally seen in middle-aged females (see Chapter 77).
Testicular pain is a common symptom in men, especially 
in early middle-age. Sudden severe testicular pain in younger 
men (<40 years old) should be treated as a medical emergency 
and the patient assessed so that a diagnosis of acute testicular 
torsion can be excluded. The time interval from the onset of 
pain to the diagnosis of suspected testicular torsion should not 
influence whether scrotal exploration is performed as torsion/
detorsion may be occurring and the testis may still be salvage-
able after a delayed time interval. Hydrocoeles and epididy -
mal cysts usually do not cause significant pain but can have 
an increasing pressure effect as they enlarge. A dragging sen -
sation in the scrotum which gets worse towards the end of the 
day is typical of the discomfort associated with a varicocoele, 
often on the left side. Typically, testicular tumours in young 
males are not associated with significant pain. Investigation 
of testicular pain in the young adult male/middle-aged male 
is frequently negative, resulting in a highly unsatisfactory 
diagnostic label of ‘idiopathic testicular pain’ which is sub -
sequently managed with the input of other clinicians, most 
commonly pain management specialists. Patients undergoing 
vasectomy are routinely counselled of the approximate 10% 
risk of testicular pain in the short term following surgery but 
more importantly the 1% chance of chronic testicular pain in 
the longer term.
Perineal pain is often a feature of a complex of symp -
toms typically seen in middle-aged men who, by a process of 
exclusion, are diagnosed as suffering from acute or chronic 
Summary box 75.1
Pain from the urinary tract
●● Renal pain is not synonymous with renal colic
●● Renal colic is a misnomer and should be referred to as 
ureteric colic
●● Renal pain can be distinguished from ureteric colic by careful 
history taking
●● Renal pain and ureteric colic may be experienced 
simultaneously
●● Ureteric colic may radiate to the groin/testicle/labium
●● Ureteric colic does not radiate to the chest or the back of the 
leg
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1374 25/10/2017   10:09Haematuria 1375
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
prostatitis. With prostatitis, perineal pain may be accom -
panied by suprapubic pain, low back pain which radiates to 
the legs, penile pain as well as frequency of micturition and 
dysuria. Perineal pain is an ominous symptom after previous 
treatment for a pelvic malignancy , often signifying recurrent 
pelvic  disease.
LOWER URINARY TRACT 
SYMPTOMS (LUTS)
The International Continence Society (ICS) provides the 
internationally accepted definitions for symptoms relating to 
lower urinary tract function:
 ● Frequency is the complaint by the patient who considers 
that he/she voids too often during the day. The patient 
may report needing to void more frequently than is their 
usual habit or more frequently than they consider is 
socially acceptable.
 ● Nocturia is the complaint that the individual needs to 
wake at night at least once to void.
 ● Strangury is a sensation of constantly needing to void. 
Typically, the patient describes having to stand/sit for long 
periods with the sensation that micturition is imminent. 
Strangury is most commonly due to a lower urinary tract 
infection (UTI).
 ● Urgency is a sudden compelling desire to pass urine which 
is difficult to defer.
 ● Urge incontinence (UI)  is involuntary urinary leakage, 
often large volume, immediately preceded by the sensa -
tion of urgency. Urgency and episo des of urge incontin -
ence are often associated with an overactive bladder or a 
bladder neuropathy.
 ● Stress incontinence is involuntary urinary leakage which  
occurs when the intra-abdominal pressure rises. This is 
most common in females who have had vaginal deliveries 
who describe small-volume urinary leakage associated with 
activity such as coughing, laughing, sneezing or exercising.
 ● Nocturnal enuresis  is involuntary loss of urine during 
sleep. A common cause in an elderly male is chronic 
retention of urine with overflow incontinence.
 ● Hesitancy is the term used when an individual describes 
difficulty in initiating micturition, resulting in a delay in 
the onset of voiding after the individual is ready to pass 
urine. This can be several seconds to several minutes and 
is often a symptom of bladder outlet obstruction.
 ● Reduced urinary stream  is usually reported compared 
with previous performance or in comparison with the per-
formance of others. This is often a symptom of bladder 
outlet obstruction.
 ● Intermittency is the term used when the individual 
describes urine flow which stops and starts, on one or more 
occasions, during micturition.
 ● Straining is the muscular effort used in order to initiate, 
maintain or improve the urinary stream.
 ● Incomplete emptying is the sensation that at the end of 
micturition bladder fullness persists.
 ● Post micturition dribble (PMD)  is the term used when 
an individual describes the involuntary loss of urine 
immediately after he/she has finished passing urine. This 
is a common symptom in the ageing male when the bulbar 
urethra fails to empty itself of urine at the completion of 
micturition. PMD is a symptom which is not usually rem-
edied by a transurethral resection of the prostate.
In general terms, LUTS are classified as either storage 
LUTS (frequency, nocturia, urgency and UI); voiding LUTS 
(hesitancy, a reduced stream, straining) or post-micturitional 
LUTS (incomplete emptying and PMD). Storage LUTS 
result from failure of the bladder to act as a functioning res -
ervoir for urine and are commonly seen in patients with an 
overactive bladder or a bladder neuropathy. Voiding and 
post-micturitional LUTS are commonly seen in males with 
bladder outlet obstruction (BOO); however, a male with 
BOO may also have storage LUTS as the thickened detrusor 
muscle resulting from outlet obstruction becomes overactive, 
resulting in the combination of symptoms. The term ‘prostat-
ism’ is now obsolete. LUTS are frequently investigated with 
urodynamics (see below).
HAEMATURIA
Haematuria occurs when there is blood in the urine. This is 
now classified as visible haematuria (VH) or non-visible hae-
maturia (NVH). Older terminology referred to macroscopic 
(or frank or gross) haematuria and microscopic (or dipstick) 
haematuria. Enquiry should be made about the timing of 
the blood in relation to the urinary stream; initial (urethral 
pathology), throughout the stream (bladder or upper tracts), 
or terminal (bladder neck or prostatic pathology), as well as 
degree of haematuria and its frequency. A patient with hae -
maturia should be investigated regardless of whether they are 
taking anticoagulant therapy. The concern for the urologist is 
that the haematuria, especially if painless, is due to an under-
lying neoplasm of the urinary tract, usually a bladder or renal 
tumour. Causes of haematuria include Trauma, Infection and 
Neoplasm (think of TIN) at all levels of the urinary tract. 
Haematuria in association with loin pain and a palpable loin 
mass defines the classic triad of symptoms and signs of a renal 
tumour although this triad is seen in less than 10% of patients 
presenting with a renal tumour.
Apart from young females with a proven UTI, most 
patients with haematuria, whether visible or non-visible, will 
Summary box 75.2
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS)
●● Are classified as storage, voiding or post-micturitional
●● Storage LUTS are frequency, nocturia, urgency and urge 
incontinence
●● Storage LUTS are typical of an overactive bladder
●● Voiding LUTS are hesitancy, a reduced stream and straining
●● Voiding LUTS are typical of bladder outlet obstruction
●● Some patients may have storage and voiding LUTS in 
combination
●● Are often investigated with urodynamics
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1375 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1376
benign inflammatory change in the prostate but occasionally 
can be the presenting symptom of a prostate cancer. A digi -
tal rectal examination (DRE) should be performed alongside 
a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test and a transrectal US 
(TRUS) should be considered. In most cases, haematosper -
mia is self-limiting.
Pneumaturia
This is air, or more correctly gas, in the urine. Patients typ -
ically describe frothy urine, bubbles in the urine or a stream 
which intermittently stops then starts again. The commonest 
cause is an underlying colovesical fistula, usually due to pri -
mary pathology in the rectum or sigmoid colon.
‘The urethral syndrome’
In this condition, typically seen in young females, symptoms 
suggestive of a UTI are reported but with negative bacteri -
ology. It is sometimes remedied by a simple cystoscopy and 
urethral dilatation.
SYMPTOMS RELATED TO THE 
EXTERNAL GENITALIA
Testis
A testis may be absent from the scrotum in patients with 
undescended or ectopic testes.
In boys <5 years, a common cause of testicular pain and 
swelling is a torted hydatid of Morgagni (appendix testis). 
Often in these young males the scrotal skin is transparent 
enough to allow visualisation of a small, bluish swelling at 
the superior pole of the testis. In a young male suspected of 
having a testicular torsion, examination of the normal i.e. 
contralateral testis may reveal a horizontal lie or ‘clapper bell 
testis’, raising the level of clinical suspicion. If torsion is sus -
pected, immediate testicular exploration is mandatory and if 
confirmed, bilateral testicular fixation is performed.
Patients with Klinefelter’s syndrome typically have bilat -
eral small, firm testes in addition to the other signs typical of 
this condition.
A hydrocoele is an accumulation of fluid between the tes-
tis and the tunica vaginalis and in the younger male can be 
associated with a patent processus vaginalis. On opening into 
a hydrocoele, the fluid is typically a yellow colour. A testis 
which cannot be felt in a tense hydrocoele in the age groups at 
risk of testis cancer needs to be assessed by USS preoperatively.
Epididymis
Epididymal pathology is rare in the prepubertal male. In the 
sexually active male, acute epididymitis (often due to chla -
mydia) with significant pain and swelling needs to be distin -
guished from acute testicular torsion. If there is any doubt, 
scrotal exploration is undertaken. Tiny cysts are frequently 
Summary box 75.3
Haematuria
●● Nowadays, is classified as visible haematuria (VH) or non-
visible haematuria (NVH)
●● A list of potential causes for haematuria can be rapidly 
generated by considering trauma (T), infection (I) and 
neoplasm (N) at all levels of the urinary tract from kidney to 
urethra
●● Haematuria is investigated with a renal USS and a flexible 
cystoscopy as a minimum
be investigated urgently at a haematuria clinic where they 
will have a renal ultrasound scan (USS) and a flexible cys -
toscopy as a minimum. The cancer detection rate depends on 
the degree of haematuria, being approximately 20% in those 
patients with visible haematuria but very much lower in those 
with non-visible haematuria (<5%).
Discolouration of the urine
Many drugs and foodstuffs have been reported to pro duce 
abnormal discolouration of the urine. Most colours have been 
reported but the most frequently encountered clinically are 
red/orange and brown. Clearly, haematuria is the common -
est cause for red urine; however, the presence of haem in the 
urine also produces red discolouration and generates a posi -
tive dipstick test. Red urine discolouration due to haemoglo -
binuria may present in haemolytic disorders such as ‘march 
haematuria’, classically seen in dehydrated soldiers after pro -
longed marching. Likewise, myoglobinuria due to myocyte 
destruction, e.g. caused by rhabdomyolysis after crush injury, 
can also result in red discolouration of the urine. Disordered 
haem production, seen in porphyria, can result in red disco -
louration that may change to brown or purple with exposure 
to sunlight. Several medications can cause red/orange disco -
louration of the urine, most commonly rifampicin, isoniazid 
or phenazopyridine with tears and other bodily fluids gen -
erally also discoloured. Others include chlorpromazine, thi -
oridazine, senna and laxatives containing a phenolphthalein 
component. Consumption of large quantities of beetroot can 
result in red discolouration of the urine. This discolouration 
is due to the excretion of betalain (betacyanin) pigments such 
as betanin. There is no direct genetic influence and no single 
gene variant that differentiates excreters from non-excreters.
The commonly used antibiotics nitrofurantoin and met-
ronidazole can lead to the urine being discoloured brown. 
Brown urine due to high-circulating bilirubin is also a feature 
of obstructive jaundice.
LESS COMMON URINARY 
SYMPTOMS
Haematospermia
This refers to blood, which can be bright red or a brown 
colour, seen in the seminal fluid. It is most commonly due to 
Giovanni Battista Morgagni , 1682–1771, Professor of Anatomy, University of Padua, Italy.
Harry Fitch Klinefelter , 1912–1990, American rheumatologist and endocrinologist, first described Klinefelter’s syndrome in 1942.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1376 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1377
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
detected in young males undergoing testicular USS but in the 
vast majority of patients these do not require attention.
Epididymal cysts can form similar scrotal swellings to 
hydrocoeles but can be distinguished by the fact that the tes-
tis can often be felt separately . They contain clear or white 
fluid. Both hydrocoeles and epididymal cysts transilluminate 
on clinical examination.
Genitourinary tuberculosis (TB) can result in bilateral 
nodular induration of the epididymes.
Spermatic cord
Ten per cent of males have a left-sided varicocoele and a 
smaller left testis. Masses are occasionally found associated 
with the spermatic cord, which on removal are found to be 
lipomas, mesotheliomas or sarcomas.
Prepuce (foreskin)
Phimosis occurs when the distal foreskin is tight and will 
not allow the foreskin to retract. Paraphimosis occurs when 
a poorly retractile foreskin becomes trapped in the retracted 
state and cannot be replaced. Significant oedema of the fore-
skin results, making replacement of the foreskin increasingly 
difficult. Depigmentation and scarring of the distal prepuce 
occurs in balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO).
Penis
Peyronie’s disease is an idiopathic condition in which fibrosis 
develops in the corpora cavernosa of the penis. The ‘plaque’ 
of Peyronie’s fibrosis is usually palpable in the midline any -
where from the base of the penis to just behind the corona. It 
gives rise to painful angulation of the penis on erection.
Penile fracture occurs when there is trauma to the erect 
penis. Classically, there is an audible crack and immediate 
penile detumescence and the patient presents with gross 
bruising of the penile shaft skin.
Glans penis
In the younger male, genitourinary warts due to human pap-
illoma virus (HPV) infection may be observed. In the older 
male, red raised patches on the glans penis or the inner aspect 
of the prepuce due to Zoon’s balanitis or CIS (erythropla-
sia of Queyrat or Bowen’s disease) are distinguished only on 
penile biopsy.
Urethra
Hypospadias occurs when there is failure of the urethra to 
completely close on the ventral aspect and epispadias occurs 
when there is failure of closure on the dorsal surface. A 
 urethral diverticulum in a female can be a cause for recurrent 
UTIs and is notable for its capacity to fill and empty at cystos-
copy. A urethral caruncle is a minor prolapse of the urethral 
mucosa in a female and usually requires no treatment.
INVESTIGATION OF URINARY 
SYMPTOMS
Blood tests
Screening blood tests
Initial blood tests in a patient with potentially serious urinary 
tract pathology often start with screening bloo d tests such 
as full blood count (FBC) and urea and electrolytes (U&E). 
Anaemia accompanied by a diagnosis of a urinary tract malig-
nancy is an adverse prognostic feature of renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC).
Serum biochemistry
Modern assessment of biochemical renal function not only 
involves reporting of serum levels of urea, creatinine and 
electrolytes but, in addition, involves the reporting of the 
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). Creatinine is 
an end-product of muscle catabolism and suffers from the 
disadvantage that eGFR can be wide ranging for a given 
serum creatinine level. For example, a serum creatinine level 
of 1.5  mg/dL (132  μmol/L) may correspond to a GFR from 
approximately 20 to 90  mL/min/1.73m2. eGFR is nowadays 
recommended as the optimal method of reporting renal func-
tion in many countries. The Modification of Diet in Renal 
Disease (MDRD) study equation uses age, gender, race and 
standardised serum creatinine to estimate the GFR. When 
patients with a urological cancer are being considered for 
nephrotoxic cisplatin-based systemic chemotherapy, in gen-
eral terms, the eGFR needs to be 50 mL/min or greater.
Patients with calculous disease routinely have serum cal -
cium and uric acid levels checked to rule out a metabolic pre-
disposition to stone formation.
Serum alkaline phosphatase may be elevated in patients 
with bone metastases due to a urological malignancy and is 
commonly seen in men with disseminated prostate cancer.
Summary box 75.4
Biochemical assessment of renal function
●● eGFR is increasingly reported along with urea and creatinine 
as it is more informative of true renal function
●● With both kidneys functioning normally, an individual has 
approximately 6 times the renal function needed to remain off 
dialysis
●● Serum creatinine will remain normal with unilateral renal 
pathology but a normally functioning contralateral kidney
François Gigot de La Peyronie , 1678–1747, French surgeon.
Johannes Jacobus Zoon , 1902–1958, Professor of Dermatology, University of Utrecht, the Netherlands, described Zoon’s balanitis in 1952.
Louis Auguste Queyrat , 1856–1933, French dermatologist, described erythroplasia of Queyrat in 1911.
John Templeton Bowen , 1857–1940, American dermatologist, described Bowen’s disease.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1377 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1378
Tumour markers
Serum tumour markers are utilised in patients with prostate 
and testis cancer. As of 2017, no serum tumour markers exist 
in routine clinical practice for renal or bladder cancer.
Prostate-specific antigen
PSA is a glycoprotein produced by prostatic epithelial cells. It 
is responsible for liquefaction of seminal fluid and allows sper-
matozoa to swim freely . As a consequence of altered archi -
tecture of the prostate in conditions such as benign prostatic 
hyperplasia (BPH) and prostatitis as well as prostate cancer, 
PSA enters the bloodstream and is detected by a blood test. 
The commonly used PSA assays measure the total amount 
of PSA. PSA levels can be influenced by certain drugs, most 
notably 5-α-reductase inhibitors such as finasteride and 
dutasteride used to treat men with LUTS, but also by aspirin, 
statins and thiazide diuretics. The PSA needs to be multiplied 
by 2 in men who have been on a 5- α-reductase inhibitor for 
at least 6 months to give an approximation of the true PSA 
value. The PSA test can be significantly influenced by an 
active or recent UTI and the true PSA level only returns to 
baseline 6 weeks after treatment and eradication of an infec -
tive episode.
In clinical practice, age-adjusted PSA values have been 
used for many years (Table 75.1), but recently have been 
called into question as they are highly variable and may 
reflect differences in demographics and clinical characteris -
tics of a particular population.
The two largest randomised PSA-based screening tri-
als, the European Randomised Study of Prostate Cancer 
(ERSPC) and the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian 
Summary box 75.5
Prostate-specific antigen 
●● Is not significantly altered by digital rectal examination
●● Can be significantly altered by a UTI
●● After an infective episode takes 6 weeks to return to baseline 
values
●● Is artificially lowered in men taking 5-α-reductase inhibitors 
(finasteride, dutasteride)
TABLE 75.1 Age-specific reference ranges for prostate-specific antigen (PSA) values.
PSA reference range (ng/mL)
Age range
(years) Oesterling et al.1 Dalkin et al.2 DeAntoni et al.3
40–49 0.0–2.5 ng/mL – 0.0–2.4 ng/mL
50–59 0.0–3.5 ng/mL 0.0–3.5 ng/mL 0.0–3.8 ng/mL
60–69 0.0–4.5 ng/mL 0.0–5.4 ng/mL 0.0–5.6 ng/mL
70–79 0.0–6.5 ng/mL 0.0–6.3 ng/mL 0.0–6.9 ng/mL
1Oesterling JE, Jacobsen SJ, Chute CG et al. Serum prostate-specific antigen in a community-based population of healthy men. Establishment of age-specific reference 
ranges. JAMA 1993; 270(7): 860–4.
2Dalkin BL, Ahmann FR, Kopp JB. Prostate specific antigen levels in men older than 50 years without clinical evidence of prostatic carcinoma. J Urol 1993; 150(6): 1837–9.
3DeAntoni EP , Crawford ED, Oesterling JE et al. Age- and race-specific reference ranges for prostate-specific antigen from a large community-based study. Urology 1996; 
48(2): 234–9.
(PLCO) Study, have evaluated PSA testing among men aged 
55–69 years with the indication for a biopsy being a PSA 
≥3 ng/mL. Recommended prostate biopsy referral values are 
being realigned to the evidence emerging from these two 
studies. The new recommended referral value for men aged 
50–69 years is 3 ng/mL. Further diagnostic evaluation should 
consider the man’s history of comorbidities, ethnicity, family 
history and abnormal DRE findings prior to biopsy.
A large UK-based clinical study of serum PSA as a tool 
for identifying asymptomatic men with prostate cancer has 
recently reported 10-year outcome data (ProtecT trial). At 
present, screening men in the UK for prostate cancer using 
regular PSA testing is not routinely performed but men inter-
ested in having a PSA test can request this from their family 
practitioners.
Risk prediction models have been developed in recent 
years to assist clinicians and patients in predicting prostate 
cancer diagnosis, stage and prognosis. A number of these risk 
assessment tools are available online as a decision aid for an 
individual man to evaluate his own risk of prostate cancer. 
These include the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) 
Risk Calculator and the ERSPC Risk Calculator.
For men newly diagnosed with prostate cancer, PSA assists 
with risk (of disease progression) stratification. It is also a use-
ful marker of response to treatment and of disease recurrence 
after treatment.
PSA derivatives
Raised serum levels of PSA in men with BPH and prostati-
tis decrease the specificity of the PSA blood test as a cancer 
marker. In an effort to improve specificity of testing, PSA 
derivatives and PSA kinetics have been used but to date have 
had little impact in assisting with clinical decision making.
FREE PSA (FPSA), COMPLEXED PSA (CPSA) AND 
FREE/TOTAL PSA (F/TPSA)
Total PSA detectable in the serum consists of proteolyti -
cally active free PSA and complexed PSA. Free PSA con-
stitutes 5–40% of total PSA and cPSA 60–95%. 60–90% 
of cPSA is bound to α-1-antichymotrypsin, 10–20% to 
α-2-macrogobulin and 1–5% to α-1-protease inhibitor. A 
lower percentage fPSA has been associated with prostate can-
cer and many studies have indicated its value in reducing the 
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1378 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1379
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
number of negative prostate biopsies performed. Studies have 
varied in the threshold of percentage fPSA used, with cut-
offs of 22%, 15% and 10% reported to be of clinical utility. 
Recent studies have indicated that there are, in fact, 3 forms 
of fPSA: inactive PSA, known as proPSA, and 2 other forms; 
BPSA (nicked PSA) and intact PSA (iPSA). BPSA and 
iPSA have been associated with benign disease of the pros -
tate while proPSA has been found in prostate cancer tissue.
HUMAN KALLIKREIN-2 (HK2)
PSA in prostatic tissue, namely pPSA, is converted to mature 
PSA via activation of HK2 induced by a physiological pro-
cess occurring in seminal fluid. HK2 is a protein belonging to 
the kallikrein family closely related to PSA and is a potential 
prostate cancer tumour marker.
PROSTATE HEAL TH INDEX (PHI)
PHI is a mathematical equation demonstrating the probabil -
ity of prostate cancer. The equation is formulated as p2PSA/
fPSA×√tPSA. p2PSA is an isoform of fPSA.  Higher PHI 
values have been associated with an increased probability of 
prostate cancer.
PSA kinetics
PSA DENSITY (PSAD)
This factors in the volume of the prostate and assumes contri-
butions to the total PSA of normal prostate epithelium, BPH 
or prostate cancer to be 0.1  ng/mL, 0.3 ng/mL and 3.5 ng/mL. 
In clinical practice, PSAD has been found not to have a sig -
nificant role.
PSA VELOCITY
PSA velocity (ng/mL/yr) has been defined as the annual 
absolute increase in tPSA. In the past, a velocity of >0.75 
ng/mL/yr compared with baseline in those men with a PSA 
in the range 4–10 ng/mL has been considered suspicious but 
currently there is no consensus concerning a useful threshold.
PSA DOUBLING TIME
This is defined as the number of months it takes for a baseline 
PSA to double. It is clinically useful in determining the need 
for treatment initiation in men undergoing active surveil -
lance and watchful waiting for prostate cancer and for deter -
mining the need for further treatment once first-line therapy 
has failed.
Other possible prostate cancer biomarkers
Recently, two promising urinary ribonucleic acid (RNA) bio-
markers, prostate cancer antigen-3 (PCA-3) and the fusion 
gene TMPRSS2:ERG, have emerged.
Testis tumour markers
There are three serum tumour markers routinely used in the 
management of men with suspected testis cancer: alpha feto-
protein (αFP), beta human chorionic gonadotropin (βHCG) 
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). These markers some -
times provide insight into the likely histological subtype of 
germ cell tumour present and, in addition, contribute to the 
prognostication of testis cancer patients into good progno-
sis, intermediate prognosis and poor prognosis groups using a 
classification devised by the International Germ Cell Cancer 
Collaborative Group (IGCCCG) (see Chapter 80).
Urine-based tests
Urinalysis
Patients in both primary and secondary care settings will very 
often be screened for significant disease with a urine dipstick 
test. Urine is dipped with a stick on which there is a series of 
small chemical-containing pads designed to detect, typically, 
glucose, bilirubin, ketones, the specific gravity , blood, pH, 
protein, urobilinogen, nitrites and leucocyte esterase through 
colour changes which are detected using a bench-top analy -
ser. A trace of blood on dipstick testing should be regarded as 
a negative test and should not prompt further evaluation of 
the patient.
Mid-stream specimen of urine (MSU)
A MSU is used to establish the diagnosis of a UTI and primarily 
allows identification of the responsible urinary pathogen and 
selection of the most appropriate antibiotic. Most MSUs will 
be processed in 2 stages with initial urine microscopy followed 
by urine culture only if appropriate. Normal urine contains 
small numbers of white blood cells (WBCs) and epithelial 
cells as indicated:
Normal values
WBC (0–40 × 106/L)
Epithelial cells (0–55 × 106/L)
Early-morning urine (EMU)
EMU samples are sent on 3 consecutive days for Ziehl–
Neelsen (ZN) staining and culture for acid-fast bacilli if geni-
tourinary TB is suspected. Culture results take 6 weeks.
Voided urine cytology
Voided urine cytology is performed when a urinary tract 
malignancy, usually a urothelial carcinoma, is suspected, par -
ticularly in the setting of a normal cystoscopy. The test has 
the disadvantage of a high false-negative rate. Approximately 
15% of low-grade transitional cell carcinomas produce posi-
tive voided urine cytology compared with approximately 50% 
of high-grade transitional cell tumours.
Endoscopy
Cystoscopy
To further evaluate urinary symptoms, the entire lining of the 
urinary tract can be directly visualised from the urethra and 
bladder (using a cystoscope) to the ureter and renal pelvis 
Franz Ziehl , 1859–1926, German bacteriologist and a professor in Lübeck, Germany.
Friedrich Carl Adolf Neelsen , 1854–1898, German pathologist and professor at the Institute of Pathology, University of Rostock, Germany.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1379 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1380
(semi-rigid ureteroscope), and finally the renal calyces (flex -
ible ureteroscope). Cystoscopy can be undertaken either as a 
flexible cystoscopy (Figure 75.1) using local anaesthesia or 
rigid cystoscopy (Figures 75.1 and 75.2), preferably under a 
general anaesthetic. Telescopes with different fields of view are 
available (0°, 12°, 30° and 70° lenses are commonly used). In 
the operating theatre, most endoscopic procedures, including 
cystoscopy, require the urology stack (Figures 75.3 and 75.4). 
Insertion of the cystoscope sheath in some centres is performed 
with the obturator inserted rather than the telescope, which is 
then switched with the obturator once in the bladder.
Flexible cystoscopy is relatively poorly tolerated in young 
males. In the male, visualisation of the urethra during flexible 
cystourethroscopy is often completed on withdrawal of the 
scope providing there is no stricture in the urethra. Flexible 
cystoscopy can be performed as a rapid turnover procedure in 
the outpatient clinic. It is principally a diagnostic tool but a 
few minor procedures can be accomplished using the flexible 
cystoscope, such as insertion/removal of ureteric stents, small 
biopsies and diathermy/laser of small bladder lesions. The tip 
of most flexible cystoscopes deflects down 90 o and upwards/
Figure 75.1 A rigid cystoscope (above) assembled with the tele -
scope inside the outer sheath, demonstrating the working channel 
with the white plastic nipple below the light attachment. Below is 
the flexible cystoscope that simply needs to be connected to a light 
source and irrigation and is ready to use.
Figure 75.2 The components of a rigid cystoscope. From above 
down: the obturator for insertion into the outer sheath used in blind 
insertion of the cystoscope sheath – usually in females; the telescope 
to which the light cable is attached; the outer sheath containing 2 taps 
for irrigation and outflow with the bridge with a working channel for 
guidewires and ureteric catheters already engaged; cold cup biopsy 
forceps that will accommodate the telescope and fit down the outer 
sheath.
Figure 75.3 The urology ‘stack’. In this stack, from above down, are 
the monitor (often on a telescopic arm), a video recording device, the 
light source which is on the camera to connect to the endoscope and 
a printer for capturing images. The endoflator (used for laparoscopic 
urological procedures) is hidden by the monitor in this image.
Figure 75.4  The ur ology stack in use in a patient under general 
anaesthetic about to under go a transur ethral resection of a bladder 
tumour.
backwards through 180 o giving a 270 o field of view. Full 
backward deflection of the flexible cystoscope allows what is 
referred to as the ‘J manoeuvre’ permitting excellent visual -
isation of the bladder neck region.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1380 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1381
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
More can be achieved with a rigid cystoscope under gen -
eral anaesthetic (GA), especially in relation to instrumenta -
tion of the ureters.
In an effort to improve the diagnostic accuracy of cystos -
copy, technological advances have produced narrow band 
imaging (NBI) and photodynamic diagnosis (PDD) com -
bined with cystoscopy.
NBI is an optic enhancement technique which filters 
the white light into two different bandwidths, including blue 
(415 nm) and green (540 nm) spectrum. In the NBI mode, the 
light is strongly absorbed by haemoglobin and only penetrates 
the tissue superficially, which increases the identification of small 
capillaries and superficial tissue structures. Since bladder tumours 
are vascular structures, the tumours appear in brown or green 
colour against a white background using NBI (Figure 75.5).
With PDD, 60 to 90 minutes before the PDD procedure, 
a solution containing a drug with fluorescent properties is 
instilled into the bladder. The drug preferentially accumulates 
in rapidly proliferating cells such as tumour cells.
During the PDD procedure, the bladder is examined 
in blue light. The accumulated drug in the tumour cells is 
spectrally excited by this blue light and emits a pink fluo-
rescence. The tumour cells are highlighted pink and stand 
out against the normal bladder tissue, which keeps its blue 
appearance (Figure 75.6). Bladder tumours and areas of CIS 
are easier to identify compared with white light cystoscopy.
Figures 75.7–75.13 show some normal anatomy as well 
as some of the pathology seen in the urethra and bladder on 
cystourethroscopy.
Figure 75.5 Enhanced detection of bladder tumour using narrow band imaging (NBI) (left image, white light; right 
image, NBI).
Figure 75.6 Enhanced detection of bladder tumour using photodynamic diagnosis (PDD): (a) white light; (b) blue 
light, PPD.
(a)
 (b)
Summary box 75.6
Cystoscopy
●● Can be performed either with a rigid cystoscope under 
general anaesthetic or a flexible cystoscope under local 
anaesthetic
●● Flexible cystoscopy is principally a diagnostic procedure
●● The diagnostic accuracy of cystoscopy has recently been 
improved by techniques such as NBI and PDD
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1381 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1382
Figure 75.7 (a) A normal urethra on ur ethroscopy. (b) A urethral 
stricture seen on urethroscopy. (c) A urethrotomy being performed 
for a urethral stricture using a laser fibre; the procedure is being per -
formed over a green guidewire that has been inserted into the bladder 
to ensure the lumen of the urethra is not lost (photograph courtesy of 
Douglas F Milam, MD).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
Figure 75.8 (a) The appearance of normal bladder mucosa on cys-
toscopy. (b) A normal right ureteric orifice (yellow arrow) at the end of 
the interureteric bar (red arrow) seen on cystoscopy.
(b)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1382 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1383
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Figure 75.9 (a, b) Bladder wall trabeculation (yellow arrows) and 
saccules (red arrows) seen on cystoscopy. (Image (a) courtesy of The 
Center for Reconstructive Urology, CA, USA.)
(a)
Figure 75.10 An endoscopic view of the pr ostatic urethra with the 
veru montanum at 6 o’clock and the bulging right and left lobes of 
the prostate.
(b)
Figure 75.11  Bladder calculi seen on cystoscopy. Stones may 
be single (a, b) or multiple (c). The stone in (b) has a characteris -
tic shape and is referr ed to as a ‘jack’ stone. (Image (b) reprinted 
with permission from Medscape Drugs & Diseases (http://emedicine.
medscape.com/), 2017, available at: http://emedicine.medscape.
com/article/2120102-overview.)
(a)
(c)
(b)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1383 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1384
Figure 75.12 (a, b) Papillary bladder tumours seen at cystoscopy. 
(b) This illustrates the proximity of the tumour to the right ureteric 
orifice (arrow) (courtesy of Tim Nathan). Bladder tumours frequently 
arise close to ureteric orifices.
(a) (b)
Figure 75.13 (a) Bladder diverticulum. (b) A paraureteric divertic -
ulum with a ureteric catheter in the left ureteric orifice. (c) The raised 
inflammatory lesion on the left side of the bladder typical of the site of 
a colovesical fistula with strands of colonic mucus.
(a) (b)
(c)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1384 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1385
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
when there is an obstructed (and/or infected) renal collect -
ing system. USS is sometimes used to further characterise 
renal lesions detected by other modalities such as computed 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and 
is a useful adjunct in clarifying whether some lesions on CT/
MRI are haemorrhagic cysts or solid renal lesions.
USS is not particularly good for assessing ureters unless 
there is significant dilatation of the ureter or sizeable pathol -
ogy in the ureter such as a stone. Soft tissue lesions in the ure-
ter are difficult to detect by USS. USS can be used to detect 
pathology in the bladder and the bladder is routinely assessed 
in addition to the kidneys by USS in the haematuria clinic. 
USS can detect filling defects in the bladder in keeping with 
bladder tumours and, in addition, can detect bladder calculi, a 
thickened, trabeculated bladder wall in patients with bladder 
outlet obstruction and large bladder diverticula, and can be 
used to determine the residual volume after micturition.
In addition, USS is frequently employed to investigate 
men with scrotal swellings and has a role to play in the assess-
ment of urethral stricture disease.
Figure 75.14  Examples of a flexible ureter oscope (above) and a 
semi-rigid ureteroscope (below).
CYSTOSCOPY AND RETROGRADE URETEROGRAMS
In patients in whom ureteric pathology is suspected (often 
stones or tumours), retrograde studies of the entire ureter and 
renal pelvis can be performed by insertion of a fine ureteric cath-
eter into the ureteric orifice (via a cystoscope) followed by the 
injection of contrast material retrogradely into the ureter in an 
effort to confirm the diagnosis. Overexuberant injection of con-
trast can result in extravasation of contrast material into the 
retroperitoneum, especially when there is ureteric obstruction.
Ureteroscopy
Ureteroscopy can be performed as both a diagnostic proce -
dure and a therapeutic procedure. A rigid or semi-rigid ure -
teroscope can be used in the ureter as far as the renal pelvis 
but to inspect or operate on the renal pelvis or renal calyces, 
a flexible ureteroscope is, generally, needed (Figure 75.14). 
The procedure is most often performed when pathology, com-
monly stones, strictures or tumours of the ureter, is suspected. 
The insertion of each of these instruments is facilitated by the 
use of a guidewire in the ureter and in most cases the ureter is 
best first outlined with radio-opaque contrast material using 
an image intensifier.
Summary box 75.7
Ultrasound scan
●● Is frequently used to screen patients with suspected 
urological pathology
●● Is frequently part of a haematuria clinic protocol
●● Is an excellent method to detect hydronephrosis
●● Can be performed at the bedside in the critically ill patient
●● Recently has been combined with contrast enhancement in 
certain settings such as in the assessment of renal cysts
Radiology
Urinary tract ultrasound scan (USS) (Figure 
75.15)
Renal USS is used frequently in the investigation of patients 
with urinary problems and, in addition to selected use, is used 
to screen patients with recurrent UTIs and patients with both 
visible and non-visible haematuria. USS is extremely useful 
in the detection of hydronephrosis and can be used at the 
bedside to detect this in the emergency setting. It is useful 
in detecting renal parenchymal cysts, tumours, renal scarring, 
and angiomyolipomas (AML) as well as stones. Stones classi-
cally produce an acoustic shadow but USS is not the most sen-
sitive imaging modality for detecting renal stones and some 
stones can be missed on USS. USS is the imaging modality 
most frequently used to assist with the insertion of a percu -
taneous nephrostomy (PCN), often placed by a radiologist 
Transrectal ultrasound scan (TRUS)
TRUS is often performed in conjunction with biopsy of the 
prostate. Some manufacturers produce USS machines dedi -
cated to USS of the prostate as shown in Figure 75.16. Most 
prostatic USS is performed using biplanar probes which give 
transverse as well as sagittal views of the prostate (Figure 
75.17). The majority of men undergoing a TRUS and pros -
tate biopsy have the procedure on account of a raised PSA 
or an abnormal digital rectal examination (DRE) or both. A 
bridging plan is needed for those patients on oral anticoag -
ulant therapy. Patients can be biopsied while continuing on 
aspirin therapy. Patients require antibiotic prophylaxis with a 
regime such as ciprofloxacin orally in the hour before the pro-
cedure and IV gentamicin immediately before the procedure 
is undertaken. Patients are counselled concerning the risk of 
complications such as a UTI (5%), septicaemia (1%), hae-
maturia, blood per rectum and haematospermia which can be 
prolonged. Prior to any biopsies, local anaesthetic is infiltrated 
around the apex of the prostate under USS guidance. During 
TRUS, a distinct peripheral zone (PZ) and transition zone 
(TZ) are evident (Figure 75.17); the volume of the prostate 
can be estimated and biopsies are taken if indicated. If the 
procedure is being performed for a raised PSA and the pros -
tate looks normal on TRUS, systematic biopsies will be taken 
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1385 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1386
Figure 75.15 Ultrasound scan showing: (a) hydronephrosis (cour-
tesy of Dr Bruno Di Muzio, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 21885); (b) renal cyst 
(courtesy of Dr Ian Bickle, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 21139); (c) renal 
tumour (courtesy of Wendy Boller); (d) medullary sponge kidney 
with renal calculi – note the stone gives rise to an acoustic win  dow 
(courtesy of Dr Bruno Di Muzio, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 12141); 
(e) angio myolipoma (arrow).
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e)
Figure 75.16 (a) A portable machine dedicated to prostatic ultra -
sound scanning. (b) A close-up view of the transrectal probe demon-
strating the diagonal channel through the probe for the biopsy needle 
(arrow).
(a) (b)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1386 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1387
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
(a) (b)
Figure 75.17 Views of the prostate on a transrectal ultrasound scan. 
(a) On the transverse image, the normal prostate demonstrates an 
anterior transition zone and a posterior (cow-horn-shaped) peripheral 
zone. (b) On the sagittal image the bladder is seen above the prostate 
(arrowheads) as well as the seminal vesicles (arrow).
(a)
(b)
Figure 75.18  (a) A biopsy device used for prostatic biopsy.  
(b) Biopsy cores taken from right and left prostatic lobes during trans-
rectal ultrasound scanning.
Figure 75.19 (a, b) A transverse image of the pr ostate on trans -
rectal ultrasound scanning demonstrating the classic hypoechoic 
lesion in the peripheral zone, typical of a cancer.
(a)
(b)
using a biopsy device as shown in Figure 75.18. The classic 
abnormality associated with prostate cancer is a hypoechoic 
area in the PZ (Figure 75.19) but this is rarely found in the 
absence of a palpable abnormality on DRE.
Transperineal template biopsies of the 
prostate
Transperineal template biopsies of the prostate (TPTBP) are 
increasingly used clinically and although they have not yet 
replaced TRUS-guided prostate biopsies as a first-line test, 
they may do this in the future. Currently , TPTBP are used 
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1387 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1388
to further evaluate men with a negative TRUS-guided pros-
tate biopsy in whom the PSA trend remains suspicious, or 
younger men for whom a diagnosis of low-risk prostate cancer 
has been made and where it is important to exclude more 
significant disease in other parts of the prostate (most notably 
in the anterior aspects of the gland) not easily accessible via 
the transrectal route. TPTBP are usually performed under GA 
although there are reports that they can be done under local 
anaesthetic (LA). Typically, around 36 biopsies are obtained 
during TPTBP including from anterior aspects of the prostate 
which are impossible to sample during TRUS. TPTBP has a 
much lower risk of sepsis than TRUS-guided biopsies.
KUB x-ray (Figure 75.20)
This is a plain x-ray of the abdomen and pelvis that includes 
the regions of the body occupied by the Kidneys, Ureters and 
Bladder. In fact, not a huge amount is learned about these 
organs in the absence of pathology. In the normal setting, soft 
tissue outlines of the kidneys are commonly seen but normal 
ureters and bladder will not be seen. The commonest indica -
tion for a KUB is to screen patients for the presence of uri -
nary tract calculi. Patients who have had a CT scan resulting 
in the diagnosis of a urinary tract calculus often have a sup -
plementary KUB to determine if plain x-ray can be used in 
the subsequent follow-up of the patient. Phleboliths (throm -
bosed, calcified veins in the pelvis) can easily be mistaken for 
distal ureteric stones by the novice. KUB is also frequently 
used in the management of patients undergoing extracorpo-
real shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL) for urinary tract stones, 
to assess the outcome of treatment and to determine whether 
further treatment is necessary. Finally, a KUB is often used to 
check for correct positioning of a double-J ureteric stent.
(a)
Figure 75.20 (a) Left lower pole renal stone on plain KUB x-ray 
(courtesy of Pr of Frank Gaillard, Radiopaedia.org, rID:  12555). (b) 
A staghorn calculus in the left kidney (courtesy of Dr Natalie Yang, 
Radiopaedia.org, rID:  9733). (c) Right lower pole calculi and stein -
strasse in the distal right ureter (arrow) (courtesy of Dr Ali Abougazia, 
Radiopaedia.org).
(b)
(c)
Summary box 75.8
Prostate biopsies
●● TRUS has been the traditional method of guiding prostate 
biopsies
●● TRUS-guided biopsies are increasingly being replaced by 
transperineal template biopsies of the prostate
●● TPTBP have a much lower sepsis risk than TRUS biopsies
●● TRUS biopsies are usually performed under local anaesthesia
●● TPTBP are usually performed under general anaesthesia
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1388 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1389
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Intravenous urography (IVU)
This is infrequently used nowadays and its primary indication 
in the investigation of patients with suspected urinary tract 
calculi has been superseded by non-contrast CT.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
A non-contrast CT scan is now the imaging modality of 
choice in the investigation of a patient with suspected urinary 
tract calculi (Figure 75.21a). Angiomyolipomas of the kid -
ney have a characteristic appearance on CT (Figure 75.21b). 
Other variations of the CT scan include a contrast CT, a con-
trast CT with a urographic phase and a triple-phase CT.
A contrast CT scan of the chest/abdomen and pelvis is 
frequently used to stage patients with renal tumours (Figure 
75.22), muscle-invasive bladder cancer and young men with 
testicular cancer. CT is less frequently used in men with pros-
tate cancer but does have a role to play when lymph node 
disease is being assessed prior to treatment.
In 1986, a classification of renal cysts based on CT criteria 
known as the Bosniak classification was devised. Nowadays, 
this classification can also be applied to MR imaging.
The Bosniak classification of renal cystic masses (Figures 
75.23 and 75.24) is as outlined:
I  Simple benign cysts with hairline thin walls (Figure 
75.24a). The cysts do not contain septations, calcifica -
tions or solid components. There are no enhancing soft 
tissue components.
II Benign cystic lesions (Figure 75.24b). The cysts may 
have hairline thin septations with fine calcifications in 
the walls. Minimal enhancement of the hairline thin 
smooth wall may be seen. No enhancing soft tissue com-
ponents are present. Non-enhancing high-attentuation 
cysts <3 cm in size are included.
IIF Complex cysts requiring follow-up imaging. These cysts 
are more complex and do not fit into category II or III. 
These cysts have an increased number of hairline septa -
tions or mild thickening of the wall and/or septations. No 
enhancing soft tissue components are present.
III Indeterminate masses (Figure 75.24c). The cystic lesions 
have thickened walls and septations that are irregular. 
The cyst walls or septations demonstrate enhancement.
IV Malignant cystic masses (Figure 75.24d). Thick and 
irregular walls and septations may be present but enhanc-
ing soft tissue components are seen, independent of wall 
or septal enhancement.
(a)
(b)
Summary box 75.9
Diagnosis of urinary tract stones
●● Intravenous urography is obsolete in diagnosing urinary tract 
stones
●● Non-contrast computed tomography scan is now the 
technique of choice for this diagnosis
Figure 75.22 Computed tomography scan demonstrating a large 
left renal tumour with involvement of the left r enal vein (arrow) (cour-
tesy of Dr Laughlin Dawes, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 35937).
Morton A Bosniak , 1929–2016, Professor of Radiology, New York University (NYU) Langone School of Medicine, NY, USA.
Figure 75.21 (a) A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan 
demonstrating bilateral renal calculi (courtesy of Dr Jer emy Jones, 
Radiopaedia.org, rID: 6211). (b) A contrast CT demonstrating a left 
renal angiomyolipoma with its characteristic content of fat (arrow).
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1389 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1390
after intravenous contrast administration) (Figure 75.25). 
The advantage of mpMRI is that multiple imaging parameters 
are combined to assign a degree of suspicion that a clinically 
significant cancer is present. A 5-point scoring system, called 
PI-RADS (Prostate Imaging-Reporting and Data System), is 
used to assign a likelihood (from 1: benign to 5: highly suspi -
cious) that prostate cancer is present within the abnormality 
detected on mpMRI of the prostate.
mpMRI has a crucial role in the detection and locali -
sation of cancer in men with a persistently elevated PSA 
but negative previous TRUS biopsy and in men with what 
is thought to be small-volume, low-risk (of progression) 
prostate cancer detected on TRUS biopsy who are consid -
ered for active surveillance to ensure a significant cancer has 
not been overlooked for biopsy. The identification of suspi -
cious abnormalities on mpMRI allows subsequent targeted 
biopsy using novel technologies that utilise MRI during 
biopsy, and has a major impact on management. Increasingly 
however, MRI–TRUS fusion biopsies are being performed 
in a similar manner to TRUS biopsy, with MRI images 
imported into the specialised workstation to guide biopsy 
during TRUS.
Category I and II cysts do not require treatment and do not 
require follow-up imaging. Category IIF (F indicating need 
for follow-up) do require further imaging but the duration of 
this is uncertain. Some authors have suggested 1–2 years but 
others recommend longer. Category III cysts have a risk of 
malignancy of 30–100% and should undergo a biopsy to iden-
tify those patients requiring surgery. Category IV ‘cysts’ have 
an incidence of malignancy of 67–100% and surgical removal 
should be considered.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MRI scanning has a significant role to play, either on its own 
or as an adjunct to other cross-sectional imaging modali-
ties, in the staging of a number of urological cancers, but it 
has a central role in the investigation of men suspected of 
having prostate cancer. Modern MRI techniques in prostate 
cancer imaging apply the principles of multiparametric MRI 
(mpMRI), utilising anatomical imaging with standard MRI 
techniques (T1- and T2-weighted images) and functional 
imaging such as diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) (for 
water molecules motion assessment) and dynamic contrast-  
enhanced (DCE) imaging (for tissue perfusion assessment 
I ~0% are malignant II ~0% are malignant
IIF ~5% are malignant III ~50% are malignant IV ~100% are malignant
Figure 75.23 Bosniak 
classification of renal 
cysts.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1390 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1391
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Figure 75.24 Computed tomography scans: (a) Bosniak I cyst (courtesy of Dr David Cuete, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 27479). (b) Bosniak II cyst 
(courtesy of Dr Andrew Dixon, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 23404). (c) Bosniak III cyst (courtesy of Dr Roberto Schubert, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 17536). 
(d) Bosniak IV cyst/mass (courtesy of Dr Ian Bickle, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 23525).
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
SPECT/CT and PET/CT
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and 
positron emission tomography (PET) are nuclear medicine 
imaging techniques that provide metabolic and functional 
information, unlike CT and MRI. They have both been com-
bined with CT and MRI to provide detailed anatomical and 
metabolic information. Whereas, initially, separate machines 
were used to image the patient and the images were then 
fused, recent technological advances allow the one machine 
to acquire both sets of data.
Radionuclides used in PET scans are substances that 
are normally utilised by the particular organ/tissue of inter -
est during metabolism, such as glucose, carbon or oxygen, 
attached to a radioactive substance. The most common radio-
nuclide in clinical use is FDG (2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose).
PET/CT looks promising as a tool for the detection of dis-
tant metastases in bladder cancer. To date the technique has 
not been used frequently in those patients with renal cancer. 
In men with testis cancer, it is recommended in the follow-up 
of patients with seminoma with any residual mass.
Choline PET/CT using either 11C-choline or 18F-   
Summary box 75.10
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
●● Is used to stage many urological cancers
●● Multiparametric MRI has a significant role in the assessment 
of men with suspected prostate cancer
●● mpMRI is increasingly used prior to prostate biopsy
●● Pre-biopsy MRI permits selection of biopsy technique (TRUS 
v. TPTBP)
●● Pre-biopsy MRI assists with targeting of biopsies
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1391 25/10/2017   11:28CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1392
choline as the radiotracer have been increasingly used, espe-
cially in the assessment of metastatic disease in men with 
prostate cancer who have failed primary treatment and may 
be candidates for salvage therapy (Figure 75.26). A new 
radiotracer for PET/CT, 18F-fluciclovine, was approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in May 2016 for 
the diagnosis of suspected prostate cancer recurrence after 
primary therapy.
Bone scan (Figures 75.27 and 75.28)
A bone scan is most frequently used in patients with a uro -
logical malignancy when other imaging suggests there may be 
bone metastases present. It is also used in the routine staging 
of patients with high-risk prostate cancer, although there is a 
<5% chance of a bone scan being positive until the PSA is 
>40 ng/mL.
Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) renogram 
(Figure 75.29)
Tc-99m DMSA is a technetium radiopharmaceutical used in 
renal imaging to evaluate renal structure, especially in the 
paediatric population where it is used to detect renal scar -
ring. DMSA is selected for evaluation of the renal cortex as 
it binds to proximal convoluted tubules in the renal cortex 
with slow renal excretion. This results in higher concentra -
tion and hence higher resolution on imaging. In addition, it 
allows better assessment of differential (split) renal function.
Diethylene-triamine-penta-acetate (DTPA) 
renogram
Tc-99m DTPA is another technetium radiopharmaceutical 
used in renal imaging. Previously it was used frequently in 
patients suspected of having a ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) 
obstruction but it has largely been superseded by the mercap-
toacetyltriglycine (MAG3) renogram in such cases.
(a)
Figure 75.25 Multiparametric magnetic resonance images of a patient with pr ostate cancer. (a) T2-weighted. (b) Diffusion weighted (DWI). 
(c) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). (d) Dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE). The tumour appears dark on the axial T2-weighted image 
(arrow); the corresponding area shows restricted diffusion on the DWI and ADC images as well as abnormal contrast enhancement on the DCE 
axial image (abnormal red colour coding of the tumour). (Images courtesy of Janet Cochrane Miller, Radiology Rounds, Massachusetts General 
Hospital.)
(b)
(c) (d)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1392 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1393
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
(a) (b)
Figure 75.27 Bone scan from patient with (a) low-volume and (b) high-volume metastatic prostate cancer.
Figure 75.26 Fifty-five-year-old patient with increasing prostate-specific antigen level, 27 months after radical prostatectomy. Coronal (left), 
axial (middle) and sagittal (right) fused image projections of positr on emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scans. (a) Focal 
11C-choline uptake in right (large arrow) and left (thin arrow) iliac region revealed lymph node involvement. (b) This was not observed with 18F-
FDG PET. (Courtesy of Hussein Farghaly.)
(a)
(b)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1393 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1394
Figure 75.28 Superscan with intense tracer uptake throughout the 
skeleton.
Figure 75.29 Dimercaptosuccinic acid scans. (a) Normal kidneys. 
(b) Horseshoe kidney. (c) Focal renal scarring (arrow). (d) Renal 
tumour (arrow).
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
MAG3 renogram (Figures 75.30 and 75.31)
Tc-99m MAG3 is now the radiopharmaceutical of choice 
used in the assessment of patients with suspected upper uri-
nary tract obstruction such as UPJO.
The shape of the renogram curve (following subtraction of 
background activity) is dependent on MAG3 uptake from the 
circulation to the kidney and secondly MAG3 elimination 
from the kidney into the bladder.
Classically, the normal MAG3 renogram curve has three 
phases (Figure 75.30):
1 The curve rises steeply upwards following intravenous 
tracer injection. This is indicative of the speed of tracer 
injection and its delivery to the kidneys (i.e. renal vascu -
lar supply).
2 A more gradual slope which represents renal handling of 
MAG3 (renal uptake by tubular secretion and glomerular 
filtration) and peaks between 2 and 5 minutes. The time 
taken for the curve to peak following tracer injection is 
referred to as Tmax. This may be delayed in patients with 
renovascular insufficiency, renal failure and obstruction.
3 Commences after the peak. It is associated with the emer-
gence of tracer in the bladder and represents elimination 
(but also delivery) of tracer from the kidney.
After 3 minutes, both elimination and uptake are in com-
petition, but the former subsequently dominates. It is this 
elimination curve that is dependent on the upper tract urody-
namics. Renogram curves of a number of normal and patho -
logical conditions are shown in Figure 75.31.
Vascular Excretion
Half-time excretion (8–12 min)
Concen-
tration
Minutes
5 10 15 20
Activity
Figure 75.30 The thr ee principal phases of a mer captoacetyltri-
glycine renogram curve.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1394 25/10/2017   10:10Investigation of urinary sympt oms 1395
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Bladder function assessment
Flow rate and US residual urine
Men with LUTS and females with recurrent UTIs or LUTS 
are frequently investigated with a flow rate and a US resid-
ual urine at the first clinic appointment (Figures 75.32–
75.34). A peak flow rate (Qmax) in excess of 15 mL/s suggests 
Figure 75.31 Curves from a series of mercaptoacetyltriglycine renograms. (a) Normal excretion. (b) An obstructed left system. (c) Bilateral 
dilated non- obstructed systems. (d) A partially obstructed right system.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
significant bladder outlet obstruction is not present whereas a 
flow rate of <10 mL/s suggests BOO is present. A very low flow 
rate with a very protracted pattern of voiding is suggestive of 
a urethral stricture. Caution is required when interpreting the 
significance of a single high US residual volume and repeated 
tests often give a more representative picture of the degree of 
bladder emptying.
Figure 75.32 (a) A flow meter for use in males. (b) A flow meter for females. (c) An ultrasound scanning device for measuring residual bladder 
volumes after micturition.
(a) (c)(b)
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1395 25/10/2017   10:10CHAPTER 75  Urinary symptoms and inv estigations
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1396
Figure 75.33 A flow study from a young healthy male patient show-
ing a high volume, rapid void with excellent peak flow of 32 mL/s.
Figure 75.34 A flow study performed by a patient with bladder outlet 
obstruction showing a very reduced peak flow of urine (8.1 mL/s).
Figure 75.35 A modern urodynamic machine.
Summary box 75.11
Assessment of bladder function
●● Simple tests are a flow rate and a US residual urine estimation
●● Urodynamics provides a pressure/flow profile
●● Urodynamics requires fine catheters to be inserted into the 
bladder and usually the rectum
●● Urodynamics can assist with the selection of patients for 
surgery such as transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) 
or anti-incontinence surgery
●● A non-invasive technique in males using a penile cuff has a 
limited clinical role
Urodynamics
A urodynamic evaluation provides information about blad -
der pressure and urine flow and as a consequence has been 
referred to as a pressure/flow study. A device for urodynamic 
assessment is shown in Figure 75.35. During urodynamics, 
fine catheters (or a dual-lumen catheter) are inserted through 
the urethra into the bladder to allow bladder filling and to 
record the intravesical pressure. The test is commonly per -
formed to investigate male patients with LUTS and female 
patients with LUTS or incontinence. It is also commonly 
used in those patients with a suspected bladder neuropathy. 
There are 2 phases to the test; a filling phase during which 
fluid is instilled into the bladder at a constant rate, and a void-
ing phase when the patient is asked to void. Involuntary rises 
in the intravesical (detrusor) pressure during the filling phase 
with or without a desire to void are classical of an overactive 
bladder (Figure 75.36). High intravesical pressure during 
voiding with a reduced flow rate is typically seen in a man 
with bladder outlet obstruction (Figure 75.37). An atonic 
bladder (no detrusor activity) is seen in diabetic neuropathy 
and in some patients following abdominoperineal excision 
of the rectum when damage to the pelvic nerve plexus has 
occurred. Detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, when coordinated 
contraction of the detrusor muscle in conjunction with relax-
ation of the external sphincter, necessary to permit normal 
voiding, is lost, is often seen in neurological conditions such 
as multiple sclerosis (MS).
Specialised centres have facilities for ambulatory uro-
dynamics when pressure/flow studies can be performed over 
several hours. A non-invasive system for urodynamics assess -
ment, based on a small penile cuff and avoiding insertion of a 
catheter into the bladder, has been developed for males.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1396 25/10/2017   10:10Further reading 1397
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Figure 75.36 A urodynamic outcome (a) in a patient with an overactive bladder, demonstrating a rise in detrusor pressure during filling (yellow 
arrow), normal detrusor pressure during voiding (red arrow) and a good urinary flow (blue arrow). The Abrams-Griffiths nomogram (b) shows 
the patient is not obstructed.
(b)
(a)
(a)
Figure 75.37 A urodynamic outcome (a) in a patient with bladder outlet obstruction, demonstrating a rise in detrusor pressure during voiding 
(yellow arrow) and a reduced urinary flow rate (red arrow). The Abrams-Griffiths nomogram (b) shows the patient is obstructed. 
(b)
Paul Abrams , contemporary, Professor of Urology, University of Bristol Medical School, Bristol, UK.
Derek Griffiths , contemporary, professor. He is a physicist who has applied physics to urology, especially urodynamics, in several major centres.
FURTHER READING
Kaisary A V, Ballaro A, Pigott K. Lecture notes: Urology, 7th edn. 
Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell, 2016.
McAninch JW , Lue TF . Smith & Tanagho’s general urology, 18th edn. New 
York: Lange, 2012.
Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin A W , Peters CA. Campbell–Walsh urology, 
11th edn. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2016.
12_75B-B&L27_Pt12_Ch75.indd   1397 25/10/2017   10:10Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To recognise and understand:
 • Important congenital abnormalities of the upper urinary 
tract
 • Important cystic diseases of the kidney
 • The management of sepsis in the upper urinary tract
 • The pathophysiology of renal stone formation
 • The management of urinary tract calculi
 • The aetiology, presentation and surgical management 
of obstruction to the upper urinary tract
 • The management of open and closed trauma to the 
kidney and ureter
 • Important renal neoplasms and their presentation
 • Surgery of upper urinary tract tumours
Kidneys and ureters
76
SURGICAL ANATOMY
The kidneys are surrounded by a distinct, well-defined enve -
lope of perinephric fat. Nephrectomy is facilitated by staying 
at the true margin of the perinephric fat envelope. The peri-
nephric fat is ‘whiter’ than colonic mesenteric fat as observed 
during a laparoscopic nephrectomy. At the renal hilum, the 
first structure encountered (i.e. the uppermost) is the renal 
vein, then the renal artery and lastly the renal pelvis. The 
right renal vein is much shorter than the left renal vein. The 
left renal vein is occasionally retroaortic. The right adrenal 
vein and right gonadal vein drain into the inferior vena cava 
(IVC) whereas the left adrenal and gonadal veins drain into 
the left renal vein. Gonadal veins can easily be confused for 
ureters – these structures are distinguished by pinching the 
ureter which contracts (vermiculation).
EMBRYOLOGY (FIGURE 76.1)
The urinary tract is formed from the cloaca and intermedi-
ate mesoderm in parallel with the early differentiation of the 
metanephric blastema which will ultimately form the kidney. 
Mesonephric
(Wolf/f_ian) duct
Metanephric
blastema
Primitive
pelvis
Ureter
Allantois Urachus
Early bladder
Ductus
deferens
Ureter
Seminal
vesicle
Rectum
Trigone
Genital
tubercle
Urogenital
sinus
Cloacal
membrane Cloaca
Urorectal
septum
Mesonephric
duct
(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f)
Figure 76.1 Development of the urinary tract. (a–d) The gr owth and development of the primitive ur eter and pelvis, with elongation and 
branching of the ureteral tip and the formation of the calyces. The kidney ascends continuously as the fetus grows. (e) During weeks 5–6 of 
gestation, the cloaca grows and develops. (f) During weeks 8–9, the urogenital sinus grows and develops into the bladder and outflow tract. 
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1398 25/10/2017   10:13Congenital abnormalities 1399
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
In the 6-week-old embryo, the mesonephric (Wolffian) duct 
and the paramesonephric (Müllerian) ducts run in parallel. 
By week 7, in the male, the Müllerian duct starts to regress, 
and the W olffian duct will eventually develop into the epi -
didymis and the caudal part of the vas deferens. In the female, 
the Müllerian ducts fuse to form the uterovaginal cord which 
will develop into the vagina. As the urogenital tract devel -
ops, there is simultaneous development of the fetal kidney. 
The ureteric bud arises from the distal end of the Wolffian 
duct as an unbranched diverticulum and invades the adjacent 
metanephric mesenchyme, initiating the branching collect -
ing system within the primitive kidney. If the ureteric bud 
fails to develop, the kidney will not form. Renal development 
is controlled by the function of a number of transcription fac-
tors including PAX-2 and WT1.
loose stroma. If bilateral it is incompatible with survival. It 
occurs in approximately 1 in 4500 births. It is mostly diag -
nosed on a prenatal ultrasound scan (USS) and is apparent as 
a palpable mass in the newborn. Previously, this was surgically 
excised but nowadays is treated conservatively as there is a 
tendency for the cystic kidney to regress. Atresia of the ipsi -
lateral ureter is usual and contralateral pelvi-ureteric junction 
(PUJ) obstruction is common.
Ectopic kidney/crossed renal 
ectopia
The fetal kidney arises in the pelvis and ascends to attain its 
normal position. If this process fails to any degree, the kidney 
ends up being in a lower-than-normal position. During their 
ascent, the renal pelvis also rotates from facing anteriorly to 
facing more medially. The most common anomaly is for the 
renal pelvis to face anteriorly and the more ectopic the kidney, 
the more severe is the rotational abnormality. In the majority 
of cases of renal ectopia, both kidneys are fused. In crossed 
renal ectopia (Figure 76.2), both kidneys are fused and are 
on the same side – one of the ureters, therefore, crosses the 
midline to enter the bladder on the correct side of the trigone.
Horseshoe kidney
In a horseshoe kidney (Figures 76.3 and 76.4), the two renal 
units are low lying and the lower poles fuse to form an isth -
mus. Further ascent of the fused kidneys is prevented by the 
inferior mesenteric artery. This condition is detected in 1 in 
1000 autopsies and has a male preponderance (2:1). Horse -
shoe kidneys have an unpredictable vascular supply from 
nearby major vessels. Horseshoe kidneys are prone to reflux, 
obstruction and stone formation.
Summary box 76.1
Embryology
●● Kidney develops from the metanephros
●● Ureter sprouts from the mesonephric duct
●● Mesonephric duct regresses in females
●● Paramesonephric duct regresses in males
Kaspar Friedrich Wolff , 1733–1794, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, St Petersburg, Russia, described the mesonephric duct and body in 1759.
Johannes Peter Müller , 1801–1858, German physiologist, described these ducts in 1830.
Gabriele Falloppio , 1523–1562, Italian anatomist and physician.
Edith Louise Potter , 1901–1993, American physician, described Potter’s facies in 1946.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES
Unilateral renal agenesis
Complete absence of one kidney occurs in 1 in 500–1000 
births and results from failure of connection between the 
metanephric blastema and the ipsilateral ureteric bud. This 
condition is an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete 
penetrance. Typically, there is an absent ipsilateral ureter and 
the ipsilateral hemi-trigone is missing in the bladder. The 
remaining kidney is usually hypertrophic but may also be dys-
plastic. In addition, the ipsilateral testis and vas deferens are 
usually absent and in some patients the adrenal gland on the 
affected side is missing as well. Females with the condition 
may have an absent ovary or Fallopian tube. Renal agenesis 
is different from renal aplasia where there is a small dysplastic 
kidney.
Bilateral renal agenesis
Bilateral renal agenesis is incompatible with life. It is asso -
ciated with pulmonary hypoplasia and Potter’s facies due to 
oligohydramnios.
Multicystic disease
This results from congenital severe renal dysplasia in which 
the kidney is composed of a mass of various-sized cysts in a Figure 76.2 Crossed renal ectopia.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1399 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1400
when there are 2 separate ureteric buds – one in the normal 
position and the other in a low position. The normal bud ends 
in the correct site in the trigone of the bladder and is non-  
refluxing. The lower bud, which will drain the lower pole of 
the kidney, ends in the bladder with a more laterally placed 
ureteric orifice with a short submucosal tunnel. The lower 
pole ureter is, therefore, often associated with vesico-ureteric 
reflux (VUR).
If there are 2 ureteric buds and the second bud arises from 
a high position, the upper ureter is incorporated into the blad-
der, ending more distally and medial to the normal one. Thus, 
the upper pole ureter ends ectopically and due to obstruction 
or dysplasia is often associated with severe scarring of the 
upper pole moiety.
When detected in adults the condition is usually asymp -
tomatic but children with duplex ureters often have VUR. 
Spontaneous resolution of VUR is less common in patients 
with duplex ureters compared with patients with single 
 ureters.
Duplex renal pelvis and ureter 
(Figures 76.5 and 76.6)
Duplication of the ureter and renal pelvis is a common anom-
aly, with an incidence of approximately 1 in 150 births. Uni-
lateral duplication is six times more common than bilateral 
and the left side is more commonly involved. The condition 
is more common in girls and the detection of duplication in a 
patient increases the risk in a sibling to 1 in 8.
Incomplete duplex ureters with a Y ureter arise if the 
ureteric bud bifurcates after its initial development from the 
mesonephric duct. Complete ureteric duplication occurs 
Surgery Fig 63.2
Figure 76.3 Horseshoe kidney. Note the ureters passing in front of 
the fused lower poles. 
Figure 76.4 Urogram of a horseshoe kidney . Only rarely are all the 
calyces directed towards the spinal column. 
Summary box 76.2
Horseshoe kidneys
●● Are prone to pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction, infection and 
stones
●● Can have anomalous vasculature which needs to be 
considered when planning surgery
Figure 76.5 Urogram showing a left kidney with double pelvis. 
Figure 76.6 Retrograde ureterogram showing a double ureter on the 
left. 
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1400 25/10/2017   10:13Congenital abnormalities 1401
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Ectopic ureters
Ectopic ureters are almost always associated with ureteric 
duplication and 10% are bilateral. There is a female:male 
ratio of 7:1. As indicated above, the ectopic ureter drains the 
upper pole of the kidney and inserts into the bladder more dis-
tally than normal and towards the bladder neck. In females, 
the ectopic ureter opens either into the urethra below the 
sphincter (Figure 76.7) or into the vagina. A female who 
voids normally but who has dribbled urine for as long as she 
can remember is typical of the patient with an ectopic ureter. 
In the male, the opening of the ureter is above the external 
urethral sphincter so the patient is continent. An ectopic ure-
teric orifice in a male at the apex of the trigone, in the poste-
rior urethra, in a seminal vesicle or in an ejaculatory duct is 
likely to be functionally abnormal and infection is common.
A severely diseased or atrophic moiety is effectively 
treated by partial nephrectomy. A refluxing ureter may need 
re-implanting. An ectopic ureter in a female often drains 
hydronephrotic and chronically infected renal tissue and 
is best excised. Rarely, the incontinence can be cured and 
renal function preserved by re-implanting the ureter into the  
bladder.
are bilateral. The condition occurs almost exclusively in Cau-
casians. Similar to ectopic ureters, ureters with ureterocoeles 
frequently drain the upper pole and are often associated with 
dysplastic or non-functional renal tissue. In childhood, they 
usually present with infection. When large, they can obstruct 
the bladder neck or even the contralateral ureteric orifice. 
In adults, ureterocoeles typically present with stones in the 
lower ureter. The classic sign of a ureterocoele on excretion 
urography was of a ‘cobra head’ (Figure 76.8) but intravenous 
urography (IVU) is relatively infrequently undertaken nowa-
days. On cystoscopy, a bulging, translucent swelling involving 
the ureteric orifice is typical which fills with and empties of 
urine with ureteric peristalsis (Figure 76.9). The treatment of 
simple ureterocoeles is surgical excision with re-implantation 
of the ureter. Endoscopic incision is a relatively straightfor -
ward method of releasing a stone stuck in a ureterocoele but 
may result in subsequent ureteric reflux. Advanced unilateral 
cases with hydronephrosis or pyonephrosis may mean that 
nephrectomy is indicated.
Summary box 76.3
Duplex ureters
●● Incidence 1 in 150
●● Unilateral more common than bilateral
●● More common in girls
●● Can be complete or incomplete
●● In children are associated with vesico-ureteric reflux
Summary box 76.4
Ectopic ureters
●● Usually associated with duplex ureters
●● More common in females
●● Drain the upper pole of the kidney
●● May cause incontinence in females
●● Never cause incontinence in males
Sphincter
urethrae
Figure 76.7  In women, one ur eteric orifice may open below the 
sphincter, causing intractable incontinence of urine. 
 Figure 76.8 Cobra head appearance of a ureterocoele. 
Ureterocoele
A ureterocoele is a cystic enlargement of the intramural ure -
ter, probably due to atresia of the ureteric orifice. Uretero -
coeles affect females more often than males (4:1) and 10% 
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1401 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1402
Congenital megaureter
In this uncommon condition, there is ureteric dilatation 
with or without obstruction. It may be bilateral and associ-
ated with other congenital abnormalities. The ureteric ori-
fice looks normal on cystoscopy and a ureteric catheter passes 
easily. Most cases of megaureter with obstruction present in 
childhood with severe infections. Renal stones can easily 
form in the dilated systems. The exclusion of obstruction is 
often established only by an antegrade pressure-flow study 
(Whitaker test) in which a nephrostomy tube is placed in the 
renal pelvis and fluids infused at a rate of 10 mL/min.
Retrocaval ureter
Rarely, the right ureter passes behind the inferior vena cava 
rather than lying to its right side. This can lead to obstruction 
and the need to surgically move the ureter to lie anterior to 
the IVC.
Autosomal dominant polycystic 
kidney disease (ADPKD)
This is a multisystem disorder characterised by multiple bilat-
eral renal cysts associated with cysts in other organs such as 
the liver, pancreas and arachnoid membranes. It is a genetic 
condition caused by mutation in one of two different genes 
(PKD1 and PKD2) and is expressed in an autosomal dominant 
pattern, with variable expression. The ADPKD proteins, now 
known as polycystin-1 and polycystin-2, play a critical role in 
the normal function of the primary cilium that is essential to 
maintaining the differentiated phenotype of tubular epithe -
lium. ADPKD occurs worldwide and in all races, with a prev-
alence of genetically affected individuals at birth of 1:400 to 
1:1000. The disease does not usually manifest before the age 
of 30 years and in some patients it is never diagnosed.
Renal USS is used for pre-symptomatic testing of at-risk 
individuals. At least 3 (unilateral or bilateral) renal cysts and 
2 cysts in each kidney are sufficient for a diagnosis of at-risk 
individuals aged 15–39 years.
The differential diagnosis of ADPKD includes autoso -
mal recessive PKD, tuberous sclerosis complex, von Hippel–
Lindau disease, renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD), 
orofaciodigital syndrome type 1, medullary sponge kidney and 
simple renal cysts.
Clinical manifestations of ADPKD are divided into renal 
and extrarenal.
Renal manifestations
RENAL SIZE
Renal size increases with age and renal enlargement even -
tually occurs in 100% of patients with ADPKD, resulting in 
some patients in a flank or abdominal mass. Cysts contain 
clear fluid, thick brown material or coagulated blood. Less 
florid examples are encountered unexpectedly at laparotomy 
or on abdominal imaging.
PAIN
Pain is commonly a dull loin ache. Haemorrhage into a cyst 
causes a more acute severe pain, as does passing a calculus 
from the diseased kidney.
HAEMATURIA AND CYST HAEMORRHAGE
Visible haematuria occurs in up to 40% of patients with 
ADPKD over the course of the disease. Cyst haemorrhage is 
a frequent complication with or without haematuria, depend-
ing on whether the cyst communicates with the collecting 
system.
URINARY TRACT INFECTION AND CYST INFECTION
Urinary tract infection is common in ADPKD but its inci-
dence may have been overestimated as sterile pyuria is com -
mon in these patients.
NEPHROLITHIASIS
Renal stones occur in approximately 20% of patients with 
ADPKD. Most stones are composed of uric acid or cal -
cium oxalate or both. Uric acid stones are more common in 
ADPKD than in stone formers without ADPKD. Stones can 
be difficult to diagnose on imaging in ADPKD on account of 
cyst wall and parenchymal calcification.
HYPERTENSION
Hypertension is the most common manifestation of ADPKD 
and a major contributor to renal disease progression and car -
diovascular morbidity and mortality. After the age of 20 years, 
most patients are hypertensive.
Figure 76.9 Ureterocoele on cystoscopy. 
Robert H Whitaker , former urologist, now lecturer at the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
Eugen von Hippel , 1867–1939, Professor of Ophthalmology in Göttingen, Germany, first described angiomas in the eye in 1904.
Arvid Vilhelm Lindau , 1892–1958, Swedish pathologist, described angiomas of the cerebellum and spine in 1927.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1402 25/10/2017   10:13Infections 1403
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
END-STAGE RENAL DISEASE
In most patients, renal function is maintained within nor -
mal limits until the 4th to 6th decade of life. Up to 80% of 
patients are alive with preserved renal function aged 50 years. 
Men tend to progress to renal failure more rapidly and require 
renal replacement therapy at a younger age than women. In 
recent years, a greater understanding of the pathophysiology 
of ADPKD has led to clinical trials of novel agents such as 
vasopressin antagonists, somatostatin analogues and mTOR 
inhibitors to prevent cystogenesis, cyst expansion and declin-
ing renal function.
Extrarenal manifestations
POL YCYSTIC LIVER DISEASE
Hepatic cysts are rare in children with ADPKD but thereafter 
their frequency increases with age. Cysts are usually asymp -
tomatic but symptoms may occur due to a mass effect or due 
to cyst complications.
INTRACRANIAL ANEURYSMS
Intracranial aneurysms occur in approximately 10% of 
patients with ADPKD.
VAL VULAR HEART DISEASE
Mitral valve prolapse is the most common valvular abnormal-
ity and has been demonstrated in up to 25% of patients with 
ADPKD by echocardiography.
 ● Haematogenous infection from a primary site in the ton-
sils, carious teeth or from cutaneous infections, particu -
larly boils or a carbuncle. Renal tuberculosis occurs by 
bloodborne spread from lymph no des in the neck, chest 
or abdomen.
 ● Ascending infection in the urinary tract is the most 
common route, and is most likely to occur when there is 
vesico-ureteric reflux. Urinary stasis and the presence of 
calculi are common contributory factors.
Acute pyelonephritis is more common in females, espe -
cially during childhoo d, at puberty, after intercourse and 
during pregnancy. Acute pyelonephritis is suggested by fever 
(temperature >38°C), rigors, flank pain, nausea and vomit -
ing, and costovertebral angle tenderness. Cystitis symptoms 
may or may not be present. Symptoms may vary from a mild 
illness to a severe illness with septic shock, renal failure and a 
threat to life. Pyuria is almost always present. Both urine and 
blood are sent for culture. Imaging of the kidney is necessary 
in the hospitalised patient to rule out pyonephrosis, perire -
nal abscess and obstruction of the collecting system by renal 
calculi. A renal USS is often the imaging modality employed 
initially when the diagnosis is suspected. Alternatively, a con-
trast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan can be used 
and typically shows decreased opacification of the affected 
parenchyma, typically in patchy, wedge-shaped or linear 
distribution.
Escherichia coli and other gram-negative organisms are 
commonly responsible. In E. coli and streptococcal infections, 
the urine is acidic. Proteus and staphylococci split urea to form 
ammonia, which makes the urine alkaline and promotes the 
formation of calculi.
INFECTIONS
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) more commonly involve the 
lower urinary tract and are significantly more common in 
females. Infection at any level in the urinary tract is classi-
fied as uncomplicated or complicated. A complicated UTI is 
defined as an episode of infection with an increased risk of 
serious complications or treatment failure. Complicated UTIs 
may require different treatment type and duration compared 
with uncomplicated UTIs.
Acute pyelonephritis
Infection of the kidney (pyelonephritis) can arise in two ways:
Summary box 76.5
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
●● Autosomal dominant condition
●● Cysts may also occur in liver, pancreas and arachnoid 
membrane
●● Usually does not manifest before 30 years of age
●● Clinical manifestations are divided into renal and extrarenal
●● Hypertension is the most common clinical manifestation
●● Renal function declines after the 4th to 6th decade of life
●● Men tend to progress to renal failure more rapidly than women
Summary box 76.6
Pyelonephritis
●● More common in women
●● Can be associated with septicaemia
●● Associated with pyuria
●● Should be treated initially with broad-spectrum antibiotics
●● Is potentially fatal, especially if associated with obstruction of 
the urinary tract
Hans Christian Gram , 1853–1938, Danish bacteriologist, developed Gram staining in 1884.
Pyelonephritis complicating pregnancy
Pyelonephritis most often presents between 20 and 28 weeks 
of gestation with malaise, fever, loin pain and rigors. Not all 
women will have had lower urinary tract symptoms and pyelo-
nephritis can also manifest in pregnancy as acute abdominal 
pain or may be detected only after presentation with pre -
mature labour. Pyelonephritis is more common in pregnant 
women with an underlying urological abnormality or diabe-
tes and more often affects the right kidney, probably because 
the ureter is often more dilated on that side. Pyonephrosis 
and perirenal abscess are rare complications but should be 
suspected when treatment fails. Under such circumstances, a 
renal USS is indicated.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1403 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1404
Urinary infection in childhood/
vesico-ureteric reflux
Symptomatic UTI occurs in 3–5% of girls and 1–2% of boys. 
In the age-group <3 months, it is more common in boys and 
in the age-group >1 year, it is more common in girls. The 
commonest underlying cause is urinary stasis due to VUR, 
detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, poor bladder emptying habit 
or constipation. Other causes of stasis include stones, outlet 
obstruction or secondary to a neurological disorder such as 
spina bifida. It is recommended that all children be investi -
gated after their first confirmed UTI.
The most important outcome of a UTI in a child is renal 
scarring secondary to renal parenchymal inflammation. Scar-
ring can be detected (on IVU) in up to 20% of children who 
have had a UTI and can be detected in up to 37% of children 
if assessed with a dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan. The 
maximal renal inflammatory response to infection is seen at 
3–5 days, hence the need for prompt antibiotic treatment. 
Between 10 and 20% of children with renal scarring will 
develop hypertension. Chronic pyelonephritis (CPN) with 
renal failure is the commonest reason for renal transplant in 
children <19 years in the UK. VUR occurs in 1–2% of the 
asymptomatic paediatric population but in 30–40% of chil-
dren with a UTI and is apparent in 90% of children with 
renal scarring on an IVU.
VUR is graded as follows:
 ● Grade I: reflux into the ureter.
 ● Grade II: reflux into the ureter and renal pelvis.
 ● Grade III: reflux is associated with mild/moderate dilata -
tion on an IVU.
 ● Grade IV: additional blunting of fornices.
 ● Grade V: absent papillary impressions.
VUR is confirmed by a micturating cystogram and a 
DMSA scan is used to assess the degree of renal scarring. 
Grades I–III generally resolve spontaneously . Surgery (ure-
teric re-implantation, periureteric injections of Teflon or 
collagen) should be considered if episodes of acute PN recur 
despite antibiotic therapy or if severe reflux is accompanied 
by a surgically correctable malformation.
Renal cortical abscess (carbuncle), 
corticomedullary abscess and 
perirenal abscess
A renal cortical abscess (carbuncle) is usually caused by Staph-
ylococcus aureus, which reaches the kidney by haematogenous 
spread. A renal carbuncle is most commonly seen in diabetics, 
intravenous drug abusers, those debilitated by chronic dis -
ease and patients with acquired immunodeficiency . A renal 
corticomedullary abscess, in contrast, usually results from an 
ascending UTI in association with an underlying urinary tract 
abnormality, such as obstructive uropathy or VUR, and is usu-
ally caused by common uropathogens such as E. coli and other 
gram-negative bacilli. Such abscesses may extend deeply into 
the renal parenchyma, perforate the renal capsule and form a 
perirenal abscess. Treatment with antibiotics without drain-
age may be effective if the abscess is small and if the underlying 
urinary tract abnormality can be corrected. However in many 
cases, percutaneous drainage of pus is required to stabilise the 
patient. T wo percutaneous drains may be needed, one to drain 
the perirenal collection and a second to decompress the col -
lecting system of the kidney in the presence of obstruction. 
Formal open drainage of the abscess may be necessary if the 
pus is too thick to be drained by the percutaneous route.
Patients usually present with pyrexia, back or abdom-
inal pain and costovertebral tenderness but they may have 
no urinary symptoms or findings if the abscess does not com -
municate with the collecting system, as often occurs with a 
cortical abscess. The clinical presentation may be insidious 
and non-specific. CT scan is the investigation of choice to 
establish the diagnosis and location of a renal or perirenal 
abscess. Empiric antibiotic therapy should be broad and cover 
S. aureus and other uropathogens causing complicated UTI.
Emphysematous pyelonephritis
Emphysematous pyelonephritis is a fulminant, necrotising, 
life-threatening variant of acute pyelonephritis caused by 
gas-forming organisms, including E. coli, Klebsiella pneumo-
niae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Proteus mirabilis. Up to 90% 
of cases occur in diabetic patients and urinary tract obstruc -
tion may be present. Symptoms are suggestive of pyelonephri-
tis and there may be a loin mass. Gas can be detected on a 
plain film, on USS or more probably on a CT scan. Intra -
venous broad-spectrum antibiotics and percutaneous catheter 
drainage with relief of obstruction may be adequate for the 
less severely ill patient, but nephrectomy may be needed in 
the most severely ill patients with this condition.
Xanthogranulomatous 
pyelonephritis (XGP)
This is a poorly understood, uncommon but severe chronic 
destructive granulomatous inflammation of the renal  
Summary box 76.7
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) in children
●● In children > 1 year, more common in girls
●● Principal cause is urinary stasis
●● All children should be investigated after a single UTI
●● VUR occurs in 30–40% of children with a UTI
●● Renal scarring is a possible long-term consequence
Theodor Escherich , 1857–1911, Professor of Paediatrics, Vienna, Austria, discovered the bacterium coli commune in 1886.
Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs , 1834–1913, German-Swiss Professor of Pathology.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1404 25/10/2017   10:13Stones 1405
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
parenchyma associated with obstruction and infection of the 
urinary tract. Patients with XGP are typically middle-aged 
women and have chronic symptoms such as flank pain, 
pyrexia and malaise. Flank tenderness, a palpable mass, and 
irritative voiding symptoms are common. The urine culture 
is usually positive for E. coli, other gram-negative bacilli or 
S. aureus. CT generally shows an enlarged, non-functioning 
kidney, often the presence of calculi and low-density masses 
(xanthomatous tissue) and, in some cases, involvement of 
adjacent structures. It can sometimes be difficult to distin -
guish XGP from neoplastic disease. Nephrectomy is usually 
the definitive treatment for the condition but is made more 
technically challenging the more the kidney is adherent to 
adjacent structures.
Tuberculosis (TB) of the urinary tract
Genitourinary tuberculosis (GUTB) accounts for 14% of 
non-pulmonary cases of TB. It is caused by dissemination 
of the organism through the bloodstream and is thus always 
secondary TB. There is either reinfection or reactivation of 
old TB.
Blood-borne organisms are deposited close to the glom -
eruli causing an inflammatory reaction. Macrophages react 
and granulomas are formed. If bacterial multiplication is 
checked, fibrous tissue is formed but if it is unchecked, tuber-
cles result with later caseous necrosis. The healing process 
produces fibrous tissue and then calcium deposition follows. 
The lesions will eventually slough causing tuberculous bacil-
luria. The disease spreads through the collecting system and 
once a calyx is stenosed it is rare for the communication to 
be restored. Hypertension is rarely seen except when there is 
extensive renal destruction.
Involvement of the ureter is an extension of renal TB 
commonly seen at the vesico-ureteric junction.
Involvement of the bladder is again secondary to renal 
disease. It is seen around the ureteric orifice as inflamma-
tion, then bullous granulations and later as ulcers. It then 
progresses to the muscle which is replaced by fibrous tissue. 
Tubercles are infrequent.
Involvement of the testis is usually secondary to epididy -
mitis. Spread to the epididymis is usually blood-borne.
The diagnosis is confirmed on a tuberculin test, or at least 
3 consecutive early-morning specimens of urine are examined 
for acid-fast bacilli with a Ziehl–Neelsen stain and subse -
quently cultured.
CT is the most sensitive modality for visualising renal cal-
cifications and CT urography is more sensitive at identifying 
all manifestations of renal tuberculosis:
 ● Early:
 ● papillary necrosis (single or multiple) resulting in 
uneven caliectasis.
 ● Progressive:
 ● multifocal strictures can affect any part of the collect-
ing system;
 ● generalised or focal hydronephrosis;
 ● mural thickening and enhancement;
 ● poorly enhancing renal parenchyma, either due to 
direct involvement or due to hydronephrosis.
 ● End-stage:
 ● progressive hydronephrosis results in very thin paren -
chyma, mimicking multiple thin-walled cysts;
 ● amorphous dystrophic calcification eventually involves 
the entire kidney (known as putty kidney).
Treatment involves short-course therapy as fewer organ-
isms are involved compared with pulmonary TB and drugs 
tend to concentrate in the urine. Drugs such as pyrazin -
amide, isoniazid and rifampicin are used. Surgery for GUTB 
is increasing because although chemotherapy can successfully 
eradicate bacteria, the complications of infection remain. 
Surgery entails excision of dead tissue, e.g. partial nephrec-
tomy or nephrectomy, and reconstructive surgery, e.g. for 
ureteric strictures, mainly distal ureteric, and surgery to the 
bladder such as augmentation cystoplasty.
Franz Ziehl , 1857–1926, German bacteriologist and professor in Lübeck, Germany.
Friedrich Carl Adolf Neelsen , 1854–1894, German pathologist and professor at the Institute of Pathology, University of Rostock, Germany.
STONES
Aetiology
There are very many causes for urinary tract stone disease 
which can be classified into the following groups:
 ● idiopathic calcium urolithiasis;
 ● hypercalcaemic disorders;
 ● renal tubular syndromes;
 ● uric acid lithiasis;
 ● enzyme disorders;
 ● secondary urolithiasis;
 ● other factors.
Idiopathic calcium urolithiasis
In this condition, there is unexplained hypercalciuria but a 
normal serum calcium distinguishes this condition from pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism. It is classified as renal (more com-
mon in children) or absorptive (more common in adults). 
This is present in approximately 70% of patients with urinary 
tract stones. It often coexists with minimal hyperoxaluria, 
hyperuricosuria, inhibitor deficiency and incomplete renal 
tubular acidosis.
Summary box 76.8
Genitourinary tuberculosis (TB)
●● Is always either re-infection or reactivation of old TB
●● Is a cause of sterile pyuria
●● Spreads from the kidney to involve the distal ureters and 
bladder around the ureteric orifices
●● Treatment involves short-course therapy
●● Surgery is increasing for this condition
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1405 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1406
Hypercalcaemic disorders
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
A parathyroid adenoma or chief cell hyperplasia results in 
overproduction of parathormone leading to increased syn -
thesis of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol which increases 
intestinal calcium absorption, renal tubular reabsorption and 
bone resorption. This is found in <5% of patients with radio-
opaque stones. In the past, urologists sometimes performed 
the parathyroid surgery for their patients with renal stones but 
this is rarely the case nowadays.
PROLONGED IMMOBILISATION
With this, hypercalcaemia and hypercalciuria result from 
bone resorption.
MILK-ALKALI SYNDROME
The ingestion of large quantities of calcium, vitamin D and 
alkali may result in hypercalcaemia, alkalosis and possible 
renal impairment. The alkalosis compromises renal excretion 
of calcium, promoting hypercalcaemic-induced soft-tissue 
calcification (nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis).
SARCOIDOSIS
The non-caseating granulomata produce 1,25-dihydroxycho-
lecalciferol.
OTHER CAUSES
These include disseminated neoplastic disease, Cushing’s dis-
ease and hyperthyroidism.
Renal tubular syndromes
RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS (RTA)
There are 3 types of RTA but only type I is associated with 
stone formation, which is due to hypercalciuria and low uri -
nary citrate excretion. Stones are composed of mainly pure 
calcium phosphate and nephrocalcinosis can occur.
CYSTINURIA
This results from an inherited defect (autosomal recessive) 
of amino acid transport in renal tubules and the gastrointes-
tinal tract involving cystine, ornithine, lysine and arginine 
(COAL or COLA). Cystine stones are often multiple, are 
very hard and are radio-opaque. Family members should be 
screened with a sodium cyanide–nitroprusside test.
Uric acid lithiasis
Uric acid stones account for approximately 5–10% of urinary 
tract stones. Patients with uric acid stones either excrete 
excessive amounts of uric acid or have excessively acid urine 
and uric acid remains undissociated and insoluble at pH <5.5. 
Uric acid is an end-product of purine metabolism. Dietary 
purine and protein excesses may increase urinary uric acid 
excretion. Extensive cellular turnover in myeloproliferative 
diseases or in those receiving chemotherapy may result in 
increased uric acid production. Uric acid stones can also occur 
in patients with normal serum uric acid levels (idiopathic uric 
acid lithiasis). Low urine volume may contribute to uric acid 
stone disease, such as in patients with inflammatory bowel 
disease and ileostomies. Uric acid stones are hard, smooth, 
often multiple and are multifaceted. Pure uric acid stones are 
radiolucent but most uric acid stones contain some calcium 
and are consequently faintly radio-opaque.
Enzyme disorders
PRIMARY HYPEROXALURIA
This is an autosomal recessive disorder of glyoxalate metab -
olism. W ith type I there is a deficiency of alanine:glyox -
alate aminotransferase, and with type II a deficiency of D-  
glycerate dehydrogenase. These enzyme deficiencies lead to 
an increased production of endogenous oxalate which results 
in nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis. This condition often 
presents in childhood.
XANTHINURIA
This is a rare inherited deficiency of xanthine oxidase. Stone 
formation in these patients can be precipitated by allopurinol, 
a xanthine oxidase inhibitor.
2, 8-DIHYDROADENINURIA
This is an inherited deficiency of adenine phosphoribosyl 
transferase.
Secondary urolithiasis
SECONDARY HYPEROXALURIA
Increased oxalate absorption may occur after small bowel 
resection, or in patients with inflammatory bowel disease or 
chronic pancreatitis or who have a jejunoileal bypass. This 
results either from excess fat in the gut binding calcium, hence 
reducing the calcium available to bind oxalate, or exposure 
of colonic mucosa to bile salts with detergent properties 
increases its permeability to charged ions, including oxalate.
DIETARY EXCESS
Rhubarb, spinach, tea, cocoa, chocolate and pepper com -
monly increase urinary oxalate.
INFECTION
Urease-producing organisms, e.g. Proteus, Pseudomonas and 
Staphylococcus, break down urea to produce ammonia and 
CO2. The urine becomes alkaline which promotes formation 
of struvite calculi (magnesium ammonium phosphate) which 
can grow to form a staghorn calculus. E. coli never causes stru-
vite stones.
OBSTRUCTION AND STASIS
Delayed crystal washout leads to aggregation and stone for -
mation.
MEDULLARY SPONGE KIDNEY
Up to 20% of patients with calcium stones may have this  
condition.
Harvey Williams Cushing , 1869–1939, American neurosurgeon, described Cushing’s disease in 1912.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1406 25/10/2017   10:13Stones 1407
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
URINARY DIVERSION
These patients develop stones due to a combination of infec-
tion, acidosis and sometimes stasis.
DRUGS
Several drugs, commonly used, can increase the risk of stone 
formation. Acetazolamide stimulates renal tubular acidosis. 
Allopurinol may precipitate xanthine stones. Thiazide diuret-
ics can result in uric acid stone formation.
Other factors
Other factors include:
 ● geography;
 ● climatic and seasonal factors;
 ● water intake;
 ● diet;
 ● occupation: especially sedentary jobs in hot environments.
Clinical features
Patients with acute ureteric colic pain represent one of the 
3 common emergency admissions seen on urology wards 
(the other 2 being acute urinary retention and haematuria). 
Approximately 50% of patients present between the ages 
of 30 and 50 years. There is a slight male preponderance. 
Patients describe ureteric colic-type pain but may, in addi -
tion, describe renal pain (see Chapter 75 for the distinction 
between these two types of pain). Visible haematuria is rarely 
present but dipstick haematuria is a frequent accompaniment 
to the pain, such that if a patient does not have detectable 
dipstick haematuria other diagnoses need to be seriously con-
sidered – this is especially true in the elderly male presenting 
for the first time with pain suggestive of a urinary tract stone, 
in whom a leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm should always 
be considered and discounted. On account of the fact that 
other serious pathology can be wrongly attributed to a urinary 
tract stone, the diagnosis of a urinary tract calculus needs to 
be confirmed at the earliest opportunity with a non-contrast 
CT scan. A supplementary plain x-ray is often performed to 
assess if the stone(s) are radio-opaque and if plain x-rays can 
be used in the follow-up of a patient who is expected to pass 
a stone spontaneously. There are 5 recognised narrowings in 
the ureter which may present obstacles to a stone’s passage 
through to the bladder and these are the PUJ, the point at 
which the ureter crosses the bifurcation of the common iliac 
artery, and 3 areas involving the distal ureter (Figure 76.10). 
Ninety percent of stones <5 mm in maximal dimension are 
likely to pass successfully. Controversy exists about the value 
of medical expulsive therapy using agents such as α-blockers 
and calcium channel blockers (such as nifedipine), with sig -
nificant variation in whether they are routinely used to facil -
itate the passage of ureteric calculi.
Emergency setting
A CT scan confirms the diagnosis and, as indicated above, 
small stones (<5  mm), especially in the distal ureter, are 
treated expectantly as they are likely to pass spontaneously. 
Medical expulsive therapy may be considered. The patient is 
usually given a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug such as 
diclofenac for pain relief and observed for further episodes of 
pain, but also temperature, pulse, blood pressure and white 
blood count are monitored for signs of developing infection 
and the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) is mon -
itored for signs of a decline in renal function. It should be 
noted that the eGFR should remain within normal limits in 
the presence of a normal contralateral kidney with normal 
function. Frequent episodes of pain, signs of infection or a 
significant decline in renal function are the usual indications 
to intervene at an early stage.
In a patient requiring relatively urgent treatment for pain, 
the options are:
1
Ureteropelvic
junction
2
Crossing
the iliac
artery
3
Juxtaposition
of vas deferens
or broad
ligament
4
Entering the
bladder wall
5
Ureteric
ori/f_ice
Figure 76.10 Normal anatomical narrowings (1–5) of the ureter. 
Summary box 76.9
Urinary stones
●● The commonest urinary tract stones are calcium oxalate
●● Stones are best diagnosed on a non-contrast computed 
tomography kidney–ureter–bladder (KUB)
●● Most stones <5 mm will pass spontaneously
●● Medical expulsive therapy remains controversial
●● Indications for surgical intervention are persistent pain, 
obstruction and infection
Stone management
The management of urinary tract stones can be subdivided 
depending on whether the patient presents in the emergency 
or elective setting.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1407 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1408
 ● In situ extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (ESWL).
 ● Cystoscopy and insertion of a ureteric stent as a temporis-
ing procedure.
 ● Primary ureteroscopic stone retrieval. Nowadays, the 
stone is usually treated with lasertripsy.
In a patient who is septic secondary to an obstructing uri-
nary tract calculus, the options are:
 ● Insertion of a percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) under 
local anaesthetic by an interventional radiologist.
 ● Cystoscopy and insertion of a ureteric stent.
When the patient is grossly unwell, insertion of a percu -
taneous nephrostomy, after the patient has been adequately 
resuscitated, is preferable to stent insertion as a ureteric stent 
may not adequately drain pus from a kidney and a PCN 
results in less manipulation and has a lower risk of producing  
septicaemia.
Elective setting
The options for surgical treatment are as follows:
EXTRACORPOREAL SHOCKWAVE LITHOTRIPSY 
(ESWL, ESL)
This is a non-invasive method of treating urinary tract stones 
by generating shockwaves outside the body which are focused 
on the stones. It was first used on a human in Germany in 
1980. Different methods of generating shockwaves include 
spark gap, electromagnetic, piezoelectric and microexpulsive. 
Shockwaves generated using the spark-gap method need to 
be coordinated with the patient’s electrocardiogram (ECG) 
to prevent cardiac arrhythmias. Stones can be localised 
for treatment using either fluoroscopy or USS. This is the 
common form of treatment these days for renal calculi and 
stones up to approximately 1.5 cm in size are suitable for this 
form of treatment. More than one treatment session may 
be needed to fully treat the stone, especially if it is sizeable. 
Prophylactic antibiotics are used to prevent infection as 
stones are often colonised by bacteria. Cystine stones are 
relatively resistant to ESWL due to their hardness. In addition 
to infection, ESWL may result in haematuria, parenchymal 
haemorrhage and even perirenal haematoma. A collection 
of stone fragments in a ureter after ESWL for a significant 
renal stone is given the German name of steinstrasse (‘street 
of stones’) (Figure 76.11). Contraindications to ESWL are 
obese patients, pregnant patients and patients taking oral 
anticoagulants.
URETEROSCOPY
Advances in the design of ureterorenoscopy have rendered 
the entire urinary tract accessible to endoscopic examina -
tion and manipulation. Ureteroscopes are classed as rigid, 
semi-rigid or flexible. Semi-rigid ureteroscopes are frequently 
used to directly visualise ureteric calculi (Figure 76.12). 
Summary box 76.10
Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy
●● Is the commonest method of treating urinary tract stones 
nowadays
●● Several sessions of ESWL may be needed for complete stone 
fragmentation
●● Stone fragments collecting in the distal ureter post ESWL are 
called Steinstrasse
 Figure 76.12  Ureteroscopy. X-ray showing a ureteroscope and 
guidewire in the ureter. 
Figure 76.11 Right lower pole calculi and steinstrasse in the distal 
right ureter (arrow).
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1408 25/10/2017   10:13Stones 1409
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
 Thereafter, stones are retrieved by either using wire retrieval 
baskets (if <6 mm and in the distal ureter (Figure 76.13)) or, 
more commonly, using lithotripsy employing different energy 
sources (ultrasound, electrohydraulic – rarely used these days, 
laser, electrokinetic). Stones can also be fragmented using 
mechanical disintegration using the lithoclast. The most sig -
nificant complications relate to injury to the ureteric mucosa 
or wall and include ureteric perforation and extravasation, 
avulsion of the ureter and ureteric stricture.
PERCUTANEOUS NEPHROLITHOTOMY (PCNL) 
(FIGURE 76.14)
Percutaneous nephrolithotomy was performed first in the 
mid-1970s. It is a technique used to treat larger stones in the 
renal pelvis or calyces but is sometimes also employed to deal 
with stones in the proximal ureter. During PCNL, a tract is 
established into the renal collecting system using ultrasound 
or fluoroscopic guidance. A series of dilators is used followed 
by placement of a working sheath into the collecting system 
through which the stone is visualised and fragmented (using 
ultrasound, laser or lithoclast). At the conclusion, a nephros-
tomy tube is left in the kidney for 24/48hrs. As well as for 
larger stones, PCNL is indicated for:
1 An obstruction: anatomic abnormalities such as PUJ 
obstruction, calyceal diverticula or ureteric obstruction 
might prevent the passage of stone fragments after ESWL.
2 Obese patients in whom ESWL is contraindicated.
3 Lower calyceal stones: these are less likely to pass after 
ESWL.
4 Stone composition: struvite stones need to be completely 
removed because of associated infection. As previously 
mentioned, some stones with a very hard composition are 
difficult to fragment using ESWL, including calcium oxa -
late monohydrate and cystine stones.
Complications relating to PCNL include:
1 Injury to the spleen, pleura and colon.
2 Haemorrhage from usually the renal parenchyma but also 
from major renal vessels. If the latter occurs, the treat-
ment of choice is embolisation but, if this doesn’t work, 
nephrectomy very occasionally has to be considered.
3 Sepsis.
4 Extravasation due to rupture of the collecting system.
5 Retained stone fragments.
6 Open surgery to the kidney is sometimes more compli -
cated after PCNL.
OPEN STONE SURGERY
Open stone surgery other than total nephrectomy is incred -
ibly infrequently undertaken in the modern era. In the past, 
pyelolithotomy, ureterolithotomy and nephrolithotomy with 
cooling of the kidney were sometimes indicated. A longstand-
ing obstructing calculus can result in chronic inflammatory 
change in the kidney with substantial if not complete loss of 
function leading to XGP – see above). Nephrectomy for XGP 
can be one of the most challenging nephrectomies performed 
by a urological surgeon as the kidney is often adherent to 
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 76.13  Dormia stone-catching basket in use. (a) Basket  
introduced past stone. (b) Opened. (c) Enclosing stone, ready for 
withdrawal. 
Figure 76.14 Percutaneous renal stone removal. (a) The stone is in 
the right renal pelvis. (b) Placement of a cannula under radiological 
control into the renal pelvis and through it a balloon catheter to stop 
fragments migrating into the upper ureter. (c) The stone is disrupted 
by contact lithotripsy and the fragments have been successfully 
removed by irrigation. (d) A nephrostogram confirms that the renal 
pelvis is intact.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Enrico Dormia , 1928–2009, Professor of Urology, University of Milan and Chief of the Department of Urology, S Carlo Hospital, Milan, Italy.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1409 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1410
many of its surrounding structures. This resulted in the devel-
opment of the subcapsular nephrectomy for this condition, 
where the renal capsule is left in situ.
Medical treatment of stones
The goal is to prevent further formation of new stones or the 
further growth of existing stones. Treatment may have to be 
lifelong. A high fluid intake is advised to prevent supersatu -
ration of the urine, with the aim of producing at least 2.5 L 
of urine in 24 hours. Dietary excesses need to be eliminated.
Idiopathic calcium lithiasis
An increased fluid intake is advised and correction of dietary 
excesses of calcium and oxalate. Thiazide diuretics may reduce 
urinary calcium excretion by increasing fractional calcium 
reabsorption in the distal nephron. Orthophosphates may be 
used, which decrease urinary calcium excretion and increase 
inhibitor activity. Cellulose phosphate given enterally is useful 
in absorptive hypercalciuria. It is a calcium-binding resin and 
reduces calcium absorption when taken with meals. Citrate 
mixtures are useful to increase inhibitor activity in the urine.
Hypercalcaemic disorders
Increased fluid intake may prevent calculus formation, espe -
cially in immobilised patients. Oral orthophosphates may be 
used to decrease urinary calcium excretion. Corticosteroids 
in sarcoidosis reduce serum calcium. Thiazide diuretics have 
a role.
Renal tubular acidosis
Sodium or potassium bicarbonate or citrate is given, resulting 
in an increased renal citrate excretion.
Cystinuria
Potassium citrate is preferred to sodium bicarbonate for this 
condition. The aim is to increase the urinary pH to 7.5–7.8. 
D-penicillamine may be used which reacts with cysteine to 
form a soluble salt that reduces, through competition, the for-
mation of cystine. It is a potentially toxic drug and should 
only be used if hydration and alkalinisation fail. Adverse 
effects include rashes, fever, agranulocytosis, arthralgia and 
lymphadenopathy. 6-mercaptopropionyl glycine (MPG) is 
an alternative and has fewer side effects. Captopril may be 
used to lower urinary cystine levels in homozygous cystinuric 
patients. Dietary methionine (precursor of cystine) restric -
tion is rarely needed.
Uric acid lithiasis
Uric acid stones may be dissolved medically. Urinary pH 
is increased to 6.5 using so dium bicarbonate or potassium 
citrate. Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, may reduce 
uric acid excretion; once calcium is dissolved this is discon-
tinued and alkalinisation is maintained.
Primary hyperoxaluria
Large doses of pyridoxine reduce urinary oxalate excretion in 
20–50% of patients. Neutral orthophosphates may be used to 
halt the growth of existing calculi.
Enteric hyperoxaluria
Fat restriction is necessary and oral calcium supplements are 
indicated. Cholestyramine may be used to bind acidic com -
ponents in the gut lumen, including oxalate. Intestinal bypass 
may need to be reversed.
Stones associated with infection
After surgical removal, antimicrobial prophylaxis should 
be maintained for 3–12 months. Urinary acidification with 
ammonium chloride may be used in conjunction. Dissolution 
of stones with hemiacridrin or Suby G and M solutions is an 
option.
URINARY TRACT OBSTRUCTION
Obstructive uropathy refers to the structural or functional 
changes in the urinary tract that impede normal urine flow. 
Obstructive nephropathy refers to the renal disease caused by 
impaired flow of urine or tubular fluid. Hydronephrosis refers 
to the aseptic dilatation of the urinary tract. Urinary tract 
obstruction can be classified as either congenital or acquired.
Congenital urinary tract obstruction
Congenital urinary tract obstruction may affect either the 
upper or lower urinary tract and occurs most frequently in 
males, most commonly as a result of either posterior urethral 
valves or pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction. If it occurs early 
during development, the kidney fails to develop and becomes 
dysplastic. If obstruction occurs later in gestation and is low 
grade or unilateral, hydronephrosis and nephron loss will still 
occur, but renal function may be sufficient to allow survival.
Acquired urinary tract obstruction
Likewise, acquired urinary tract obstruction may affect either 
the upper or lower urinary tract and can result from either 
intrinsic or extrinsic causes. Intrinsic causes of obstruction 
may be intraluminal or intramural.
Causes of upper urinary tract obstruction are summarised 
in Table 76.1 and causes of lower urinary tract obstruction are 
summarised in Table 76.2. 
Clinical features
Unilateral hydronephrosis
Unilateral hydronephrosis (commonly caused by idiopathic 
PUJ obstruction or calculus) is more common in women and 
on the right side.
Summary box 76.11
Medical treatment of urinary stones
●● Aim for urine output of 2.5 L in 24 hours
●● Dietary excesses to be corrected
●● Specific drugs are available for certain conditions
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1410 25/10/2017   10:13Urinary tract obstruction 1411
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Presenting features include the following:
 ● Mild pain or dull aching in the loin, often a dragging 
heaviness worsened by excessive fluid intake. The kidney 
may be palpable.
 ● Intermittent hydronephrosis (Dietl’s crisis). Loin swelling 
is associated with acute renal pain. The pain goes and the 
swelling disappears when a large volume of urine is passed.
 ● Antenatal detection in the fetus by USS. Many of these 
cases are benign, but postnatal investigation is required to 
detect those with significant PUJ obstruction.
Joseph Dietl , 1804–1878, Professor of Pathology and Therapeutics, Krakau,  
Poland.
Bilateral hydronephrosis
 ● From lower urinary obstruction: symptoms of bladder 
outlet obstruction predominate.
 ● From bilateral upper urinary tract obstruction: idiopathic 
retroperitoneal fibrosis affects both ureters and idiopathic 
PUJ obstruction can be bilateral. Symptoms may be 
referred to one side.
 ● Hydronephrosis from pregnancy.
Dilatation of the ureters and renal pelves occurs early in 
pregnancy up to the 20th week. It results from the effects on 
the ureteric smooth muscle of high levels of circulating pro -
gesterone and is part of normal pregnancy. The ureters return 
to their normal size within 12 weeks of delivery. This phys -
iological condition is associated with an increased liability 
to infection and there is a possibility that abdominal pain 
during pregnancy may be erroneously ascribed to ureteric 
obstruction.
Summary box 76.12
Idiopathic pelvi-ureteric obstruction
●● May be asymptomatic
●● Can present as intermittent loin pain often exacerbated by a 
fluid load
Summary box 76.13
Ureteric dilatation in pregnancy
●● Physiological dilatation of the ureter is common in pregnancy
Imaging
Ultrasound scanning (Figure 76.15) is the least invasive 
means of detecting hydronephrosis and is regularly used to 
diagnose PUJ obstruction in utero.
IVU helps only if there is significant function in the 
obstructed kidney . The extrarenal pelvis is dilated and 
the minor calyces lose their normal cupping and become 
‘clubbed’. If the level of obstruction is in doubt, it can help 
to take follow-up films 36 hours after the contrast has been 
injected. Contrast slowly diffuses to fill the obstructed system 
down to the blockage.
TABLE 76.1 Causes of upper urinary tract obstruction.
Intrinsic causes Extrinsic causes
Intraluminal
Intratubular deposition of 
crystals (uric acid, drugs)
Stones
Papillary tissue
Blood clots
Fungal ball
Reproductive system
Cervix: carcinoma
Uterus: pregnancy, tumours, 
prolapse, endometriosis, pelvic 
inflammatory disease
Ovary: tumour, cysts
Prostate: carcinoma
Intramural
Functional: pelviureteral or 
vesicoureteral junction 
dysfunction
Anatomic: tumours (benign 
or malignant)
Infections, granulomas, 
strictures
Vascular system
Aneurysms: aorta, iliac vessels
Aberrant arteries: pelviureteral 
junction
Venous: ovarian veins, retrocaval 
ureter
Gastrointestinal tract
Crohn’s disease
Pancreatitis
Appendicitis
Diverticulitis
Tumours
Retroperitoneal space
Lymph nodes
Fibrosis: idiopathic, drugs, 
inflammatory or lgG4-related 
disease
Tumours: primary or metastatic
Haematomas
Radiation therapy
Surgical disruption or ureteral 
ligation
The most common causes are in italics. (Adapted from Johnson JJ, Feehally J, 
Floege J. Comprehensive clinical nephrology, 5th edn, Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2015, p. 704.)
TABLE 76.2 Causes of lower urinary tract obstruction.
Urethral anatomic causes
Urethral strictures: trauma, postinstrumentation, infections such as 
gonococcal urethritis, nongonococcal urethritis, tuberculosis
Posterior urethral valves
Stones
Blood clots
Periurethral abscess
Phimosis
Paraphimosis
Meatal stenosis
Urethral functional causes
Anticholinergic drugs, antidepressants, levodopa
Prostate
Benign prostatic hypertrophy
Prostatic carcinoma
Bladder anatomic causes
Bladder cancer
Schistosomiasis (Schistosoma haematobium infection)
Bladder calculi
Bladder trauma, pelvic fracture
Bladder functional causes
Neurogenic bladder: spinal cord defects or trauma, diabetes, 
multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, cerebrovascular accidents
The most common causes are in italics. (Adapted from Johnson JJ, Feehally J, 
Floege J. Comprehensive clinical nephrology, 5th edn, Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2015, p. 704.)
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1411 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1412
Isotope renography is the best test to confirm obstruc -
tive dilatation of the collecting system. A substance (usually 
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) or MAG-3) 
is injected intravenously . The DTPA is labelled with tech -
netium-99m, a gamma-ray emitter, so that the passage of 
99mTc-labelled DTPA through the kidneys can be tracked 
using a gamma camera. 99mTc-DTPA is cleared from a nor -
mal kidney but stays in the renal pelvis on the obstructed side 
and is retained even if urine flow is increased by administering 
frusemide (Figure 76.17).
Very occasionally, a Whitaker test is indicated. A percu -
taneous puncture of the kidney is made and fluid is infused 
at a constant rate with monitoring of intrapelvic pressure. 
An abnormal rise in pressure confirms obstruction. Retro -
grade pyelography (Figure 76.16) is rarely indicated but will 
confirm the site of obstruction immediately before corrective 
 surgery.
Figure 76.15  Ultrasound of a hydronephr otic kidney. A, artery; 
C, calyces; P , pelvis. 
Figure 76.16 Retrograde ureteropyelogram showing hydronephro -
sis with greatly enlarged pelvis and dilated ‘clubbed’ calyces. 
Figure 76.17 Isotope renogram series showing a late accumulation 
and persistence of radioactivity in the left kidney (the image is a pos-
terior view). 
James Christie Anderson , 1899–1984, urologist, The Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, UK.
Wilfred Hynes , 1903–1991, plastic surgeon, The Plastic and Jaw Department, The Royal Sheffield Hospital, Sheffield, UK. Anderson and Hynes devised the oper-
ation in 1949. It is nowadays done laparoscopically, particularly in children. Robotically assisted laparoscopic dismembered pyeloplasty has also been carried out.
Treatment
The indications for operation are bouts of renal pain, increas-
ing hydronephrosis, evidence of parenchymal damage and 
infection. Nephrectomy should be considered only when the 
kidney has largely lost most of its function (<10% split func -
tion). Mild cases should be followed by serial ultrasound scans 
and operated upon if dilatation is increasing.
Pyeloplasty
In the original Anderson–Hynes open pyeloplasty, the 
upper third of the ureter and the renal pelvis are mobilised, 
Summary box 76.14
Imaging
●● Obstruction of the ureter is diagnosed by a combination of 
ultrasound scanning and isotope renography
●● An obstructed kidney is worth preserving if it is contributing 
>20% of total renal function
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1412 25/10/2017   10:13Renal trauma 1413
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
the  ureter is dismembered from the renal pelvis, redundant 
renal pelvis is excised and a new PUJ is reconfigured (Figure 
76.18). A renal vein overlying the distended pelvis can be 
divided, but an artery in this situation should be preserved 
to avoid infarction of the renal parenchyma it supplies. The 
anastomosis is made in front of such an artery if it exists. A 
ureteric stent is inserted to splint the anastomosis. This type 
of surgery is now almost universally performed using lapa-
roscopic techniques and in some centres is being performed 
with robotic assistance. Other surgical procedures have been 
described to widen the PUJ without dismembering the ureter 
from the renal pelvis.
Endoscopic pyelolysis
Other endoscopic treatments have been tried to surgically 
remedy PUJ obstruction including retrograde balloon dilata -
tion, incision of the PUJ using a hot wire over a balloon, laser 
incision, and percutaneous pyelolysis from above but, in gen-
eral, these do not produce results equivalent to pyeloplasty.
RETROPERITONEAL 
PATHOLOGY
Retroperitoneal pathology may result in extrinsic obstruction 
of the ureters, as can metastases or extension of tumours from 
the cervix, prostate, bladder, colon, ovary and uterus. Primary 
tumours of the retroperitoneum, such as lymphomas and sar -
comas, can commonly cause obstruction. Obstruction can 
also result from inflammatory conditions affecting the retro-
peritoneum such as Crohn’s disease and colonic diverticulitis. 
Less common pathological processes include retroperitoneal 
fibrosis (RPF), in which thick fibrous tissue ‘plaques’ extend 
out from the aorta to encase the ureters and draw them medi-
ally. RPF can be idiopathic but can result from inflammatory 
aortic aneurysms, certain drugs (β-blockers, bromocriptine, 
methysergide), previous irradiation, trauma or surgery and 
granulomatous disease (tuberculosis and sarcoidosis).
RPF can be treated medically or surgically. There are 
reports of favourable outcomes after immunosuppression 
with high doses of corticosteroids or azathioprine, usually 
used in combination with bilateral ureteric stents. Alterna-
tively, surgery consisting of ureterolysis (freeing the ureters 
from the fibrotic plaques) and omentoplasty (transposition of 
the ureters into the peritoneal cavity in omental wraps) has 
been shown to have good long-term results. Increasingly, this 
surgery is being performed laparoscopically with or without 
robotic assistance rather than as an open surgical procedure.
RENAL TRAUMA
Ten percent of all trauma cases involve the genitourinary 
tract. This is usually as a result of blunt trauma and the injury 
is usually self-limiting. Five to 10% of blunt trauma and up to 
70% of penetrating trauma are major injuries. Common blunt 
injuries result often from road traffic accidents, falls, assaults 
and sporting injuries. Common penetrating injuries are knife 
or gunshot wounds.
Major renal injury should be suspected with gross haema -
turia, shock in combination with microscopic haematuria, 
paediatric renal trauma and penetrating renal injuries. Hae -
maturia may be absent in up to 40% of renal injuries and 24% 
of pedicle injuries. Renal injuries (Figure 76.19) are classified 
as follows:
 ● Grade I: contusion or non-enlarging subcapsular perire -
nal haematoma, and no laceration.
 ● Grade II: superficial laceration <1 cm depth and does 
not involve the collecting system (no evidence of urine 
extravasation), non-expanding perirenal haematoma con-
fined to retroperitoneum.
 ● Grade III: laceration >1 cm without extension into the 
renal pelvis or collecting system (no evidence of urine 
extravasation).
 ● Grade IV:
 ● Laceration extends to renal pelvis or urinary extra -
vasation.
 ● Vascular: injury to main renal artery or vein with con-
tained haemorrhage.
 ● Segmental infarctions without associated lacerations.
 ● Expanding subcapsular haematomas compressing the 
kidney.
 ● Grade V:
 ● Shattered kidney.
 ● Avulsion of renal hilum: devascularisation of a kidney 
due to hilar injury.
 ● Ureteropelvic avulsions.
 ● Complete laceration or thrombus of the main renal 
artery or vein.
The indications for radiological assessment are:
 ● Penetrating injuries.
 ● Gross haematuria.
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
Figure 76.18 (a–e) Anderson–Hynes pyeloplasty. 
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described Crohn’s disease in 1932.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1413 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1414
 ● Shock in combination with microscopic haematuria.
 ● Children: in whom the kidneys are much lower and less 
well protected.
CT scan with contrast is the investigation of choice. It 
will accurately assess the extent of the injury, showing lac -
eration, extravasation, surrounding haemorrhage and vessel 
injury. It also shows non-renal injuries and effectively stages 
renal pedicle injuries. Arterial occlusion is manifest as rim 
enhancement of the normal renal contour.
The vast majority of cases of blunt renal trauma can be 
treated conservatively and in one major series only 2.5% of 
such cases required surgical exploration. Most penetrating 
injuries from knife or gunshot wounds require renal explo-
ration.
In general, minor and limited major injuries are treated 
conservatively. Unstable major injuries are best treated with 
prompt surgical exploration as this lessens the risk of contin -
ued bleeding, sepsis and renal loss.
Some patients who have not undergone prior radiolog -
ical assessment will require an immediate laparotomy and 
in some patients renal trauma will be encountered unex-
pectedly during laparotomy. If this occurs, then an on-table 
intravenous urogram is required. If significant extravasation, 
non-function, poor opacification or caliceal distortion is 
found then renal exploration is indicated. An expanding or 
pulsatile retroperitoneal haematoma should be explored but 
only after vascular control has been achieved.
Grade I
Grade IV Grade V
Grade II Grade III
Kidney
capsule
Laceration
<1 cm
Laceration
>1 cm
Subcapsular
haematoma
Laceration into
collecting system
Renal artery
or vein injury
Kidney
shattered
Arterial blood clot
from endothelial
injury
Avulsion
of hilum
Haematoma
Peritoneum
Figure 76.19 Classification of renal trauma. 
INJURY TO THE URETER
Rupture of the ureter
This is an uncommon result of a hyperextension injury of the 
spine. The diagnosis is rarely made until there is swelling in 
the loin or iliac fossa associated with a reduced urine out -
put. An IVU or contrast-enhanced CT shows extravasation 
of contrast.
Summary box 76.15
Renal trauma
●● 10% of trauma cases involve the genitourinary tract
●● Blunt trauma is much more common than penetrating trauma
●● Most cases of blunt trauma are treated conservatively
●● Most penetrating injuries require renal exploration
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1414 25/10/2017   10:13Injury to the ur eter 1415
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Injury to one or both ureters during 
pelvic surgery
This occurs most often during vaginal or abdominal hysterec-
tomy when the ureter is mistakenly divided, ligated, crushed 
or excised. Pre-emptive ureteric catheterisation makes it eas-
ier to identify the ureters.
Injury recognised at the time of operation
Ureterovesical continuity should be restored by one of the 
methods described below unless the patient’s condition is 
poor. Deliberate ligation of the proximal ureter and tempo -
rary percutaneous nephrostomy is then the best course until 
the patient is well enough for a repair. apposed without tension, they should be joined by a spatu -
lated anastomosis over a double pigtail catheter.
If the division is low, the bladder may be hitched and the 
ureter can be re-implanted. Extra length may be obtained by 
mobilising the kidney.
In the Boari operation (Figure 76.20), a flap of bladder 
wall is fashioned into a tube to replace the lower ureter. The 
disadvantage of implanting the ureter end-to-side into the 
contralateral ureter (a transureteroureterostomy) is that it 
risks converting a unilateral injury into a bilateral one.
Nephrectomy may be best when the patient’s outlook is 
poor and the other kidney is normal. When conservation of 
all renal tissue is vital, replacement of the damaged ureter by 
a segment of ileum is necessary.
Injury not recognised at the time of operation
UNILATERAL INJURIES
There are three possible outcomes:
1 No symptoms. Ligation of a ureter may lead to silent atro-
phy of the kidney. The injury may be unsuspected until 
the patient undergoes urological imaging.
2 Loin pain and fever, possibly with pyonephrosis, occur 
with infection of the obstructed system. Loss of func -
tion will be permanent unless obstruction is relieved by 
promptly inserting a percutaneous nephrostomy.
3 A urinary fistula develops through the abdominal or vag-
inal wound. The IVU or contrast-enhanced CT shows 
extravasation with or without obstruction of one or both 
ureters. Nephrostomies may be inserted and repair post-
poned until oedema and inflammation have subsided. 
Early repair is safe if the patient is fit for surgery.
BILATERAL INJURY
Ligation of both ureters leads to anuria. Ureteric catheters 
will not pass and urgent nephrostomy or immediate surgery 
is essential.
Repair of the injured ureter
An open repair may be avoidable if a stent will pass the 
obstruction (Table 76.3). If the cut ends of the ureter can be 
Summary box 76.16
Ureteric injury during operation
●● Surgical trauma during pelvic surgery is the most common 
cause of ureteric trauma
●● Preoperative catheterisation of the ureters makes them easier 
to protect
●● Injuries discovered during surgery should be repaired 
immediately
Achille Boari , 19th century Italian, urological surgeon from Ferrara, described the technique of a bladder flap in dogs in 1894; it was first performed in a patient 
in 1936.
TABLE 76.3 Methods for repairing a damaged ureter.
If there is no loss of 
length
Spatulation and end-to-end anastomosis 
without tension
If there is little loss of 
length
Mobilise kidney
Psoas hitch of bladder
Boari operation
If there is marked 
loss of length
Transureteroureterostomy
Interposition of isolated bowel loop or 
mobilised appendix
Nephrectomy
Figure 76.20 Boari operation: a strip of bladder wall is fashioned 
into a tube to bridge the gap between the cut ureter and the bladder. 
Summary box 76.17
Repair of ureteric injury
When surgical damage to a ureter is discovered postoperatively:
●● Repair need not be delayed
●● Ideally surgical repair should be performed by a urologist
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1415 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1416
VASCULAR PATHOLOGY
Renal artery occlusion/renal 
infarction
Renal infarction may involve the whole kidney or small areas 
of the cortex and medulla. The most common presenting 
symptoms of renal infarction are loin, flank or abdominal 
pain with nausea and vomiting. Urinalysis often demon -
strates microscopic haematuria and proteinuria. Transient or 
accelerated hypertension may occur secondary to the abrupt 
release of renin from the infarcted segment. Approximately 
25% of cases are asymptomatic. Transient elevation in serum 
creatinine is not uncommon. When bilateral occlusion of 
both kidneys or infarction of a single functioning kidney 
occurs, the patient presents with oliguric or anuric acute kid-
ney injury (AKI). Systemic signs of renal infarction include 
pyrexia and leucocytosis. CT scan with IV contrast is the 
best imaging modality for demonstrating areas of renal cor -
tex that are not perfused. The most common causes of renal 
infarction are trauma, renal artery embolism from cardiac 
thrombus, and iatrogenic complications of endovascular 
procedures. Spontaneous renal artery thrombosis or dissec -
tion is most often associated with atherosclerotic disease of 
the aorta or renal arteries, but other vascular causes include 
fibromuscular hyperplasia, Takayasu’s arteritis, polyarteritis 
nodosa, Marfan’s syndrome and Ehlers–Danlos syndrome 
with associated dissection or aneurysms. Less common causes 
include hypercoagulable states and inflammatory diseases of 
the retroperitoneum.
In the setting of renal infarction, a search for the cause 
of the renal vascular compromise should be undertaken to 
determine whether it is embolic or thrombotic. Treatment 
of the infarction itself is usually conservative. If renal artery 
occlusion is caused by a hypercoagulable state or an embolism 
from a central source, systemic anticoagulation is indicated. 
Common sources include atrial fibrillation, atrial or mural 
thrombi, intracardiac mass and valvular lesions; therefore, 
echocardiography is indicated.
Renal vein thrombosis
Renal vein thrombosis is rare and primarily observed in chil -
dren with severe dehydration or in adults with nephrotic 
syndrome, renal tumours, or hypercoagulable states and after 
surgery or trauma to the renal vessels. Thrombosis of the lon-
ger left renal vein may also involve ureteric, gonadal, adrenal 
and phrenic branches that drain into the left renal vein. Most 
patients are treated with systemic anticoagulation.
TUMOURS OF THE KIDNEY
Benign tumours
Adenoma
Pea-like cortical adenomas are occasionally discovered. They 
are asymptomatic and are benign.
Angioma
Angioma may cause profuse haematuria, often in young 
adults. The bleeding source may be difficult to diagnose with-
out renal angiography.
Angiomyolipoma
Angiomyolipoma is an unusual tumour of the kidney, often 
but not always associated with tuberous sclerosis. Its high fat 
content has a typical appearance on CT. Malignant elements 
are present in about one-quarter and may metastasise.
Renal cell carcinoma
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) encompasses a heterogeneous 
group of cancers derived from renal tubular epithelial cells 
and is among the 10 most common cancers worldwide, 
accounting for about 2% of all cancer diagnoses and deaths. 
The male:female ratio is approximately 2:1. Key advances 
in histopathological and molecular characteristics of RCC 
over the past two decades have led to major revisions in its 
classification. Major subtypes with >5% incidence are clear-
cell RCC (ccRCC), papillary RCC (pRCC) and chromo-
phobe RCC (chRCC). ccRCC is the most common subtype 
and accounts for the majority of deaths from kidney cancer. 
Indeed, owing to the predominance of clear-cell histology in 
metastatic disease (83–88%), tumours with non-clear-cell 
histology have been grouped as ‘nccRCC’ (Table 76.4). Kid-
ney cancer accounts for approximately 84  000 new cases and 
approximately 35 000 deaths in Europe annually. The median 
age at presentation is 64 years and when RCC is diagnosed 
at younger ages (<46 years) the possibility of an underly -
ing hereditary kidney cancer syndrome – which accounts 
for 3–5% of all RCCs – should be considered (Table 76.5). 
Although overall the incidence rates of RCC are increas -
ing, the mortality rates have levelled off, probably accounted 
for by increasing incidental detection – from increased use 
of abdominal imaging – of small renal masses (<4  cm) that 
are unlikely to have metastasised. The global increase in the 
prevalence of obesity, an established risk factor , might also 
play a part in increasing incidence.
Mikito Takayasu , 1860–1938, Japanese ophthalmologist, described Takayasu’s arteritis in 1908.
Antoine Bernard-Jean Marfan , 1858–1942, French pediatrician, described Marfan’s syndrome in 1886.
Edvard Laurits Ehlers , 1863–1937, Danish dermatologist.
Henri-Alexandre Danlos , 1844–1912, French physician and dermatologist.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1416 25/10/2017   10:13Tumours of the kidne y 1417
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Risk factors for RCC include:
 ● age;
 ● sex;
 ● obesity;
 ● hypertension;
 ● cigarette smoking.
Other medical conditions have been associated with 
RCC including chronic kidney disease, haemodialysis, kid -
ney transplantation and acquired cystic disease of the kidney 
(ACDK). Genetic factors also contribute to RCC risk, as evi-
denced by individuals with a family history of renal cancer 
TABLE 76.4 Non-clear-cell renal cell carcinomas.
Tumour type Subtype Cytogenetic 
alterations
Genes 
mutated
Gross appearance Histological features*
Papillary Type 1 ●● Gains of 7, 8q, 
12q, 16p, 17 
and 20
●● Loss of 9p
MET ●● Mixed cystic or solid 
consistency
●● Often whitish in 
colour and may show 
haemorrhage and 
necrosis
●● Frequently with a 
well-demarcated 
pseudocapsule
●● Single layer of cuboid tumour cells
●● Thin, basophilic papillae with scant 
pale cytoplasm and low nuclear 
grade
●● Concentric lamellated calcifications 
(psamomma bodies)
●● Foamy macrophage infiltration
Type 2 ●● Gains of 8q
●● Loss of 1p and 
9p
●● CDKN2A
●● SETD2
●● NRF2
●● Heterogeneous, thick papillae and 
eosinophilic cytoplasm, high nuclear 
grade and pseudostratification
●● Concentric lamellated calcifications
●● Foamy macrophage infiltration
Chromophobe Classic Loss of 
chromosomes 1, 2, 
6, 10, 13, 17 and 21
●● TP53
●● PTEN
●● Large, well-
circumscribed grey to 
tan-brown coloured 
tumour
●● Occasional central 
scar
●● Tumour cells with prominent 
membrane and pale cytoplasm
●● Voluminous cytoplasm 
(cytoplasmic accumulation of acid 
mucopolysaccharides)
Eosinophilic ●● Large tumour cells with fine 
eosinophilic granules
●● Distinct cell borders
●● Voluminous cytoplasm
MiT family 
translocation
NA Recurrent 
translocations 
involving Xp11.23 
(TFE3) or 6p21 
(TFEB)
●● TFE3
●● TFEB
●● Yellowish tissue
●● Often studded by 
haemorrhage and 
necrosis
●● Papillary or nested architecture
●● Abundant clear or eosinophilic 
cytoplasm
Collecting 
duct
NA ●● Losses at 8p, 
16p, 1p and 9p
●● Gains at 13q
Unknown ●● Partially cystic
●● White-grey 
appearance
●● Often exhibit invasion 
into the renal sinus
●● Tubulopapillary pattern
●● Often with cells taking columnar 
pattern with hobnail appearance
●● Presence of mucinous material
●● Desmoplastic stroma
Medullary NA Poorly described, 
but thought to be 
normal karyotype
SMARCB1 ●● Tan or white 
appearance
●● Poorly defined capsule
●● Extensive 
haemorrhage and 
necrosis
●● Poorly differentiated, eosinophilic 
cells
●● Inflammatory infiltrative cells
●● Sheet-like or reticular pattern is 
common
Oncocytoma NA ●● Loss of 
chromosome 
1 and Y 
chromosome
●● CCND1 
rearrangement
Mitochondrial 
genes (COX1, 
COX2, 
MTND4 and 
MTCYB)
●● Mahogany colour
●● Circumscribed
●● Occasional central 
scar
●● Rarely with necrosis
●● Polygonal cells with abundant 
eosinophilic cytoplasm
●● Uniform, round nuclei
NA, not applicable. *No consensus is currently available that describes the immune infiltration of non-clear-cell renal cell carcinomas. (Adapted from Hsieh JJ, 
Purdue MP , Signoretti S et al. Renal cell carcinoma. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017; 9(3): 1–19.)
having an approximate twofold increased risk. Investigations 
into familial RCC have uncovered mutations in at least 11 
genes ( BAP1, FLCN, FH, MET, PTEN, SDHB, SDHC, 
SDHD, TSC1, TSC2 and VHL), some of which have been 
implicated in sporadic RCC. A notable example is VHL, the 
mutated gene underlying von Hippel–Lindau disease, which 
is characterised by a high risk of developing ccRCC.
The classic triad of loin pain, loin mass and haematuria is 
seen in <10% of patients with a renal tumour. Nowadays, the 
majority of diagnoses result from incidental findings. This shift 
is a consequence of the widespread use of USS and CT imag-
ing, performed for other reasons. That said,  paraneoplastic 
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1417 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1418
TABLE 76.5 Hereditary syndromes associated with renal cell carcinoma.
Syndrome 
(phenotype OMIM 
reference)
Gene 
(position)
Protein Incidence of 
developing 
a kidney 
tumour (%)
Median age 
at diagnosis 
(years)
Other phenotypic features
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma*
von Hippel–Lindau 
disease (193300)
VHL (3p25-26) pVHL 25-45 40 ●● Haemangioblastoma
●● Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours
●● Pheochromocytoma
●● Renal cysts
●● Pancreatic cysts
●● Ovary cystadenoma
●● Epididymal cystadenoma
BAP1 mutant disease 
(also known as 
tumour predisposition 
disease; 614327)
BAP1 (3p21) BRCA-
associated 
protein
No data No data ●● Breast cancer
●● Uveal melanoma
●● Mesothelioma
●● Other cutaneous melanocytic tumours
SDH-associated 
kidney cancer 
(185470, 602413,
602690 and 115310)
SDHB (1p36), 
SDHC (lq23)
and SDHD 
(llq23)
Succinate 
dehydrogenase 
subunits B, C
and D
5-15 30 ●● Paraganglioma
●● Carotid body tumours
●● Pheochromocytoma
●● Gastrointestinal stromal tumour
Papillary renal cell carcinoma
Hereditary 
leiomyomatosis and 
renal cell cancer 
(150800)‡
FH (1q43) Fumarate 
hydratase
2-21 46 ●● Uterine leiomyosarcomas
●● Breast cancer
●● Bladder cancer
●● Cutaneous leiomyomas
●● Uterine leiomyomas
Hereditary papillary 
kidney cancer 
(605074)§
MET (7q31) Hepatocyte 
growth factor 
receptor
No data <60 No additional features
Multiple tumour types
Birt-Hogg-Dubé 
syndrome (135150)||
FLCN 
(17p11.2)
Folliculin 34 50 ●● Fibrofolliculomas and trichodiscomas
●● Pulmonary cysts
●● Pneumothorax
Tuberous sclerosis 
complex (191100 and 
191092)¶
TSC1 (9q34) 
and TSC2
(16p13)
Hamartin and 
tuberin
2-4 30 ●● Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas
●● Angiomyolipomas
●● Renal cysts
●● Facial angiofibroma
●● Ungual and periungual fibromas
●● Hypomelanotic macule
●● Forehead plaque
●● Cardiac rhabdomyomas
●● Connective tissue naevus
Cowden syndrome 
(also known as 
multiple hamartoma 
syndrome; 158350)#
PTEN (10q23) Phosphatase 
and tensin 
homologue
34 40 ●● Breast cancer
●● Endometrial cancer
●● Thyroid cancer
●● Prostate cancer
●● Macrocephaly
●● Intestinal hamartomatous polyps
●● Benign skin tumours (multiple 
trichilemmomas, papillomatous papules and 
acral keratoses)
●● Dysplastic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum
Hyperparathyroidism 
jaw tumour syndrome 
(145001)**
HRPT2 (1q31) Parafibromin No data No data ●● Parathyroid carcinomas
●● Uterine carcinomas
●● Renal cysts and hamartomas
●● Hyperparathyroidism
●● Parathyroid gland tumours
●● Jaw fibromas
OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database. *Familial clear cell kidney cancer with chromosome 3 translocation is another possible syndrome 
associated with clear cell renal cell carcinoma, but the genetic lesions and associated data are unknown. ‡Main renal cancer type is papillary renal cell 
carcinoma type 2. §Main renal cancer type is papillary renal cell carcinoma type 1. ||Main renal cancer types are hybrid tumours, oncocytomas, and 
chromophobe, papillary and clear cell renal cell carcinomas. ¶Main renal cancer types are angiomyolipomas, epithelioid angiomyolipomas, oncocytomas, 
and papillary and clear cell renal cell carcinomas; renal cysts also are common. #Main renal cancer types are clear cell, papillary and chromophobe renal 
cell carcinomas. **Main renal cancer types are mixed tumours (epithelial and connective tissue), papillary renal cell carcinomas and nephroblastomas. 
(Adapted from Hsieh JJ, Purdue MP , Signoretti S et al. Renal cell carcinoma. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017; 9(3): 1–19.)
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1418 25/10/2017   10:13Tumours of the kidne y 1419
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
 syndromes – symptoms caused by hormones or cytokines 
excreted by the tumour cells or by an immune response against 
the tumour – are not uncommon in RCC and symptoms 
include hypercalcaemia, fever and erythrocytosis.
extends into the vasculature. Bone scan and 18F-FDG PET 
scan are not recommended for initial staging.
Pathology
In 2016, the World Health Organisation (WHO) classifica -
tion of RCC was updated from previous (2004) WHO and 
International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) Con -
sensus Conference (2013) systems. At macroscopic level, 
the cut surface of ccRCC tumours is golden-yellow in colour 
with frequent haemorrhagic, necrotic and cystic areas (Figure 
76.22). Microscopically, ccRCC usually consists of tumour 
cells with clear cytoplasm arranged in nests or tubules sur -
rounded by a rich vascular network. The clear appearance 
of the cytoplasm is due to the accumulation of glycogen and 
lipids. The most widely used grading system for ccRCC is the 
Fuhrman grading system, which defines 4 nuclear grades (1–4) 
in order of increasing nuclear size, irregularity and nucleolar 
prominence. The pathologist also often assigns a Leibovich 
score following nephrectomy – the Leibovich prognostic score 
runs from 0 to 11 and is based on the tumour’s stage, grade, 
size, involvement of lymph nodes and the presence of tumour 
necrosis histologically. It should be noted that all RCC types 
may contain foci of high-grade malignant spindle cells (i.e. 
sarcomatoid differentiation).
Surgery
Surgical treatment of RCC is related to the clinical stage of the 
disease and to the general condition of the patient. Although 
typically reserved for localised disease, nephrectomy can also 
be used with cytoreductive intent in patients with metastatic 
Staging (Figure 76.21).
CT imaging with contrast enhancement of the chest, abdo -
men and pelvis is required for optimal staging. Such imaging 
enables the assessment of the primary tumour (such as the size 
and whether the tumour is organ-confined or extends to per -
inephric fat or the renal hilum), regional spread (lymph node 
involvement) and distant metastases (including lung, bone 
and distant lymph no des). MRI can also provide additional 
information, especially to determine whether the tumour 
Summary box 76.18
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
●● Arises from epithelium of the proximal convoluted tubule
●● Frequently detected coincidentally
●● Has a male preponderance
●● Major subtypes are clear-cell, papillary and chromophobe 
RCC
●● Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for organ-confined 
disease
●● Metastatic disease is treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
(TKIs) or mTOR inhibitors
Aorta
Lymph
node
Gerota’s
fascia
Adrenal
gland
Inferior
vena cava
Stage I
Stage IV
Stage II
Stage III
Figure 76.21  Staging renal cell carcinoma 
is based on size, position and lymph node 
involvement: 
 Stage I: tumour <7 cm in the largest dimension, 
limited to the kidney
 Stage II: tumour >7 cm in the largest dimension, 
limited to the kidney
 Stage III: tumour in the major veins or adrenal 
gland with intact Ger ota’s fascia, or regional 
lymph nodes involved
 Stage IV: tumour beyond Gerota’s fascia
Susan A Fuhrman , American pathologist, described the Fuhrman grading system in 1982.
Bradley C Leibovich , contemproary, Professor of Urology, Rochester, MN, USA.
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1419 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1420
disease, especially if there is substantial disease volume at the 
primary site but only a low burden of metastatic disease.
PARTIAL NEPHRECTOMY
The goal of partial nephrectomy is to completely remove 
the primary tumour while preserving the largest possible 
amount of healthy renal parenchyma. Partial nephrectomy 
is indicated for patients with a T1 tumour (according to the 
UICC TNM staging system) and a normal contralateral kid -
ney. Moreover, partial nephrectomy is strongly recommended 
(imperative absolute indications) in patients with RCC who 
have only one kidney (anatomically or functionally), in 
those with bilateral synchronous RCC and in those with von  
Hippel–Lindau syndrome. Similarly, relative indications 
include conditions that can impair renal function (e.g. kidney 
stones, hypertension, diabetes and pyelonephritis). Indeed, 
partial nephrectomy offers lower renal function impairment 
and equivalent oncological survival outcomes compared with 
radical nephrectomy in those with T1 tumours. In the past 
decade, nephrometry scoring systems (such as the R.E.N.A.L. 
and PADUA systems) have been proposed to predict the 
complexity of the partial nephrectomy procedure. Laparo -
scopic partial nephrectomy (LPN) and robot-assisted partial 
nephrectomy (RAPN) are the main alternatives to classic 
open partial nephrectomy (OPN). In the past, cooling of the 
kidney using crushed ice was frequently employed during par-
tial nephrectomy but this is being used in a more selective 
fashion in the modern era. Haematuria, perirenal haematoma 
and urinary fistulas are the most common complications of 
partial nephrectomy. Less frequent postoperative complica -
tions are acute renal impairment and infection.
RADICAL NEPHRECTOMY
Classic radical nephrectomy consists of removal of the kid -
ney, perirenal fat, adrenal gland and regional lymph nodes. 
However, in patients with a tumour <5  cm in size, located at 
the inferior pole, the adrenal gland can be spared. Similarly, 
regional lymph node dissection can be reserved for patients 
with clinically positive nodes detected by CT or during the 
surgical procedure. It is performed if possible as a laparoscopic 
procedure (most stage I and stage II tumours) but if this is 
not feasible then as an open procedure. Data recently taken 
from the US National Cancer database support the use of 
cytoreductive nephrectomy in those with metastatic disease, 
even while they receive systemic targeted therapies. Indeed, 
the median overall survival was 17.1 months in cytoreduc -
tive nephrectomy patients compared with 7.7. months in the 
non-cytoreductive nephrectomy group. Patients with renal 
vein or IVC involvement by tumour but without evidence of 
metastatic disease remain surgical candidates. Occasionally, 
nephrectomy and removal of IVC tumour thrombus need to 
be done in conjunction with cardiothoracic surgeons, using 
cardiopulmonary bypass techniques for those tumours extend-
ing above the diaphragm. Bench surgery and autotransplan-
tation is performed in highly specialised centres for larger 
tumours in a solitary kidney.
Summary box 76.19
Surgery for renal tumours
●● Surgery is the mainstay treatment for organ-confined renal 
cancer
●● Partial nephrectomy is increasingly used for renal tumours  
<7 cm
●● Partial nephrectomy is increasingly performed using robotic 
assistance
●● Cytoreductive nephrectomy (removal of the kidney in the 
presence of metastatic disease) has a role in patients with a 
good performance status
Active surveillance and ablative therapies
Active surveillance and ablative therapies, such as radiofre -
quency ablation (RFA) and cryotherapy, are alternative strat-
egies for elderly patients and/or those with competing health 
risks and limited life expectancy that render them unsuitable 
for surgery. Intervention should be considered for growth to 
>3–4 cm or by >0.5 cm per year.
Ablative technology must be able to completely destroy 
all viable tumour tissue with no viable tumour left. Both cryo-
therapy and RFA can be performed using a laparoscopic or 
percutaneous approach under CT or ultrasound guidance. 
Available low-quality studies suggest a higher local recurrence 
rate for ablative therapies than for partial nephrectomy.
Medical management using targeted 
therapies
The past 10 years have seen the approval of several targeted 
therapeutic agents for the treatment of metastatic RCC. 
Given the highly vascular nature of RCCs, it is unsurpris -
ing that several therapies are available to exploit this fea -
ture. Indeed, tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting the VEGF 
(vascular endothelial growth factor) signalling axis that 
are approved in the first-line and second-line settings for 
the treatment of metastatic RCC are sorafenib, sunitinib, 
pazopanib, axitinib, lenvatinib and cabozantinib. In addi -
tion, the anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody, bevacizumab, is 
approved for use with interferon-α. The mTOR inhibitors, 
Figure 76.22 A radical nephrectomy specimen containing a r enal 
cell carcinoma (arrow) (courtesy of Dharam M Ramani, MD).
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1420 25/10/2017   10:13Tumours of the kidne y 1421
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
everolimus and temsirolimus, are approved as single agents 
in the second-line setting and in the first-line setting in 
patients with poor risk status. The average duration of dis -
ease control with these drugs is 8–9 months in the first-line 
setting and 5–6 months in the second-line setting. Most of 
the phase III RCTs leading to approval of these agents have 
excluded patients with nccRCC. Many studies are currently 
investigating combinations of anti-VEGF therapy with a 
new generation of immunotherapy agents in the form of 
T cell-immune checkpoint inhibitors such as antibodies 
against programmed cell death protein 1 ligand 1 (PDL1), 
which include avelumab and atezolizumab, and antibod -
ies against programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1) which 
include nivolumab and pembrolizumab.
the bladder – with again laparoscopic mobilisation of the 
kidney which is then delivered through the open incision. A 
catheter is needed for around 10 days after nephroureterec -
tomy to allow the bladder to heal satisfactorily. Robotic assis-
tance for this operation is likely to continue to develop.
Summary box 76.20
Targeted therapies for renal cancer
●● These include tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), anti-VEGF 
monoclonal antibodies and mTOR inhibitors
●● The average duration of disease control with these agents is 
8–9 months
Summary box 76.21
Upper tract transitional cell carcinoma
●● Accounts for 5–10% of urothelial carcinomas
●● Often presents late with advanced disease
●● In the absence of metastatic disease, standard treatment is 
nephroureterectomy
●● Surgical technique is tailored depending on whether the 
UTTCC is in the upper ureter/renal pelvis or lower ureter
Upper tract transitional cell 
carcinoma (UTTCC)
Transitional cell carcinomas of the renal pelves or ureters 
account for 5–10% of transitional cell tumours of the uri -
nary tract. The risk factors for these tumours are the same 
as for bladder cancer. Tumours, especially high-grade ones, 
in the upper urinary tract are often multifocal and associated 
with carcinoma in situ (CIS). Approximately 5% of patients 
who have been diagnosed with bladder cancer will, during  
follow-up, develop a metachronous UTTCC – usually 
patients with high-grade tumours or CIS of the bladder. 
Approximately 40% of patients who present with a UTTCC 
will, at some point, develop a metachronous bladder cancer, 
hence the need for endoscopic follow-up after the diagnosis 
of a UTTCC. The incidence of subsequent bladder tumours 
in these patients has been shown to be reduced by 25% with 
a single intravesical dose of mitomycin-C around the time of 
treatment of the UTTCC. UTTCC often presents late with 
the disease already invading the muscle of the ureter or renal 
pelvis, involving lymph nodes or already metastatic.
The standard treatment of UTTCC is nephroureterec-
tomy. In most cases, the surgery to mobilise (a) the kidney 
and (b) the distal ureter is accomplished using different surgi-
cal approaches depending on whether the tumour is high up 
in the renal pelvis or involves the distal ureter. If the tumour 
is in the renal pelvis, laparoscopic mobilisation of the kidney 
and ureter can be combined with endoscopic resection of the 
ipsilateral intramural ureter to allow nephroureterectomy. If 
the tumour involves the distal ureter, the distal ureter is usu -
ally dissected out using a lower midline incision and  opening 
Carl Max Wilhelm Wilms , 1867–1918, German surgeon, described Wilms’ tumour in 1899.
Wilms’ tumour (nephroblastoma)
This mixed tumour contains elements from embryonic 
nephrogenic tissue (Figure 76.23). Nephroblastoma is usu -
ally discovered during the first five years of life, usually in one 
pole of one kidney. Bilateral tumours pose a difficult problem.
Pathology
A rapidly growing tumour is likely to be friable in consistency.
Clinical features
An abdominal tumour grows rapidly in a poorly child. The 
mass may be very large. Some patients are hypertensive.
Figure 76.23 Wilms’ tumour. 
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1421 25/10/2017   10:13CHAPTER 76  Kidneys and ur eters
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1422
Haematuria is an unfavourable symptom denoting exten -
sion of the tumour into the renal pelvis.
Imaging confirms a solid space-occupying lesion in the 
kidney, with or without venous invasion, contralateral disease 
and distant spread.
Metastasis to the lungs occurs early. Liver, bone and brain 
metastases are rare. Lymphatic spread is uncommon.
Treatment
These children are best treated in specialist paediatric oncol-
ogy units. Most unilateral tumours are treated by chemother-
apy followed by nephrectomy. Partial nephrectomy may be 
possible in patients with bilateral disease.
Prognosis
Eighty per cent survive long term with modern chemotherapy 
and surgery. The prognosis is worse in those with metastases 
and in older children.
FURTHER READING
Hsieh JJ, Purdue MP , Signoretti S et al. Renal cell carcinoma. Nat Rev Dis 
Primers. 2017; 9(3): 1–19.
Johnson JJ, Feehally J, Floege J. Comprehensive clinical nephrology, 5th 
edn. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2015.
Khan SR et al. Kidney stones. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016; 2: 1–22.
Summary box 76.22
Nephroblastoma (Wilms’ tumour)
●● Usually presents in the first five years of life
●● Typically presents with an abdominal mass
●● May cause haematuria, abdominal pain or fever
●● Metastasises to the lung
●● Is best treated in a specialist paediatric oncology unit
12_76-B&L27_Pt12_Ch76.indd   1422 25/10/2017   10:13Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The anatomy, vascular supply and innervation of the 
bladder in relation to function and disease
 • The principles of management of bladder trauma, 
incontinence and fistulae
 • The common causes of acute and chronic urinary 
retention and management
 • The different types of bladder cancer and the principles 
of management
Chapter
The urinary bladder
77
SURGICAL ANATOMY OF THE 
BLADDER
 ● It is lined by transitional epithelium covering the connec-
tive tissue lamina propria, which contains a rich plexus of 
vessels and lymphatics.
 ● When the detrusor muscle hypertrophies, the inner layer, 
covered by urothelium, stands out, resulting in the appear-
ance of trabeculation.
 ● Over the trigone is a thin layer of smooth muscle to which 
the epithelium is closely adherent and which extends as 
a sheath around the lower ureters and into the proximal 
urethra.
 ● Around the male bladder neck is the smooth muscle inter-
nal sphincter innervated by adrenergic fibres, which pre-
vents retrograde ejaculation.
 ● The distal urethral sphincter is a horseshoe-shaped mass 
of striated muscle that lies anterior and distal to the pros-
tate, or in the proximal two-thirds of the female urethra. 
It is distinct from the pelvic floor and is supplied by S2–4 
fibres via the pudendal nerve and by somatic fibres passing 
through the inferior hypogastric plexus.
Fascial and ligamentous supports of 
the bladder
At the posterolateral bladder neck, condensations of fascia 
pass forward medially and laterally to the ureter to join with 
the prostatic fascia; this fascia needs to be divided during 
cystectomy. The puboprostatic ligaments are well-defined 
condensations of the anterior endopelvic fascia; they stretch 
from the front of the prostate to the periosteum of the pubis 
and lie lateral to the dorsal vein complex. The urachus and 
obliterated hypogastric arteries, together with the folds of 
peritoneum overlying them, are called the median and lat-
eral umbilical ligaments. Condensations of fascia also occur 
around the superior and inferior vascular pedicles.
Arteries
The superior and inferior vesical arteries are derived from 
the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery. Branches from 
the obturator and inferior gluteal arteries (and from the uter-
ine and vaginal arteries in females) also help to supply the  
bladder.
Veins
The veins form a plexus on the lateral and inferior surfaces of 
the bladder. In males the prostatic plexus is continuous with 
the vesical plexus, which drains into the internal iliac vein. 
In females similar large veins are continuous with the vaginal 
plexus.
Lymphatics
These accompany the veins and drain to nodes along the 
internal iliac vessels, and then to the obturator and external 
iliac chains. Some lymphatics pass to no des that are situated 
posteriorly to the internal iliac artery (hypogastric nodes).
INNERVATION
The parasympathetic input
The parasympathetic input (Figure 77.1) is derived from 
the anterior primary divisions of the second, third and fourth 
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1423 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1424
sacral segments (mainly S2 and S3). Fibres pass through the 
pelvic splanchnic nerves to the inferior hypogastric plexus, 
from where they are distributed to the bladder. The pelvic 
plexus can be damaged during deep pelvic operations.
The sympathetic input
This arises in the eleventh thoracic to the second lumbar seg-
ments; fibres pass via the presacral hypogastric nerve (rather than 
via the sympathetic chains) to the inferior hypogastric plexus.
Somatic innervation
A somatic innervation passes to the distal sphincter mech-
anism via the pudendal nerves and also via fibres that pass 
through the inferior hypogastric plexus.
Functional aspects
Sympathetic nerves convey afferents from the fundus. Affer -
ents arise from the mucosa, where they respond to touch, tem-
perature and pain, and from the detrusor and lamina propria, 
where they convey stretch information. Afferents pass via 
the inferior hypogastric plexus to the posterior roots of S2–4. 
Some aspects of micturition are centred in the pons, where 
detrusor contraction is coordinated with inhibition of the dis-
tal sphincter. Interruption of this pathway below the pons, 
with preservation of the sacral cord. is likely to result in a con-
tractile detrusor and tonically active distal sphincter that will 
not relax during voiding (detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia).
CONGENITAL DEFECTS OF THE 
BLADDER
Bladder exstrophy
Clinical features
Bladder exstrophy occurs in 1:50 000 births (male:female ratio 
4:1) (Figure 77.2). In males, the penis is broad and short, and 
bilateral inguinal herniae may be present. There is separation 
of the pubic bones (Figure 77.3). In epispadias alone, the 
pubes are united and external genitalia are almost normal, 
although in females the clitoris is bifid (Figure 77.4).
T11
12
L1
2 Hypogastr ic ner ve
S2
3
4
Bladder
Intra-abdominal
urethra
P elvic /f_loor
External sphincter
Pudendal ner ve
P elvic
splanchnics
Lumbar trunk
Figure 77.1 The nervous control of the bladder. Micturition is partly 
a reflex and partly a voluntary act.
Figure 77.3 Separation of the pubes in a case of ectopia vesicae 
(courtesy of the late Professor Grey Turner, London, UK).
Figure 77.4 Female epispadias showing deficient sphincter and 
bifid clitoris.
Figure 77.2 Ectopia vesicae in a man. A dr op of urine (arrow) is 
seen at the left ureteric orifice, the cor ona glandis being retracted by 
threads (courtesy of GD Adhia, Bombay, India).
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1424 25/10/2017   10:14Bladder trauma 1425
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Treatment
The bladder is closed in the first year of life, usually after oste-
otomy of both iliac bones just lateral to the sacroiliac joints. 
Later, reconstruction of the bladder neck and sphincters is 
required. In some patients the reconstructed bladder remains 
small and requires augmentation. One-stage reconstruction is 
being practised in some major centres.
Less satisfactorily, urinary diversion can be carried out 
by means of ureterosigmoid anastomosis, an ileal or colonic 
conduit, or continent urinary diversion. Long-term compli -
cations include: (1) stricture at the site of anastomosis with 
bilateral hydronephrosis and infection; (2) hyperchloraemic 
acidosis; and (3) an increased (20-fold) risk of tumour forma-
tion (adenoma and adenocarcinoma) at the site of a uretero -
colic anastomosis.
BLADDER TRAUMA
Bladder rupture
This can be intraperitoneal (20%) or extraperitoneal (80%) 
(Figures 77.5 and 77.6). Intraperitoneal rupture is usually 
secondary to a blow or fall on a distended bladder, and more 
rarely to surgical damage. Extraperitoneal rupture is caused 
by blunt trauma or surgical damage. Gross haematuria can be 
absent. It may be difficult to distinguish extraperitoneal rupture 
from rupture of the membranous urethra (see Chapter 79). 
Intraperitoneal rupture is associated with sudden severe pain in 
the hypogastrium, often accompanied by syncope. The shock 
subsides and the abdomen distends and there is no desire to 
micturate. Peritonitis does not follow immediately if the urine 
is sterile; varying degrees of rigidity are present on examination.
Investigation
Computed tomography (CT) is ideal. Plain erect radiographs 
may show a ground-glass appearance (fluid). Intravenous 
urography (IVU) may confirm a leak. Retrograde cystography 
will confirm the diagnosis (Figure 77.7). It is important to 
image the patient after drainage of contrast because the full 
bladder may mask extravasation.
Treatment of intraperitoneal rupture
A lower midline laparotomy should be performed; the edges 
of the rent are trimmed and sutured with a single-layer 2/0 
absorbable suture. A suprapubic and a urethral catheter are 
placed. Very rarely, the rupture will be through an unsus -
pected tumour; a biopsy can be taken before suturing the 
defect. Laparoscopic approaches are also now being used.
Injury to the bladder during 
operation
The bladder may be injured in (1) inguinal or femoral herni -
otomy, (2) hysterectomy and (3) excision of the rectum. If the 
injury is recognised, the bladder must be repaired and catheter 
Figure 77.5 Intraperitoneal extravasation of urine.
Figure 77.6 Extraperitoneal extravasation of urine.
Figure 77.7 Cystogram of a patient who has fallen over and devel -
oped severe abdominal pain. Leakage of contrast into the peritoneal 
cavity is seen.
Summary box 77.1
Bladder trauma
●● Intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal
●● Suspected if there is trauma and damage to the pelvis
●● May be diagnosed by retrograde cystography
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1425 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1426
drainage maintained for 7 days. If it is not recognised, the 
treatment is similar to that of rupture of the bladder.
When accidental extraperitoneal perforation of the 
bladder occurs during endoscopic resection, drainage of the 
bladder with a urethral catheter and the administration of 
antibiotics usually suffice. If a mass of extravasated fluid is 
present it is best to place a small drain through a stab incision. 
A laparotomy will usually be required if an intraperitoneal 
perforation is caused by transurethral resection.
Treatment
Treatment is to pass a fine urethral catheter (14F – French 
gauge is defined as the circumference in millimetres) and 
arrange urological management. Occasionally, in postopera -
tive retention a warm bath can help (Figures 77.9–77.12).
URETHRAL CATHETERISATION
After a thorough hand wash, sterile gloves are donned. The 
genitalia are cleaned using soapy antiseptic. Lidocaine gel is 
inserted into the urethra, warning the patient that this may 
create stinging. The jelly should be massaged posteriorly in 
an attempt to anaesthetise the sphincter region, and it is of 
advantage to place a penile clamp for several minutes. A 
small Foley catheter should be passed while the penis is held 
RETENTION OF URINE (SEE 
ALSO CHAPTER 78)
Acute retention
There are many possible causes of acute retention of urine.
Summary box 77.2
Management of bladder trauma
●● Extravesical injury – catheter drainage for 10 days
●● Intraperitoneal injury – laparotomy, repair and bladder 
drainage
Summary box 77.3
The most frequent causes of acute retention
Male
●● Bladder outlet obstruction (the most common cause)
●● Urethral stricture
●● Acute urethritis or prostatitis
●● Phimosis
Female
●● Retroverted gravid uterus
●● Bladder neck obstruction (rare)
Both
●● Blood clot
●● Urethral calculus
●● Rupture of the urethra
●● Neurogenic (injury or disease of the spinal cord)
●● Smooth muscle cell dysfunction associated with ageing
●● Faecal impaction
●● Anal pain (haemorrhoidectomy)
●● Intensive postoperative analgesic treatment
●● Some drugs
●● Spinal anaesthesia
Clinical features
 ● No urine is passed for several hours.
 ● Pain is present.
 ● The bladder is visible, palpable, tender (Figure 77.8) and 
dull to percussion.
 ● Potential neurological causes should be excluded by check-
ing reflexes in the lower limbs and perianal sensation.
Figure 77.8 Distended bladder in a man who presented with reten-
tion of urine.
Figure 77.9 Cleaning of the penis before catheterisation.
Figure 77.10  Insertion of local anaesthetic befor e insertion of a 
catheter.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1426 25/10/2017   10:14Retention of urine 1427
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
If the catheter will not pass, it is usually due to poor tech-
nique, lack of anaesthesia, traumatisation of the urethra or a 
urethral stricture. Occasionally, a large prostatic middle lobe 
may prevent the catheter entering the bladder; sometimes a 
coudé catheter will pass. If a catheter cannot be passed the 
following plan should be pursued.
Suprapubic puncture
Suprapubic puncture with commercially available cathe-
ters such as Cystofix or Lawrence Add-a-Cath catheters is 
straightforward provided that the bladder is palpable. The 
skin, fascia and retropubic space are anaesthetised with 0.5% 
lidocaine. Correct placement is confirmed by aspiration. A 
large-bore needle is then placed into the bladder, down which 
a fine catheter is passed (Cystofix) and then secured in posi -
tion. The other option is to place a plastic suprapubic trocar 
and cannula, which has a removable plastic strip on the side. 
A standard 12F Foley catheter can be passed down the can -
nula, the balloon is inflated, the cannula is extracted and the 
strip pulled away from the catheter (Add-a-Cath). If urine 
cannot be aspirated through the fine-bore needle, passing a 
suprapubic trocar should not be attempted.
If these devices are not available, a catheter can be placed 
in the bladder under direct vision through a small incision 
under local anaesthetic.
Urethral instrumentation
In a patient with a known stricture, an experienced  urologist 
may elect to dilate the stricture or to take the patient to  theatre 
to carry out an optical urethrotomy (see Chapter 79).
Chronic retention
In chronic retention there is no pain. These patients are 
at risk of upper tract dilatation because of high intravesical 
tension – they require urgent urological referral. Men with 
impaired renal function may develop postobstructive diuresis 
after catheterisation. Such men need careful monitoring, with 
replacement of inappropriate urinary losses by intravenous 
saline; they are also at risk of haematuria as the distended 
urinary tract empties. Often it is several days before full renal 
recovery occurs.
Retention with overflow
The patient is incontinent with small amounts of urine pass -
ing involuntarily from the distended bladder. It usually fol -
lows a neglected retention.
Indwelling catheters and closed 
systems of catheter drainage
The risk of ascending infection is decreased by connecting 
the catheter to sterile tubing connected to a collecting bag. 
Irrigations should be avoided unless clot retention occurs. 
When a catheter has been in situ for a few days, some degree 
Figure 77.11 The use of a penile clamp to ensure that suf ficient 
time is given to allow the anaesthetic to work before the catheter is 
inserted.
Figure 77.12 A selection of silicone catheters.
taut. In a female patient, the labia should be parted using the 
middle and index fingers of the left hand, which should not 
be moved once cleaning has been performed. Provided that a 
stricture is not the cause, the catheter should pass freely. Once 
urine begins to drain it is wise to pass a few more centimetres 
of catheter into the bladder before the balloon is inflated to 
avoid inflation in the prostate. Force must not be used.
Frederic Eugene Basil Foley , 1891–1966, urologist, Anker Hospital, St Paul, MN, USA.
Summary box 77.4
Catheterisation for acute retention of urine
After catheterisation:
●● Record the volume of urine drained
●● Examine the abdomen to exclude other pathology (rupture of 
an aortic aneurysm, ureteric colic or diverticulitis can cause 
confusion)
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1427 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1428
of urethritis and bacteriuria is likely; changing a catheter then 
entails risks of severe infection if prophylactic antibiotics are 
not used (Figure 77.13).
Acute retention due to drugs
A number of drugs can induce retention, including antihista-
mines, antihypertensives, anticholinergics and tricyclic anti -
depressants.
The acute neuropathic bladder
1 Immediately after spinal cord injury, ‘spinal shock’ occurs 
(see Chapter 25), which may last for days or months. The 
detrusor cannot contract, the bladder distends and over -
flow incontinence occurs. Neglected bladder distension 
will lead to damage to the detrusor, infection and ulti -
mately renal failure. Management is as follows.
2 The bladder must be emptied by aseptic intermittent cath-
eterisation performed two or three times daily or the use of 
an indwelling urethral catheter on continuous drainage, 
making sure that the patient has a high urinary output (3 
litres per day) to combat infection. Currently , intermit -
tent catheterisation is preferred as soon as the patient’s 
spinal injury is stable.
3 Neurological examination must be performed to assess 
the level of sensory and motor loss. Ischaemic necrosis of 
the cord may extend below the upper level of cord injury. 
When sensory loss below the upper level is total, recovery 
is unlikely. Incomplete lesions may recover somatic and 
bladder function.
4 Demonstration of intact bulbocavernosus and anal 
reflexes indicates that the sacral cord and nerves are intact 
and that reflex bladder contractions are likely to develop, 
although they may be insufficient to empty the bladder. If 
there is persistent total loss of reflexes and perineal sen -
sation then either the sacral cord or the cauda equina is 
damaged. In such circumstances an acontractile bladder is 
likely. In cauda equina lesions there may be sensory, motor 
or mixed loss.
5 Full urodynamic assessment of bladder function should be 
undertaken when the injury is stable. This allows an accu-
rate assessment of bladder and sphincter activity and will 
enable decisions to be made about further management; 
the prime aim is to prevent upper tract damage by promot-
ing good bladder emptying.
100
100
1200
1200
Figure 77.13  Modern Simpla bag used for continuous bladder 
drainage. (The nurse who is emptying the bag should be wearing dis-
posable gloves to avoid contaminating the hands with organisms.)
The following situations represent the typical patterns of 
bladder function seen after spinal cord injury.
Lesions above T10
Usually leads to an ‘upper motor neuron’ bladder with reflexes 
intact but isolated from higher control mechanisms. Such 
patients are at risk of autonomic dysreflexia.
As a result of detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia, bladder 
contractions are high pressure and ineffective in producing 
bladder emptying; the bladder neck is normally open. If left 
untreated, upper tract dilatation and renal failure may result. 
Bladder capacity is usually decreased with the development of 
trabeculation and a typical ‘fir-tree’ appearance. Patients are 
incontinent during high-pressure phasic contractions because 
the sphincter resistance suddenly diminishes.
Some patients with low-pressure bladders that empty may 
be managed by means of condom drainage. Others will require 
clean, intermittent, self-catheterisation (CISC), popularised 
by Lapides. Patients with poor emptying, low bladder capac -
ity and upper tract dilatation require treatment with endo -
scopic sphincterotomy and condom drainage. Some carefully 
selected patients may require bladder reconstruction.
Lesions involving the sympathetic outflow 
(T11, T12, L1, L2)
These patients are usually similar to the group with lesions 
above T10.
Damage to the sacral centre S2, S3, S4 and 
cauda equina lesions
Usually leads to a ‘lower motor neuron’ bladder, also found  
in spina bifida (myelodysplasia); the detrusor is acontractile. 
Abdominal straining can produce reasonable emptying but the 
mainstay is CISC. Some patients may have sensation of filling 
through the hypogastric nerves if T11 and T12 are intact. The 
bladder capacity may be good, but some patients have high rest-
ing pressures and high increases during bladder filling, which 
Summary box 77.5
Clinical management of spinal injury
●● The bladder should be emptied during spinal shock by 
catheterisation
●● Encourage high fluid intake
●● Commence intermittent catheterisation
●● When the patient is stable undertake full urodynamic 
evaluation
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1428 25/10/2017   10:14Incontinence of urine 1429
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
means that there is a risk to the upper urinary tract. The blad-
der neck is usually open and the distal sphincter mechanisms 
may be paralysed but of fixed resistance. Vesicoureteric reflux 
is common and upper tract damage is frequent in neglected 
cases. Patients who can achieve satisfactory bladder emptying 
by means of CISC usually have reasonable continence.
Bladder dysfunction after excision of the 
rectum or radical hysterectomy
Between 10% and 15% of patients undergoing radical rectal 
excision for cancer sustain damage to the inferior hypogastric 
plexus, leading to impotence in males and neurogenic bladder 
dysfunction. This type of bladder dysfunction is similar to the 
cauda equina lesion. Postoperative retention in other patients 
may also be caused by simple bladder outlet obstruction. The 
best plan is to catheterise the patient to allow postoperative 
recovery and then carry out urodynamic investigation to 
determine the appropriate treatment.
INCONTINENCE OF URINE
Overall, urinary incontinence occurs in 5% of men and 20% 
of women. Up to 40% of women over the age of 60 years and 
50% of institutionalised elderly patients experience regular 
episodes of urinary incontinence. Health problems include 
skin breakdown and depression, and loss of esteem and sexual 
activity. Continence is dependent on normal mobility and 
brain function allowing a perception of when it is socially 
acceptable to void, normal bladder sensation, normal volun-
tary detrusor contraction producing good bladder emptying, 
a normally competent sphincter mechanism, which relaxes 
appropriately during a voluntary detrusor contraction allow-
ing good bladder emptying, and good bladder capacity with 
normally low pressures during filling. This is clearly a fine bal-
ance and several factors can cause incontinence. In children, 
non-neurogenic incontinence is often associated with other 
dysfunctional conditions such as infections, constipation, 
psychological factors, increased fluid intake, intentional mis -
conduct or an overactive bladder. Several investigations are 
required for diagnosis of urinary incontinence.
In selected cases IVU is carried out if a ureteric fistula is 
suspected, although ultrasound examination will often pro -
vide adequate details
Urodynamic testing
The key to the practical management of lower urinary tract 
dysfunction, and particularly incontinence, lies with urody -
namic investigation. The principle is to artificially simulate 
bladder filling and emptying while obtaining pressure mea -
surements (Figure 77.14).
The patient attends with a full bladder and is allowed to 
void in private to measure the maximum urinary flow rate. 
After voiding, the residual urine is measured by ultrasound. 
A pair of catheters or a twin-lumen catheter is passed into 
the bladder, which allows the bladder to be filled at a rate of 
50 mL/min while a continuous recording of intravesical pres-
sure is made. To obtain ‘true’ detrusor pressure, a second chan-
nel is required to assess intra-abdominal pressure, measured 
by means of a small intrarectal or intravaginal balloon. The 
bladder is filled until the patient states that the bladder is full. 
Radiographic screening may be carried out to assess bladder 
neck closure and urinary leakage during movement or cough-
ing (stress incontinence) or during bouts of phasic detrusor 
pressure (detrusor instability). The patient is then asked to 
void at the end of bladder filling after the filling catheter has 
been removed (Figure 77.15).
The normal bladder will accept approximately 400–  
550 mL when filled at room temperature at a rate of <50  mL/
min. The pressure increase in the bladder should be less than 
15 cmH2O. In addition, phasic pressure increases should not 
be seen. The normal voiding pressure should not exceed 
60 cmH2O in men and about 40  cmH2O in women, with a 
flow rate of between 20 mL/s and 25 mL/s.
Common abnormalities identified during 
urodynamic testing in incontinence
THE OVERACTIVE BLADDER
Phasic increases in pressure give rise to urgency and urge 
incontinence (detrusor overactivity; Figure 77.16). This 
abnormality is found in patients with neurogenic bladder 
Summary box 77.6
Diagnosis of urinary incontinence
The following investigations are required:
●● A careful history and physical examination and completion of 
frequency voiding charts
●● Urodynamic testing in most patients and in all patients in 
whom surgical intervention is proposed
●● Urine culture to exclude infection and measurement of serum 
creatinine Key
F
B
B–R
R
FAM
Pen recorder
F
B
B–R
R
FAM
Flow
Bladder
Bladder–rectum
Rectum
Flow at micturition
Camera
Videotape
recorder
Image
intensi/f_ier
Split screen
unit
Monitor
Figure 77.14 Urodynamic study.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1429 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1430
dysfunction, such as in multiple sclerosis (MS) or Parkinson’s 
disease, or after a stroke or spinal injury, when it is known as 
detrusor hyperreflexia. About 50% of men with bladder out-
flow obstruction have detrusor instability, and in about half of 
them the instability resolves after prostatectomy. Idiopathic 
detrusor overactivity is common and must be distinguished 
from genuine stress incontinence (GSI) in women before 
performing bladder neck suspension procedures. In children, 
overactive bladder symptoms must be carefully investigated 
and treated with conservative measures before initiating anti-
muscarinic therapy.
GENUINE STRESS INCONTINENCE
This is defined as urinary leakage occurring during increased 
bladder pressure when this is solely due to increased abdom -
inal pressure and not to increased true detrusor pressure (see 
Figure 77.15). It is caused by sphincter weakness.
CHRONIC URINARY RETENTION
Chronic urinary retention with overflow incontinence is rec-
ognised by a large residual volume of urine (Figure 77.17) 
and is usually associated with high pressures during bladder 
filling.
BLADDER OUTFLOW OBSTRUCTION
Bladder outflow obstruction is associated with increased void-
ing pressures, often in excess of 90  cmH2O (Figure 77.18), 
coupled with low urinary flow rates.
NEUROGENIC DYSFUNCTION
Neurogenic bladder dysfunction may also be identified.
Causes of incontinence
There are various ways of classifying the causes of incontinence.
 ● Problems of social control. Patients with dementia often 
have incontinence because of uninhibited detrusor hyper-
reflexia and impaired social perception.
 ● Storage problems. Patients with a small bladder capacity 
owing to fibrosis (tuberculosis, radiotherapy or interstitial 
cystitis) can develop incontinence. Patients with a small 
functional capacity owing to severe detrusor instability, neu-
rogenic dysfunction or infection can develop incontinence.
 ● Impairment of emptying. Patients with chronic retention 
or neurogenic bladder dysfunction have small functional  
bladder capacities with detrusor overactivity causing incon-
tinence, despite having large residual volumes of urine.
 ● Weak sphincter. This leads to GSI and can follow surgical 
procedures such as radical prostatectomy in men.
200
180
140
160
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
012345 6789 10 11 12 13 14 15
Time (min)
Pressure (cmH2O)
Figure 77.15  A section of an ambulatory, natural-fill ur odynamic 
trace. The rectal pressure is in red, the bladder pressure in blue and 
the subtracted detrusor trace in black. The orange trace is the out -
put of an electronic nappy, which records urinary leakage. A cough is 
shown, which results in genuine stress incontinence.
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–20
–40
01 61 71 81 92 02 12 22 32 42 52 62 72 82 93 0
Time (min)
Pressure (cmH2O)
Leak
Void 100 mlFigure 77.16  A section of an ambulatory, natural-fill ur odynamic 
trace. The rectal pr essure is in red, the bladder pressure in blue and 
the subtracted detrusor trace in black. The orange trace is the output 
of an electronic nappy, which records urinary leakage. Phasic activity 
is shown, which is detrusor instability resulting in urge incontinence.
James Parkinson , 1755–1824, general practitioner of Shoreditch, London, UK, published An essay on the shaking palsy in 1817.
Figure 77.17 An ultrasound scan showing a large postvoid residual 
urine.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1430 25/10/2017   10:14Incontinence of urine 1431
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Male incontinence
CHRONIC URINARY RETENTION WITH OVERFLOW
This may be due to benign prostatic hypertrophy, carcinoma 
of the prostate, urethral stricture and, in younger men, hyper-
trophy of the bladder neck. Examination may reveal that the 
bladder is distended, and it can be confirmed by ultrasonogra-
phy. The treatment is discussed in Chapter 78.
POST-PROSTATECTOMY
Post-prostatectomy incontinence may result from injury to the 
external sphincter mechanism. Treatment should be conser -
vative initially with pelvic floor exercises, and an anastomotic 
stricture must be excluded. The condition may necessitate 
insertion of an artificial urethral sphincter (Figure 77.19).
Female incontinence
STRESS INCONTINENCE
The most common cause is GSI although, in some parts 
of the world, vesicourethral fistulae as a result of neglected 
labour are common. It is usually found in multiparous women 
with a history of difficult labour. It can be found in normal 
young women who indulge in competitive trampolining and 
in patients with epispadias. The classic symptom is urine loss 
during coughing, laughing, sneezing or a sudden change of 
posture. The symptoms may change with the menstrual cycle. 
The volume of urine loss can be measured during an exer -
cise test, which is performed by putting the patient through 
a standard set of tests with 300 mL of fluid in the bladder; in 
GSI the fluid losses usually range from 10 mL to 50 mL. Uri -
nary frequency and urgency are often found in such patients 
because they try to avoid incontinence by frequent voiding.
Idiopathic detrusor instability can mimic GSI and coexist 
with it. It is important to make a correct preoperative diagnosis 
by urodynamic measurements, because the outcome of surgery 
is suboptimal in women with idiopathic detrusor instability.
Minor-to-moderate stress urinary incontinence can be 
controlled by pelvic floor exercises. However, if this fails, sur-
gery is indicated. Standard operations include open colposus-
pension or the use of a minimally invasive approach involving 
the insertion of a transvaginal tape (TVT procedure).
OPEN COLPOSUSPENSION
This operation is carried out through a Pfannenstiel incision 
with the patient in the Lloyd-Davies position. The vaginal 
fascia is identified by sweeping the bladder off the vagina, 
and three sutures are placed on each side between the vaginal 
fascia and the iliopubic ligament. A suprapubic catheter is 
120
80
40
20
10
0
0 12
Time (min)Voided volume 340 mL
0
Obstructed void
(200)
(100)
Scale change
Flow rate (mL s–1) Detrusor pressure (cmH2O)
Figure 77.18  A conventional urodynamic trace showing detrusor 
pressure during voiding. There has been a change of scale because 
the pressure was so high; voiding pressures are increased with a low 
flow rate, which is diagnostic of bladder outflow obstruction.
Summary box 77.7
Uses of urodynamic testing
●● To distinguish genuine stress incontinence (due to sphincter 
weakness) from detrusor instability in women (see Figure 
77.15)
●● For the classification of neurogenic bladder dysfunction
●● To distinguish bladder outflow obstruction from idiopathic 
detrusor instability in men
●● To investigate incontinence or other lower urinary tract 
symptoms
Cuff
Control pump
Pressure
regulating 
reservoir
Figure 77.19  The artificial urinary sphincter made by American 
Medical Systems.
 ● Fistulae. Leakage from fistulae or upper tract duplication 
with an ectopic ureter.
 ● In children, the causes must be carefully investigated and 
treated with conservative measures before initiating anti -
muscarinic therapy.
The common causes may be classified into male, female or 
mixed-sex groups.
Hermann Johann Pfannenstiel , 1862–1909, gynaecologist, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland), described this incision in 1900.
Oswald Lloyd-Davies , 1905–1987, surgeon, St Mark’s Hospital and the Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1431 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1432
placed. Voiding difficulties are frequent but usually temporary. 
It is best to warn women with large bladder capacities and 
low voiding pressures that this complication may occur and 
that they may be required to carry out CISC for a period. The 
operation is very successful for the treatment of GSI, with 
good results at 1 year in 90% of patients, which are main -
tained in about 80% of patients at 5 years.
Modifications of bladder neck suspension can also be 
achieved by minimally invasive approaches such as the trans-
vaginal sling. This technique does reduce both hospital stay 
and postoperative morbidity.
Incontinence common to both sexes
IDIOPATHIC DETRUSOR OVERACTIVITY
Phasic increases in bladder pressure may occur during filling 
in otherwise normal patients (idiopathic) or it may be found 
in neurogenic bladder dysfunction (when it is known as detru-
sor hyperreflexia) and bladder outflow obstruction. Idiopathic 
detrusor overactivity may be asymptomatic but usually results 
in symptoms of frequency, urgency, urge incontinence, noc -
turia or nocturnal incontinence (enuresis), depending on the 
severity of the instability. It must be distinguished from GSI 
and from bladder outflow obstruction before surgical treatment. 
Infection, tuberculosis or carcinoma in situ (CIS) should be 
excluded. The mainstay of treatment is the use of various anti-
cholinergic medications (oxybutynin and tolterodine). Severe 
symptoms resistant to conventional conservative treatment, 
resulting in major impairment of quality of life, may need more 
aggressive treatment such as enterocystoplasty or the injection 
of small doses of botulinum toxin (the toxin from Clostridium 
botulinum), known as BoTox, which blocks cholinergic neuro-
muscular transmission, at least for a time.
AGEING
Ageing can result in smooth muscle cell dysfunction, which 
can cause combinations of small functional capacity, detru -
sor overactivity, impaired bladder emptying and symptoms of 
lower urinary tract dysfunction.
CONGENITAL
Congenital causes include ectopic vesicae and severe epispa -
dias. The abnormal entry of an ectopic ureter distal to the 
sphincter complex or into the vagina in a female patient 
should theoretically result in total urinary incontinence. This 
is discussed in Chapters 9 and 76.
TRAUMA
Trauma, whether from pelvic surgery or associated with pelvic 
fracture, may result in disruption of the nerve supply to the 
bladder or urethra, or in fistula formation.
INFECTION
Lower urinary tract infection (UTI) may be sufficient to 
induce urinary incontinence. A history of frequency, burn-
ing and a fever should prompt the diagnosis. Symptoms will 
usually settle with a course of antibiotics, but in the case of 
recurrent infection further investigation of the urinary tract 
will clearly be indicated.
NEOPLASIA
Locally advanced cancers in the pelvis, particularly carci -
noma of the cervix in a woman and carcinoma of the prostate 
in a man, may result in direct invasion of the sphincter mech-
anism causing incontinence; occasionally, fistula formation 
may occur in women.
Other causes
CONSTANT DRIBBLING OF URINE COUPLED WITH 
NORMAL MICTURITION
This occurs when there is a ureteric fistula or an ectopic ure -
ter associated with a duplex system opening into the urethra 
beyond the urethral sphincter in females or into the vagina. 
The history is diagnostic, and IVU or ultrasonography may 
reveal the upper pole segment, which is often poorly func-
tioning. Treatment is by excision of the aberrant ureter and 
portion of kidney. A ureteric fistula can be difficult to diag -
nose and its demonstration may require retrograde ureterog-
raphy and a high degree of suspicion.
NOCTURNAL ENURESIS
This is a condition of young children and young adults. Of 
course, the time at which children become dry at night varies 
and, in some, nocturnal enuresis is merely a delayed onset of 
continence. In others, it persists until late adolescence and is 
classified into primary and secondary nocturnal enuresis. In 
children, once neurogenic dysfunction has been excluded, 
the condition can be associated with other symptoms such 
as intentional misconduct, infections, constipation and 
increased fluid intake. These causes must be ruled out before 
medication is considered.
Primary nocturnal enuresis occurs in patients with noctur-
nal symptoms alone, which are absent during the day. Often, 
they have been dry for a period, and the vast majority of 
patients will eventually become dry. In the meantime, a sym-
pathetic approach to these children is essential. They often 
respond to a system of rewards using a ‘star’ chart. In addi -
tion, the use of DDA VP (a vasopressin analogue) can produce 
increased urinary concentration at night with a decrease in 
nocturnal incontinence. Other treatments include the use of 
an alarm that wakes the child (or at least the child’s parents) 
when incontinence occurs and medication in the form of an 
anticholinergic drug such as oxybutynin.
Treatments for incontinence
Treatments are listed below . Management is dependent on 
making a correct diagnosis.
Management and treatment
After careful assessment and investigation, many cases of 
incontinence can improve with simple measures such as life-
style interventions, pelvic floor exercises with biofeedback, 
bladder training and incontinence devices where necessary. 
In mixed urge and stress incontinence, the major component 
has to be treated first.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1432 25/10/2017   10:14Incontinence of urine 1433
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
PROBLEMS OF SOCIAL FUNCTIONING
Patients with dementia may respond to regular toileting. Anti-
cholinergic agents can cause increased confusion in these patients 
and often, in severe cases, an indwelling catheter is needed.
STORAGE PROBLEMS
Patients with a small bladder capacity because of fibrosis 
may require augmentation cystoplasty. Detrusor overactivity 
will require treatment with anticholinergic medication but, 
in severe cases, particularly in neuropathic patients at high 
risk of upper tract dilatation, bladder substitution (near-total 
supratrigonal cystectomy followed by the need for detubular -
ised ileocaecal segment bladder substitution) or augmentation 
(enterocystoplasty) may be needed. These procedures should be 
carried out only after careful assessment in units used to dealing 
with such problems. Patients with very impaired mobility and 
MS may require ileal conduit diversion. The use of intravesical 
injections of BoTox has provided good improvements, and it 
may avoid or delay the need for major surgery.
IMPAIRED BLADDER EMPTYING
Patients with overflow incontinence because of bladder out -
flow obstruction will usually respond well to prostatectomy. 
Patients with impaired bladder emptying because of neuro -
genic bladder dysfunction should be treated in the first place 
by means of CISC.
WEAK SPHINCTER
Patients with GSI should be treated by means of pelvic floor 
exercises initially. Duloxetine can be used as medical treat -
ment for GSI. Bulking agents, such as macroplastique, can 
be used and can provide good temporary solutions. Surgi -
cal treatment by means of colposuspension or TVT may be 
needed. Those with post-prostatectomy incontinence or 
neurogenic bladder dysfunction may need to be fitted with 
an artificial urinary sphincter (see Figure 77.19), if they are 
well motivated and mobile, but careful assessment is required.
Use of appliances
An indwelling catheter drained constantly into a leg urinal 
may be a satisfactory solution although, in some instances, 
diversion via an ileal conduit is necessary. In men, a con -
dom urinary appliance may be satisfactory and can avoid an 
indwelling catheter.
More major surgical treatments
VARIOUS TYPES OF URINARY DIVERSION
Urinary diversion may be required for the treatment of end-
stage incontinence that is not otherwise treatable (see later 
in this chapter).
BLADDER SUBSTITUTION PROCEDURES
The principle behind these operations is the creation of a 
low-pressure, large-capacity reservoir, which can be made 
using any segment of bowel isolated on its vascular pedicle 
(Figures 77.20–77.22). This is then detubularised by divid-
ing its anti-mesenteric border and suturing this into a plate, 
Figure 77.20 A vascularised ileocaecal segment being detubular -
ised.
Figure 77.21  An ileocaecal segment being anastomosed to the 
trigone after near-total cystectomy; the left ur eter is about to be 
implanted by means of a Camay–Le Duc anastomosis.
Figure 77.22  A capacious ileocaecal reservoir to be used in a 
patient requiring bladder substitution. These segments may be used 
for total bladder replacement, bladder substitution and the construc-
tion of continent diversion with a Mitrofanoff-type anti-incontinence 
mechanism (see later in the chapter).
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1433 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1434
which is then reconfigured into a spherical structure. This 
reservoir can then be anastomosed to the bladder remnant 
after excision of the fundus above the trigone. If necessary, 
the ureters can be reimplanted into the bowel segment. This 
new bladder will need to be emptied by means of CISC in up 
to 30% of cases.
‘CLAM’ ENTEROCYSTOPLASTY
This procedure was originally described by Bramble for the 
treatment of nocturnal enuresis. It has been used in the treat-
ment of idiopathic detrusor instability (Figure 77.23). This 
procedure can also be used as an augmentation procedure in 
patients with neurogenic bladder dysfunction and a reason-
able bladder capacity (approximately 300 mL).
FITMENT OF ARTIFICIAL URINARY SPHINCTER
See Figure 77.19.
Summary
Treatments for incontinence can be summarised as follows:
1 Conservative measures such as lifestyle interventions, 
pelvic floor muscle and bladder training.
2 Devices for collection : external penile condom or an 
indwelling urethral or suprapubic catheter.
3 Drugs: to decrease the strength of the bladder neck (e.g. 
adrenergic blockers); with mixed action on the bladder 
neck and central nervous system (e.g. tricyclic drugs); to 
inhibit bladder activity (e.g. anticholinergic drugs). Botu-
linum toxin A is used in selected patients. Duloxetine can 
be used as medical treatment for GSI – it is a serotonin– 
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor.
4 Intermittent self-catheterisation: to improve emptying.
5 Increasing outlet: pelvic floor physiotherapy; resistance 
colposuspension or TVT tapes or slings; periurethral 
injections of ‘bulking agents’ such as cross-linked collagen 
or other particles; use of the artificial urinary sphincter.
6 Denervation of bladder: S3 sacral nerve blockade, neurec-
tomy or surgical transection of the bladder to inhibit bladder 
activity and improve functional capacity. These are rarely 
used nowadays because of the use of botulinum toxin and the 
clam cystoplasty or S3 nerve stimulation (see point 7).
7 Sacral nerve stimulation devices  can improve inconti-
nence. They involve percutaneous insertion of electrodes 
through the sacral foramina under radiological control 
and implantation of an electronic stimulator.
8 Augmentation of bladder: ‘clam’ enterocystoplasty, bladder 
capacity substitution with detubularised bowel segment.
9 Urinary diversion: ileal conduit, continent urinary diver-
sion.
BLADDER STONES
Definition
A primary bladder stone is one that develops in sterile urine; 
it often originates in the kidney. A secondary stone occurs in 
the presence of infection, outflow obstruction, impaired blad-
der emptying or a foreign body.
Incidence
Until the twentieth century, bladder stone was a prevalent 
disorder among poor children and adolescents. As a result of 
improved diet, especially an increased protein:carbohydrate 
ratio, primary vesical calculus is rare.
Composition and cystoscopic 
appearance
Most vesical calculi are mixed. An oxalate calculus is a pri -
mary calculus that grows slowly; usually, it is of moderate 
size and solitary, and its surface is uneven (Figure 77.24). 
Although calcium oxalate is white, the stone is usually dark 
brown or black because of the incorporation of blood pig -
ment. Uric acid calculi are round or oval and smooth, and 
vary in colour from yellow to brown (Figure 77.25). They 
occur in patients with gout but are also found in patients with 
ileostomies or bladder outflow obstruction. A cystine calculus 
occurs only in the presence of cystinuria and is radio-opaque 
because of its high sulfur content. A triple phosphate calculus 
is composed of ammonium, magnesium and calcium phos-
phates and occurs in urine infected with urea-splitting organ-
isms. It tends to grow rapidly. In some instances it occurs on 
a nucleus of one of the other types of calculus; more rarely 
it occurs on a foreign body (Figures 77.26 and 77.27). It is 
dirty white in colour and of chalky consistency.
A bladder stone is usually free to move in the bladder and 
it gravitates to the lowest part of the bladder. Less commonly, 
the stone is wholly or partially in a diverticulum, where it may 
be hidden from view.
Clinical features
Men are affected eight times more frequently than women. 
Stones may be asymptomatic and found incidentally.
Frank James Bramble , formerly urologist, the Royal Victoria Hospital, Bournemouth, UK.
Figure 77.23 A ‘clam’ cystoplasty being performed. One of the ure-
teric orifices can be seen with the interureteric bar (arrow); the defect 
will be filled by a segment of detubularised ileum, performing a blad-
der augmentation.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1434 25/10/2017   10:14Bladder stones 1435
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Figure 77.24 A rough bladder stone.
Figure 77.25 Smooth uric acid-type stones.
Figure 77.26  Stone on a vaginal sling that had eroded into the  
bladder.
Figure 77.27 Uric acid stones that had formed on metal staples 
used to construct a colonic bladder augmentation.
Symptoms
Frequency is the earliest symptom and there may be a sensa -
tion of incomplete bladder emptying. Pain (strangury) is most 
often found in patients with a spiculated oxalate calculus. 
It occurs at the end of micturition and is referred to the tip 
of the penis or the labia majora; more rarely it is referred to 
the perineum or suprapubic region. The pain is worsened by 
movement. In young boys, screaming and pulling at the penis 
with the hand at the end of micturition are indicative of a 
bladder stone. Haematuria is characterised by the passage of 
a few drops of bright-red blood at the end of micturition, and 
is due to the stone abrading the vascular trigone. Interruption 
of the urinary stream is due to the stone blocking the internal 
meatus. Urinary infection is a common presenting symptom.
Examination
Rectal or vaginal examination is normal; occasionally, a large 
calculus is palpable in females. Examination of the urine reveals 
microscopic haematuria, pus or crystals that are typical of the 
calculus, e.g. envelope like in the case of an oxalate stone or 
hexagonal plates in the case of cystine calculi. In most patients 
the stone is visible on an ultrasound scan or a plain radiograph 
(Figure 77.28). Imaging of the whole of the urinary tract 
should be undertaken to exclude an upper tract stone. Nearly 
all stones can be dealt with endoscopically. In men with blad-
der outflow obstruction, endoscopic resection of the prostate 
should be performed at the same time as the stone is dealt with.
Treatment
The cause of the stone should be sought and treated; this may 
include bladder outflow obstruction or incomplete bladder 
emptying in patients with neurogenic bladder dysfunction.
Litholapaxy
The blind lithotrite (Figure 77.29) was an early type of 
minimally invasive technique. Standard management now 
includes the optical lithotrite, electrohydraulic lithotrite, 
holmium laser or ultrasound probe (Figure 77.30). Other 
devices include the stone punch, which is useful for crushing 
small fragments further so that they can be evacuated with an 
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1435 25/10/2017   10:14CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1436
Ellik evacuator. Contraindications to perurethral litholapaxy 
are extremely rare and include the following:
 ● Urethral: a urethral stricture that cannot be dilated suffi-
ciently; when a patient is aged below 10 years
 ● Bladder: a contracted bladder
 ● Stone characteristics: a very large stone.
Ultrasound lithotripsy is extremely safe but appropriate 
only for small stones. Laser lithotripsy with the holmium laser 
can deal with most large stones. Once small fragments are 
produced, the optical lithotrite can be used to finish the job. 
For evacuation of the fragments, fluid (200 mL) is introduced 
into the bladder. The evacuator, filled with solution, is fitted 
on to the sheath. The bulb is compressed slowly and then 
permitted to expand; the returning solution carries with it 
fragments of stone.
Percutaneous suprapubic litholapaxy
It is possible to insert a needle into the bladder and then pass 
a guidewire. As in percutaneous nephrolithotomy, Alken 
metal dilators can be passed over the guidewire to dilate the 
track and an Amplatz sheath inserted, followed by a large-
bore nephroscope. This is the best method to use if it is not 
possible to carry out litholapaxy per urethram because of a 
narrow urethra.
Removal of a retained Foley catheter
A retained Foley catheter is usually caused by the channel 
that connects the balloon to the side arm becoming blocked, 
usually at the end near the balloon. The best way of dealing 
with this problem is to further inflate the balloon with 20 mL 
of water and then burst the balloon percutaneously using a 
needle under ultrasound screening. If the balloon bursts, it is 
important subsequently to cystoscope the patient to ensure 
that any fragments are removed before they can form a  
foreign body calculus. Cutting off the side arm and attempt -
ing to clear the channel with a wire is only occasionally 
 successful.
FOREIGN BODIES IN THE 
BLADDER
The most common foreign body in the bladder is a fragment 
of catheter balloon (see above). Occasionally, a foreign body 
enters through the wall of the bladder, e.g. non-absorbable 
sutures used in an extravesical pelvic operation. Complica -
tions include:
 ● lower UTI;
 ● perforation of the bladder wall;
 ● bladder stone.
Treatment
A small foreign body can usually be removed per urethram by 
means of an operating cystoscope. Occasionally, a suprapubic 
approach using the percutaneous insertion of a cystoscope is 
needed.
DIVERTICULA OF THE BLADDER
Definition
The normal intravesical pressure during voiding is about 
35–50 cmH2O; however, pressures as great as 150  cmH2O 
may be reached by a hypertrophied bladder endeavouring to 
force urine past an obstruction. This pressure causes the lining 
between the inner layer of hypertrophied muscle to protrude, 
forming multiple saccules. If one or more, but usually one, 
Figure 77.28 Radiograph showing a vesical calculus (no contrast 
has been used).
Figure 77.29 ‘Blind’ lithotrite used to crush bladder stones.
Figure 77.30 An endoscopic ultrasound probe, which is used to 
fragment bladder or kidney stones.
Milo Ellik , b.1905, American urologist. P Alken , urologist, the University of Heidelberg, Germany.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1436 25/10/2017   10:14Diverticul a of the bladder 1437
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
saccule is forced through the bladder wall, it becomes a diver-
ticulum (Figure 77.31). Congenital diverticula are the result 
of a developmental defect.
Aetiology of diverticula
Congenital diverticula
These are situated in the midline anterosuperiorly and repre-
sent the unobliterated vesical end of the urachus.
Pulsion diverticula
The usual cause is bladder outflow obstruction.
Pathology
The mouth of the diverticulum is situated above and to the 
outer side of one ureteric orifice. Exceptionally, it is near the 
midline behind the interureteric ridge. The size varies from 
2 cm to 5 cm, but they may be larger. Diverticula are lined 
by bladder mucosa and the wall is composed of fibrous tissue 
only (compare with a traction diverticulum). A large diver -
ticulum enlarges in a downward direction and sometimes 
may obstruct a ureter – probably because of peridiverticular 
inflammation.
Complications
Recurrent urinary infection
As the pouch cannot empty itself efficiently, there remains a 
stagnant pool of urine within it. Peridiverticulitis can cause 
dense adhesions between the diverticulum and surrounding 
structures. Squamous cell metaplasia and leukoplakia are 
infrequent complications.
Bladder stone
This develops as a result of stagnation and infection. The 
stone often protrudes into the bladder.
Hydronephrosis and hydroureter
This is extremely rare and is a consequence of peridiverticular 
inflammation and fibrosis.
Neoplasm
Neoplasm arising in a diverticulum is an uncommon compli -
cation (<5%). The prognosis is dependent on the stage of the 
tumour (see below).
Clinical features
An uninfected diverticulum of the bladder usually causes 
no symptoms. The patient is nearly always male (95%) and 
aged over 50 years. Symptoms are those of associated urinary 
tract obstruction, recurrent infection and pyelonephritis. 
Haematuria (due to infection, stone or tumour) is a symp -
tom in about 30%. In a few patients micturition occurs twice 
in rapid succession (the second act may follow a change of 
posture).
Diagnosis
Diverticula are usually discovered incidentally on cystoscopy 
or ultrasonography (Figures 77.32–77.34).
Figure 77.31 Cystogram showing a large diverticulum of the bladder.
Figure 77.32 Cystoscopic appearance of the orifice of a diverticu -
lum and trabeculation of the bladder.
Figure 77.33 Occasional appearance of a diverticulum with inade -
quate distension of the bladder.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1437 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1438
Indications for surgery
Surgery is necessary only for the treatment of complications. 
Provided that the diverticulum is small and associated outflow 
obstruction has been dealt with by prostate resection, there is 
no reason to resect the diverticulum. Even a large diverticu -
lum may not require treatment in the absence of infection or 
other complications.
Combined intravesical and 
extravesical diverticulectomy
A ureteric stent is passed up the ureter on the affected side 
and the anterior bladder wall is exposed through a suprapu -
bic incision. The bladder is incised in the midline and the 
diverticulum is packed with a strip of gauze. The neck of the 
diverticulum is separated from the ureter and, when the pouch 
is free, it is severed from the bladder. The resulting defect is 
closed in a single layer with 2/0 absorbable sutures. A supra -
pubic catheter is left in place and an extravesical drain is 
inserted. An alternative method, if the sac is densely adher -
ent, is to carry the incision in the bladder down to the rim 
of the diverticular orifice, then to detach the diverticulum 
together with its fibrous rim. The incision in the bladder is 
closed and the diverticulum left in position with a corrugated 
drain placed into it for 2–3 days. The track fibroses rapidly 
after removal of the drain. If bladder outlet obstruction is pres-
ent, prostatectomy should be carried out at the same time as 
the diverticulectomy, using any appropriate method (transure-
thral resection of the prostate [TURP], laser or open).
Traction diverticulum (synonym: 
hernia of the bladder)
A portion of the bladder protruding through the inguinal or 
femoral hernial orifice occurs in l.5% of such herniae treated 
by surgery (Figure 77.35).
URINARY FISTULAE
Congenital urinary fistulae
The causes of congenital urinary fistulae include:
 ● ectopia vesicae;
 ● a patent urachus – the presence of a urinary leak from the 
umbilicus, present at birth or commencing soon after, sug-
gests this diagnosis. In adult life, infection in a urachal 
cyst may produce a fistula and adenocarcinoma may occur 
(Figures 77.36 and 77.37). Treatment is by means of 
excision of the urachal tract and closure of the bladder 
once distal obstruction has been excluded;
 ● in association with imperforate anus (see Chapters 9 and 
73).
Traumatic urinary fistulae
Perforating wounds, damage not recognised during surgery or 
poor healing and avascular necrosis after radiotherapy and sur-
gery may lead to fistula formation. Also, clot retention occur-
ring after an open bladder operation may lead to dehiscence of 
Figure 77.34 Bladder diverticulum demonstrated by ultrasound.
Summary box 77.8
Bladder diverticula
●● Bladder diverticula are most frequently diagnosed incidentally 
by cystoscopy or urinary tract imaging
●● The presence of a diverticulum – even quite a large one – is 
not an indication for diverticulectomy unless symptoms or 
cancer is present
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 77.35 (a) Intraperitoneal, (b) paraperitoneal and (c) extra-
peritoneal hernia of the bladder, in relation to a hernial sac.
Figure 77.36 An operative photograph showing a large urachal cyst 
in which adenocar cinoma formation has occurr ed. A partial cystec -
tomy with total removal of the urachal remnant is about to be carried 
out.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1438 25/10/2017   10:15Urinary fistulae 1439
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
the wound and a fistula, which will heal quickly provided that 
the bladder is kept empty with an indwelling catheter.
Vesicovaginal fistulae
Aetiology
 ● Obstetric. The usual cause is protracted or neglected 
labour.
 ● Gynaecological. The operations chiefly causing this com-
plication are total hysterectomy and anterior colporrhaphy.
 ● Radiotherapy.
 ● Direct neoplastic infiltration. Exceptionally, carcinoma 
of the cervix ulcerates through the anterior fornix to 
implicate the bladder.
When an injury to the bladder is recognised and repaired, 
leakage is uncommon, but escape of urine will quickly follow if 
such damage passes unnoticed. However, most vesico  vaginal 
fistulae are the result of ischaemic necrosis of the bladder 
because of prolonged pressure of the fetal head in obstetric 
cases. In gynaecological cases, the ischaemia is brought about 
by grasping the bladder wall in an artery forceps, including 
the bladder wall in a suture or perhaps even by local oedema 
or haematoma. Leakage because of tissue necrosis seldom 
manifests itself before 7 days after the operation. An intracta-
ble fistula after radiotherapy for carcinoma of the cervix uteri 
may arise from avascular necrosis years after the apparent cure 
of the original lesion.
Clinical features
There is leakage of urine from the vagina and excoriation of 
the vulva. Vaginal examination may reveal a localised thick-
ening on its anterior wall or in the vault. On inserting a vagi-
nal speculum, urine will be seen escaping from an opening in 
the anterior vaginal wall.
The ‘three-swab test’
The differential diagnosis between a ureterovaginal and 
vesicovaginal fistula can be made by placing a swab in the 
vagina and injecting a solution of methylene blue through the 
urethra; the vaginal swab becomes coloured blue if a vesico -
vaginal fistula is present. Cystoscopy and bilateral retrograde 
ureterography provide a more reliable demonstration. IVU 
should be performed to exclude a coincidental ureterovaginal 
fistula (ureterovaginal fistula occurs with vesicovaginal fistula 
in about 10% of cases). Usually, IVU shows some upper tract 
dilatation resulting from partial obstruction.
Treatment
Just occasionally, conservative management of a vesicovagi -
nal fistula after a hysterectomy, by urethral bladder drainage, 
is successful; however, most fistulae will require definitive sur-
gical repair. A low fistula (subtrigonal) is best repaired per 
vaginam. The fistula is exposed, the bladder is closed using 
absorbable sutures and the vagina subsequently closed with a 
separate layer. A urethral catheter should be left in situ for at 
least 10 days. For higher (supratrigonal) fistulae a transvag-
inal approach can be difficult. These patients should always 
undergo cystoscopy before the repair procedure and bilat -
eral ureterograms performed. For high fistulae a suprapubic 
approach is the best method in most hands; however, some 
experts will aim to carry out vaginal closure in most cases that 
have not involved complex surgery or radiotherapy.
To repair a ureterovaginal fistula, an extraperitoneal 
approach to the ureter via the previous Pfannenstiel incision 
is made. Considerable adhesions will be encountered, but the 
ureter can usually be found above the level of the injury and fol-
lowed down. Reimplantation into the bladder is often required. 
Depending on the amount of ureter lost, it may be possible to 
achieve reimplantation with a psoas hitch procedure. If the gap 
is too large a Boari flap of anterior bladder wall should be cut 
and brought over to meet the ureter and a reimplant performed. 
The most important principle of ureteric reimplantation is that 
there should be no tension on the repair.
Figure 77.37  (a, b) Computed tomography scans of the same 
patient as in Figure 77.36, showing a large urachal cyst closely 
approximated to the dome of the bladder.
(a)
(b)
Achille Boari , nineteenth century Italian surgeon.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1439 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1440
Fistulae from renal pelvis to skin 
or gut
Tuberculosis of a kidney may result in a fistula to the duo de-
num, colon or skin. Similarly, a pyonephrosis may discharge 
into the gut or on to the skin. Duodenal ulcer involving the 
pelvis of the right kidney, Crohn’s disease involving the renal 
pelvis or ureter or cases of xanthogranulomatous pyelonephri-
tis may cause fistulae. A longstanding urinoma will occasion-
ally fistulate into the gut.
Fistulae arising from infection
The most common cause is diverticulitis of the colon. Fistulae 
may also follow Crohn’s disease, appendix abscess or pelvis 
sepsis after acute salpingitis, or pelvic surgery.
The onset of a fistula from diverticular disease may well 
be treated as a simple urinary infection. The diagnosis can 
be difficult to make, but on cystoscopy a patch of oedema on 
the left side of the vault is suggestive and bubbles of gas may 
be seen (Figure 77.38). A cystogram may reveal the fistula. 
The passage of gas per urethram in a patient is most suggestive 
(provided that diabetes resulting in urinary infection with a 
gas-forming organism is excluded).
Treatment of fistulae caused by diverticular 
disease
In most patients a single-stage operation is indicated provided 
that the surgeon is experienced in colonic surgery. At laparot-
omy, the communication is separated, the hole in the bladder 
being closed and patched with omentum, and the segment of 
diseased bowel resected; it is most important to ensure that 
the left colon and, if necessary, the splenic flexure are fully 
mobilised to facilitate a tension-free, well-vascularised anas -
tomosis. The bladder is drained by a urethral catheter.
Fistulae caused by carcinoma
By the time that a fistula between the bowel and the bladder 
has developed, the tumour is usually locally advanced but may 
be operable.
Urethral fistulae in males
These occur as the result of infection above a stricture pro -
ducing a paraurethral abscess that ruptures into the urethra, 
allowing extravasation to occur suddenly into the scrotum 
and perineum. Urine and infection extend into the upper 
2.5 cm of the thigh and lower abdominal wall. Widespread 
cellulitis and tissue necrosis (which may lead to Fournier’s 
gangrene) may occur unless drainage of urine is achieved by 
suprapubic cystotomy and the tissue planes are freely drained 
by inguinal and scrotal incisions.
Neoplastic fistulae
Primary bladder tumours very rarely produce fistulae. Involve-
ment of the bladder by tumours of the cervix, uterus, colon 
and rectum can produce fistulae, as may sarcoma of the small 
gut. Carcinoma of the prostate rarely produces a rectal fistula. 
Treatment is difficult and in most cases only palliative relief 
can be given. It is rarely in the patient’s interest to carry out 
urinary diversion, although minimally invasive techniques 
such as placement of ureteric stents can be helpful in palli-
ating symptoms.
Burrill Bernard Crohn , 1884–1983, gastroenterologist, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, USA, described regional ileitis in 1932.
Jean Alfred Fournier , 1832–1915, French syphilologist and founder of the Venereal and Dermatological Clinic, Hôpital St Louis, Paris, France.
Figure 77.38 Cystoscopic view of a vesicointestinal fistula. Bubbles 
of gas can be seen issuing from the orifice of the fistula.
Summary box 77.9
Fistulae
●● A fistula is a communication between two epithelium-lined 
surfaces
●● Most urinary fistulae are vesicovaginal and result from 
obstetric trauma; an associated ureterovaginal fistulae occurs 
in about 10% of cases
●● A ‘three-swab test’ is used to aid the diagnosis. An 
examination under anaesthesia, vaginoscopy, and cystoscopy 
and intravenous urography should be performed and, if 
necessary, retrograde ureterography
●● Conservative management is rarely successful
●● The principles of repair include good exposure, excision 
of diseased tissue and tension-free vascularised repair in 
anatomical layers
●● Fistulae caused by radiation, cancer and sepsis can be 
complex with multiple tracts
●● The persistence of a fistula on the skin implies the presence of 
distal obstruction, chronic infection, such as tuberculosis, or a 
foreign body, such as a stone or non-absorbable ligature
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1440 25/10/2017   10:15Lower urinary tract infection and cystitis 1441
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
LOWER URINARY TRACT 
INFECTION AND CYSTITIS
Infection of the bladder gives rise to symptoms of frequency, 
urgency, suprapubic discomfort, dysuria and cloudy offensive 
urine. These symptoms are often known as ‘cystitis’. Lower 
UTIs are much more common in women than in men, partic-
ularly in those aged under 50. It should be remembered that 
a lower UTI is often associated with upper tract colonisation 
and the presence of associated loin pain, pyrexia, rigors and 
malaise (these symptoms represent complicated infection and 
should be taken seriously because serious sepsis can ensue).
Isolated infection
A single episode of lower tract infection occurs frequently in 
women and is rarely complicated.
Recurrent infection
Recurrent infection may be associated with an underlying 
predisposing cause or may be a result of bacterial resistance. In 
healthy women, infection after intercourse can occur without 
any demonstrable abnormality of the urinary tract. Repeated 
attacks of UTIs in women, or a single attack in a man or a 
child of either sex, should always be followed by investigation 
to discover and treat the cause; sometimes, however, no cause 
can be found. Asymptomatic bacteriuria is common and 
investigation may fail to demonstrate any underlying cause.
Infection in men
Although more common in women, the incidence of infec-
tion is higher in male infants because underlying urinary tract 
abnormalities are more frequent. Complicated or recurrent 
infection in men warrants prompt antibiotic therapy and 
investigation to exclude an underlying cause.
Infection in pregnancy
The incidence of asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnant 
women is twice as high as in non-pregnant women. Simple 
uncomplicated infection can be treated after urine culture 
with an appropriate antibiotic that is not contraindicated in 
pregnancy, such as cephalosporin or ampicillin. Non-respon-
sive infection may require intravenous therapy and an ultra -
sound scan.
Predisposing causes of urinary tract 
infection
 ● Incomplete emptying of the bladder, secondary to bladder 
outflow obstruction, a bladder diverticulum, neurogenic 
bladder dysfunction or decompensation of the detrusor 
muscle.
 ● A calculus, foreign body or neoplasm.
 ● Incomplete emptying of the upper tract, dilatation of the 
ureters associated with pregnancy, or vesicoureteric reflux. 
In childhood, the mainstay of treatment of vesicoureteric 
reflux is antibiotic therapy; surgery is reserved for those 
with recurrent infection despite antibiotics or with severe 
upper tract dilatation.
 ● Oestrogen deficiency, which may give rise to lowered local 
resistance.
 ● Colonisation of the perineal skin by strains of Escherichia coli 
expressing molecules that facilitate adherence to mucosa.
 ● Diabetes.
 ● Immunosuppression.
Avenues of infection
Ascending infection from the urethra is the most common 
route (see Chapter 79). The organisms originate in the bowel, 
contaminate the vulva and reach the bladder. The passage 
of urethral instruments may cause infection in either sex, 
especially when the bladder contains residual urine (Figure 
77.39). Other routes are less common and include descend -
ing infection from the kidney (tuberculosis), haematogenous 
spread, lymphogenous spread and spread from adjoining struc-
tures (Fallopian tube, vagina or gut).
Bacteriology
Bacterial virulence factors affect the ability of a pathogen to 
infect the host. The possession of pili (rod-shaped structures) 
that project from the outer membrane increases adhesiveness. 
Pyelo-
nephritis
Cystitis
Prostatitis
Epididymitis
Orchitis
Urethritis
Figure 77.39  Complications liable to follow the changing of a 
 urethral catheter in the presence of urethritis (courtesy of CG Scorer, 
FRCS, London, UK).
Gabriele Falloppio (Fallopius) , 1523–1563, Professor of Anatomy, Surgery and Botany, Padua, Italy.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1441 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1442
The type of pilus can be used to classify the pathogen involved. 
E. coli is the most common organism followed by Proteus mira-
bilis, Staphylococcus epidermidis and Streptococcus faecalis. Infec-
tion with other organisms or infection with mixed organisms is 
found in patients with neurogenic bladder dysfunction or those 
with a longstanding indwelling urethral catheter. These organ-
isms include Pseudomonas and Klebsiella spp., Staphylococcus 
aureus and various streptococci. Tuberculous infection is con-
sidered below. The presence of pus cells without organisms calls 
for examination for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae. Having eliminated these possibilities, the under-
lying condition may be abacterial cystitis, CIS, renal papillary 
necrosis, stones or incomplete treatment of a urinary infection.
Clinical features
These include frequency, pain, haematuria and pyuria. Pyrexia 
and rigors are not associated with a simple UTI but are a sign 
of upper tract infection or septicaemia.
Examination
On examination there is tenderness over the bladder. Initial 
and midstream urine specimens should be collected in males 
as acute prostatitis may be present (see below), which will 
lead to threads in the initial specimen. The midstream spec -
imen must be subjected to microscopy and culture, and the 
sensitivity of any organisms assessed.
Treatment
Treatment should be started immediately and modified if nec-
essary when the bacteriological report is to hand. The patient 
is urged to drink. Appropriate first-line antibiotics depend on 
local likely sensitivities but would include trimethoprim or 
one of the quinolones. Failure to respond indicates the need 
for further investigation to exclude predisposing factors. It is 
important to check for associated allergies or other drugs or 
conditions that might preclude the use of some antibiotics 
(e.g. concomitant administration of methotrexate and tri -
methoprim [both inhibit tetrahydrofolate reductase]).
Investigation
Investigation may be needed in the male or when recurrent 
infection occurs. This includes measurement of urinary flow 
rates and post-void residual urine. IVU, ultrasound scan or 
CT scanning will usually be carried out together with cys-
toscopy. Difficult cases may require urodynamic investigation.
SPECIAL FORMS OF LOWER 
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
Acute abacterial cystitis (acute 
haemorrhagic cystitis)
The patient presents with a severe UTI. Pus is present in the 
urine but no organism can be cultured. It is commonly sexu-
ally acquired but tuberculous infection and CIS must be ruled 
out. The underlying causative organism may be Mycoplasma 
sp. or herpes simplex virus. Cyclophosphamide can also cause 
this problem.
Frequency–dysuria syndrome 
(urethral syndrome)
This consists of symptoms of a lower tract infection but with 
negative urine cultures. CIS, tuberculosis and interstitial cys-
titis should be excluded. Most urologists advise patients to 
adopt general measures such as wearing cotton underwear, 
using simple soaps, adopting general perineal hygiene mea-
sures and voiding after intercourse. Other treatments include 
cystoscopy and urethral dilatation, although the benefits 
remain doubtful.
Tuberculous urinary infection
Tuberculous urinary infection is secondary to renal tuberculo-
sis. Early tuberculosis of the bladder starts around the ureteric 
orifice or trigone, the earliest evidence being pallor of the 
mucosa due to submucous oedema. Subsequently, tubercles 
may be seen and, in longstanding cases, there is marked fibro-
sis and the capacity of the bladder is greatly reduced (Figure 
77.40).
Treatment
Tuberculous infection usually responds rapidly to antituber -
culous drugs but occasionally the involved kidney and ureter 
have to be removed. If the bladder remains of low capacity , 
patients will have severe symptoms and the upper tracts are at 
Theodor Albrecht Edwin Klebs , 1834–1913, Professor of Bacteriology successively at Prague, Czechoslovakia, Zurich, Switzerland, and the Rush Medical College, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
Albert Ludwig Siegmund Neisser , 1855–1916, Director of the Dermatological Institute, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Summary box 77.10
Urinary tract infections ( UTIs) in adults
●● Isolated UTIs in adults are not infrequent and are more 
common in women
●● Recurrent or complicated infection (haematuria, rigors) 
warrants appropriate antimicrobial therapy and investigation
●● Investigation to exclude a predisposing cause includes 
urinalysis, microscopy and culture, upper tract imaging and 
cystoscopy
●● Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae or 
Mycoplasma genitalium should be suspected if pus cells are 
present but urine culture is negative
●● Cancer, especially CIS, masquerading as infection may be 
diagnosed as abacterial cystitis
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1442 25/10/2017   10:151443
PART 12 | GENITOURINARYSchistosomiasis of the bl adder
risk because of high filling pressures and vesicoureteric reflux. 
Such patients, after appropriate chemotherapy, respond well 
to bladder augmentation. The ureters may need reimplanta -
tion.
BLADDER AUGMENTATION BY ILEOCYSTOPLASTY 
OR CAECOCYSTOPLASTY
The fibrosed supratrigonal bladder is removed and the blad-
der augmented with a segment of bowel. This may consist of 
intact caecum, a detubularised segment of ileum or a detubu-
larised ileocaecal segment (see Figures 77.20–77.22).
Interstitial cystitis (Hunner’s ulcer)
For practical purposes, this is confined to women. The first 
symptom is increased frequency; pain, relieved by micturition 
and aggravated by jarring and overdistension of the bladder, 
is another characteristic symptom. In most patients pyuria 
and urinary infection are absent. Haematuria also occurs. 
The aetiology remains as obscure as it was when Guy Hunner 
described the condition in 1914. It consists of a chronic pan-
cystitis, often with marked infiltration with lymphocytes and 
macrophages. Fibrosis of the vesical musculature and areas of 
avascular atrophy of the epithelium occur. Ulceration of the 
mucosa occurs in the fundus of the bladder. In severe cases the 
bladder capacity is reduced to 30–60 mL. The characteristic 
linear bleeding ulcer is caused by splitting of the mucosa when 
the bladder is distended under anaesthesia. Inflammation of 
all coats of the bladder is present with granulation tissue in 
the submucosa underlying the ulcer. The muscularis is hyper-
trophied and the peritoneum in proximity to the area of max-
imum disease is thickened. The inflammation may involve 
the trigone, the urethra and, in severe cases, the peritoneum. 
Pronounced mast cell infiltration is seen but is not specific. 
It is important to check urinary cytology and to biopsy the 
mucosa to exclude underlying neoplastic disease.
On cystoscopy the characteristic ulcer is found in the 
fundus, but it may be absent. This area bleeds readily as the 
bladder is decompressed. Treatment is difficult and unsatisfac-
tory. Hydrostatic dilatation under anaesthesia may give relief 
for some months. Instillation of dimethylsulfoxide results in 
improvement in some patients. Other drugs that have been 
tried include intravesical heparin, oral ranitidine and steroid 
therapy. Patients with severe symptoms may well require cys-
tectomy and orthotopic bladder substitution. In patients with 
severe inflammation involving the trigone and urethra, this 
operation may not result in complete relief and some type of 
urinary diversion may be needed.
Alkaline encrusting cystitis
Alkaline encrusting cystitis is rare and is due to urea-splitting 
organisms causing phosphatic encrustations on the bladder 
mucosa of elderly women. There are symptoms of a chronic 
UTI and a plain radiograph shows the bladder outline. The 
encrustations may be removed by bladder irrigation and the 
infection treated with appropriate antibiotics.
Cystitis cystica
Under the influence of chronic inflammation the surface epi-
thelium sends down buds, resulting in minute cysts filled with 
clear fluid, most abundant on the trigone. This is frequently 
found in patients with recurrent frequency and dysuria.
SCHISTOSOMIASIS OF THE 
BLADDER (SEE CHAPTER 6)
Geographical distribution
The disease is endemic in Egypt, parts of Africa, Israel, Syria, 
Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq and the shores of China’s great lakes. 
Dwellers of the Nile valley have suffered for centuries. Marshes 
or slow-running fresh water provide the habitat for the freshwa-
ter snail (Bulinus truncatus) that is the intermediate host.
Mode of infestation
The disease is acquired through exposure of the skin to 
infected water, which usually occurs while bathing. The 
free-swimming, bifid-tailed embryos (cercariae) of the trem -
atode Schistosoma haematobium penetrate the skin. Shedding 
their tails, they enter blood vessels and are swept to all parts 
of the body but they flourish in the liver where they live on 
Figure 77.40 Retrograde cystograph showing an exceedingly con-
tracted (‘thimble’) bladder in a case of tuberculous cystitis.
Guy Leroy Hunner , 1868–1951, gynaecologist, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1443 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1444
erythrocytes and develop into male and female worms. Once 
sexual maturity has been attained, the nematodes leave the 
liver and enter the portal vein. The male worm bends into 
the shape of a gutter (the gynaecophoric canal) into which 
a female worm nestles, and the pair makes its way towards 
the inferior mesenteric vein. Schistosoma haematobium  has 
an affinity for the vesical venous plexus, which it reaches 
through the portosystemic anastomotic channels.
Having reached the bladder the female worm eventually 
enters a submucous venule which is so small that it completely 
blocks it. It now proceeds to lay about 20 ova in a chain; each 
ovum is provided with a terminal spine that penetrates the 
vessel wall. A heavily infected individual passes hundreds of 
ova a day. If the ova reach fresh water, the low osmotic pres-
sure causes rupture and the ciliated miracidium emerges. To 
survive, it must reach and penetrate the intermediate snail 
host within 36 hours. Within the snail’s liver, the miracidium 
enlarges and gives rise to myriads of daughter cysts, which are 
set free on the death of the snail. A single miracidium begets 
thousands of cercariae to complete the life cycle.
Clinical features
After penetration of the skin, urticaria lasting about 5 days can 
occur (swimmer’s itch). After an incubation perio d of 4–12 
weeks, a high evening temperature, sweating and asthma, 
together with leukocytosis and eosinophilia, occur. Usually, 
an asymptomatic period of several months supervenes before 
the ova are released, causing the typical early signs and symp-
toms of intermittent, painless, terminal haematuria. Men are 
affected three times more frequently than women.
Examination of the urine
The last few millilitres of an early morning urine specimen 
are collected and centrifuged. Examination on several con-
secutive days may be required, but a negative result does not 
exclude bilharziasis, especially in patients no longer resident 
in bilharzial districts. Antibody detection by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using Schistosoma mansoni 
adult microsomal antigen (MAMA) can be performed. The 
test is positive 1 month after infection and is specific for Schis-
tosoma mansoni and Schistosoma haematobium.
Cystoscopy
Depending on the length of time for which the disease has 
remained untreated, cystoscopy will reveal one or more of the 
following:
1 Bilharzial pseudotubercles are the earliest specific appear-
ance of the disease (Figure 77.41).
2 Bilharzial nodules (Figure 77.42) are caused by the 
fusion of tubercles.
3 ‘Sandy patches’ are the result of calcified dead ova with 
degeneration of the overlying epithelium (Figure 77.43).
4 Ulceration is the result of sloughing of the mucous mem -
brane containing dead ova (Figure 77.44).
5 Fibrosis is mainly the result of secondary infection.
6 Granulomas. Bilharzial masses are caused by the aggrega -
tion of nodules.
7 Papillomas are more pedunculated (Figure 77.45).
8 Carcinoma is a common end-result in grossly infected bil-
harziasis of the bladder that has been neglected for years.
Theodor Maximilian Bilharz , 1825–1862, Professor of Zoology, Cairo, Egypt.
Sir Patrick Manson , 1844–1922, practised in Formosa (now Taiwan), and Hong Kong before becoming physician to the Dreadnought Hospital, Greenwich,  
London, UK. He is regarded as the founder of Tropical Medicine.
Figure 77.41 Bilharzial tubercles (courtesy of N Makar).
Figure 77.42 Bilharzial nodules (courtesy of N Makar).
Figure 77.43 ‘Sandy patches’ (courtesy of N Makar).
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1444 25/10/2017   10:15Neoplasms of the bl adder 1445
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Treatment
Safe and effective drugs are available for the treatment of 
schistosomiasis, including praziquantel taken in three doses 
of 20  mg/kg (total 60  mg/kg) 4 hours apart. It takes many 
months for dead ova to be expelled and, even after repeated 
courses and healing of the bladder lesion, living bilharzial 
worms have been found at necropsy in the portal system.
Other complications, requiring specific treatment, include 
the following:
 ● urinary calculi;
 ● stricture of the ureters;
 ● prostatoseminal vesiculitis;
 ● fibrosis of the bladder and bladder neck (Figure 77.46);
 ● bilharzial urethral strictures;
 ● squamous bladder cancer.
NEOPLASMS OF THE BLADDER
In total, 95% of primary bladder tumours originate in transi-
tional epithelium; the remainder arise from connective tissue 
(angioma, myoma, fibroma and sarcoma) or are extra-adrenal 
phaeochromocytomas.
Secondary tumours of the bladder are common and most 
frequently arise from the sigmoid and rectum, the prostate, 
the uterus or the ovaries, although bronchial neoplasms may 
also spread to the bladder.
Pathology
Benign papillary tumours
The papilloma consists of a single frond with a central  
vascular core with villi; it looks like a red sea anemone  
(Figures 77.47 and 77.48). Inverted papilloma is a condi -
tion in which the proliferative cells penetrate under normal 
mucosa so that the lesion is covered with smooth urothelium. 
It is benign.
Figure 77.44 Bilharzial ulcer (courtesy of N Makar).
Figure 77.45 Bilharzial papilloma (courtesy of N Makar).
Figure 77.46  Bilharzial contractur e of the bladder, with ureteric 
reflux (courtesy of H Talib, Baghdad, Iraq).
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 76.47Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 77.47  Papillary tumour with daughter implantation (‘kiss’ 
cancer).
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1445 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1446
CARCINOMA OF THE BLADDER
Histological types of bladder cancer include urothelial, squa -
mous and adenocarcinoma (or mixed, as a result of metapla -
sia in a transitional cell carcinoma [TCC]). Over 90% are 
urothelial in origin. Pure squamous carcinoma is uncom-
mon (approximately 5%), except in areas where bilharzia is 
endemic. Primary adenocarcinoma, which arises from either 
the urachal remnant or areas of glandular metaplasia, accounts 
for 1–2% of cases.
Urothelial cell carcinoma
Aetiology
Cigarette smoking is the main aetiological factor (40% of 
cancers). Occupational exposure to urothelial carcinogens 
remains common. The first suspicion of a chemical cause for 
bladder cancer was raised by Rehn in l895 when he recorded 
a series of tumours in workers in aniline dye factories. Hueper 
showed that 2-naphthylamine was carcinogenic in dogs. Sub-
sequent investigation demonstrated that the following com -
pounds may be carcinogenic:
 ● 2-naphthylamine;
 ● 4-aminobiphenyl;
 ● benzidine;
 ● chlornaphazine;
 ● 4-chloro-o-toluidine;
 ● o-toluidine;
 ● 4,4´-methylene bis(2-choloroaniline);
 ● methylene dianiline;
 ● benzidine-derived azo dyes.
Occupations associated with an increased risk of bladder 
cancer are:
 ● textile workers;
 ● dye workers;
 ● tyre rubber and cable workers;
 ● petrol workers;
 ● leather workers;
 ● shoe manufacturers and cleaners;
 ● painters;
 ● hairdressers;
 ● lorry drivers;
 ● drill press operators;
 ● chemical workers;
 ● rodent exterminators and sewage workers.
Bladder cancer became a prescribed industrial disease 
(No. 39) in 1953, and previously exposed workers may be 
entitled to compensation. Balkan nephropathy is associated 
with an increased incidence of upper tract urothelial tumours 
(see Chapter 76).
A series of genetic events has been clearly implicated 
in cancer formation but is outside the remit of this chapter. 
Activation of dominantly acting oncogenes such as ras and 
c-erbB-1 and -2, and transcription factors such as E2F3, have 
been reported in bladder cancer, as has the inactivation of 
tumour-suppressor genes such as p53, p21, p16 and the ret -
inoblastoma gene. Activation of many other genes occurs 
including: those coding for enzymes that dissolve the base -
ment membrane, such as the metalloproteinases (strome-
lysin, collagenases and elastase), lysosomal enzymes such 
as the cathepsins and others including urinary plasmino -
gen activators; angiogenic factors (e.g. vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF]) and other peptide growth factors 
such as the epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its recep-
tor (EGFR) also have a role to play, as well as the fibroblast 
growth factor (FGF) and its receptor-3 (FGFR-3) which 
was found to be altered mostly in non-muscle invasive dis -
ease. These changes are common to several tumour types, 
including prostate cancer. More recently, new approaches 
through genome-wide association studies allowed the inves -
tigation of genetic susceptibility for urothelial cancer. Sev -
Ludwig Rehn , 1849–1930, surgeon, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
The Balkans  are the countries that occupy an area in the south-east of Europe. They are south of the Danube and the Sava rivers, and form a peninsula bounded 
on the east by the Aegean and Black seas, on the west by the Adriatic and Ionian seas, and on the south by the Mediterranean sea.
Figure 77.48  Endoscopic photograph of a pTa bladder tumour 
about to be resected.
Summary box 77.11
Urothelial cell carcinoma of the bladder
●● The fourth most common non-dermatological malignancy in 
men (male:female ratio 3:1)
●● Strongly associated with smoking and chemical exposure in 
western societies
●● Strongly associated with Schistosoma haematobium infection 
(bilharzial bladder cancer) in regions where the parasite is 
endemic
●● Reducing in incidence in countries where smoking is 
decreasing
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1446 25/10/2017   10:15Carcinoma of the bl adder 1447
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
eral new loci were identified, but, to date, only two, NAT2 
(N-acetyltransferase 2) and GSTM1 (glutathione S-transfer-
ase Mu 1) have been demonstrated to be consistent germ -
line susceptibility markers. These genetic markers do not yet 
have sufficient discriminatory ability to be used for clinical 
 decision-making.
Tumour staging and grading
Study of the biological behaviour of TCC of the bladder shows 
that cancers fall into the three following groups shown in the 
list. Depth of invasion (T) from the tumour–node–metastasis 
(TNM) classification and grade (World Health Organization 
I, II or III) are important factors in planning treatment and 
determining prognosis in bladder cancer.
 ● Non-muscle-invasive pTa (see Figure 77.48) and pT1 
tumours account for 70% of all new cases; the previous 
terminology of ‘superficial’ bladder cancer in this category 
has now been abandoned; it is important, however, to dis-
tinguish ‘low-risk’ uothelial cancers, which are unlikely 
to progress, such as well-differentiated (G1) pTa tumours 
(not invading lamina propria), from ‘high-risk’ cancers, 
such as poorly differentiated (G3) pT1 cancers (invading 
lamina propria), which should be followed up carefully 
and treated aggressively as necessary. This can be deter -
mined by careful histological examination. Single papil -
lary pTa tumours account for a significant proportion of 
bladder cancers and carry an excellent prognosis.
 ● Muscle-invasive disease (pT2) accounts for 25% of new 
cases. Such tumours carry a much worse prognosis because 
they are subject to local invasion and distant metastasis.
 ● Flat, non-invasive CIS (primary CIS) accounts for 5% of 
new cases. Unless diagnosed and treated promptly it car -
ries a poor prognosis. The highest-risk non-muscle inva-
sive cancer is found with multifocal poorly differentiated 
tumours invading lamina propria (pT1G3) in the pres-
ence of CIS.
Non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
These are usually papillary tumours that grow in an exo -
phytic fashion into the bladder lumen (see Figures 77.47 
and 77.48). They may be single or multiple and may appear 
pedunculated, arising on a stalk with a narrow base, but if the 
tumours are less well differentiated they are more solid with 
a wider base. The mucosa around the tumour is often rather 
oedematous, with angry-looking, dilated blood vessels. These 
areas may contain in situ changes (concomitant CIS).
The urothelium elsewhere in the bladder may appear 
rather oedematous and velvety; this suggests a generalised 
‘field change’ with the presence of widespread CIS. The most 
common sites for superficial tumours are the trigone and lat -
eral walls of the bladder.
After initial complete treatment by endoscopic transure -
thral resection (TURT), patients with pTa or pT1 disease may 
develop two problems:
1 About 50–70% develop recurrent tumours that may be 
single or multiple, and the recurrences may occur on one 
or on many occasions. The recurrent tumours are usually 
of the same stage or grade as the primary tumour. High-
grade multiple tumours with concomitant CIS are most 
likely to develop recurrent disease.
2 About 15% will develop a recurrent tumour that invades 
the bladder muscle. The risk of such progression increases 
with high-grade disease, pT1 disease, multiple primary dis-
ease and concomitant CIS. Many urologists now regard 
the presence of pT1 grade 3 tumours as an indication for 
offering the patient immediate cystectomy because of the 
excellent outcome.
This behaviour provides the rationale for performing 
check cystoscopies. The factors that result in an increased 
recurrence and progression rate are:
 ● high grade;
 ● pT1 disease;
 ● concomitant CIS;
 ● multiple primary tumours;
 ● recurrent disease at the first check cystoscopy 3 months 
after diagnosis.
Patients presenting with a solitary grade 1 or grade 2 
pTa tumour without concomitant CIS, which does not 
recur within the first 6 months, have an excellent outcome. 
Patients with recurrent low-grade disease can be treated 
with intravesical instillations of a chemotherapeutic agent 
such as mitomycin C or epirubicin, with regular cysto -
copic check-ups and repeat biopsies, or immunotherapy 
Summary box 77.12
Bladder cancer staging
●● Cystoscopy and resection of tumour with separate resection 
of the tumour base are essential for accurate analysis of 
invasion into detrusor muscle
●● Bimanual examination should be performed after resection of 
the tumour
●● Complete urinary tract imaging is required using contrast 
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) 
urography. Cross-sectional imaging by CT or MR is essential 
in high-risk and muscle-invasive disease to stage the tumour, 
further including lymph node status for metastasis.
Summary box 77.13
Non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC)
●● Does not invade the detrusor muscle but can extend to the 
lamina propria
●● Extension to the lamina propria (pT1) is a significant risk factor 
for progression to invasive disease, especially if associated 
with high-grade disease and carcinoma in situ
●● The incidence of recurrence of this disease can be reduced by 
intravesical chemotherapy and immunotherapy
●● High-risk superficial disease (any grade 3 disease) is best 
managed by bacille Calmette–Guérin immunotherapy followed 
by radical treatment if disease persists
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1447 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1448
using regular intravesical instillations of bacille Calmette–
Guérin, (BCG) an attenuated form of the anti-tuberculosis 
vaccine. Patients with high-grade pTa or pT1 disease are 
at high risk and should be counselled very carefully . The 
options include immediate cystectomy or a more conserva -
tive approach with a course of BCG), followed by careful 
cystosopic assessment and maintenance instillations. The 
presence of persistent disease after BCG therapy is a reason 
for offering  cystectomy.
Muscle-invasive bladder cancer
Muscle-invasive tumours are nearly always solid (Figure 
77.49), although there may be a low tufted surface. These 
tumours are often large and broad based, having an irregular, 
ulcerated appearance within the bladder. The incidence of 
metastases, whether from lymphatic invasion in the pelvis or 
blood borne to the lung, liver or bones, is much more com -
mon and will cause the death of 30–50% of patients.
In situ carcinoma
The histological appearance of irregularly arranged cells, with 
large nuclei and a high mitotic index replacing the normally 
well-ordered urothelium, is known as CIS. It may occur alone 
(primary CIS) or in association with a new tumour (concom-
itant CIS), or it may occur later in a patient who has pre -
viously had a tumour (secondary CIS). It can be diagnosed 
only when a biopsy is examined under the microscope. It may 
cause severe symptoms of dysuria, suprapubic pain and fre -
quency (hence its old name of malignant cystitis). It carries a 
risk for the patient of developing a malignant muscle-invasive 
cancer. Without treatment, 50% will die of invasive bladder 
cancer. It can be treated initially with intravesical BCG, but 
failure of response is an indication for cystectomy. CIS cannot 
be treated with external beam radiotherapy
Pure squamous cell carcinoma of the 
bladder
Squamous cell tumours tend to be solid and are nearly always 
associated with muscle invasion. This is the most prevalent 
form of bladder cancer in areas where bilharzia is endemic. 
Squamous cell tumours may be associated with chronic irri -
tation caused by stone disease in the bladder as a result of 
metaplasia.
Pure adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma accounts for approximately 1–2% of all 
bladder cancers. It usually arises in the fundus of the blad -
der at the site of the urachal remnant. Occasionally, primary 
adenocarcinomas arise at other sites and probably originate 
from areas of glandular metaplasia. Such tumours need to be 
distinguished from secondary cancer, and can be treated with 
partial cystectomy
CLINICAL FEATURES OF 
BLADDER CARCINOMA
Painless gross haematuria is the most common symptom and 
is indicative of a bladder carcinoma until proven otherwise. 
Often, however, the patient fails to declare the symptom to 
their GP . The bleeding may give rise to clot formation and 
clot urinary retention.
Constant pain in the pelvis usually heralds extravesical 
spread. There is often frequency and discomfort associated 
with urination. Pain in the loin or pyelonephritis may indi-
cate ureteric obstruction and hydronephrosis. A late mani-
festation is nerve involvement causing pain that is referred 
to the suprapubic region, groins, perineum, anus and into the 
thighs.
Albert Leon Charles Calmette , 1863–1933, and Jean-Marie Camille Guérin, 1872–1961, microbiologists at the Institute Pasteur, at Lille in France, introduced 
the bacille Calmette–Guérin in 1908.
Figure 77.49 Radical cystectomy specimen showing a large solid 
bladder cancer with total removal of the bladder and prostate.
Summary box 77.14
Muscle-invasive bladder cancer
●● Muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) should be staged 
by an accurate bimanual examination performed under 
anaesthesia before and after resection of the tumour
●● Complete urinary tract assessment should be performed, 
including CT, MR and IV urography, as well as cross-sectional 
imaging to identify lymph node involvement and distant 
spread
●● Radical primary treatment options include radical cystectomy, 
urinary diversion and thorough lymph node dissection, which 
tends to be offered as first line, or radical external beam 
radiotherapy
●● Neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves survival rates as well 
as adjuvant chemotherapy in some cases, particularly in the 
presence of nodal and distant disease
●● Locally advanced disease may be downstaged by 
radiotherapy or chemotherapy to enable salvage cystectomy
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1448 25/10/2017   10:15Investigation of bl adder carcinoma 1449
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
It is also important to assess the patient as a whole. Many 
are elderly men who have been lifelong smokers and who have 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cardiovascular dis -
ease. Their suitability for major surgery must be borne in mind.
INVESTIGATION OF BLADDER 
CARCINOMA
Urine
Urine should be cultured and examined cytologically for 
malignant cells. This is not a goo d screening test but a posi -
tive result is highly specific, and it is mostly helpful with high-
grade disease and CIS. New tests are being developed based 
on the presence of antigens such as nuclear matrix proteins 
(NMP22) or mini-chromosome maintenance (MCM) pro-
teins, which may be able to detect new or recurrent tumours, 
and epigenetic events such as methylated panels of markers 
or micro-RNA fragments. These tests continue to be under 
evaluation and are not used routinely.
Blood
Estimation of haemoglobin and the level of serum electrolytes 
and urea should be carried out.
CT, MR, IV urography or 
ultrasonography
This should be performed on all patients with painless haema-
turia. Occasionally, the preliminary film shows a faint shadow 
of an encrusted neoplasm of the bladder . The most common 
radiological sign is a filling defect (Figure 77.50). Occasion-
ally, irregularity of the bladder wall may herald the presence 
of an invasive tumour. Hydronephrosis may occur if a superfi-
cial tumour grows up the intramural ureter or direct invasion 
of the ureteric wall occurs. Ultrasonography should be carried 
out if the kidney is non-functioning to determine its presence 
and the possibility of an obstructed system.
Cross-sectional imaging
Non-contrast CT and MRI and ultrasonography are now 
replacing IVU in most centres for the immediate management 
of patients with gross painless haematuria. For staging when 
a MIBC is suspected, contrast-enhanced CT is used, ideally 
before TURT. False-positive pT3 disease can be diagnosed if 
cross-sectional imaging is carried out soon after TURT. MRI 
is being used more frequently (Figure 77.51) and can demon-
strate lymph node metastasis or muscle invasion.
Cystourethroscopy
Cystourethroscopy is the mainstay of diagnosis and should 
always be performed on patients with haematuria. It can be 
carried out with a rigid instrument under general anaesthe -
sia or with a flexible instrument under local anaesthesia. 
The urethra is inspected at the initial insertion of the instru -
ment (urethroscopy) and the bladder is then examined in a 
systematic fashion (cystoscopy). Conventional ‘white’ light 
cystoscopy has been improved recently by the introduction 
of photodynamic ‘blue’ light cystoscopy, which relies on the 
photosensitiser hexaminolaevulinate. It is now recommended 
in patients with high suspicion of the disease and negative 
initial findings and in follow-up of patients with CIS.
Bimanual examination
A bimanual examination with the patient fully relaxed under 
general anaesthesia should be performed both before and after 
endoscopic surgical treatment of these tumours. The bladder 
should be empty. Once there is muscle invasion the differ -
entiation between pT2 and pT3 disease depends on whether 
a mass is palpable bimanually at the end of the procedure 
(pT3). When invasion has spread into the prostate in a man 
or the vagina in a woman it is classified as pT4a. If the tumour 
is fixed to the lateral pelvic side wall it is staged as pT4b.
Figure 77.50 Intravenous urography showing a filling defect in the 
region of the right ureteric orifice.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1449 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1450
TREATMENT FOR CARCINOMA 
OF THE BLADDER
Non-muscle invasive tumours
Endoscopic surgery
The tumour should be carefully resected in layers using a 
resectoscope. The base of the tumour is sent separately for  
histological examination. Small pinch biopsies are taken 
near to and distant from the primary lesion when CIS is sus -
pected (inflamed or velvety appearance). After removal of 
the tumour, two or three further loops of tissue from the base 
should be sent separately so that the pathologist can accurately 
determine whether there is lamina propria or muscle inva -
sion. The base of the tumour is then coagulated, so achiev -
ing haemostasis. The appearance of pale-yellow glistening fat 
will indicate a perforation of the bladder. Should this occur 
before the resection is complete, it may be prudent to stop the 
resection and leave a catheter in the bladder for a few days. In 
this instance the procedure could be completed some 2 weeks 
later. The bimanual examination is repeated at the end of the 
endoscopic procedure. After these procedures, an irrigating 
catheter is left in situ for 48 hours to prevent clot retention of 
urine. There is good evidence that a single dose of mitomycin 
(mitomycin C, 40 mg in 60 mL of fluid) instilled into the blad-
der before catheter removal decreases the risks of recurrence in 
patients with pTa and pT1 grade 1 and 2 disease.
Patients with larger solid tumours should have adequate 
material resected for histological staging and grading. If it is 
possible and straightforward, the mass of the tumour should 
be resected as completely as possible – even when pT2 or pT3 
disease is suspected.
FOLLOW-UP
Most urologists agree that patients with a single low- or medi-
um-grade pTa tumour can safely be treated by resection alone 
plus a single instillation of mitomycin, followed up with reg -
ular cystoscopies.
The treatment of patients with multiple low- or medi -
um-grade pTa tumours can be by either resection alone or 
resection followed by a 6-week course of intravesical chemo-
therapy with mitomycin, doxorubicin or epirubicin.
The treatment of pT1 disease is difficult. Approximately 
30% of tumours are understaged at first resection. For this rea-
son, a repeat cystoscopy and resection of the tumour base are 
advocated within 6 weeks. Some urologists would offer imme-
diate cystectomy to a patient with a high-grade pT1 tumour, 
particularly if it were multiple or accompanied by CIS, because 
of the 30–50% risk of progression to muscle invasion. Others 
will treat such patients by endoscopy followed by immuno -
therapy with intravesical BCG. The most effective treatment 
of solitary medium-grade pT1 disease remains uncertain, but a 
reasonable approach would be endoscopic resection followed 
by re-resection of the area after 6 weeks, followed by intraves-
ical BCG.
Follow-up cystoscopies are essential; they may be carried 
out under local anaesthesia with a flexible cystoscope or under 
general anaesthesia if the urologist feels that the patient is at 
high risk of recurrence. They should be performed at 3-monthly 
intervals over the first year; after this the time interval between 
cystoscopies can be determined according to the presence or 
absence of further disease. In total, 30% of patients will never 
develop another tumour so that, if the bladder has remained 
clear after 2 years, annual inspection may be adequate. For 
patients who go on to develop multiple recurrences within the 
bladder at each examination, the cystoscopies need to be main-
tained at frequent intervals so that the growths can be resected. 
These patients are at a greater risk of their disease progressing; 
although intravesical chemotherapy can decrease the recur -
rence rate, no reduction in progression rates has been found.
Open surgical excision
This should be totally avoided. If by some error a bladder con-
taining a tumour is entered, then the tumour may be removed 
with a diathermy needle, the base coagulated and the bladder 
closed. Postoperative radiotherapy to the wound will dimin -
ish the chance of tumour implantation.
Figure 77.51 (a) Cross-sectional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
showing a ‘cystogram’ and a bladder cancer. (b) Cross- sectional MRI 
showing invasive bladder cancer.
(b)
(a)
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1450 25/10/2017   10:15Treatment for carcinoma of the bladder 1451
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Muscle-invasive tumours
The treatment of cancer with proven muscle invasion remains 
a subject for debate. Whatever the modality of treatment 
employed, few centres have 5-year survival rates of more than 
50%. There is a move towards primary surgical treatment in 
most centres. The use of systemic chemotherapy with a com-
bination of agents – cisplatin, methotrexate, doxorubicin and 
vinblastine (M-VAC) or cisplatin plus gemcitabine given 
before (neoadjuvant) radical cystectomy – has been shown 
to be of benefit. The current evidence is that neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy improves survival by about 5–7%. There is no 
good evidence for the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in these 
patients. Survival from MIBC has not improved over the past 
two decades, and newer immunotherapy approaches are being 
evaluated, in particular immune-checkpoint inhibitors with 
antibodies targeting the programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 
(PDL1) pathway with promising results.
Radiotherapy
EXTERNAL BEAM RADIOTHERAPY
External beam radiotherapy is usually given at 60  Gy over 
a 4- to 6-week period. There is a complete response rate of 
40–50%. Unfortunately, some patients do not respond and 
others exhibit only a partial response, with pTa or pT1 tumour 
remaining in the bladder, giving rise to a risk of recurrence, and 
predictive biomarkers of radiosensitivity are emerging to guide 
therapy, such as the DNA damage-signalling protein MRE11. 
Patients with residual disease after radiotherapy should be 
offered ‘salvage cystectomy’ if they are fit. Proponents of radio-
therapy claim that it avoids the need to remove the bladder in 
some patients and allows men to retain potency. Radiotherapy 
is not without complications, and during the course of treat -
ment will cause urinary frequency and also diarrhoea. Late 
complications can leave the bladder contracted and fibrosed, 
in which case it may need to be removed for palliative reasons. 
Late complications affecting the rectum should be uncom-
mon, especially if lateral fields of irradiation are employed.
Surgery
PARTIAL CYSTECTOMY
This should be limited to the treatment of small adenocarci -
nomas of the bladder.
RADICAL CYSTECTOMY AND PEL VIC 
L YMPHADENECTOMY
This is now standard treatment for localised pT2–pT3 disease 
without evidence of secondary spread or of CIS that has not 
responded to BCG. However, bladder cancer tends to occur in 
elderly people, with a median age at diagnosis of 73 years, and 
radical surgery carries morbidity in this age group; thus patients 
must be carefully assessed preoperatively. Before contemplating 
radical surgery to remove the bladder, it is important to have 
evidence that surgical cure is attainable. Cross-sectional imag-
ing of the pelvis may locally overstage the bladder if a recent 
resection has been carried out, although the finding of grossly 
enlarged pelvic, iliac or para-aortic nodes or liver metasta -
ses will alter the decision for cystectomy. A bone scan (using 
technetium-99m [99mTc]), or bone marrow MRI will help to  
show whether there is spread to bone, and a chest plain radio-
graph should be performed to exclude pulmonary metastases, 
although many centres now perform routine CT imaging of 
the chest preoperatively and it tends to be more sensitive than 
plain radiography in detecting small lung lesions.
SURGERY
Alternative drainage for urine is necessary after removal of 
the bladder. The standard procedure is to perform an ileal 
conduit diversion. Male patients should be counselled about 
the onset of erectile impotence and absent ejaculation after 
the operation, although in some cases the nerve supply for 
erectile function can be preserved through careful dissection; 
they should also be told about alternative forms of urinary 
diversion, which include continent urinary diversions and 
orthotopic bladder replacement.
Patients should be seen by a stoma care therapist, who will 
help to advise the patient and will try different ileostomy bags 
to ensure that the correct site is chosen, avoiding skin creases 
so that one does not end up with the disaster of a leaking 
urinary ileostomy. A decision is made about whether the male 
urethra is to be removed (depending on the estimated risk 
of recurrence within the urethra); a urethrectomy is usually 
indicated in patients with primary CIS or those with tumour 
invading the prostate stroma. Many surgeons are now offering 
total replacement of the bladder after cystectomy.
The patient should receive prophylactic antibiotics includ-
ing metronidazole, cefuroxime and amoxicillin, and low-dose 
heparin or equivalent thromboembolic prophylaxis, including 
physical means such as stockings and inflatable devices applied 
to the legs peroperatively to promote venous circulation.
The abdomen is opened through a midline incision extend-
ing down to the symphysis pubis. The liver and the retro -
peritoneum are checked for evidence of metastases, and the 
operability of the bladder is assessed. A bilateral pelvic lymph-
adenectomy is performed, removing external iliac nodes, inter-
nal iliac nodes and the nodes in the obturator fossae. Some 
surgeons will remove lymph nodes up to the aortic bifurcation 
or higher with some evidence of improved long-term onco -
logical outcomes. The vessels passing to the bladder from the 
side wall of the pelvis are ligated and divided; these include 
the obliterated hypogastric vessels, the superior vesical artery, 
the middle vesical veins, and the inferior vesical arteries and 
veins. The ureters are then divided. The posterior ligaments 
extending from the pararectal area to the back of the bladder 
are ligated and divided, and the layer posterior to Denonvil-
liers’ fascia is opened up. The endopelvic fascia is then divided 
on each side and the puboprostatic ligaments are divided. A 
ligature is passed between the dorsal vein complex and the ure-
thra, and the former is ligated and divided. The urethra is then 
mobilised and divided. The ligaments lateral to the prostate 
are divided and the bladder is removed. In women, the uterus 
Charles Pierre Denonvilliers , 1808–1872, Professor of Anatomy, and later of Surgery, Paris, France.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1451 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1452
and anterior vaginal wall need to be included. Women must be 
counselled about the loss of ovarian and uterine function.
An isolated loop of ileum is then prepared on its own mes-
entery, and continuity of the small bowel restored. The ure -
ters are then implanted into the bowel and the ileostomy is 
created. Meticulous care must be taken to close all mesenteric 
windows, thus avoiding internal hernias. If the bladder is to 
be replaced orthotopically, a reservoir made from detubula -
rised bowel (usually a segment of well-vascularised ileum) is 
created and anastomosed to the urethra after implantation of 
the  ureters.
More recently, the technique of cystectomy and urinary 
diversion has evolved using minimally invasive approaches 
such as robot-assisted surgery, which is being evaluated in 
some centres, because it may in theory carry advantages 
including reduced blood loss, improved precision surgery and 
speedier patient recovery.
The surgical mortality rate associated with cystectomy 
used to be considerable but is now less than 2%. Late com -
plications include urethral recurrence (about 5–8%), which 
is increased in the presence of multifocal tumours, CIS and, 
particularly, invasion of prostatic stroma (Figure 77.52).
Leukoplakia
This condition is simply squamous metaplasia of the bladder. 
Profuse pro duction of keratin may result in the passing of 
white particles in the urine. It cannot be treated easily. Local-
ised areas may be resected endoscopically. Diffuse leukoplakia 
of the bladder is pre-malignant and results in squamous can -
cer of the bladder. Careful cystoscopic assessment is required 
and the condition may require cystectomy.
Endometriosis
Endometriosis within the bladder wall is rare but can have 
the appearance of a vascular bladder tumour or a tumour that 
contains chocolate-coloured or bluish cysts. The swelling 
enlarges and bleeds during menstruation. If medical manage -
ment fails, by means of danazol or luteinising hormone-releas-
ing hormone (LHRH) agonists, further treatment is usually 
by means of partial cystectomy or full-thickness endoscopic 
resection, depending on its site. The condition may be part 
of more widespread disease. Endometriosis is also a cause of 
ureteric stricture.
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL 
URINARY DIVERSION
Indications
Diversion of the urine may be either a temporary expedient to 
relieve distal obstruction or a permanent procedure when the 
bladder has been removed or lost normal neurological control, 
and in cases of incurable fistula or irremovable obstruction.
Methods of urinary diversion
Temporary methods use prosthetic materials, the most com -
mon being a urinary catheter. In elderly patients unfit for 
prostatectomy, and in some patients with terminal carci -
noma of the prostate, an indwelling, silicone, urethral Foley 
catheter changed every 3 months is a satisfactory method of 
drainage. A suprapubic placement is an alternative to ure -
thral placement. The major drawback of long-term catheteri-
sation is infection secondary to the associated bacteriuria that 
invariably develops. Ureteric obstruction can be relieved by 
placement of internal ‘double-J’ pigtail ureteric stents, which 
can remain for 4–5 months but are usually changed every 3 
months. As an alternative, a nephrostomy tube, inserted per-
cutaneously by ultrasound and fluoroscopic imaging, is effec -
tive when internal stent placement is not feasible.
Permanent urinary diversion
External diversion
ILEAL CONDUIT
Permanent urinary tract diversion is most commonly per -
formed by conduit diversion. The ureters are implanted into 
a short, isolated segment of ileum (Figure 77.53a) or, less 
commonly, colon. The conduit diverts the urine onwards to 
a cutaneous stoma for collection in an ileostomy bag. This 
form of diversion is well established and associated with a low 
complication rate of less than 10%. The main complication is 
ureteroileal stricture, which can be limited by spatulation of 
the distal ureters and an end-to-end anastomosis as described 
by Wallace (Figure 77.53a). Stenosis at the ileocutaneous 
site is less frequent, and a short isoperistaltic conduit limits 
the formation of a residual urine volume, reducing infection 
and avoiding the problems of reabsorption of urine. In some 
cases, when the pelvic area has been subjected to radiation, 
the lower ureters may be unhealthy; a high division with 
insertion of the ureters into an ileal loop above the root of the 
mesentery may then be wiser (Figure 77.54).
The site for the stoma must be chosen before the opera-
tion, in consultation with a stoma care therapist; the site is 
marked indelibly on the skin.
Operative details
A coil of ileum, approximately 15–20  cm long and 30  cm 
from the ileocaecal valve, with its bloo d supply intact, is iso-
lated. The left ureter is brought behind the mesorectum. The 
Figure 77.52 Urethrectomy specimen from a patient who has pre -
viously undergone a radical cystectomy showing new transitional cell 
tumour formation in the urethra.
David Mitchell Wallace , 1913–1992, urologist, St Peter’s Hospital, London, UK.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1452 25/10/2017   10:15Internal and e xternal urinary diversion 1453
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
the operation is that the renal tract is exposed continuously to 
infection from the faeces; this can be minimised by construct-
ing an anti-reflux procedure. Various diversions are described; 
the Mainz II ureterosigmoidostomy creates a cul-de-sac-type, 
low-pressure reservoir in the sigmoid into which the ureters 
are placed (see Figure 77.53b). This reduces reflux, and 
bowel content, although in contact with urine, takes a direct 
route to the rectum. In the long term, cancer can develop at 
longstanding ureterocolic junctions (Figure 77.55).
BLADDER RECONSTRUCTION
Over the past decade, several techniques have been devel -
oped to allow a near-spherical urinary reservoir to be formed 
out of various lengths of bowel that are detubularised. These 
may consist of ileum, ileum and caecum, or sigmoid colon 
(see Figure 77.53c). The ureters can then be reimplanted 
in these reservoirs in an anti-reflux manner and the reservoir 
anastomosed to the membranous urethra in males (see Fig-
ures 77.20–77.22). This is indicated only when the urethra 
can be preserved, with no evidence of tumour at the junction 
Stoma
Ileum
Figure 77.54 Ureteroileostomy (after DM Wallace, FRCS).
Figure 77.53 Diversion of urine. Favoured methods: (a) ileal con -
duit; the ureters are spatulated and anastomosed to ileum end to side 
(insert); (b) ureterosigmoidostomy; (c) ileal neobladder with  antireflux 
long afferent limb.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 77.55 An anterior resection of the rectum specimen con -
taining a rectal cancer in a patient aged 18 years who has pr evi-
ously undergone ureterosigmoidostomy for the treatment of bladder 
 exstrophy.
 ureters may be joined to the ileum either end to side or end 
to end after anastomosing the distal spatulated ureters to form 
a plate (Wallace). The distal end of the coil is brought out 
through an incision made at the site identified before oper -
ation; a disc of skin and fat is removed, a cruciate incision is 
made in the fascia and the muscle is split. The stoma is made 
about 2–3 cm long. It is evaginated initially by means of four 
sutures passing through the skin, the ileal loop as it passes 
through the opening and the cut edge of the ileum.
Internal urinary diversion
COLON AND RECTUM
The advantage of diverting urine into the colon is that no 
collecting apparatus is necessary. Clearly, however, the anal 
sphincter must be competent. Before ureterosigmoidostomy is 
undertaken, the patient must prove that he or she can control 
at least 200 mL of fluid in the rectum. The disadvantage of 
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1453 25/10/2017   10:15CHAPTER 77  The urinary bl adder
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1454
between the urethra and the prostate in males, and bladder 
neck in females. About 15–30% of patients cannot empty the 
neobladder completely and will need to perform intermittent 
self-catheterisation. The results are good after radical cystec -
tomy, particularly in younger well-motivated patients.
CONTINENT URINARY DIVERSION
A similar concept is used in the construction of continent diver-
sions. A urinary reservoir is made as described above and the ure-
ters are attached to the reservoir. A continence mechanism is 
then made to connect the reservoir to the skin. This is the com-
plication-prone part of the operation. The continence mecha-
nism may be made of an invaginated loop of ileum supported by 
three rows of staples (Kock pouch) or from the appendix, buried 
in an anti-reflux manner in a submucosal tube (Mitrofanoff; Fig-
ure 77.56). Alternatively, a length of ileum can be made into 
a tube (of a similar size to the appendix) after excision of the 
anti-mesenteric ileum, and buried in a submucosal tunnel in an 
anti-reflux way. Clearly, these operations are complex, with the 
potential for increased postoperative complications.
BLADDER SUBSTITUTION AND AUGMENTATION
In patients with contraction of the bladder because of tuber -
culosis or with neuropathic dysfunction and a small bladder 
capacity, the bladder may need to be augmented. Similar 
techniques to those used to perform a bladder replacement 
can be utilised to make a near-spherical pouch from detu -
bularised bowel, which can then be attached to the trigone 
or bladder neck after a near-total cystectomy (see Figures 
77.20–77.22). The ureters are then reimplanted. The facil -
ity to provide a continence mechanism must be available if 
needed in the neuropathic patient. This may comprise an 
artificial urinary sphincter or a colposuspension in females.
Complications of internal diversion
Stricture
Ureterosigmoidostomy was first used by Chaput in 1894. Sub-
sequent modifications included those made by Coffey and 
Grey Turner. In these methods the ureters were cut obliquely 
and pulled into the gut by a stitch – the ends were not stitched 
to the gut wall – and stenosis was common. Nesbit, Cordon -
nier and Leadbetter all recognised that these strictures could 
be prevented by anastomosing mucosa to mucosa.
Reflux of urine
High-pressure activity within a segment of gut can cause 
reflux of potentially infected urine at high pressure to the kid-
neys. In the long term, this can cause renal impairment. The 
principle of a low-pressure reservoir for both neobladder and 
ureterosigmoidostomy (Mainz II) reduces this. In addition, an 
anti-reflux mechanism, used in neobladder construction, is 
created by anastomosing the ureters to a non-detubularised 
20-cm segment of small bowel, which is in continuity with 
the neobladder (see Figure 77.53c).
Metabolic consequences of internal 
diversion
Resorption of solutes
This depends upon the following factors: (1) the area of bowel 
that is exposed to urine, and (2) the length of time that the 
urine is in contact with the bowel epithelium.
The biochemical changes associated with urinary diver -
sion are due to a combination of reabsorption of chloride and 
urea and progressively diminishing tubular function as a result 
of pyelonephritis. Diarrhoea with loss of potassium-contain -
ing mucus may exacerbate the loss of potassium. The typi -
cal changes of a hyperchloraemic acidosis with potassium 
depletion occur more frequently with ureterosigmoid diver -
sion than with a colonic and ileal neobladder. When severe, 
the patient develops loss of appetite, weakness, thirst and 
 diarrhoea. Coma may ensue. Mild acidosis, unrecognised 
over a long period, pro duces osteomalacia. Bone pain and 
even pathological fracture can occur. Renal impairment from 
pyelonephritis and reabsorption from the mucosa are seen 
less frequently after ileal or colonic conduit formation, conti-
nent urinary diversion or orthotopic bladder substitution. In 
fact, they are seen very infrequently except in patients with 
Nils G Kock , b.1924, Professor of Surgery, the University of Göteborg, Sweden.
Paul Mitrofanoff , b.1934, Professor of Paediatric Surgery, Rouen, France.
Henri Chaput , b.1857, surgeon, La Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Robert Calvin Coffey , 1869–1933, surgeon, Nashville, TN, USA.
George Grey Turner , 1877–1951, Professor of Surgery, the University of Durham (1927–1934), and at the Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith, London, 
UK (1934–1945).
Figure 77.56 A patient with a pT3a bladder cancer who has previ -
ously undergone cystoprostatectomy and urethrectomy. A detubular-
ised ileocaecal reservoir has been made with the ureters implanted in 
submucosal tunnels. The appendix has been implanted within the res-
ervoir in a submucosal tunnel to provide the continence mechanism. 
The appendix has been brought to the umbilicus and is catheterised 
4- to 6-hourly to empty the reservoir.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1454 25/10/2017   10:15Further reading 1455
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
pre-existing renal impairment and unsatisfactory emptying of 
the urinary reservoir. Malabsorption can occur with the loss 
of terminal ileum and small bowel. The loss of terminal ileum 
can result in vitamin B12 deficiency and so monitoring of vita-
min B12 and folate is recommended after the first year.
TREATMENT
Patients should be instructed to empty the rectum or conti -
nent reservoir or neobladder 3-hourly by day. In patients who 
have undergone ureterosigmoidostomy and in whom acidosis 
is present, a rectal tube should be inserted at night to drain 
the urine continuously. The patient should take a mixture of 
potassium citrate and sodium bicarbonate three times a day 
(2 g of each, as either crystals or tablets). Regular serum bio -
chemical analyses, including calcium, are required.
Established hyperchloraemic acidosis is usually associated 
with marked dehydration and the mainstay of treatment is 
administration of intravenous saline. The patient may be 
given small doses of sodium bicarbonate to half-correct the 
pH deficit if it is severe and additional intravenous potassium. 
This should be coupled with appropriate systemic antibiotic 
treatment.
Risk of malignancy
There is a risk of cancer developing in bowel used to recon -
struct the urinary tract. When the urine is not mixed with fae-
ces, the incidence is small, becoming significant after 15–18 
years. The major risk of malignancy was discovered when ure-
terosigmoidostomy construction enabled free mixing of urine 
and faeces. The development of sigmoid reservoirs into which 
the ureters are inserted has reduced this risk.
FURTHER READING
Cardozo L, Staskin DR. Textbook of female urology and urogynecology, 4th 
edn. London: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2016.
Hamdy FC, Eardley I. Oxford textbook of urological surgery. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2017.
Scardino PT, Marston Linehan W , Zelefski MJ et al. Comprehensive text-
book of genitourinary oncology, 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2011.
Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin A W , Peters CA. Campbell-Walsh urology, 
11th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2016.
12_77-B&L27_Pt12_Ch77.indd   1455 25/10/2017   10:15Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The relationship of anatomical structure and 
biochemical function to the development and treatment 
of benign and malignant disease of the prostate
 • The terminology used to describe lower urinary tract 
symptoms and to know their causes as well as the 
treatment options available
 • Which investigations are appropriate for carcinoma of 
the prostate
 • Clinical staging of carcinoma of the prostate and how 
staging contributes to the complex decision
The prostate and seminal vesicles
78
EMBRYOLOGY
From the primitive urethra, a series of solid epithelial buds 
develop and become canalised in a matter of weeks. The sur -
rounding mesenchyme forms the muscular and connective 
tissue of the gland and has a major role in differentiation 
(stromal epithelium interactions). Skene’s tubules, which 
open on either side of the female urethra, are the homologue 
of the prostate.
SURGICAL ANATOMY
The contemporary classification of the prostate into differ -
ent zones was based on the work of McNeal (Figure 78.1). 
He showed that it is divided into the peripheral zone (PZ), 
which lies mainly posteriorly and from which most carcino -
mas arise, and a central zone (CZ), which lies posterior to 
the urethral lumen and above the ejaculatory ducts as they 
pass through the prostate; the two zones are rather like an egg 
in an eggcup. There is also a periurethral transitional zone 
(TZ), from which most benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) 
arises. Smooth muscle cells are found throughout the pros-
tate but, in the upper part of the prostate and bladder neck, 
there is a separate sphincter muscle that subserves a sexual 
function, closing during ejaculation. Resection of this tissue 
during prostatectomy is responsible for retrograde ejaculation. 
The distal striated urethral sphincter muscle is found at the 
junction of the prostate and the membranous urethra; it is 
horseshoe shaped with the bulk lying anteriorly and is quite 
distinct from the muscle of the pelvic floor (Figure 78.1).
The glands of the peripheral zone (Figure 78.2), lined by 
columnar epithelium, lie in the fibromuscular stroma and their 
ducts, which are long and branched, open into posterolateral 
grooves on either side of the verumontanum. The glands of 
the CZ and TZ are shorter and unbranched. All these ducts, 
the common ejaculatory ducts and the prostatic utricle open 
into the prostatic urethra. BPH starts in the periurethral 
transitional zone and, as it increases in size, it compresses the 
outer PZ of the prostate, which becomes the false capsule. 
There is also the outer true fibrous anatomical capsule and 
external to this lie condensations of endopelvic fascia known 
Alexander Johnston Chalmers Skene , 1828–1900, Professor of Gynecology, Long Island Hospital, Brooklyn, New York, NY, USA.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 77.1Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Anterior
/f_ibromuscular
stroma
Capsule
Transitional
zone
Verumontanum
Distal
sphincter
mechanism
Preprostatic
sphincter
Central
zone
Ejaculatory
duct
Peripheral
zone
Membranous
urethra
Pelvic /f_loor
Figure 78.1 Sagittal diagram of the prostate just lateral to the urethra 
showing the division into the different zones described by McNeal. 
The  transitional zone is the area from which most benign prostatic 
hyperplasia arises.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1456 25/10/2017   10:16Physiology 1457
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
as the periprostatic sheath of endopelvic fascia. Between the 
anatomical capsule and the prostatic sheath lies the abundant 
prostatic venous plexus. The neurovascular bundles supplying 
autonomic innervation to the corpora of the penis are in very 
close relationship to the posterolateral aspect of the prostatic 
capsule and are at risk of damage during radical cystoprosta -
tectomy or radical prostatectomy; inadvertent diathermy in 
the region of these nerves may be the cause of uncommon 
erectile impotence after transurethral prostatectomy.
PHYSIOLOGY
The prostate has a sexual function, but it is unclear how 
important its secretions are to human fertility. That the nor -
mal adult prostate undergoes atrophy after castration was 
known to John Hunter.
Systemic hormonal influences 
(endocrine) and local growth factors 
(paracrine and autocrine)
The growth of the prostate is governed by many local and 
systemic hormones whose exact functions are not yet known. 
The main hormone acting on the prostate is testosterone, 
which is secreted by the Leydig cells of the testes under the 
control of luteinising hormone (LH), itself secreted from the 
anterior pituitary under the control of hypothalamic lutei -
nising hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH). LHRH has a 
short half-life and is released in a pulsatile manner. This pul -
satile release is important, as receptors for LHRH will become 
desensitised if permanently occupied. The administration 
of LHRH analogues in a continuous, non-pulsatile manner 
exploits the concept of receptor desensitisation and forms the 
basis for androgen deprivation therapy in prostate cancer. Tes-
tosterone is converted to 1,5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by 
the enzyme 5α-reductase, which is found in high concentra-
tion in the prostate and the perigenital skin (type II). Other 
androgens are secreted by the adrenal cortex, but their effects 
are minimal in the normal male. Oestrogenic steroids are also 
secreted by the adrenal cortex and, in the ageing male, may 
play a part in disrupting the delicate balance between DHT 
and local peptide growth factors, and hence increase the risk 
of BPH. Increased levels of serum oestrogens, by acting on 
the hypothalamus, decrease the secretion of LHRH (and 
hence LH) and thereby decrease serum testosterone levels. 
Thus, pharmacological levels of oestrogens cause atrophy of 
the testes and prostate by means of reductions in testoster -
one. Other locally acting peptides are secreted by the pros -
tatic epithelium and mesenchymal stromal cells in response 
to steroid hormones. These include epidermal growth factor, 
insulin-like growth factors, basic fibroblast growth factor and 
transforming growth factors alpha and beta. These undoubt-
edly play a part in normal and abnormal prostatic growth, but 
as yet their functions are unclear.
Urethral glands
Submucosal glands
(adenomatous zone) Prostatic urethra
Prostatic glands proper
(carcinomatous zone)
Anatomical capsule
Figure 78.2  A transverse section of the prostate. The peripheral 
zone is the area from which most prostate cancers arise. The ‘adeno-
matous’ zone comprises the central and transitional zones.
Franz von Leydig , 1821–1908, Professor of Histology successively at Wurzburg, Tubingen and Bonn, Germany.
Elaboration and secretion of 
prostate-specific antigen
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a glycoprotein that is a ser-
ine protease. Its function may be to facilitate liquefaction of 
semen, but it is a marker for prostatic disease. It is measured by 
an immunoassay and the normal range can differ a little from 
laboratory to laboratory. There is no real normal upper limit. 
The levels increase with age, with prostate cancer and with 
BPH. There are age-related values but, in general, in men 
aged 50–69 years, a level of about 3–4 ng/mL would prompt a 
discussion about the need for prostate biopsy. Its level in men 
with metastatic prostate cancer is usually increased to >30 ng/
mL and falls to low levels after successful androgen ablation. 
Men with locally confined prostate cancer usually have serum 
PSA levels <10–15 ng/mL. Although PSA is a reliable marker 
for the progression of advanced disease, it is neither specific 
nor sensitive in the differential diagnosis of early prostate 
cancer and BPH, as both diseases are compatible with PSA in 
the range of 3–15 ng/mL. In summary, about 25% of men with 
a PSA of 4–10 ng/mL have prostate cancer (i.e. it is not very 
specific) and about 15–20% of men with a PSA of 1–4 ng/mL 
have prostate cancer. In general, one would advise men aged 
Summary box 78.1
Androgenic hormones
●● Androgenic hormones, which drive prostate growth, are 
derived from several sources
●● The majority of testosterone (90%) is secreted by the Leydig 
cells of the testes under the control of luteinising hormone, 
secreted from the anterior pituitary
●● Metabolised adrenal androgen accounts for the remaining 
5–10% of testosterone
●● Testosterone is converted to 1,5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) 
by the enzyme 5a-reductase type II, which is found in high 
concentration in the prostate and the perigenital skin
●● DHT has five times the potency of testosterone
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1457 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1458
50–69 years to undergo prostate biopsy if the PSA was more 
than ~3 ng/mL. The threshold would be lower in younger men 
with a strong family history. PSA is a useful tumour marker in 
the postsurgery setting, where a supersensitive assay, with sen-
sitivity to 0.02 ng/mL, facilitates early detection of biochem -
ical recurrence.
BENIGN PROSTATIC 
HYPERPLASIA
Aetiology
Hormones
Serum testosterone levels slowly but significantly decrease 
with advancing age; however, levels of oestrogenic steroids 
are not decreased equally. According to this theory, the pros-
tate enlarges because of increased oestrogenic effects. It is 
likely that the secretion of intermediate peptide growth fac -
tors plays a part in the development of BPH.
Anatomically, the effects are as follows:
 ● Urethra. The prostatic urethra is lengthened, sometimes 
to twice its normal length, but it is not narrowed anatom-
ically. The normal posterior curve may be so exaggerated 
that it requires a curved catheter to negotiate it. When 
only one lateral lobe is enlarged, distortion of the prostatic 
urethra occurs.
 ● Bladder. If BPH causes BOO, the musculature of the blad-
der hypertrophies to overcome the obstruction and appears 
Pathology
BPH affects both glandular epithelium and connective tissue 
stroma to variable degrees. These changes are similar to those 
occurring in breast dysplasia (see Chapter 53), in which ade -
nosis, epitheliosis and stromal proliferation are seen in differ-
ing proportions. BPH typically affects the submucous group 
of glands in the transitional zone, forming a nodular enlarge -
ment. Eventually, this overgrowth compresses the PZ glands 
into a false capsule and causes the appearance of the typical 
‘lateral’ lobes.
When BPH affects the subcervical CZ glands, a ‘middle’ 
lobe develops that projects up into the bladder within the 
internal sphincter (Figure 78.3). Sometimes, both lateral 
lobes also project into the bladder, so that when viewed from 
within, the sides and back of the internal urinary meatus are 
surrounded by an intravesical prostatic collar.
Effects of benign prostatic 
hyperplasia
It is important to realise that the relationship between ana -
tomical prostatic enlargement, lower urinary tract symptoms 
(LUTS) and urodynamic evidence of bladder outflow obstruc-
tion (BOO) is complex (Figure 78.4). Pathophysiologically, 
BOO may be caused in part by increased smooth muscle tone, 
which is under the control of α-adrenergic agonists.
Summary box 78.2
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) 
●● Occurs in men over 50 years of age; by the age of 60 years, 
50% of men have histological evidence of BPH
●● Is a common cause of significant lower urinary tract 
symptoms in men and is the most common cause of bladder 
outflow obstruction in men >70 years of age
Right half of bladder
Enlargement of
lateral lobe of
prostate
Prostatic
urethra
Posterior lobe
of prostate
Hypertrophy
of trigone
Enlargement of
median lobe of
prostate
Figure 78.3  Diagram of late-stage bladder outflow obstruction 
showing enlargement of the prostate from benign prostatic hyperpla-
sia, trabeculation of the bladder with smooth muscle hypertrophy and 
fibrosis.
Symptoms
BOOBPH
Figure 78.4  Diagrammatic repr esentation of the relation between 
symptoms of prostatism, benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and uro-
dynamically proven bladder outflow obstruction (BOO).
Summary box 78.3
Consequences of benign prostatic hyperplasia
●● No symptoms, no bladder outflow obstruction (BOO)
●● No symptoms, but urodynamic evidence of BOO
●● Lower urinary tract symptoms, no evidence of BOO
●● Lower urinary tract symptoms and BOO
●● Others (acute/chronic retention, haematuria, urinary infection 
and stone formation)
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1458 25/10/2017   10:16Benign prostatic hyperpl asia 1459
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
trabeculated (Figure 78.5). Significant BPH is associated 
with increased blood flow , and the resultant veins at the 
base of the bladder are apt to cause haematuria.
Lower urinary tract symptoms
In both sexes, non-specific symptoms of bladder dysfunction 
become more common with age, probably owing to impair -
ment of smooth muscle function and neurovesical coordina -
tion. Not all symptoms of disturbed voiding in ageing men 
should therefore be attributed to BPH causing BOO. Urol-
ogists prefer the term LUTS and discourage the use of the 
descriptive term ‘prostatism’.
The following conditions can coexist with BOO, leading 
to difficulty in diagnosis and in predicting the outcome of 
treatment:
 ● idiopathic detrusor overactivity (see Chapter 77);
 ● neuropathic bladder dysfunction as a result of diabetes, 
strokes, Alzheimer’s disease or Parkinson’ s disease (see 
Chapter 77); degeneration of bladder smooth muscle giv -
ing rise to impaired voiding and detrusor instability;
 ● BOO due to BPH.
Lower urinary tract symptoms can be described as:
 ● Voiding:
 ● hesitancy (worsened if the bladder is very full);
 ● poor flow (unimproved by straining);
 ● intermittent stream – stops and starts;
 ● dribbling (including after micturition);
 ● sensation of poor bladder emptying;
 ● episodes of near retention.
 ● Storage:
 ● frequency;
 ● nocturia;
 ● urgency;
 ● urge incontinence;
 ● nocturnal incontinence (enuresis).
LUTS are usually assessed by means of scoring systems, 
which give a semiobjective measure of severity. However , 
some symptoms do not give an accurate picture of the under-
lying pathophysiological problem. For instance, a man with 
severe detrusor instability may void only small volumes and 
hence he will have a sensation of poor flow because low 
voided volumes (<100 mL) are associated with low flow rates.
Severe irritative symptoms are usually associated with 
detrusor instability. Postmicturition dribbling is now known 
not to be a consequence of BOO and is not usually improved 
by prostatectomy.
Bladder outflow obstruction
This is a urodynamic concept based on the combination of 
low flow rates in the presence of high voiding pressures. It 
can be diagnosed definitively only by pressure–flow studies. 
This is because symptoms are relatively non-specific and can 
result from detrusor instability, neurological dysfunction and 
weak bladder contraction. Even low measured peak flow rates 
(<10–12 mL/s) are not absolutely diagnostic because, in addi-
tion to BOO, weak detrusor contractions or low voided vol -
umes (owing to instability) can be the cause. Nonetheless, 
flow rates provide a useful guide for everyday clinical man-
agement.
Urodynamically proven BOO may result from:
 ● BPH;
 ● bladder neck stenosis;
 ● bladder neck hypertrophy;
 ● prostate cancer;
 ● urethral strictures;
 ● functional obstruction due to neuropathic conditions.
The primary effects of BOO on the bladder are as follows:
 ● Urinary flow rates decrease (for a voided volume 
>200 mL, a peak flow rate of >15  mL/s is normal (Figure 
78.6), one of 10–15 mL/s is equivocal and one <10 mL/s is 
low (Figure 78.7).
Figure 78.5 Pathological specimen of bladder and kidneys in a case 
of bladder outflow obstruction caused by benign prostatic hyperpla-
sia. Bladder trabeculation, bilateral hydroureter and hydronephrosis 
can be seen.
Alois Alzheimer , 1864–1915, neurologist, worked at Heidelberg and Munich before being appointed Professor of Psychiatry at Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, 
Poland).
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1459 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1460
 ● Voiding pressures increase  (pressures >80  cmH2O are 
high (Figure 78.8), pressures between 60 and 80  cmH2O 
are equivocal and pressures <60 cmH2O are normal).
The long-term effects of bladder outflow obstruction are 
as follows:
 ● The bladder may decompensate so that detrusor contrac-
tion becomes progressively less efficient and a residual 
urine develops.
 ● The bladder may become more irritable during filling with 
a decrease in functional capacity partly caused by detrusor 
overactivity (see Chapter 77), which may also be caused 
by neurological dysfunction or ageing, or may be idio -
pathic.
Aside from symptoms, the complications of BOO are as 
follows:
 ● Acute retention of urine is sometimes the first symptom 
of BOO. Postponement of micturition is a common pre -
cipitating cause; overindulgence in beer and confinement 
to bed on account of intercurrent illness or operation are 
other causes.
 ● Chronic retention. In patients in whom the residual vol -
ume is >250  mL or so (Figure 78.9), the tension in the 
bladder wall increases owing to the combination of a large 
volume of residual urine and increased resting and filling 
bladder pressures (a condition known as high-pressure 
chronic retention). The increased intramural tension 
results in functional obstruction of the upper urinary tract 
with the development of bilateral hydronephrosis (Figure 
78.10–78.12). As a result, upper tract infection and renal 
impairment may develop. Such men may present with 
overflow incontinence, enuresis and renal insufficiency. 
These symptoms should alert the doctor to the presence 
of this condition.
 ● Impaired bladder emptying. If the bladder decompensates 
with the development of a large volume of residual urine, 
urinary infection and calculi are prone to develop.
 ● Haematuria. This may be a complication of BPH. Other 
causes must be excluded by carrying out an intravenous 
urography (IVU), cystoscopy, urine culture and urine 
cytological examination.
 ● Other than pain from retention, pain is not a symptom 
of BOO, and its presence should prompt the exclusion of 
acute retention, urinary infection, stones, carcinoma of 
the prostate and carcinoma in situ of the bladder.
Flow
Volume
5 m/s
100 mL
Figure 78.6 Normal flow rate. The voided volume is well in excess of 
350 mL, and the maximum flow rate is in excess of 25 mL/s.
Flow
Volume
5 m/s
100 mL
10 s
Figure 78.7 Diagram of a low flow rate showing a rather low voided 
volume of about 200 mL, but with markedly decreased flow rate. Such 
a flow rate could be caused by a urethral stricture, bladder outflow 
obstruction or a weak detrusor.
cmH2O
mL s–1
120
80
40
20
10
0
0 12
Time in minutesVoided volume 340 mL
0
Obstructed void
(200)
(100)
Scale change
Flow rate Detrusor pressure
Figure 78.8 Conventional urodynamic trace showing detrusor pres-
sure during voiding. Ther e has been a change in scale because the 
pressure was so high; voiding pressures are increased with a low flow 
rate. This is diagnostic of bladder outflow obstruction.
Figure 78.9 An ultrasonogram showing a lar ge postvoid r esidual 
urine.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1460 25/10/2017   10:16Assessment of the patient with lower urinary tract symptoms 1461
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT 
WITH LOWER URINARY TRACT 
SYMPTOMS
History
Symptom score sheets such as the International Prostate 
Symptom Score (IPSS) assign a score that gives information 
regarding the severity of symptoms at the outset and changes 
over time and following intervention. The IPSS assessment 
should include an assessment of quality of life, which is a 
reflection of the degree of ‘bother’ caused by a patient’s symp-
toms. In addition to the IPSS, a frequency–volume diary com-
pleted by the patient before attending the clinic is invaluable 
in revealing fluid intake habits, diurnal variation in outputs 
and low-volume, frequent voiding. These assessments are 
routinely performed at lower urinary tract clinics but can be 
elicited by a thorough clinical history.
Figure 78.10  Image of an abdomen with high pressur e urinary 
retention.
Figure 78.11 Magnetic resonance image showing a median lobe 
projecting into the bladder and causing bladder outflow obstruction.
Figure 78.12 Computed tomography scan showing bilateral hydro-
nephrosis as a result of bladder outflow obstruction.
Summary box 78.4
Investigations of men with lower urinary tract 
symptoms
Essential investigations
●● Urine analysis by dipstick for blood, glucose and protein
●● Urine culture for infection
●● Serum creatinine
●● Urinary flow rate and residual volume measurement
Additional investigations
●● Prostate-specific antigen if indicated
●● Pressure-flow studies
Abdominal examination
Abdominal distension is usually normal. In patients with 
chronic retention, a distended bladder will be found on palpa-
tion, on percussion and sometimes on inspection with loss of 
the transverse suprapubic skin crease. General physical exam-
ination may demonstrate signs of chronic renal impairment 
with anaemia and dehydration. The external urinary meatus 
should be examined to exclude stenosis and the epididymides 
are palpated for signs of inflammation.
Rectal examination
In benign enlargement, the posterior surface of the prostate is 
smooth, convex and typically elastic, but the fibrous element 
may give the prostate a firm consistency. The rectal mucosa 
can be made to move over the prostate. Residual urine may 
be felt as a fluctuating swelling above the prostate. It should 
be noted that, if there is a considerable amount of residual 
urine present, it pushes the prostate downwards, making it 
appear larger than it is. It is not always possible to examine 
the cranial extreme of the very large prostate per rectum. An 
inability to get to the prostate base implies a volume of at 
least 50 mL.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1461 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1462
The nervous system
The nervous system is examined to eliminate a neurological 
lesion. Diabetes mellitus, tabes dorsalis, disseminated sclero -
sis, cervical spondylosis, Parkinson’s disease and other neu -
rological states may mimic prostatic obstruction. If these are 
suspected, then a pressure–flow urodynamic study should be 
carried out to diagnose BOO. Examination of perianal sensa-
tion and anal tone is useful in detection of an S2 to S4 cauda 
equina lesion.
Serum prostate-specific antigen
The difficulty here is the uncertain benefit of early detection 
and radical treatment of prostate cancer – this is dealt with 
in the section on prostate cancer. Certainly, men should be 
informed about the test, the risks of the prostate biopsy that 
might be required and the risks of the detection of a cancer 
that we are not certain how best to treat, as well as the posi -
tive aspects of the early discovery of a small prostate cancer. 
After suitable counselling, measurement of serum PSA may 
be helpful. Men in whom a diagnosis of early prostate can-
cer might influence treatment option (such as those under 
70 years or those with a positive family history who might 
be offered radical treatment) should be offered a PSA mea -
surement. If this is in excess of 2.5–4  ng/mL, then transrectal 
ultrasound scanning (TRUS) plus transrectal biopsies (12 
biopsies taken from six areas) should be considered.
If rectal examination is quite normal with no suspicion 
of cancer, and if no change in treatment policy would in any 
case result from the diagnosis of early prostate cancer , then 
there is little point in the routine measurement of PSA in 
men with uncomplicated BOO. However, because of the fear 
of future litigation, many find it easier to offer a PSA test. A 
variety of online calculators using PSA data from thousands 
of men involved in clinical trials are available and can be 
used to calculate the risk of a man having a positive biopsy at 
a given PSA level.
Flow rate measurement
For this to be meaningful, two or three voids should be 
recorded using a special flow meter, usually found in urology 
outpatient clinics and the voided volume should be in excess 
of 150–200  mL. A typical history and a flow rate <10  mL/s 
(for a voided volume of >200  mL; see Figure 78.7) will be 
sufficient for most urologists to recommend treatment. Usu-
ally, a flow rate measurement will be coupled with ultrasound 
measurement of postvoid residual urine.
There are pitfalls in the measurement of flow rates. The 
machine must be accurately calibrated. The patient must void 
volumes in excess of 150  mL and two or three recordings are 
needed to obtain a representative measurement. Decreased 
flow rates and LUTS may be seen in:
 ● BOO;
 ● low voided volumes (characteristically in men with detru-
sor instability);
 ● men with weak bladder contractions (low pressure–flow 
voiding).
Pressure–flow urodynamic studies
Details of these studies are outlined in Chapter 77 (see Figure 
77.14). They should be performed on the following patients:
 ● men with suspected neuropathy (Parkinson’s disease, 
dementia, longstanding diabetes, previous strokes, multi -
ple sclerosis);
 ● men with a dominant history of irritative symptoms and 
men with lifelong urgency and frequency;
 ● men with a doubtful history and those with flow rates in 
the near normal range (~ or >15 mL/s);
 ● men with invalid flow rate measurements (because of low 
voided volumes).
Blood tests
Serum creatinine, electrolytes and haemoglobin should be 
measured.
Examination of urine
The urine is examined for glucose and blood; a midstream 
specimen should be sent for bacteriological examination and 
cytological examination may be carried out if carcinoma in 
situ is thought possible.
Upper tract imaging
Most urologists no longer carry out imaging of the upper 
tract in men with straightforward symptoms. Obviously, 
if infection or haematuria is present, then the upper tract 
should be imaged by means of intravenous urogram or ultra-
sound scan.
Cystourethroscopy
Inspection of the urethra, the prostate and the urothelium 
of the bladder should always be done immediately prior to 
prostatectomy, whether it is being done transurethrally or 
by the open route to exclude a urethral stricture, a bladder 
carcinoma and the occasional non-opaque vesical calculus. 
The decision of whether to perform prostatectomy must be 
made before cystoscopy. This should be based on the patient’s 
symptoms, signs and investigations. Direct inspection of the 
prostate is a poor indicator of BOO and the need for surgery.
Transrectal ultrasound scanning
There is no need to carry this out routinely. Accurate esti -
mation of prostatic size is possible by means of transrectal or 
transabdominal ultrasound scanning when a very large pros -
tate is suspected.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1462 25/10/2017   10:16Management of men with benign prostatic hyperpl asia or bladder outflow obstruction 1463
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
MANAGEMENT OF MEN 
WITH BENIGN PROSTATIC 
HYPERPLASIA OR BLADDER 
OUTFLOW OBSTRUCTION
Strong indications for treatment (usually prostatectomy) 
include:
 ● Acute retention (see Chapter 77) in fit men with no other 
cause for retention (drugs, constipation, recent operation, 
etc.) (accounts for 25% of prostatectomies).
 ● Chronic retention and renal impairment: a residual urine 
of 200  mL or more, a raised blood urea, hydroureter or 
hydronephrosis demonstrated on urography and uraemic 
manifestations (accounts for 15% of prostatectomies).
 ● Complications of bladder outflow obstruction : stone, 
infection and diverticulum formation.
 ● Haemorrhage: occasionally, venous bleeding from a rup -
tured vein overlying the prostate will require prostatec -
tomy to be performed.
 ● Elective prostatectomy for severe symptoms : this 
accounts for about 60% of prostatectomies. Increasing 
difficulty in micturition, with considerable frequency day 
and night, delay in starting and a poor stream are the usual 
symptoms for which prostatectomy is advised. Frequency 
alone is not a strong indication for prostatectomy. The 
natural progression of outflow obstruction is variable and 
rarely gets worse after 10 years. Severe symptoms, a low 
maximum flow rate (<10  mL/s) and an increased resid -
ual volume of urine (100–250  mL) are relatively strong 
indications for operative treatment. The exact cut-off 
for operative or non-operative treatment will depend on 
careful discussion between the patient and the urologist. 
Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HOLEP) or 
open prostatectomy should be considered for very large 
prostates.
indwelling prostatic stents or a catheter. Similar comments 
apply to men with chronic retention once renal function 
has been stabilised by catheterisation. The role of α-adren-
ergic drugs followed by a trial of catheter has been tested and 
found to be successful in certain groups with a short history 
and a low residual volume of urine, but the recurrence rate 
becomes cumulatively high. 5alpha-reductase is given to pre-
vent progression of symptoms in men with large (>35  mL) 
prostates.
Special problems in the 
management of chronic retention
Men with chronic retention who have relatively low volumes 
of residual urine and who do not have symptoms suggestive of 
coexisting infection and with good renal function do not nec-
essarily require catheterisation before proceeding to prosta -
tectomy on the next available list. For those who are uraemic, 
urgent catheterisation is mandatory to allow renal function 
to recover and stabilise. Haematuria often occurs following 
catheterisation owing to collapse of the distended bladder and 
upper tract, but settles within a couple of days.
Uraemic patients with chronic retention are often dehy -
drated at the time of admission. Owing to the chronic back 
pressure on the distal tubules within the kidney, there is loss 
of the ability to reabsorb salts and water. The result, following 
release of this pressure, may be an enormous outflow of salts 
and water, which is known as postobstructive diuresis. It is for 
this reason that a careful fluid chart, daily measurements of 
the patient’s weight and serial estimations of creatinine and 
electrolytes are essential. Intravenous fluid replacement is 
required if the patient is unable to keep up with this fluid loss. 
These patients are often anaemic and may require a blood 
transfusion once fluid balance is stabilised (if haemoglobin is 
<9 g/l).
The general management of retention is discussed in 
Chapter 77.
Indications for elective treatment in 
men with LUTS secondary to BPH
Following careful assessment (see section on the assessment 
of men with LUTS), the following questions should be 
answered:
 ● Have they failed a preliminary trial of medical therapy? 
Commonly, men will have been treated with α-blockers 
or 5α- reductase inhibitors and will have failed treatment. 
They are then referred by their general practitioner to the 
urologist.
 ● Is BOO present? In many cases, the findings of significant 
symptoms (assessed by symptom scoring), a benign pros-
tate supplemented by the finding of a low maximum flow 
rate (<10–12 mL/s for a good voided volume [>200  mL]) 
will suffice to make a reasonable working diagnosis of 
BOO. In some men, particularly those with irritative 
symptoms, suspected neurological disease or those with 
technically imperfect flow rate measurements, pressure–
flow studies will need to be performed.
Summary box 78.5
Options for treatment of LUTS secondary to BPH
●● Conservative measures include watchful waiting in 
conjunction with fluid restriction and reduction in caffeine 
intake
●● Drug therapy is with a-blockers or, in men with a large 
prostate, a 5a-reductase inhibitor, or both
●● Interventional measures include transurethral resection of the 
prostate, which remains the ‘gold standard’; consider open 
prostatectomy for large glands
Acute retention
The management of retention is discussed in detail in Chap -
ter 77. Once the bladder has been drained by means of a 
catheter, the patient’s fitness for treatment is determined. If 
retention was not caused by drugs or constipation, then pros-
tatectomy would usually be the correct management. Unfit 
men or those with dementia may be treated by means of 
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1463 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1464
 ● How severe are the symptoms and what are the risks 
of doing nothing? Severe symptoms and a large resid-
ual volume of urine will usually require treatment. Men 
with mild symptoms, good flow rates (>15  ml/s) and good 
bladder emptying (residual urine <100  mL) may be safely 
managed by reassurance and review: such patients rarely 
develop severe complications such as retention in the 
long term.
 ● Is the man fit for operative treatment?
 ● What treatments are available, what are the outcomes and 
do the side-effects justify treatment?
Treatment
Men with symptoms attending for elective 
treatment (excluding acute and chronic 
retention)
CONSERVATIVE TREATMENT
It is in men with relatively mild symptoms, reasonable flow 
rates (>10 mL/s) and good bladder emptying (residual urine 
<100 mL) that careful discussion over the merits and side-  
effects of operative treatment is warranted. Waiting for a 
period of 6 months after careful discussion of the diagnosis is 
indicated. After this, a repeat assessment of symptoms, flow 
rates and ultrasound scan is helpful; many men with stable 
symptoms will elect to leave matters be. Advice over limiting 
fluid intake in the evening and careful use of propantheline to 
help with irritative symptoms is also useful.
DRUGS
In men who are very concerned about the development of 
sexual dysfunction after transurethral resection of the pros -
tate (TURP), the use of drugs may be helpful. T wo classes 
of drug have been used in the treatment of men with BOO. 
Alpha-adrenergic blocking agents inhibit the contraction 
of smooth muscle that is found in the prostate. The other 
class of drug is the 5α-reductase inhibitors, which inhibit 
the conversion of testosterone to DHT, the most active 
form of androgen. These drugs, when taken for a year, result 
in a 25% shrinkage of the prostate gland. Both groups of 
drugs are effective; however, α-blockers work more quickly 
and, although the 5α-reductase inhibitors have fewer side 
effects, they need to be taken for at least 6 months, and their 
effect is greatest in patients with large (>50  g) glands. Drug 
therapy results in improvements in maximum flow rates by 
about 2 mL/s more than placebo and results in a mild (20%) 
improvement in symptom scores. TURP , however , results 
in improvements in maximum flow rates from 9–18  mL/s 
and a 75% improvement in symptom scores. These drugs 
are expensive in comparison with their effectiveness, and a 
significant proportion of men who try these drugs will sub -
sequently undergo TURP . They may be best targeted at men 
who have failed an initial trial of watchful waiting and who 
wish to avoid surgery for a period.
OPERATIVE TREATMENT
Apart from the strong indications for operative treatment 
mentioned above, the most common reason for TURP is a 
combination of severe symptoms and a low flow rate <12 mL/s. 
The key is to assess the symptoms carefully and to counsel 
men about side effects and likely outcome before advising 
operative treatment.
Counselling men undergoing 
prostatectomy
Men undergoing prostatectomy need to be advised about the 
following:
 ● Retrograde ejaculation. This occurs in about 65% of men 
after prostatectomy.
 ● Erectile impotence. This occurs in about 5% of men, usu-
ally those whose potency is waning.
 ● Success rate. On the whole, men with acute and chronic 
retention do well from the symptomatic point of view. 
Ninety per cent of men undergoing elective operation 
for severe symptoms and urodynamically proven BOO do 
well in terms of symptoms and flow rates. Only about 65% 
of those with mild symptoms or those with weak bladder 
contraction as the cause of their symptoms do well. Men 
with unobstructed detrusor instability do not respond well 
to TURP . This is the reason for carefully documenting the 
severity of symptoms and flow rates (supplemented when 
necessary by pressure–flow studies) before deciding on 
treatment.
 ● Risk of reoperation. After TURP , this is about 15% after 
8–10 years.
 ● Morbidity rate. Death after TURP is infrequent (<0.5%), 
severe sepsis is found in about 6% and severe haematuria 
requiring transfusion of more than 2 units of blood occurs 
in about 3%. After discharge, about 15–20% of men sub -
sequently require antibiotic treatment for symptoms of 
urinary infection. Risk factors for complications include 
admission with retention, prostate cancer, renal impair -
ment and advanced age.
Methods of performing 
prostatectomy
The prostate can be approached (1) transurethrally (TURP), 
(2) retropubically (RPP), (3) through the bladder (transvesi-
cal; TVP) or (4) from the perineum (Figure 78.13).
Transurethral prostate surgery
TURP remains the most commonly performed procedure for 
the surgical correction of BOO. Perhaps the greatest advance 
in the history of transurethral surgery was marked by the 
development of the rigid lens system of Professor Harold 
Hopkins. His lenses, illuminated by a fibreoptic light source, 
permit unparalleled visualisation of the working field. Men 
with indwelling catheters, those with recent urinary infec-
tion, those with chronic retention or those with prosthetic 
material or heart valves benefit from prophylactic antibiotics 
in addition to the standard for clean surgery at induction of 
anaesthesia.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1464 25/10/2017   10:16Management of men with benign prostatic hyperpl asia or bladder outflow obstruction 1465
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Laser can be used to evaporate (e.g. Green light laser) 
or enucleate the prostate (e.g. HOLEP). The advantage of 
green light laser is that vaporisation is haemostatic and this 
procedure can be performed even while patients are antico -
agulated. HOLEP involves the use of a laser to coagulate any 
of the small vessels crossing the relatively avascular plane 
between the peripheral and transitional zones of the prostate 
while the tip of the cystoscope is used, much like the surgeons 
finger at Millin’s prostatectomy, to enucleate the transition 
zone adenoma. The enucleated adenoma is pushed into the 
bladder, where it is morcellated and extracted via the cysto-
scope. Damage to the external sphincter is avoided provided 
one uses the verumontanum as a guide to the most distal 
point of the resection/vaporisation/enucleation.
Retropubic prostatectomy (Millin)
This procedure is rarely performed nowadays as it has been 
largely superceded by HOLEP . However, where HOLEP is 
not available or where diverticulectomy or the removal of 
large stones are required, this open operation may be per -
formed. Using a low, curved transverse suprapubic Pfannen -
stiel incision, which includes the rectus sheath, the recti 
are split in the midline and retracted to expose the bladder. 
With the patient in the Trendelenburg position, the surgeon 
separates the bladder and the prostate from the posterior 
aspect of the pubis. In the space thus obtained, the anterior 
capsule of the prostate is incised with diathermy below the 
bladder neck, care being taken to obtain complete control 
of bleeding from divided prostatic veins by suture ligation. 
The prostatic adenoma is exposed and a finger used to dissect 
along the avascular plane between the transition and periph-
eral zones. A wedge is taken out of the posterior lip of the 
bladder neck to prevent secondary stricture in this region. 
The exposure of the inside of the prostatic cavity is good, 
and control of haemorrhage is achieved with diathermy and 
suture ligation of bleeding points before closure of the cap-
sule over a Foley catheter (inserted per urethram) draining 
the bladder.
2 3
1
4
Figure 78.13 The surgical approaches to the prostate. (For key see 
text.)
Prostate
Prostate tissue
is removed Resectoscope
Figure 78.14 For transurethral resection of the prostate 
the resectoscope is inserted transurethrally. Electric cur -
rent is passed through a diathermy loop at the end of 
the instrument. The surgeon moves this back and forth 
to create a cavity using diathermy to cauterise as they 
go. The resultant chips are washed out of the bladder 
intermittently throughout the procedure. A visual image 
of the operative field is transmitted through lenses run-
ning in the middle of the resectoscope. Around this lens, 
irrigating fluid is instilled and flows out, washing blood 
away from the operative field. The procedure is complete 
when an adequate channel has been created through the 
prostate.
Terence John Millin , 1903–1980, surgeon, The Westminster Hospital, London, UK and Honorary surgeon, All Saints’ Hospital for Genitourinary Diseases,  
London, UK, described the operation of retropubic prostatectomy in 1945. He was regarded as ‘the greatest of Irish urologists’ and ‘the pioneer of the retropubic 
space’. To facilitate his operation, he devised a self-retaining retractor that goes by his name and the ‘boomerang’ needle to close the prostatic capsule. He used to 
be invited all over the world to operate on VIPs. He was a former President of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. He gave up operating at the age of 57 to 
enjoy his farm in County Wicklow where he died of laryngeal carcinoma. He played international rugby for Ireland.
Strips of tissue are cut from the bladder neck down to 
the level of the verumontanum (Figure 78.14). Cutting is 
performed by a high-frequency diathermy current, which is 
applied across a loop mounted on the hand-held trigger of 
the resectoscope. Coagulation of bleeding points can be accu-
rately achieved. The ‘chips’ of prostate are then removed from 
the bladder using an Ellik evacuator. Resection proceeds at 
1 g/minute in experienced hands. The duration of resection 
for monopolar TURP is limited to 1 hour due to the risk of 
resorption of water if 1% glycine is used as an irrigant. The 
advent of bipolar TURP where normal saline is used as an irri-
gant permits resection of larger prostates. Following TURP , 
careful haemostasis is performed, and a three-way , self-re -
taining catheter irrigated with isotonic saline is introduced 
into the bladder to prevent any further bleeding from form-
ing blood clots. Irrigation is continued until the outflow is 
pale pink, and the catheter is usually removed on the sec -
ond or third postoperative day. In men with small prostates 
or bladder neck dyssynergia or stenosis, it is better to divide 
the bladder neck and prostatic urethra with a Collings knife.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1465 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1466
Transvesical prostatectomy
This operation is very rarely performed nowadays but provides 
an alternative means by which to enucleate the prostate when 
BOO is combined with a large bladder stone. The bladder is 
opened and the prostate enucleated by putting a finger into 
the urethra, pushing forwards towards the pubes to separate 
the lateral lobes, and then working the finger between the 
adenoma and the false capsule (compressed peripheral zone). 
In Freyer’s operation (1901), the bladder was left open widely 
and drained by a suprapubic tube with a 16-mm lumen in 
order to allow free drainage of blood and urine. Harris (1934) 
advocated control of the prostatic arteries by lateral stitches 
inserted with his boomerang needle. The bladder wall was 
then closed and the wound drained.
After treatment
Most urologists irrigate the bladder with sterile saline by 
means of a three-way Foley catheter for 24 hours or so.
Complications
Local
Haemorrhage is a major risk following prostatectomy what -
ever the surgical approach. Care should be taken in diather -
mising arterial bleeding points after TURP; they are often 
better seen when the rate of inflow of fluid is decreased. In the 
recovery room, one should check that the bladder is draining 
adequately; if it is not, this may indicate that a clot is block-
ing the eye of the catheter. The bladder should be promptly 
washed out using strict aseptic technique. The catheter 
should be changed by the surgeon. Only rarely is it necessary 
to return the patient to the operating room.
Secondary haemorrhage tends to occur after the patient 
has been discharged. All men should be warned about this 
possibility and given appropriate advice to rest and to have a 
high fluid intake. It is usually minor in degree but if clot reten-
tion occurs, the patient will need to be readmitted, a catheter 
passed and the bladder washed out.
Perforation of the bladder or the prostatic capsule can 
occur at the time of transurethral surgery. This usually occurs 
from a combination of inexperience in association with a large 
prostate or heavy blood loss. If the field of vision becomes 
obscured by heavy blood loss, it is often prudent to achieve 
adequate haemostasis and abandon the operation, swallowing 
one’s pride on the understanding that a second attempt may 
be necessary. A large perforation with marked extravasation 
may require the insertion of a small suprapubic drain. Rectal 
perforation should be extremely rare.
Sepsis
Bacteraemia is common even in men with sterile urine and 
occurs in over 50% of men with infected urine, prolonged 
catheterisation or chronic retention. Septicaemia can occur 
in these patients shortly after operation or when the cathe -
ter is removed. Routine use of prophylactic antibiotics is rec-
ommended based on local antimicrobial sensitivity profiles. 
Wound infection following open prostatectomy is common 
if a urethral catheter has been in situ for a number of days 
before the operation. The most worrying aspect of infection 
is the early rigor following surgery. If left undetected and 
untreated, this may progress to frank septicaemia with pro -
found hypotension. A blood culture should be taken and anti-
biotics given parenterally (e.g. amoxicillin plus cefuroxime, 
or gentamicin).
Incontinence
Incontinence is inevitable if the external sphincter mecha-
nism is damaged. The bladder neck is rendered incompetent 
by any prostatectomy and, therefore, an intact distal sphinc-
ter mechanism is essential for continence. The verumonta-
num marks the proximal margin of the external sphincter. If 
physiotherapy is ineffective, then the only satisfactory treat -
ment is the fitting of an artificial urinary sphincter or a sling 
to increase the resistance of the urethra. In some patients, 
detrusor instability contributes to the incontinence. The use 
of the anticholinergic agents imipramine or duloxetine may 
help.
Retrograde ejaculation and impotence
Impotence in men with good sexual function before surgery 
is uncommon, but retrograde ejaculation occurs commonly 
(>50%) because of disruption to the bladder neck mechanism.
Urethral stricture
This may be secondary to prolonged catheterisation, the use 
of an unnecessarily large catheter, clumsy instrumentation or 
the presence of the resectoscope in the urethra for too long 
a period. These strictures arise either just inside the meatus 
or in the bulbar urethra. An early stricture can usually be 
managed by simple bouginage but, later on, it may be neces -
sary to cut the densely fibrotic stricture with the optical ure -
throtome. The routine use of an Otis urethrotomy prior to 
TURP reduces the incidence of postoperative stricture.
Bladder neck contracture
Occasionally, a dense fibrotic stenosis of the bladder neck 
occurs following overaggressive resection of a small prostate. 
It may be due to the overuse of coagulating diathermy. Trans-
urethral incision of the scar tissue is necessary using laser or 
diathermy.
Reoperation
It is now well known that, after 8 years, 15–18% of men with 
BPH will require repeat TURP (the rate after open prostatec-
tomy is about 5%). The reasons include a technically imperfect 
Sir Peter Johnston Freyer , 1852–1921, Irish born surgeon, performed the first successful prostatectomy in 1900 at St Peter’s Hospital for Stone, London, UK. He 
used to give a running commentary to his visiting surgeons in French and Hidustani.
Samuel Harry Harris , 1881–1937, urologist, Lewisham Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Fessenden Nott Otis , 1825–1900, nineteenth century American urologist.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1466 25/10/2017   10:16Bladder outflow obstruction caused by the bl adder neck 1467
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
primary procedure and a speculative repeat operation in men 
with symptoms who are cystoscoped after operation.
General complications
Death occurs in about 0.2–0.3% of men undergoing elective 
prostatectomy. In very elderly men, in men with prostate can-
cer admitted as an emergency with acute or chronic retention 
or in those with very large prostates, the 30-day death rate 
may be in the order of 1%.
Cardiovascular
Pulmonary atelectasis, pneumonia, myocardial infarction, 
congestive cardiac failure and deep venous thrombosis are 
all potentially life-threatening conditions that can affect this 
elderly and often frail group of men.
Water intoxication
Absorption of water into the circulation at the time of trans-
urethral resection can give rise to congestive cardiac failure, 
hyponatraemia and haemolysis. Accompanying this, there is 
frequently confusion and other cerebral events often mimick-
ing a stroke. The incidence of this condition has been reduced 
since the introduction of isotonic glycine for irrigating during 
resection, and further still with the development of bipolar 
TURP where saline is used as an irrigant. The treatment con-
sists of fluid restriction.
Laser treatment of bladder outflow 
obstruction
A wide range of tissue ablative techniques using hyperthermia 
and laser energy have been developed and evaluated. These 
could often be performed as outpatient procedures with little 
morbidity. However, as experience has grown and high level 
data has accumulated, several of these techniques have been 
excluded and others ensconced within the surgical armamen-
tarium in the treatment of BOO. Most successful transure -
thral alternatives to TURP involve the use of medical lasers.
The different penetrative and haemostatic characteristics 
render each type of laser most useful for a particular appli-
cation. The holmium laser does not penetrate deep but is 
haemostatic, making it useful in sealing the small vessels that 
are opened on blunt dissection of the Millin’s plane using the 
beak of the cystoscope during HOLEP . This approach involves 
excision of parts of the prostate using a cutting laser and then 
morcellating the excised prostate fragments, which fall back 
into the bladder so that they can be removed. Morbidity with 
this procedure is low and long-term results suggest that the 
benefit will be sustained.
The KTP (green light) laser vaporises tissue and has 
a deeper penetration than holmium, making it suitable for 
vaporisation of prostate tissue. This has not yet been shown 
to be as durable as holmium laser treatment or TURP , because 
the amount of tissue removed is usually less. Vaporisation of 
the tissue causes minimal bleeding and green light laser has 
been used to vaporise the prostate of men in whom stopping 
anticoagulants is dangerous.
Intraurethral stents
These devices (Figure 78.15) are possibly helpful in the man-
agement of men with retention who are grossly unfit (classi -
fied by the American Society of Anesthesiologists as ASA 
grade IV). These men are rare cases.
BLADDER OUTFLOW 
OBSTRUCTION CAUSED BY THE 
BLADDER NECK
Aetiology
This condition usually occurs in men, but can rarely affect 
children of both sexes and women. It may be due to muscular 
hypertrophy or fibrosis of the tissues at the bladder neck fol -
lowing TURP .
Clinical syndromes
Owing to muscle hypertrophy or dyssynergia
Marion described a series of cases in which muscular hypertro-
phy of the internal sphincter in a young person had resulted 
in the development of a vesical diverticulum or hydrone -
phrosis (Marion’s disease or ‘prostatism sans prostate’). It is 
thought that dyssynergic contraction of the smooth muscle of 
the bladder neck (bladder neck dyssynergia) may account for 
some cases of BOO.
Owing to fibrosis
The symptoms are similar to those of prostatic enlargement 
but are a consequence of scarring after TURP or radical 
prostatectomy (usually compounded by external beam radio -
therapy)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 77.14Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Prostate
External
sphincter
Bladder
Figure 78.15 Diagram showing one type of prostatic stent in situ.
Jean Baptiste Camile Marion , 1869–1932, Professor of Urology, The Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1467 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1468
Treatment
The management of these patients depends on achieving an 
accurate diagnosis. For this, urodynamic investigation is often 
necessary, which should demonstrate raised voiding pressures 
and diminished flow rate.
Drugs
The presence of α-adrenergic receptors in the region of the 
bladder neck and prostatic urethra allows pharmacological 
manipulation of the outflow to the bladder.
ALPHA-BLOCKING DRUGS
Alfuzosin (2.5 mg b.d. to t.d.s., to a total maximum of 10  mg/
day), doxazosin (1 mg nocte, up to a maximum of 8  mg/day), 
indoramin (20  mg b.d., increased to a total maximum of 
100 mg/day in divided doses), prazosin (500  mg b.d., mainte-
nance up to 2  mg/day) and terazosin (1  mg nocte, to a total 
maximum of 10  mg/day), can be very useful, causing relax -
ation of the bladder neck. These drugs are not target specific, 
and patients must be warned of the possibility of postural 
hypotension, which is usually limited to the first few doses. 
They can be safely used in combination with anticholinergics 
to minimise the symptoms of bladder overactivity associated 
with BOO.
Transurethral incision
Transurethral incision of the bladder neck is the operation of 
choice. Sometimes symptoms recur, but this is usually due to 
inadequate division of the fibres of the bladder neck.
Congenital valves of the prostatic urethra
See Chapter 79.
PROSTATIC CALCULI
Prostatic calculi are of two varieties: endogenous, which are 
common, and exogenous, which are comparatively rare. An 
exogenous prostatic calculus is a urinary (commonly ure -
teric) calculus that becomes arrested in the prostatic urethra. 
Endogenous prostatic calculi are usually composed of calcium 
phosphate combined with about 20% organic material.
Clinical features
Prostatic calculi are usually symptomless, being discovered 
on TRUS, on radiography of the pelvis, during prostatec -
tomy or associated with carcinoma of the prostate or chronic 
prostatitis. In cases associated with severe chronic prostatic 
infection, the associated fibrosis and nodularity are difficult to 
differentiate from carcinoma. On radiographs or ultrasound 
scans, these stones are often seen to form a horseshoe (Figure 
78.16) or a circle.
Treatment of prostatic calculi
Prostatic calculi usually require no treatment.
Conservative measures
Associated chronic prostatic infection may be treated by 
means of ciprofloxacin or trimethoprim.
Transurethral resection
Transurethral resection will often release small calculi as the 
strips of prostatic tissue are excised. Others are passed per ure-
thram at a later date.
Corpora amylaceae
Corpora amylaceae are tiny calcified lamellated bodies found 
in the glandular alveoli of the prostates of elderly men and 
apes, but not in the prostates of animals lower in the phyloge-
netic scale than anthropoids. Corpora amylaceae are probably 
the forerunners of endogenous prostatic calculi.
CARCINOMA OF THE PROSTATE
Carcinoma of the prostate is the most common malignant 
tumour in men over the age of 65 years. In England and Wales 
in 2004, 30  000 men were registered and 10  000 died from 
prostate carcinoma; the corresponding figures in the USA 
were 260 000 and 35 000, respectively. If histological section 
of prostates at autopsy is performed, increasingly frequent foci 
of microscopic prostate cancers are found with increasing 
age. These foci of prostate cancer have variable potential for 
progressing clinically to metastatic disease. About 10–15% 
of younger men who develop prostate cancer have a posi -
tive family history of the disease, but the aetiology is unclear. 
Figure 78.16 Endogenous prostatic calculi.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1468 25/10/2017   10:16Carcinoma of the pr ostate 1469
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Throughout the world, rates of microscopic foci of prostate 
cancer are constant, but rates of clinically evident disease are 
low in men in Japan and China. Carcinoma of the prostate 
usually originates in the PZ of the prostate (see Figure 78.2), 
so ‘prostatectomy’ for benign enlargement of the gland con -
fers no protection from subsequent carcinoma.
Pathology
Serial sections of prostates obtained at routine necropsy 
demonstrate prostate carcinoma in 25% of men between 50 
and 65 years of age. The incidence in men over 80 years is 
in the region of 70% (Franks). Most of these neoplasms are 
tiny and (if life had continued) might have remained latent 
for years.
The following types of prostate cancer occur:
 ● microscopic latent cancer found on autopsy or at cysto -
prostatectomy;
 ● tumours found incidentally during TURP (T1a and T1b) 
or following screening by PSA measurement (T1c);
 ● early, localised prostate cancer (T2);
 ● advanced local prostate cancer (T3 and T4);
 ● metastatic disease, which may arise from a clinically evi -
dent tumour (T2, T3 or T4) or from an apparently benign 
gland (T0, T1) (i.e. occult prostate cancer).
It should be noted that only the last two groups cause 
symptoms, and such tumours are not curable. Only screening 
or the treatment of incidentally found tumours can result in 
cure of the disease. The problem is that many such tumours 
would never progress during the patient’s lifetime; herein lies 
the problem with prostate cancer.
Screening for prostate cancer
The cancer detection rate using measurement of PSA is 
between 2% and 4%, and approximately 30% of men with an 
elevated PSA will have prostate cancer confirmed by biopsy. 
Unfortunately, 20% of men with clinically significant prostate 
cancer will have PSA values within the normal range. There 
is therefore controversy over the usefulness of PSA alone as a 
screening procedure. Currently, a number of prospective trials 
aimed at determining whether or not PSA testing reduces the 
disease-specific mortality of prostate cancer are under way. At 
present, in Europe, population-based screening is performed 
only within the confines of clinical trials.
Histological appearances
The prostate is a glandular structure consisting of ducts and 
acini; thus, the histological pattern is one of an adenocarci -
noma. The prostatic glands are surrounded by a layer of myo-
epithelial cells. The first change associated with carcinoma is 
the loss of the basement membrane, with glands appearing to 
be in confluence. As the cell type becomes less differentiated, 
more solid sheets of carcinoma cells are seen. A classification 
of the histological pattern based on the degree of glandular 
de-differentiation and its relation to stroma has been devised 
by Gleason. Prostate cancers exhibit heterogeneity within tis-
sue, and so two histological areas of prostate are each scored 
between 1 and 5. The scores are added to give an overall 
Gleason score of between 2 and 10; this (and the volume of 
the cancer) appears to correlate well with the likelihood of 
spread and the prognosis.
Local spread
Locally advanced tumours tend to grow upwards to involve 
the seminal vesicles, the bladder neck and trigone and, later, 
the tumours tend to spread distally to involve the distal 
sphincter mechanism. Further upward extension obstructs the 
lower end of one or both ureters, obstruction of both resulting 
in anuria. The rectum may become stenosed by tumour infil-
trating around it, but direct involvement is rare.
Spread by the bloodstream
Spread by the bloodstream occurs particularly to bone; 
indeed, the prostate is the most common site of origin for 
skeletal metastases, followed in turn by the breast, the kidney, 
the bronchus and the thyroid gland. The bones involved most 
frequently by carcinoma of the prostate are the pelvic bones 
and the lower lumbar vertebrae. The femoral head, rib cage 
and skull are other common sites.
Lymphatic spread
Lymphatic spread may occur (1) via lymphatic vessels passing 
to the obturator fossa or along the sides of the rectum to the 
lymph nodes beside the internal iliac vein and in the hollow 
of the sacrum and (2) via lymphatics that pass over the semi-
nal vesicles and follow the vas deferens for a short distance to 
drain into the external iliac lymph nodes. From retroperito-
neal lymph nodes, the mediastinal nodes and occasionally the 
supraclavicular nodes may become implicated.
Staging using the tumour, node, 
metastasis (TNM) system (Figure 
78.17)
 ● T1a, T1b and T1c. These are incidentally found tumours 
in a clinically benign gland after histological examination 
of a prostatectomy specimen. T1a is a tumour involving 
less than 5% of the resected specimen; these tumours 
are usually well or moderately well differentiated. T1b is 
Donald F Gleason , 1920–2008, pathologist, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, published The Gleason System in 1966. He spent his last 20 years 
sailing, baking bread and playing bridge.
Summary box 78.6
●● The results of several large scale randomised clinical 
trials evaluating the role of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
screening for prostate cancer suggest that at present screening 
the entire population with serum PSA is not cost effective as a 
large number of men must be screened, biopsied and treated 
in order to prevent each death from prostate cancer.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1469 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1470
a tumour involving >5% of the resected specimen. T1c 
tumours are impalpable tumours found following investi-
gation of a raised PSA.
 ● T2a disease presents as a suspicious nodule (Figure 
78.18) on rectal examination confined within the pros -
tate capsule and involving one lobe. T2b disease involves 
both lobes.
 ● T3 tumour extends through the capsule (T3a, uni- or 
bilateral extension; T3b, seminal vesical extension).
 ● T4 is a tumour that is fixed or invading adjacent structures 
other than seminal vesicles – rectum or pelvic side wall.
T0
T2B
T4
T1
T2A
T3
Figure 78.17 Tumour, node, metastasis staging system for prostate 
cancer.
Figure 78.18 Transrectal ultrasound scan of a T2 nodule in the pros-
tate.
 ● locally advanced disease or even asymptomatic metasta-
ses, which may be found incidentally on investigation of 
other symptoms.
Early prostate cancer is asymptomatic and may be found:
 ● incidentally following TURP for clinically benign disease 
(T1);
 ● as a nodule (T2) on rectal examination.
Summary box 78.7
The natural history of prostate cancer
This depends on the stage and grade of disease:
●● T1 and T2
The progression rate of well-differentiated T1a prostate 
cancer is very low: 10–14% after eight years. For 
moderately differentiated tumours, the rate is about 20%
For T1b and T2 tumours, the rate is in excess of 35%
●● T3 and T4 (MO)
About 50% progress to bony metastases after 3–5 years
●● M1
The median survival of men with metastatic disease is 
about 3 years
Rectal examination
Rectal examination can detect nodules within the prostate 
and advanced disease. Irregular induration, characteristically 
stony hard in part or in the whole of the gland (with obliter -
ation of the median sulcus), suggests carcinoma. Extension 
beyond the capsule up into the bladder base and vesicles (Fig-
ure 78.19) is diagnostic, as is local extension through the 
capsule (Figure 78.20).
Prostatic biopsy
If there is suspicion of prostate cancer, because of local find -
ings, a raised PSA or metastatic disease, then a prostate biopsy 
using an automated gun is recommended (Figure 78.21). This 
is usually performed transrectally, although increasingly the 
transperineal approach is being used. In a standard transrectal 
biopsy about 12 systematic biopsy cores are obtained as well 
as biopsy of any suspicious areas. Broad-spectrum antibiotic 
cover is given to all patients to reduce the incidence of sepsis, 
Summary box 78.8
The presentation of men with prostate cancer
●● Often men are asymptomatic, and detection is by 
opportunistic PSA testing
●● Cancer is detected in men describing lower urinary tract 
symptoms or may present with symptoms of metastatic 
disease
Clinical features
Only advanced disease gives rise to symptoms, but even 
advanced disease may be asymptomatic. Symptoms of 
advanced disease include:
 ● BOO;
 ● pelvic pain and haematuria;
 ● bone pain, malaise, ‘arthritis’, anaemia or pancytopenia;
 ● renal failure;
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1470 25/10/2017   10:16Carcinoma of the pr ostate 1471
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
General blood tests
These are normal in early disease but, in metastatic disease, 
there may be leucoerythroblastic anaemia secondary to exten-
sive marrow invasion, or anaemia may be secondary to renal 
failure. There may be thrombocytopenia and evidence of dis-
seminated intravascular coagulopathy with increased fibrino-
gen degradation products.
Liver function tests
These will be abnormal if there is extensive metastatic inva-
sion of the liver. Alkaline phosphatase may be raised from 
either hepatic involvement or secondaries in the bone. These 
can be distinguished by measurement of isoenzymes or gam -
maglutamyltransferase.
Prostate-specific antigen
This is discussed earlier in this chapter. It is goo d at follow -
ing the course of advanced disease; however, it is lacking in 
sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of early localised 
prostate cancer. Nevertheless, the finding of a PSA >10  ng/
mL is suggestive of cancer and >35 ng/ml is almost diagnostic 
of advanced prostate cancer. A decrease in PSA to the normal 
range following hormonal ablation is a good prognostic sign. 
Following radical prostatectomy the serum PSA should fall to 
undetectable levels (the limit for detection for modern super-
sensitive assays is 0.02 ng/mL)
Radiological examination
Radiographs of the chest may reveal metastases in either the 
lung fields or the ribs. An abdominal radiograph may show 
the characteristic sclerotic metastases in lumbar vertebrae 
Figure 78.19 Transrectal ultrasound scan showing normal 
seminal vesicles.
Figure 78.20 Transrectal ultrasound scan showing local extension 
of a T3 prostate cancer.
Transperineal
needle
Anterior
Posterior
Prostate
Bladder
Rectum
Transrectal
needle
Figure 78.21 The prostate is commonly biopsied by two routes. The 
biopsy needle can be inserted through skin between the scrotum and 
anus (perineum) or the rectum. In both cases the passage of the nee-
dle is usually guided to the correct place with transrectal ultrasound. 
Transrectal ultrasound is not good for sampling the anterior prostate, 
particularly when the prostate is large. Transperineal biopsy is gaining 
popularity as an alternative to conventional transrectal biopsy.
which is greater with transrectal than transperineal biopsy. 
Transperineal biopsy usually involves sedation or general 
anaesthetic while transrectal biopsy can be performed under 
local anaesthetic. Increasingly, areas appearing suspicious 
for prostate cancer on multiparametric magnetic resonance 
imaging (mp-MRI) can be targeted for biopsy to increase the 
diagnostic yield.
If there are associated symptoms of BOO, then either:
 ● a TURP can be performed, which will provide diagnostic 
material and symptomatic relief; or
 ● a transrectal biopsy can be carried out. If the diagnosis is 
positive and there is locally advanced disease, then hor -
mone ablation can provide good symptomatic relief with-
out the need for operation.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1471 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1472
and pelvic bones (Figure 78.22). The bone appears dense and 
coarse, and it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the change 
from that in Paget’s disease of bone. Nevertheless, osteolytic 
metastases are very common in prostate cancer and may coex-
ist with sclerotic ones. Information about the upper urinary 
tracts can be obtained by excretion urography or ultrasound.
Cross-sectional imaging with 
magnetic resonance imaging and 
TRUS
MRI with a high tesla magnet (1.5–3 T) is the most accurate 
method of staging local disease In order to characterise pros -
tate cancer a combination of imaging sequences must be inter-
preted (mp-MRI). mp-MRI consists of T2-weighted imaging 
combined with several functional sequences including dif -
fusion-weighted imaging, perfusion or dynamic contrast-  
enhanced imaging and spectroscopic imaging. The accuracy 
of mp-MRI in localising and staging prostate cancer shows 
a high degree of variation between reporting radiologists. 
mp-MRI is used preoperatively to assess pelvic lymph nodes 
as well as local stage, although the sensitivity of mp-MRI to 
detect small areas of capsular spread is limited, even in the 
best hands. As well as preoperative staging, mp-MRI plays an 
important role in active surveillance and localisation of recur-
rent prostate cancer after surgery. Low-grade tumours are fre-
quently not seen on MRI, which is useful as these low-grade 
tumours are often clinically insignificant.
Transrectal ultrasound scanning can also be used to stage 
prostate cancer. Locally extensive disease (T2) can be diag-
nosed with increased sensitivity by TRUS (see Figure 78.18) 
compared with rectal examination, but many tumours will 
still be missed. This problem remains a real one in screening 
for early prostate cancer; in comparison with breast cancer, 
with mammography detecting 70–80% of tumours, TRUS 
plus rectal examination and measurement of PSA will detect 
only 30–50% of cancers that are known to be present on 
autopsy studies (although it may detect the larger, more sig -
nificant cancers).
Bone scan
Once the diagnosis has been established, if metastatic spread 
is suspected (on the basis of a high PSA [>10  ng/mL], locally 
advanced disease or presence of Gleason 7 or higher) a bone 
scan should be carried out. If however the PSA is <10  ng/
mL, then a bone scan would be performed only on clinical 
indications. The bone scan is performed by the injection of 
technetium-99m, which is then monitored using a gamma 
camera. It is more sensitive in the diagnosis of metastases 
(Figure 78.23) than a skeletal survey, but false positives 
occur in areas of arthritis, osteomyelitis or a healing fracture.
Treatment
Patients are counselled on their treatment options based on 
an estimated risk of a localised cancer spreading and causing 
death. The strongest risk factors for metastasis are PSA level, 
Gleason grade and clinical stage.
Early disease
Curative treatment can only be offered to patients with early 
disease. Low risk prostate cancer (low PSA, small foci of Glea-
son 6 disease) can be managed by active surveillance. Here, 
with 3- to 6-monthly digital rectal examination (DRE) and 
PSA measurement and repeated prostate biopsy, a proportion 
can safely avoid the toxicity of radical treatment. However, 
one-third of patients embarking on this approach will require 
radical treatment within a few years. The options available for 
T1, T2 or some T3 disease need to take into account patient 
Figure 78.22 Osseous metastases of the pelvic bones in carcinoma 
of the prostate (courtesy of LN Pyrah, Leeds, UK).
Figure 78.23 Bone scan showing multiple hot-spots suggestive of 
metastatic disease in a man with prostate cancer.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1472 25/10/2017   10:16Carcinoma of the pr ostate 1473
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
age, performance status and lifestyle preferences. The treat -
ment of patients with advanced disease (T4 or any nodal or 
distant metastases) is only palliative.
and similar problems affecting the rectum with diarrhoea 
and, occasionally, late radiation proctitis. Development of 
erectile dysfunction occurs less frequently than following 
radical prostatectomy, but is present in up to 30% of cases. 
EBRT is rendered more effective with a period of neoadjuvant 
and adjuvant androgen ablation, with its inherent effects on 
libido.
Brachytherapy
Under transrectal ultrasound guidance, radioactive seeds are 
permanently implanted into the prostate. A computer pro -
gram converts accurate ultrasound measurements of the pros-
tate gland to construct a plan of the gland. Under anaesthesia, 
the patient is placed in the lithotomy position and, according 
to the template plan, seeds are placed through transperineal 
needles. The radioisotopes commonly used are iodine-125 
and palladium-103. These isotopes deliver an intense, con -
fined radiation dose, which falls off rapidly to spare the sur -
rounding structures. Brachytherapy is gaining widespread 
acceptance for the treatment of lower grade low-volume T1 
disease. A major factor is the reduced peroperative compli -
cations and generally low morbidity. Long-term cancer sur -
vival results from institutions specialising in the procedure are 
encouraging.
Advanced disease
There is still debate about the timing of androgen ablation 
treatment in patients with locally advanced or metastatic dis-
ease without symptoms. The options are androgen depriva-
tion at diagnosis or careful review, reserving active treatment 
for the later development of symptoms. Patients with poorly 
differentiated disease are at risk of a catastrophic event such 
as spinal cord compression; in these patients, early andro -
gen ablation can prolong the time to complications. Also, 
patients with local or general symptoms should be offered 
androgen deprivation.
Radical prostatectomy
Radical prostatectomy is suitable for localised disease and 
should be carried out only in men with a life expectancy of 
>10 years. A wide excision approach can give clear surgical 
margins in T3a disease. Exclusion of metastases would require 
a negative bone scan and MRI of the pelvis. It is a procedure 
that should be performed only by experienced surgeons when 
there is a high chance of cure. It results in a high incidence of 
impotence, but a low incidence of severe stress incontinence 
(<2%), which may require the fitting of an artificial urinary 
sphincter or urethral sling. It involves removal of the prostate 
down to the distal sphincter mechanism in addition to the 
seminal vesicles (Figure 78.24). The bladder neck is recon -
stituted and anastomosed to the urethra. Modifications to this 
operation by Walsh can lead to preservation of the neurovascu-
lar bundles that lie behind the prostate. This modification has 
led to the preservation of erectile function in about 60–70% of 
cases. Laparoscopic approaches to radical prostatectomy, often 
with robotic assistance, generate similar oncological results to 
the open approach with a more rapid recovery.
Radical radiotherapy for early prostate 
cancer
External beam radiotherapy (EBRT) can be administered in 
fields that conform to the contours of the prostate, thereby 
limiting exposure of adjacent tissues. Survival rates follow -
ing the treatment of T1 and low-volume T2 disease are not 
greatly different from those following radical prostatectomy , 
although histological evidence of persistent tumour is found 
within the prostate in about 30% of treated patients. Patients 
with locally advanced disease (T3) may be treated by radio-
therapy. The treatment requires the patient to attend hospital 
on a daily basis for between 4 and 6 weeks. Some local com -
plications are inevitable, namely irritation of the bladder with 
urinary frequency, urgency and sometimes urge incontinence 
Summary box 78.9
Treatment and stage
●● Treatment options for prostate cancer depend on stage of 
disease, life expectancy of the patient and patient preference
●● Prostate-specific antigen, digital rectal examination and 
biopsy Gleason grade are used to predict pathological stage
●● Localised cancer can be treated by radical prostatectomy, 
radiation therapy and active monitoring
●● Treatment of advanced disease is palliative, and hormone 
ablation remains the first-line therapy
Patrick C Walsh , Professor of Urology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA, recipient of 2007 National Physician of the Y ear Clinical Excellence 
Award.
Figure 78.24 Radical prostatectomy specimen for a T2a pr ostate 
cancer. Preoperative prostate-specific antigen was 6 ng/mL; post -
operative levels remained undetectable at 8 years. The patient is fully 
continent.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1473 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1474
Orchidectomy
Orchidectomy is performed in advanced disease. In 1941, 
prostate cancer was shown to be responsive to such treatment 
by Charles Huggins, the only urologist to win a Nobel Prize. 
Bilateral orchidectomy, whether total or subcapsular, will 
eliminate the major source of testosterone production.
Medical castration
Medical forms of androgen ablation have been available since 
the discovery of stilbestrol. The other commonly available 
treatments to reduce testosterone levels to the castrate range 
are LHRH agonists. These agents initially stimulate hypotha-
lamic LHRH receptors but, because of their constant presence 
(rather than the normal diurnal rhythm), they then downreg-
ulate them, resulting in cessation of pituitary LH production 
and, hence, a decrease in testosterone production. In the first 
10 days or so, serum testosterone levels may increase, and it 
is wise to give flutamide, bicalutamide or cyproterone acetate 
for this period. LHRH agonists may be given by monthly, 
3-monthly or 6-monthly depot injection. Other treatments 
that block the androgen receptor have become available 
recently. Cyproterone acetate also has some progestogenic 
effect, while flutamide and bicalutamide are pure antian-
drogen. In general, oral antiandrogen monotherapy has not 
been shown to be as good as LHRH agonists or orchidectomy. 
Androgen ablation can be administered in an intermittent 
fashion governed by serum PSA levels.
Recently agents such as enzalutamide (a second generation 
androgen receptor blocker), degarelix (an LHRH antagonist), 
abiraterone (a drug that blocks the production of testoster -
one from its precursors) and taxane chemotherapy have all 
been shown to promote survival in metastatic prostate cancer. 
Many clinical trials are underway to ascertain which drugs 
should be used in which patients and the therapeutic land -
scape is changing rapidly.
General radiotherapy
Radiotherapy for symptomatic metastases is an excellent 
form of palliative treatment, often producing dramatic pain 
relief in men with hormone-relapsed prostate cancer that 
can last up to 6 months. When multiple sites are involved, 
intravenous radiopharmaceuticals such as strontium-89 can 
be employed. Strontium is a bone-seeking isotope that deliv -
ers effective radiotherapy to metastatic areas. It appears to be 
as effective as hemibo dy irradiation in the treatment of men 
with metastatic hormone-relapsed disease; however, the dura-
tion of response has been disappointing.
Chemotherapy
Cytotoxic agents in the treatment of these men have proved 
disappointing, but whether this is because the tumour is 
inherently insensitive or because these elderly men will not 
tolerate effective doses is uncertain. Trials of docetaxel and 
carbitaxel have shown improvements in survival, but only by 
a few months in end-stage castrate-resistant prostate cancer . 
Recent data suggest better results when used earlier in the 
natural history of advanced prostate cancer.
Summary of treatment for carcinoma 
of the prostate
 ● Low risk disease. For men in their 70s, conservative treat-
ment would usually be the correct approach. Radical sur -
gical treatment might be considered in the younger (<70 
years) man with this form of the disease, although even in 
this group, some men will elect to pursue a conservative 
course when counselled about risks versus benefits.
 ● Intermediate risk disease. In younger, fitter men (<70 
years), this may be treated by radical prostatectomy or rad-
ical radiotherapy. Active monitoring remains an option, 
particularly for more elderly patients towards the lower 
end of the risk spectrum. In the elderly patient with out -
flow obstruction, transurethral resection with or without 
hormone therapy is indicated. The benefit of radical treat-
ment over a conservative approach is likely to be about 
25%, given that progression to metastatic disease is of this 
order of magnitude after 10 years.
 ● High risk disease. These patients are at significant risk of 
disease progression. Early androgen ablation is favoured 
if close follow-up is not possible. For the sexually active, 
a careful conservative approach with the adoption of 
androgen ablation when symptoms arise is reasonable. 
Androgen ablation coupled with radiotherapy, perhaps 
with surgery as part of a multimodal approach, is standard 
treatment for younger men with T3 disease.
 ● Metastatic disease. Once metastases have developed, the 
outlook is poor. For patients with symptoms, there is no 
dilemma; androgen ablation will provide symptomatic 
relief in over two-thirds of patients. For patients with 
asymptomatic metastases, the timing of treatment is less 
clear. Systemic chemotherapy with docetaxel should be 
considered in younger, fitter men.
PROSTATITIS
In both acute and chronic prostatitis, the seminal vesicles and 
posterior urethra are usually also involved.
Acute prostatitis
Aetiology
Acute prostatitis is common, but underdiagnosed. The usual 
organism responsible is Escherichia coli , but Staphylococcus 
aureus, Staphylococcus albus, Streptococcus faecalis, Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia may be responsible. The infection 
may be haematogenous from a distant focus or it may be sec-
ondary to acute urinary infection.
Charles Brenton Huggins , 1901–1997, Canadian born, Professor of Surgery, The University of Chicago, IL, USA, shared the 1966 Nobel Prize for Physiology or 
Medicine for his discoveries concerning hormonal treatment of prostate cancer.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1474 25/10/2017   10:16Tuberculosis of the prostate and seminal vesicles 1475
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Clinical features
General manifestations overshadow the local: the patient feels 
ill, shivers, may have a rigor, has ‘aches’ all over, especially in 
the back, and may easily be diagnosed as having influenza. 
The temperature may be up to 39°C. Pain on micturition is 
usual, but not invariable. The urine contains threads in the 
initial voided sample, which should be cultured. Perineal 
heaviness, rectal irritation and pain on defaecation can occur; 
a urethral discharge is rare. Frequency occurs when the infec-
tion involves the bladder. Rectal examination reveals a ten-
der prostate; one lobe may be swollen more than the other, 
and the seminal vesicles may be involved. A frankly fluctuant 
abscess is uncommon.
Treatment
Treatment must be rigorous and prolonged or the infection 
will not be eradicated and recurrent attacks may ensue. 
Spread of infection to the epididymides and testes may occur. 
Prolonged treatment with an antibiotic that penetrates the 
prostate well is indicated (trimethoprim or ciprofloxacin).
Prostatic abscess
In addition to the foregoing symptoms and signs, the advent 
of a prostatic abscess is heralded by the temperature ris -
ing steeply with rigors. Antibiotics disguise these features. 
Severe, unremitting perineal and rectal pain with occasional 
tenesmus often cause the condition to be confused with an 
anorectal abscess. Nevertheless, if a rectal examination is per-
formed, the prostate will be felt to be enlarged, hot, extremely 
tender and perhaps fluctuant. TRUS or MRI may aid diag -
nosis. Retention of urine is likely to occur and, in such men, 
suprapubic catheterisation is best.
Treatment
The abscess should be drained without delay by perurethral 
resection (unroofing the whole cavity) or using a needle via 
the transrectal or perineal route.
Chronic prostatitis
Many urologists find the diagnosis of chronic prostatitis and 
‘prostatodynia’ very difficult, for many men present with 
perigenital pain, testicular pain, prostatic pain exacerbated 
by sexual intercourse or pain that apparently renders sexual 
intercourse out of the question. Psychosexual dysfunction in 
such patients may be the underlying problem. The diagnosis 
of chronic prostatitis has to be based on:
 ● persistent threads in voided urine;
 ● prostatic massage showing pus cells with or without bacte-
ria in the absence of urinary infection.
Aetiology
This is thought to be the sequela of inadequately treated acute 
prostatitis. While pus is present in the prostatic secretion, the 
responsible organism is often difficult to find. Other organ -
isms such as Chlamydia species may be responsible for chronic 
abacterial prostatitis.
Clinical features
The clinical features are extremely varied. Only men with 
symptoms of posterior urethritis, prostatic pain and perigen -
ital pain accompanied by intermittent fever and pus cells or 
bacteria in the post-prostatic massage specimen should be 
diagnosed as having chronic prostatitis.
Diagnosis
The three-glass urine test is valuable. If the first glass with 
the initial voided sample shows urine containing prostatic 
threads, prostatitis is present.
Rectal examination of the prostate may be normal or may 
show a soft, boggy and tender prostate.
Examination of the prostatic fluid obtained by prostatic 
massage should show pus cells and bacteria.
Urethroscopy may reveal inflammation of the prostatic 
urethra, and pus may be seen exuding from the prostatic ducts. 
The verumontanum is likely to be enlarged and oedematous. 
In many men with the symptoms described above, all investi-
gations are normal.
Treatment
Antibiotic therapy should be administered only in accor -
dance with bacteriological sensitivity tests. Trimethoprim or 
ciprofloxacin penetrate well into the prostate. If Trichomonas 
or anaerobes are the responsible agent, a rapid response is 
obtained from administration of metronidazole (200 mg t.d.s. 
for 7 days to both partners). If Chlamydia is suspected, dox-
ycycline is the antibiotic treatment of choice. There is lit -
tle evidence that prostatic massage helps in eradicating the 
infection.
Prostatodynia
This diagnosis is made by the presence of perigenital pain in 
the absence of any objective evidence of prostatic inflamma-
tion. Whether the syndrome has any relationship with the 
prostate is unclear. The syndrome is part of the chronic pelvic 
pain syndrome spectrum.
TUBERCULOSIS OF THE 
PROSTATE AND SEMINAL 
VESICLES
Tuberculosis of the prostate and seminal vesicles is rare and 
associated with renal tuberculosis. In 30% of cases, there is a 
history of pulmonary tuberculosis within 5 years of the onset 
of genital tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis of one or both seminal vesicles may be found 
when examining a patient with chronic tuberculous epidid -
ymitis, no symptoms being referable to the internal genita -
lia. On rectal examination, the affected vesicle is found to be 
nodular.
When the prostate is involved, rectal examination reveals 
nodules in one or both lateral lobes. Patients with tuberculous 
prostatitis usually present with the following:
 ● urethral discharge;
 ● painful, sometimes blood-stained, ejaculation;
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1475 25/10/2017   10:16CHAPTER 78  The prostate and seminal vesicles
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1476
 ● mild ache in the perineum;
 ● infertility;
 ● dysuria;
 ● abscess formation.
Special forms of investigation
Radiography sometimes displays areas of calcification in the 
prostate and/or the seminal vesicles. Bacteriological examina-
tion of the seminal fluid yields positive cultures for tubercle 
bacilli.
Treatment
The general treatment is that for tuberculosis. If a prostatic 
abscess forms, it should be drained transurethrally.
SEMINAL VESICLES
Acute seminal vesiculitis
Acute seminal vesiculitis occurs in association with prostati -
tis. Prior to the antibiotic treatment of gonorrhoea, gonococ-
cal vesiculitis was common.
Chronic seminal vesiculitis
Chronic seminal vesiculitis usually presents with haemato -
spermia and pain on intercourse. TRUS demonstrates the 
features of distension and thickening and the presence of tur-
bid fluid. The treatment is the same as for chronic prostatitis.
Tuberculous seminal vesiculitis
The clinical features and treatment have been discussed 
above.
Diverticulum of the seminal vesicle
Diverticulum of the seminal vesicle occurs occasionally. In 
such cases, the kidney of that side is absent and the diver -
ticulum represents an abortive ureteric bud. It is a cause of 
persistent infection.
Cyst of the seminal vesicle
A cyst of the seminal vesicle is uncommon and rarely requires 
treatment. It may be removed by dissection through an inci -
sion similar to that for perineal prostatectomy if it is large or 
giving rise to symptoms.
FURTHER READING
Mundy AR, Fitzpatrick J, Neal DE, George NJ (eds). The scientific basis of 
urology, 3rd edn. London: Informa Healthcare, 2010.
Scardino PT, Linehan WM, Zelefsky MJ, Vogelzang NJ. (2012) Com-
prehensive textbook of genitourinary oncology , 4th edn. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin A W , Peters CA. Campbell-Walsh urology, 
11th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015.
12_78-B&L27_Pt12_Ch78.indd   1476 25/10/2017   10:16Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To recognise and understand:
 • The common congenital abnormalities of the urethra
 • The diagnosis and management of urethral trauma
 • The diagnosis and management of urethral stricture
 • The diagnosis and management of phimosis
 • The principles of management of a man with erectile 
dysfunction
 • The common diseases of the penis and urethra and the 
principles of their surgical management
Chapter
Urethra and penis
79
THE MALE URETHRA
Anatomy
The male urethra is a tubular structure extending from the 
bladder neck to the external urinary meatus at the tip of the 
glans penis. It has four components, which are named (from 
proximal to distal) the prostatic, membranous, bulbar and 
penile urethra. The prostatic urethra extends from the blad -
der neck to the verumontanum and is compressed on either 
side by the lateral lobes of the prostate, giving it a slit-like 
configuration. The verumontanum is a small hillock of tissue 
indented at its crown by a pit called the utriculus masculi -
nus, which marks the proximal extent of the external ure -
thral sphincter and is an important landmark for urologists 
performing transurethral resection of the prostate. The mem-
branous urethra lies just distal to the verumontanum and is 
located where the urethra penetrates the pelvic floor and it is 
the usual site of urethral rupture at the time of a pelvic frac -
ture. It is the primary location of continence as a consequence 
of the surrounding pelvic floor musculature and external ure-
thral sphincter. The bulbar urethra extends from the mem-
branous urethra to the penoscrotal junction and is anteriorly 
located within the corpus spongiosum. The penile urethra is 
normally flattened anteroposteriorly but distends when filled 
with fluid. The urethral lining changes from transitional cell 
epithelium proximally to stratified squamous cell epithelium 
distally.
The external urethral sphincter is composed of circular 
striated muscle within the urethral wall. It is innervated by 
the pudendal nerve, originating from spinal segments S2, 3 
and 4. The bladder neck contributes to maintenance of con -
tinence in the man, although its main role is as a genital 
sphincter that closes at the time of ejaculation. Its innervation 
originates in the spinal segments T10–12 with sympathetic 
innervation mediated by release of noradrenaline via alpha  
adrenoceptors.
Congenital abnormalities
Posterior urethral valves
Posterior urethral valves occur in around 1 in 5000–8000 
live male births. The valves are membranes that have a small 
posterior slit within them, which typically lie just distal to 
the verumontanum and cause obstruction to the urethra of 
boys. They function as flap valves and so although they are 
obstructive to antegrade urinary flow, a urethral catheter can 
be passed retrogradely without any difficulty.
DIAGNOSIS
Posterior urethral valves need to be detected and treated as 
early as possible to minimise the degree of renal failure. The 
presentation varies according to the severity of the obstruc -
tion. The more severe the obstruction, the earlier the presen-
tation. Diagnosis is most commonly made antenatally with 
ultrasound, which demonstrates bilateral hydronephrosis 
above a distended bladder.
If the diagnosis is not made antenatally, then babies typi -
cally present with urinary infection in the neonatal period or 
with uraemia and renal failure.
Rarely the valves are incomplete and the patient is symp-
tom free until adolescence or adulthood, when again urinary 
infection or renal impairment can supervene.
Investigation will involve a voiding cystogram, with the 
dilatation of the urethra above the valves demonstrable on 
a voiding cystogram (Figure 79.1). The bladder is hypertro -
phied and often shows diverticula. Typically, there is vesico -
ureteric reflux into dilated upper tracts. The valves themselves 
can be difficult to see on urethroscopy because the flow of 
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1477 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1478
irrigant sweeps them into the open position. Renal function 
is usually impaired, albeit to a varying degree, and the extent 
is further assessed by measurement of ultrasound scanning, 
which will assess the renal cortical thickness, and renography 
to assess differential renal function.
TREATMENT
Initial treatment is by catheterisation to relieve the obstruc-
tion and to allow the effects of renal failure to improve. Defin-
itive treatment is by endoscopic destruction of the valves with 
continuing lifelong supportive treatment of the dilated uri -
nary tract, the recurrent urinary infections and the uraemia.
 ● Coronal hypospadias. The meatus is placed at the junction 
of the underside of the glans and the body of the penis.
 ● Penile and penoscrotal hypospadias. The meatus is on the 
underside of the penile shaft.
 ● Perineal hypospadias. This is the rarest and most severe 
abnormality. The scrotum is bifid and the urethra opens 
between its two halves. In children with severe hypo -
spadias it is important to consider disorders of sexual 
development, which are usually associated with testicular 
maldescent and micropenis.
The more severe varieties of hypospadias represent an 
absence of the urethra and corpus spongiosum distal to the 
ectopic opening. The absent structures are represented by a 
fibrous cord, which deforms the erect penis in a downward 
direction (chordee).
TREATMENT
Hypospadias does not cause either obstruction or urinary tract 
infection. Surgery is indicated to improve sexual function, to 
correct problems with the urinary stream and for cosmetic 
reasons. A variety of plastic surgical procedures have been 
described to correct the chordee and to re-site the urethral 
opening. The commonest procedure for distal hypospadias is 
the ‘tubularised incised plate’ urethroplasty, while techniques 
that utilise the foreskin are commonly used for more proxi -
mal hypospadias. Circumcision should be avoided, therefore, 
before the hypospadias has been repaired. Operations for 
hypospadias are best performed by a paediatric urologist and 
are typically undertaken before the age of 18 months.
Figure 79.1 A voiding cystogram showing a dilated bladder with 
a dilated prostatic ur ethra above an obstruction at the level of the 
posterior urethral valve.
Summary box 79.1
Posterior urethral valves
●● Posterior urethral valves are congenital membranes that 
cause obstruction to the urinary tract in baby boys
●● Antenatal ultrasound typically shows urinary tract dilatation
●● If not recognised antenatally, they may cause recurrent urinary 
infection, urinary retention and uraemia
●● Treatment is valve destruction accompanied by treatment of 
urinary infection and renal impairment
Hypospadias (see also Chapter 9)
Hypospadias occurs in around 1 in 200–300 male live births 
and is the most common congenital abnormality of the ure -
thra. There are three characteristic features. The external 
meatus opens on the underside of the penis anywhere from 
just short of the normal site as far back as the perineum, while 
the ventral aspect of the prepuce is poorly developed (the 
‘hooded prepuce’) and there is usually a ventral deformity of 
the erect penis (chordee).
Hypospadias is classified according to the position of the 
meatus (Figure 79.2):
 ● Glanular hypospadias. The ectopic meatus is placed on 
the glans penis, but proximal to the normal site of the 
external meatus, which is marked by a blind pit. Occa-
sionally the two are connected by a channel.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 78.2Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Hooded
foreskin
Glanular
Coronal
Penile
Perineal
Figure 79.2 Hypospadias classification.
Epispadias
Epispadias is very rare. In penile epispadias, the urethral 
opening is on the dorsum of the penis and is associated with 
an upward curvature of the erect penis (Figure 79.3). Epis-
padias often coexists with bladder exstrophy and other severe 
developmental defects.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1478 25/10/2017   10:18The male urethra 1479
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Urethral diverticulum
This is usually congenital and represents a partial duplication 
of the urethra. Acquired cases are uncommon but are some -
times seen as a result of increased intraurethral pressure behind 
a stricture. Others are caused by the longstanding presence of 
a foreign body such as a stone or calculus in the urethra. Typ-
ically, patients present in adult life with a history of postmic-
turition dribbling and diagnosis is made at cystoscopy (Figure 
79.4a) or via a urethrogram (Figure 79.4b). Treatment is 
often unnecessary, but they can be treated endoscopically by 
incising the flap of urethral mucosa between the two lumens 
or, in severe cases, by excision of the diverticulum.
Injuries to the male urethra
The commonest cause of urethral trauma is that which occurs 
at the time of instrumentation, either with a catheter or with 
a cystoscope. Prevention is therefore the most important issue 
here, with the need for careful urethral instrumentation being 
paramount. Typically, when such an injury does occur it tends 
to happen either where the urethra bends or where it nar -
rows. Such injuries initially result in bleeding and typically 
heal by scarring, which then results in a urethral stricture. 
The commonest sites of such strictures are the submeatal area, 
the bulbar urethra or the region of the membranous urethra.
Injuries following external trauma are much less common, 
but require appropriate and prompt management. The most 
common sites for such injury are the bulbar urethra and the 
membranous urethra.
Rupture of the bulbar urethra
There is a history of a blow to the perineum, usually due to a 
fall astride injury. The bulbar urethra is crushed upwards onto 
the pubic bone, typically with significant bruising. In the days 
of sailing ships, the common cause was falling astride a spar 
and the modern equivalent is seen among workers losing their 
footing on scaffolding. Cycling accidents, loose manhole cov-
ers and gymnasium accidents astride the beam account for a 
number of cases. Almost certainly King William I of England 
died in 1087 following a ruptured bulbar urethra. It was writ -
ten that ‘his horse reared in fright at a blazing timber and 
threw its ponderous rider against the iron of his saddle’, sug -
gesting that he ruptured the urethra on the saddle’s pommel. 
He subsequently developed urinary retention and sepsis sec -
ondary to infection of the haematoma and he died some days 
after the accident.
Summary box 79.2
Hypospadias
●● Hypospadias is characterised by the combination of a 
ventrally placed urethral meatus, a hooded foreskin and 
chordee
●● In severe cases with coexisting testicular maldescent and 
micropenis, consider disorders of sexual development 
(intersex) as a diagnosis
●● Avoid circumcision as the prepuce may be used in procedures 
to correct the abnormality
●● Surgical treatment should be undertaken by a paediatric 
urologist
Figure 79.3 Epispadias.
Figure 79.4 Urethral diverticulum. (a) Cystoscopic appearance of a 
urethral diverticulum. The normal urethra can be seen to extend supe-
riorly to the urethral sphincter, while the blind ending diverticulum is 
seen inferiorly. (b) Urethrogram showing a urethral diverticulum.
(a)
(b)
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1479 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1480
Extravasation of urine is common if the urine is not 
diverted and the extravasated urine is confined in front of 
the mid-perineal point by the attachment of Colles’ fascia to 
the triangular ligament and by the attachment of Scarpa’s fas-
cia just below the inguinal ligament. The external spermatic 
fascia stops it getting into the inguinal canals. Extravasated 
urine collects in the scrotum and penis and beneath the deep 
layer of superficial fascia in the abdominal wall.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The signs of a ruptured bulbar urethra are perineal bruising 
and haematoma, typically with a butterfly distribution. There 
is usually bleeding from the urethral meatus and retention of 
urine is also typically present.
MANAGEMENT
If the diagnosis is suspected, the patient should be treated 
with appropriate analgesia and antibiotics should be admin -
istered. He should be discouraged from passing urine. A full 
bladder should be drained with a catheter placed by percu -
taneous suprapubic puncture using a Seldinger technique 
(Figure 79.5). This reduces urinary extravasation and allows 
investigations to establish the extent of the urethral injury. 
Diagnosis is made by urethrography using water-soluble 
contrast.
If there is significant extravasation, then the perineal col-
lection should be drained. The suprapubic catheter should 
remain in situ while the bruising and extravasation settle down 
and a stricture will typically develop at the site of the injury. 
The optimal treatment is delayed anastomotic urethroplasty 
after the swelling and bruising have settled down (typically 
8–12 weeks later), with excision of the traumatised section 
and spatulated end-to-end reanastomosis of the urethra.
Summary box 79.3
Bulbar urethral injury
●● Suspect urethral injury after blunt perineal trauma when the 
man cannot void, when there is perineal bruising and when 
there is blood at the urethral meatus
●● Diagnosis is made by urethrography using water-soluble 
contrast
●● The safest initial management is to insert a suprapubic 
catheter
●● Beware of urinary extravasation and sepsis in the perineal 
haematoma
●● Delayed urethroplasty is the preferred definitive management 
of complete disruptions
Abraham Colles , 1773–1843, Professor of Surgery, The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and surgeon, Dr. Stevens’ Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
Antonio Scarpa , 1747–1832, Professor of Anatomy, Pavia, Italy.
Sven Ivar Seldinger , 1921–1998, Swedish radiologist, introduced the Seldinger technique to obtain safe access to blood vessels and other hollow organs.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 78.5aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 78.5bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 78.5cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
(c)
Figure 79.5 (a) Percutaneous puncture of the bladder with passage of a guidewire into the bladder followed by dilatation of the track over the 
guidewire (b), thereby allowing placement of a catheter into the bladder (c).
Rupture of the membranous urethra
Rupture of the membranous urethra typically occurs in asso -
ciation with a fractured pelvis and may be associated with an 
extraperitoneal rupture of the bladder. When the pelvis frac-
tures, the membranous urethra is ruptured as it passes through 
the bony ring of the pelvis. The urethra is elastic at this point, 
and if the fracture results in only a minor displacement, then 
the tear may only be partial, but more typically the rupture is 
complete, such that the two ends are completely displaced, 
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1480 25/10/2017   10:18The male urethra 1481
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
with the development of a significant interposing haema -
toma. About 1–2% of cases of fractured pelvis have an asso -
ciated urethral injury and such injuries are almost universally 
seen in men.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The most common causes of pelvic fracture are road traffic 
accidents, severe crush injuries and falls. Typically there are 
multiple associated injuries that may be immediately life 
threatening and the overriding priority is to keep the patient 
alive by appropriate resuscitation. Under these circumstances 
the management of the other injuries takes precedence.
The clinical features include urinary retention, blood 
at the urethral meatus and a high riding prostate on digital 
rectal examination. There is typically marked bruising of the 
pubic area, scrotum and penis. If the diagnosis is suspected, a 
urethrogram performed with water-soluble contrast media is 
confirmatory (Figure 79.6).
A suprapubic catheter should be inserted as soon as prac -
ticable using the Seldinger technique. The distended bladder 
may be palpable, making suprapubic catheterisation straight -
forward, but often the bruising and swelling associated with 
the fracture makes this difficult and ultrasound guidance 
is required. When suprapubic urinary diversion has been 
achieved then no further urological management is required 
until the patient has stabilised.
In the presence of a coexisting extraperitoneal bladder 
injury, no bladder will be apparent on ultrasound examina-
tion, and surgical exploration, bladder repair, suprapubic 
catheter placement and drainage of the retropubic space is 
needed.
In a patient with a pelvic fracture who does not have 
blood at the urethral meatus but who has not yet passed 
urine (such that there is uncertainty as to whether there is 
a urethral injury), a single, gentle attempt at catheterization, 
by an experienced doctor, is permissible. In adults a 16F soft, 
silicone catheter should be used. If the catheter will not pass 
or passes and drains only blood, the balloon should not be 
inflated, but the catheter should be withdrawn and a retro -
grade urethrogram should be performed.
COMPLICATIONS
Urethral disruption injury  The two ends of the urethra, 
having been torn apart, become separated by a haema -
toma. With time, this haematoma resolves and is replaced 
by fibrosis. This pelvic fracture urethral disruption injury is 
technically not a stricture of the urethra but is often, erro -
neously, described as being one. The conventional manage -
ment of such an injury is delayed surgical reconstruction 
with excision of the scar tissue and end-to-end anastomosis. 
This surgery should be delayed until the patient has recov -
ered from any other injuries and is usually undertaken 3–6 
months later. It is a highly challenging technical procedure 
and should be undertaken only in specialist centres. Some 
surgeons continue to undertake early attempts to realign the 
urethral ends endoscopically, and while there are some suc -
cessful reports, most experts feel that there is an increased 
risk of sepsis, (true) stricture, incontinence and erectile dys -
function (ED).
Urinary incontinence The site of the urethral rupture is 
at or close to the striated urethral sphincter. If the external 
urethral sphincter is damaged or destroyed, continence of 
urine will depend on the bladder neck mechanism. While 
this is usually adequate to maintain complete continence 
(only 5–10% of men suffer stress urinary incontinence after 
urethroplasty), subsequent surgical manoeuvres that destroy 
the bladder neck (such as transurethral prostatectomy) may 
cause incontinence.
Erectile dysfunction  ED is common after pelvic frac -
ture with urethral injury and is due to damage of either the 
cavernosal nerves, which innervate the penis, or the penile 
arteries, which also lie close to the site of the urethral dis -
ruption. Indeed, surgical treatment of the urethral disruption 
can itself cause ED by similar mechanisms. If this does occur, 
treatment is with an orally active agent such as sildenafil or 
if that fails, with intracavernosal prostaglandin injections, a 
vacuum device or a penile implant.
Orthopaedic For management of a fractured pelvis see 
Chapter 27.
Extravasation of urine  This can occur with extraperito -
neal rupture of the bladder, pelvic fracture urethral disrup-
tion or in the rare cases where the level of the disruption is 
the prostatic urethra. Urine extravasates in the layers of the 
pelvic fascia and the retroperitoneal tissues. Treatment is by 
suprapubic cystostomy. In rare cases where the extravasation 
persists despite the suprapubic tube, drainage of the retropu -
bic space and definitive repair of the urethral, prostatic or 
bladder rupture is required.
Figure 79.6 An ascending urethrogram demonstrating extra vasation 
of contrast fr om the membranous ur ethra at the site of a urethral 
injury. Note the associated pelvic fracture with disruption of the infe-
rior pubic rami.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1481 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1482
Urethral stricture
CAUSES
The common causes of urethral stricture are:
 ● Inflammatory
 ● Secondary to urethritis
 ● Secondary to balanitis xerotica obliterans (BXO)
 ● Traumatic
 ● Bulbar urethral injury
 ● Pelvic fracture urethral disruption injury
 ● Iatrogenic
 ● Secondary to urethral instrumentation including cath-
eterisation and transurethral prostatectomy
 ● Secondary to radical prostatectomy
 ● Secondary to radiotherapy for prostate cancer
 ● Idiopathic
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Postinflammatory strictures are less common since the intro -
duction of effective antibiotic treatment of gonorrhoea. 
The stricture is most commonly seen in the bulbar urethra 
but submeatal strictures also occur. There is infection in the 
periurethral glands, which persists after inadequately treated 
gonorrhoea. The infection spreads to cause a periurethritis, 
which heals by fibrosis. Most strictures appear within 1 year of 
infection but may not cause difficulty in micturition for some 
time later.
BXO is a rare condition characterised by fibrosis of the 
foreskin resulting in phimosis. In around 10% of cases the 
glans penis is also affected, causing meatal stenosis, and in a 
proportion of these cases there is also fibrosis and stricturing 
of the penile urethra. The cause of the condition is unknown, 
but the strictures produced are typically long and difficult 
to treat.
Post-traumatic strictures have been discussed previously.
Postinstrumentation strictures follow endoscopy or cath -
eterisation and may affect any part of the urethra. Typically, 
when such an injury does occur it tends to happen either 
where the urethra bends or where it narrows. Such injuries 
initially result in bleeding and typically heal by scarring, 
which then results in a urethral stricture. The commonest 
sites of such strictures are the submeatal area, the bulbar ure-
thra or the region of the membranous urethra. Some surgeons 
recommend prophylactic dilatation or urethrotomy before 
transurethral prostatectomy in order to try to avoid this com-
plication. Some cases of stricture seem to be due to sensitivity 
to chemicals from a catheter, but most are the result of a com-
bination of trauma, infection and pressure necrosis.
Bladder neck stenosis can occur following TURP and fol-
lowing radical prostatectomy for the treatment of prostate 
cancer. If it cannot be managed by dilatation, bladder neck 
stenosis should be treated by transurethral incision and resec-
tion of the stricture, although in the man who has undergone 
radical prostatectomy, this will result in urinary incontinence.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Symptoms are usually hesitancy of micturition, straining to 
void and a poor urinary stream. The relative youthfulness 
of the patient often rules out prostatic enlargement, which 
characteristically occurs after the age of 50. As the stream 
becomes narrower, micturition is prolonged and is followed 
by postmicturition dribbling as a result of urine trickling from 
the dilated urethra proximal to the stricture. Urinary fre-
quency by day and night is common and is due to incomplete 
bladder emptying, coexisting detrusor overactivity or urinary 
infection.
If the stricture is tight enough, the patient will go into 
acute retention, although this is rare. If this happens, there is 
a danger that clumsy attempts to pass a urethral catheter will 
result in a false passage. If a patient has gone into retention 
because of a urethral stricture, its lumen will be too narrow 
to pass even a tiny catheter and suprapubic catheterisation 
is required.
Investigation involves uroflowmetry, urethroscopy, ure -
thrography and ultrasound scanning to assess bladder emp-
tying and to detect any upper tract dilatation. The urinary 
flow rate is typically prolonged and plateau shaped (Figure 
79.7) while urethroscopy allows the stricture to be viewed 
Summary box 79.4
Pelvic fracture urethral disruption injury
●● Suspect the diagnosis in cases of pelvic fracture, when the 
patient has not voided and when there is blood at the urethral 
meatus
●● If the diagnosis is suspected, a water-soluble urethrogram is 
needed to confirm the diagnosis
●● Initial management is insertion of a suprapubic catheter
●● Immediate surgical exploration is needed if there is coexisting 
rupture of the bladder
●● Delayed anastomotic urethroplasty is the preferred definitive 
management
Results of uroflowmetry
Voiding time T100 102 s
Flow time TQ 101 s
Time to max flow TQmax 32 s
Max flow rate Qmax 10.5 ml/s
Average flow rate Qave 7.8 ml/s
Voided volume Vcomp 788 ml
25 ml/s flow rate
Figure 79.7 Urinary flow rate trace from a patient 
with a ur ethral strictur e. Note the prolonged flow 
with the typical plateau shape of the curve.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1482 25/10/2017   10:18The male urethra 1483
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
as a circumferential scar (Figure 79.8 ). Openings of false 
passages commemorate previous misguided attempts to pass 
a urethral catheter. Urethrography using a water-soluble con-
trast medium will show the extent and severity of the stricture 
(Figures 79.9 and 79.10).
COMPLICATIONS
The commonest complication of a urethral stricture is uri -
nary tract infections, which usually respond to antibiotic 
treatment, although there is a tendency for them to recur as a 
consequence of the increased residual urine within the blad-
der. Any of the complications of bladder outflow obstruction 
can occur, including bladder calculi and upper tract dilatation 
with renal impairment, although the latter is rare. Similarly, 
retention of urine is also rare and should be treated by supra -
pubic catheterisation. Rare complications include urethral 
diverticulum and paraurethral abscess.
TREATMENT
The management of urethral strictures has changed con-
siderably over the past 20 years. The old treatments of ure -
thral dilatation have largely been superceded by endoscopic 
incision (internal urethrotomy) or by formal reconstruction 
(urethroplasty). Urethral dilatation still has a place in elderly 
men with short strictures that recur infrequently and when 
the stricture is intimately related to the continence mecha-
nism (such as the bladder neck stricture that follows radical 
prostatectomy). In these patients, occasional dilatation may 
be preferable to more complex procedures.
In patients with recurrent strictures who are unable or 
unwilling to undergo urethroplasty, then intermittent self-  
dilatation with soft hydrophilic catheters on a regular (daily) 
basis can prevent stricture recurrence, although such self dila-
tation is needed lifelong.
Short strictures with a clear traumatic history should be 
treated by urethroplasty since cure rates in excess of 90% can be 
achieved by excision of the stricture with end-to-end anastamosis.
A conventional therapeutic algorithm, therefore, is to 
offer an internal urethrotomy to all newly diagnosed strictures 
(excluding post-traumatic strictures) and to reserve the more 
major urethroplasty procedures for recurrent strictures.
Urethral dilatation This is the old treatment for stricture. 
Under aseptic conditions, the urethra is stretched using grad-
uated dilators. With care and gentleness the procedure can be 
performed under local urethral anaesthesia with lidocaine gel. It 
is performed ‘blind’, so there is always a danger of causing a false 
passage. This is most likely with an inexperienced operator unfa-
miliar with the complexities of an individual patient’s urethra.
Summary box 79.5
Diagnosis of urethral stricture
●● Suspect the diagnosis of urethral stricture in a young man 
with poor urinary stream
●● Diagnosis is made either by visualisation (urethroscopy) or 
radiologically (by urethrography)
●● Urinary infection should be excluded
Figure 79.8 Urethroscopic appearance of a urethral stricture.
Figure 79.9 Ascending urethrogram showing urethral stricture of the 
bulbar urethra.
Figure 79.10 Gonorrhoeal stricture of the bulbar ur ethra. Note that 
some of the contrast has entered the penile veins.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1483 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1484
Endoscopic (internal) ur ethrotomy Internal urethrot -
omy is performed using the optical urethrotome. The stric-
ture is cut under visual control using a knife passed through 
the sheath of a rigid urethroscope. The stricture is usually 
cut at the 12 o’clock position, taking care not to cut too 
deeply into the vascular spaces of the corpus spongiosum 
that surrounds the urethra. It is possible to get lost when try -
ing to cut a way through a very tight stricture, and this is 
especially true when there are false passages because of previ-
ous dilatation attempts. Accordingly, a guidewire should be 
passed through to the bladder prior to incision of the stric -
ture in order to establish the true lumen of the urethra. Fol -
lowing urethrotomy a catheter should be left in situ for 1–3 
days afterwards.
A single urethrotomy seems to give a permanent cure of 
an uncomplicated stricture in about 50% of patients. Success 
rates are highest when the stricture is short and when it is 
present within the bulbar urethra. In contrast, failure rates are 
highest in long strictures, strictures within the penile urethra 
and in recurrent strictures. The main complications are infec-
tion and bleeding.
Urethroplasty The simplest urethroplasty involves exci -
sion of the stenosed length of urethra and reanastomosis of 
the spatulated cut ends. This operation is possible only if the 
stricture is relatively short, because there must be no ten -
sion at the suture line and it can only be performed where 
the urethra can be stretched, so it is not possible within the 
penile urethra. If an end-to-end anastomosis is not feasible, a 
large number of different surgical procedures can be used to 
reconstruct the fibrosed urethra. The operations typically uti-
lise free grafts, usually of buccal mucosa, but also occasionally 
of penile skin, lingual mucosa and bladder mucosa. Buccal 
mucosa is in plentiful supply (approximately 6–7  cm can be 
obtained from each cheek), is tough with an excellent vascu-
lar plexus, is used to being wet and is associated with minimal 
donor site morbidity.
Urethroplasty should be considered when the stricture 
has arisen following trauma and when a stricture has recurred 
following endoscopic treatment. The actual technique used 
should depend on the site of the stricture, the length of the 
stricture and the cause of the stricture. Careful preoperative 
assessment with ascending and descending urethrography 
is vital.
Other conditions of the urethra
Urethral fistula
The most frequent cause of urethral fistula is bursting or inci-
sion of a periurethral abscess. If the fistula arises behind a 
tight stricture, there may be multiple openings (watering-can 
perineum). A fistula can also follow urethroplasty if there is 
necrosis of part of the graft or flap. The stricture should be 
treated, after which case some fistulae heal themselves. Occa-
sionally, formal urethroplasty is indicated.
Urethral calculi
Urethral calculi can arise primarily behind a stricture or in 
an infected urethral diverticulum. More commonly, the stone 
is a renal calculus that has migrated to the urethra via the 
bladder.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Migratory calculi cause sudden pain in the urethra soon after 
an attack of ureteric colic. There is blockage to the flow of 
urine and, if the stone is small, the force of the jet will usually 
expel it from the urethral meatus. Larger stones get stuck and 
must be removed endoscopically. It is sometimes possible to 
feel the calculus as a hard lump in the urethra, but if there is 
doubt the diagnosis is confirmed by urethroscopy.
TREATMENT
A stone lodged within the prostatic urethra should be dis -
placed back into the bladder and treated by lithopaxy or 
suprapubic cystotomy as if it were a bladder stone. Calculi 
in more distal parts of the urethra are removed by basketing 
under vision or fragmented in situ using the electrohydrau-
lic or ultrasonic lithotripter. It may be necessary to perform 
a meatotomy to deliver the stone. Open removal by external 
urethrotomy is rarely necessary.
Neoplasms
Polyps are a relatively common finding in the prostatic ure -
thra, where they may result from chronic infection. Genital 
warts acquired by sexually transmitted infection are some-
times found in the anterior urethra as an extension of warts 
on the skin of the glans penis. Angioma of the urethra is a 
very rare cause of urethral bleeding.
Bloody urethral discharge without infection should raise 
the suspicion that the patient has a urethral tumour, although 
such tumours are rare. Multifocal transitional cell cancers 
of the bladder are sometimes associated with tumours in the 
prostatic urethra and occasionally more distally. Although 
superficial and susceptible to local ablation by diathermy or 
laser, they are associated with a tendency to distant spread. 
Squamous carcinoma can develop in an area of squamous 
metaplasia sometimes seen with a urethral stricture. It car -
ries a poor prognosis even if the patient is treated by radical 
surgery.
Summary box 79.6
Treatment of urethral strictures
●● Newly diagnosed strictures are best treated initially by internal 
urethrotomy, with a high short-term success rate and a 50% 
long-term success rate
●● Intermittent self-dilatation increases the success rate of 
internal urethrotomy alone
●● Urethroplasty should be considered in traumatic strictures 
and in recurrent strictures
●● Urethral dilatation should be considered in strictures closely 
related to the external sphincter mechanism
Anastomotic urethroplasty has a success rate of around 
90% while substitution urethroplasty has a success rate at 10 
years of around 80%.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1484 25/10/2017   10:18The female urethra 1485
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
THE FEMALE URETHRA
Anatomy
The female urethra is around 2–3 cm long, extending from the 
bladder neck to the external urethral meatus. Continence is 
maintained by the external striated urethral sphincter, which 
in women extends for almost the whole length of the ure-
thra. There is extra support from the surrounding pelvic floor 
musculature. In contrast to men, the female bladder neck has 
little role in the maintenance of continence.
Abnormalities of the female urethra include:
 ● prolapse;
 ● stricture;
 ● Fowler’s syndrome (dysfunction of the striated urethral 
sphincter);
 ● diverticulum;
 ● caruncle;
 ● papillomata acuminata;
 ● carcinoma.
Prolapse (syn: urethrocele)
Urethroceles reflect weakening of the tissues that hold the 
urethra in place, causing it to move and to put pressure on the 
vagina, leading to the prolapse of the anterior distal wall of 
the vagina. They typically occur in conjunction with prolapse 
of the bladder into the vagina (cystocele). Prolapse occurs in 
later life and is usually, in part, due to the trauma of child -
birth. Prolapse of the urethral lining also occurs as a congeni-
tal abnormality, when it causes discomfort proportional to the 
degree of prolapse.
Stricture
Urethral strictures are uncommon in women but may follow 
urethritis or, more commonly, the trauma of a difficult labour. 
Urinary retention is an occasional consequence and is usually 
chronic. True strictures in women respond well to urethral 
dilatation.
Fowler’s syndrome
This idiopathic condition, which was described by Fowler and 
Kirby, is associated with an abnormal myotonic discharge in 
the striated urethral sphincter that can be detected by sphinc-
ter electromyography. It is often associated with polycystic 
ovaries and causes urinary retention in women and should 
not be confused with a urethral stricture. Urethral dilatation 
is ineffective and the retention is best treated by intermittent 
self-catheterisation. There is some evidence that sacral neu -
romodulation can be effective.
Diverticulum
Urethral diverticula are more commonly seen in women than 
in men, but they are still rare. Some seem to be congenital 
while others are acquired by rupture of a distended urethral 
gland or injury of the urethra during childbirth. Urine within 
the diverticulum becomes infected, causing local pain and 
repeated bouts of cystitis. Purulent urine is discharged if the 
urethra is compressed with a finger placed in the vagina. Diag-
nosis is by magnetic resonace imaging (MRI) or by transvag -
inal ultrasound (Figure 79.11). Excision of the diverticulum 
through the anterior vaginal wall is effective, but care must be 
taken not to damage the urethral sphincter.
Caruncle
This is common in elderly women. It presents as a soft, rasp -
berry-like, pedunculated granulomatous mass about the size of 
a pea, attached to the posterior urethral wall near the exter -
nal meatus (Figure 79.12). It is composed of highly vascular 
Clare Juliet Fowler , contemporary, Professor of Uroneurology, The National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen Square, London, UK.
Roger Sinclair Kirby , contemporary, Professor of Urology, St George’s Hospital, London, UK.
Figure 79.11  A magnetic resonance imaging scan of a ur ethral 
diverticulum in a female. The arrow identifies the fluid-filled diver -
ticulum adjacent to the urethra.
External
urethral
opening
External
urethral
opening
Vagina
Anus
Urethral
caruncle
Figure 79.12 A urethral caruncle.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1485 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1486
connective tissue stroma infiltrated with pus cells. There may 
be frequency of micturition and urethral pain afterwards. 
Occasionally, there is bleeding. A urethral prolapse is less 
tender and is not pedunculated. Treatment is by excision and 
diathermy coagulation of the base of the stalk. The patient 
should be given antibiotics to treat the underlying chronic 
urethritis.
Papillomata acuminata
Papillomata acuminata are the same as the sexually trans -
mitted warts that occur on the penis. They are treated in 
the same way. In African women, papillomata acuminata 
are common and may grow to such a large size during preg-
nancy that they obstruct labour and necessitate a caesarean 
section.
Carcinoma of the urethra
This occurs twice as often in women as in men. Whether a 
caruncle can become malignant is disputed, but caruncles 
and tumours often occur close together. Malignant swellings 
of the urethra feel harder than benign ones. Treatment by 
radiotherapy or radical surgery is often ineffective. The over -
all prognosis is poor.
THE PENIS
Anatomy
The penis is composed of three tubular structures. The upper 
two structures, the corpora cavernosa, provide erectile func -
tion and are apposed to each other, being anchored posteri-
orly onto the pubic rami. The third tubular structure is the 
corpus spongiosum, which contains the urethra and which 
expands distally to form the glans penis.
The corpora cavernosa have an outer covering of tunica 
albuginea, which is relatively inelastic and which also forms 
the septum between them. The tunica albuginea encloses 
the erectile tissue itself, which has a trabecular structure 
with a network of sinusoidal spaces lined by endothelium 
within which the blood pools during erection. The central 
arterial blood supply (the central penile artery) is a branch 
of the internal pudendal artery. Erection occurs when the 
sacral parasympathetic nerves that innervate the penis cause 
smooth muscle relaxation with increased arterial inflow and 
dilatation of the sinusoids such that blood accumulates within 
the trabecular spaces.
DISEASES OF THE FORESKIN
Phimosis (see also Chapter 9)
At birth, the foreskin is normally adherent to the glans penis. 
These physiological adhesions between the foreskin and 
the glans penis begin to disappear around the age of 2 years 
and may persist until 6 years of age or later, giving the false 
impression that the prepuce will not retract. This condition 
(sometimes known as physiological phimosis) should not be 
confused with true phimosis in young boys.
Phimosis in boys
True phimosis is where there is scarring of the prepuce such 
that it will not retract without fissuring of the foreskin (Figure 
79.13). This may result in ballooning of the foreskin during 
micturition and may also result in infection (balanoposthitis). 
Rarely, the aperture in the prepuce may be so tight as to cause 
urinary obstruction.
Phimosis in adults
Scarring in adults occurs as a result of balanitis (inflamma -
tion of the glans penis), posthitis (inflammation of the fore -
skin), or lichen sclerosus et atrophicus (syn: balanitis xerotica 
obliterans). BXO is an uncommon condition in which the 
normally pliant foreskin becomes thickened, typically whitish 
in appearance and forms a constricting band (cicatrix) that 
prevents retraction (Figure 79.14). BXO may also affect the 
glans penis (causing meatal stenosis) (Figure 79.15) and the 
penile urethra (causing urethral stricture). As a consequence 
it is difficult to keep the penis clean, there may be recurrent 
attacks of balanitis and there is both a problem with hygiene 
and, in later life, an increased susceptibility to carcinoma.
Treatment
In a young child with a non-retractile foreskin, no treat -
ment is necessary or appropriate. When the foreskin is mildly 
scarred, then preputioplasty is possible. For all other cases, 
circumcision is the appropriate treatment. In cases of BXO, 
circumcision is often curative, although when the condition 
affects the glans penis, topical steroid cream may be helpful. 
In resistant cases, formal meatotomy is necessary. In emer -
gency situations, such as when catheterisation is required, but 
is impossible, then it is possible to divide the foreskin dorsally 
under local anaesthetic (a so called dorsal slit).
Figure 79.13 Non-retractile foreskin. The patient presented with a 
recent history of symptoms. Examination reveals thickening and scar-
ring with a true phimosis  (picture courtesy of Kim Hutton).
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1486 25/10/2017   10:18Diseases of the foreskin 1487
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
PREPUTIOPLASTY
This is an application of the Heineke-Mikulicz principle 
whereby the tight ring of the foreskin is divided longitudi -
nally and sewn transversely, thereby allowing retraction of the 
preserved foreskin. There is a recurrence rate and it is only 
indicated in mild cases with minimal scarring. If it fails, then 
circumcision is indicated.
CIRCUMCISION
Apparently, circumcision did not originate among the Jewish 
people; they took the practice either from the Babylonians or 
from African tribes, probably the latter. It had been practiced 
in West Africa for over 5000 years.
Indications In infants and young boys, circumcision is most 
usually performed at the request of the parents for social or 
religious reasons. Medical indications for circumcision in boys 
include true phimosis, BXO (rare under the age of 5 years), 
recurrent attacks of balanoposthitis and recurrent urinary 
tract infections with an abnormal upper urinary tract.
In adults, circumcision is indicated because of an inabil -
ity to retract the foreskin for intercourse, for splitting of an 
abnormally tight frenulum or for recurrent balanitis.
Recently, evidence has emerged that circumcision protects 
against the spread of human immuno deficiency virus (HIV), 
and a large scale programme of adult circumcision under the 
auspices of the World Health Organisation is ongoing in some 
African countries where HIV is a major health problem.
Technique in an infant Applying a clamp or bone forceps 
across the prepuce distal to the glans with blind division of 
the foreskin is to be condemned. To see one boy with par -
tial or total amputation of the glans is enough to realise the 
folly of this technique. It is far better to perform a proper cir -
cumcision under direct vision as in an adult. The Plastibel 
device can be used in infants (Hollister) and its use is shown 
in Figure 79.16; the ring separates between 5 and 8 days post-
operatively.
Technique in adolescents and adults  In adolescents 
and adults the following method is preferable. The prepuce 
is held in artery forceps and put on a gentle stretch. Marking 
the skin with a pen at the level of the corona is essential 
prior to incision to ensure that excess skin is not removed. A 
Figure 79.15  Severe balanitis xer otica obliterans causing meatal 
stenosis, thickened and scarred preputial and penile skin. There was 
also a severe penile urethral stricture.
Figure 79.14 Phimosis secondary to balanitis xerotica obliterans. 
Note the white and thickened appearance of the preputial skin (a) 
with a constriction such that the foreskin cannot be retracted (b).
(b)
(a)
Walter Hermann von Heineke , 1834–1901, German surgeon and Professor of Surgery in Erlangen.
Jan Mikulicz-Radecki , 1850–1905, Polish surgeon and Director of Surgery in Krakow and Wroklaw.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1487 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1488
When the undersurface of the prepuce has been separated 
from the glans, the inner layer of each flap is again marked 
with a pen and then incised with a second circum  ferential 
incision, leaving about 0.5 cm of the inner layer of the  
preputial skin. Cutting the remaining connective tissue 
completes the excision (Figure 79.17). Monopolar diathermy 
must be avoided in operations on the penis because there is 
a danger that the current path will cause coagulation at the 
base of the penis. Haemostasis is important in circumcision, 
however, and vessels should be secured with bipolar diathermy 
or with absorbable ligatures. The cut edges of the skin are 
approximated using interrupted sutures, making certain that 
the frenular vessels are ligated.
Summary box 79.7
Circumcision
●● Is most commonly performed for cultural reasons
●● Is not indicated for failure of retraction caused by congenital 
adhesions between the glans penis and the prepuce
●● Is indicated when there is true phimosis
●● Never use monopolar diathermy when performing 
circumcision
Figure 79.16  The Plastibel (Hollister) device for circumcision in 
infants. (a) The foreskin is freed and retracted. (b) After the Plastibel 
device has been slipped into place over the glans penis, the foreskin 
is ligated over the groove of the bell and redundant foreskin is cut 
away. (c) This shows the completed operation (courtesy of Profes -
sor Asal Y Izzidien Al-Samarrai, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia).
(a) (b)
(d)
(c)
(e)
Figure 79.17 (a–e) Stages in circumcision.
(a)
(b)
(c)
cir cumferential incision in the penile skin is made at the level 
of the corona using a knife. The prepuce is then slit dorsally in 
the midline to within 1 cm of the corona. This converts the 
foreskin into two flaps connected at the midline anteriorly . 
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1488 25/10/2017   10:18Injuries of the penis 1489
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Frenulum breve
Phimosis should not be confused with this condition, where 
the frenulum is short, such that it causes pain when the fore-
skin is retracted. Another possible presentation is tearing of 
the frenulum during sexual activity. T reatment is by frenu -
loplasty, which utilises the Heineke–Mikulicz principle to 
‘lengthen’ the frenulum.
Paraphimosis
A tight foreskin once retracted may be difficult to return and 
a paraphimosis results. In this condition, the venous and lym-
phatic return from the glans and distal foreskin is obstructed 
and these structures swell, causing even more pressure within 
the obstructing ring of prepuce. Icebags, gentle manual com-
pression and injection of a solution of hyaluronidase in nor -
mal saline may help to reduce the swelling. Such patients 
can be treated by circumcision if careful manipulation fails. 
A dorsal slit of the prepuce under local anaesthetic may be 
enough in an emergency.
Balanoposthitis
Inflammation of the prepuce is known as posthitis; inflamma-
tion of the glans is balanitis. The opposing surfaces of the two 
structures are often involved, hence the term balanoposthitis. 
In mild cases, the only symptoms are itching and some dis -
charge. In more severe inflammation, the glans and foreskin 
are red-raw and pus exudes. Treatment is by broad-spectrum 
antibiotics and local hygiene measures. If there is associated 
phimosis, then a circumcision is required.
Preputial calculi
Later in life, chronic posthitis may lead to adhesions between 
the prepuce and the glans and closure of the orifice of the 
preputial sac. Preputial calculi result from the accumulation 
beneath a non-retractable foreskin of inspissated smegma, uri-
nary salts or both.
INJURIES OF THE PENIS
Avulsion of the skin of the penis
Entanglement of clothing in rotating machinery is the usual 
cause. Repair can be effected by burying the shaft of the penis 
in the scrotum, with subsequent release at the time of a defin-
itive plastic surgical repair. An alternative approach is initial 
debridement with delayed, but early, skin grafting.
Fracture of the penis
Fracture of the penis is an uncommon accident, usually 
occurring when the erect penis is bent violently during inter-
course. The forced deformity results in a rupture of the tunica 
albuginea with immediate extravasation of blood from within 
the penis. There is typically a loud cracking sound with 
immediate loss of the erection, and the rapid development 
of a large bruise around the penis and extending onto the 
scrotum (Figure 79.18). There may occasionally be an asso-
ciated urethral injury. Optimal management involves early 
exploration of the penis with surgical repair of the ruptured 
tunica albuginea.
Strangulation of the penis
Strangulation of the penis by rings placed on the penis, usu-
ally for sexual reasons, can cause venous engorgement, which 
prevents their removal. It may help to aspirate the corpora 
cavernosa but often the ring must be cut off with a ring cutter 
or hacksaw.
Other abnormalities of the penis
Erectile dysfunction
ED is failure to attain or maintain an erection. It is a symp -
tom, rather than a condition in itself. It can arise as a conse -
quence of psychological issues, but the commonest cause is 
vascular disease, and as such ED is associated with diabetes, 
hypertension, dyslipidaemia and smoking. Other rarer causes 
include endocrine disease (hypogonadism and prolactin 
secreting pituitary tumours), neurological disease (multiple 
sclerosis, spinal cord injury and prolapsed intervertebral disc), 
iatrogenic damage to the cavernosal nerves due to radical 
pelvic surgery (e.g. radical prostatectomy, abdominoperineal 
excision of the rectum and radical cystectomy), neuropathy 
secondary to pelvic radiotherapy and drug-induced cases 
(including antihypertensive agents, antidepressants and anti-
psychotics).
Figure 79.18  Penile fracture. Note the extensive bruising of the 
penis and scrotum.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1489 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1490
Assessment involves confirmation of the diagnosis by tak-
ing a careful history, assessing the patient for underlying risk 
factors and trying to identify the rare case that can be cured as 
opposed to being treated. Physical examination of the genita-
lia, measurement of the blood pressure and assessment of the 
secondary sexual characteristics is required and biochemical 
assessment of the blood sugar, the serum lipid profile and the 
serum testosterone is necessary in all cases.
Treatment for most patients involves the use of the phos-
phodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (such as sildenafil) with intra-
cavernosal injection of alprostadil, vacuum erection devices 
and penile implants reserved for resistant cases.
causes the erect penis to bend, often dramatically, towards the 
side of the plaque. The commonest direction of deformity is 
dorsally (towards the abdomen) and the deformity may be so 
great as to prevent penetrative sexual intercourse.
While the aetiology is uncertain, there is an association 
with Dupuytren’s contracture. The natural history of the con-
dition is that it typically progresses for 18–24 months before 
stabilising. During this acute (or active) phase of the disease, 
surgery is not indicated, and a variety of medical treatments 
have been tried, although none with any good evidence of 
benefit.
When the disease has stabilised (the chronic or stable 
phase), the crucial issue is whether the patient is still able to 
have sexual intercourse. If he can, then no treatment is indi -
cated, while if the deformity prevents penetration, or makes 
it difficult, then corrective treatment is indicated. Using this 
criterion, only around a quarter of men require treatment. 
While injections of collagenase have been recently licensed 
for this condition, the commonest treatment is surgery with 
the Nesbitt procedure being the most common procedure. 
This operation corrects the deformity by plicating the convex 
side of the deformity, thereby straightening the penis, albeit 
with some accompanying loss of length.
Peyronie’s disease
Peyronie’s disease is characterized by penile deformity (Figure 
79.19), palpable penile plaques within the penis, ED and pain 
on erection. The cause is unknown, but probably involves 
minor injury to the erect penis with secondary microhaem-
orrhage beneath the tunica albuginea and secondary fibrosis. 
The latter results in the palpable plaques that can be identi -
fied on examination. The plaques may rarely be calcified (Fig-
ure 79.20). The presence of these relatively inelastic plaques 
Figure 79.19 An artificial erection obtained perioperatively, demon-
strating the dorsal deformity of the erect penis that is typical of 
Peyronie’s disease.
Figure 79.20 Penile calcification in Peyronie’s disease (courtesy of 
Dr SS Rawat, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia).
Summary box 79.8
Erectile dysfunction
●● The commonest cause of erectile dysfunction is 
atherosclerosis
●● Appropriate investigation involves identification of vascular 
risk factors
●● Phosphodiesterase inhibitors are the first line treatment for 
most men
Summary box 79.9
Peyronie’s disease
●● Medical treatments during the active phase have little 
evidence of efficacy
●● The disease has two phases: an initial acute phase lasting 
12–24 months and a later chronic phase
●● There is no effective treatment in the acute phase
●● Surgery may be indicated in the chronic phase to correct 
deformity that interferes with sexual activity
●● Surgical treatment will shorten the erect penile length
Francois de la Peyronie , 1678–1747, surgeon to King Louis XIV of France, and Founder of the Royal Academy of Surgery, Paris, France.
Baron Guillaume Dupuytren , 1777–1835, surgeon, Hôtel Dieu, Paris, France, described this condition in 1831.
Reed Nesbitt , urological surgeon, Nashville, TN, USA.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1490 25/10/2017   10:18Carcinoma of the penis 1491
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Congenital curvature of the penis
A penile deformity that is similar and analagous to Peyronie’s 
disease is occasionally seen in young men. Called congential 
curvature of the penis, the urethral length is normal and it 
typically results in a ventral deformity of the erect penis. If 
the deformity interferes with sexual activity , then surgery, 
usually a Nesbit procedure, will straighten the erect penis.
Chordee
Chordee (French = corded) is a fixed bowing of the penis 
caused by hypospadias or, more rarely , chronic urethritis. 
Erection is deformed and sexual intercourse may be impos -
sible. Treatment is usually surgical.
Priapism
Priapism means a persistent erection lasting longer than 4 
hours and it is a surgical emergency. There are two main types 
of priapism.
ISCHAEMIC PRIAPISM
Ischaemic or venogenic priapism is the commoner and is due 
to venous congestion, with consequent thrombosis and isch -
aemia. The penis remains erect and becomes painful. This is 
a pathological erection and the glans penis and corpus spon -
giosum are not involved. The condition is most commonly 
seen as a side effect of medication, most notably antipsychotic 
medication and intracavernosal injections, but it can also 
arise as complication of a hypercoagulable blood disorders 
such as sickle cell disease or leukaemia. A tiny proportion 
of cases are caused by malignant disease in the corpora cav -
ernosa or the pelvis.
The clinical features are of a painful erection not involv-
ing the glans penis. Blood taken from the penis shows hypoxia, 
hyercapnoea and acidosis, while Doppler scanning shows an 
absence of blood flow within the penis.
An underlying cause should be excluded and the patient 
should be referred for specialist urological care. Treatment 
is an emergency, since delay beyond 6 hours results in pro -
gressive, irreversible damage to the corpus cavernosal tissue 
with subsequent fibrosis and ED. Aspiration of the sludged 
blood in the corpora cavernosa is the first-line therapy but 
if this fails, then intracavernosal injection of phenylephrine 
(an alpha adrenoceptor agonist) is the next line of therapy. If 
that proves ineffective, it may be necessary to decompress the 
penis by creating a shunt between the corpus cavernosum and 
either the glans penis or the corpus spongiosum. Treatment 
initiated after 24–36 hours rarely restores normal erectile 
function.
NON-ISCHAEMIC PRIAPISM
This rarer form of priapism arises as a consequence of trau -
matic damage to the central penile artery, usually as a conse -
quence of blunt perineal trauma. A fistula develops between 
the artery and the sinusoidal space, which results in a per -
sistent erection that is painless, in contrast to the ischaemic 
priapism. Blood gas analysis shows the characteristics of arte-
rial blood and Doppler scanning and selective arteriography 
will demonstrate the fistula (Figure 79.21). Treatment is not 
an emergency, since there is no ischaemia, and is most appro-
priate achieved by selective arterial embolisation.
CARCINOMA OF THE PENIS
Penile cancer is rare in the UK, with only around 600 cases 
being recorded annually. It is much commoner in other parts 
of the world, most notably South America, where it is one of 
the commonest cancers.
Summary box 79.10
Ischaemic priapism
●● The characteristic clinical features are a painful erection not 
involving the glans penis
●● Blood gas analysis from the penis shows hypoxia, 
hypercapnoea and acidosis
●● Detumescence should be ideally achieved within 6-12 hours 
to avoid long-term erectile dysfunction
Figure 79.21 (a) Colour Doppler scan of a high flow (non-ischaemic) 
priapism showing turbulence at the site of the arterial injury. Compare 
the high unilateral signal (turbulence) with normal contralateral flow. 
(b) Selective pudendal arteriogram showing the site of the fistula 
(the arterial blush) between the central penile artery and the corpus 
cavernosum.
(a)
(b)
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1491 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1492
Aetiology
Circumcision soon after birth confers immunity against car -
cinoma of the penis. Later circumcision does not seem to 
have the same benefit, with the assumption that smegma is 
in some way carcinogenic. Human papillomavirus infection 
(HPV types 16 and 18) is a risk factor, as are BXO and smok-
ing. Phimosis and chronic balanoposthitis are known to be 
contributory factors, and there are definite precarcinomatous 
states including leucoplakia of the glans, which is similar to 
the condition seen on the tongue, and penile intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PeIN).
Penile intraepithelial neoplasia 
(carcinoma in situ of the penis, 
Bowen’s disease, erythroplasia of 
Queyrat)
PeIN is typically seen as a red cutaneous patch on the penis 
(Figure 79.22). When it occurs on the glans penis, it is 
known as erythroplasia of Queyrat and when it occurs on 
the shaft of the penis it is called Bowen’s disease. There are 
several other benign causes of red patches on the penis, and 
when there is clinical doubt as to the underlying diagnosis a 
biopsy is indicated. When the diagnosis of carcinoma in situ is 
confirmed, treatment is by means of topical 5-FU cream, CO2 
laser ablation or surgical excision.
Pathology
Carcinoma of the penis is most typically a squamous cell car-
cinoma arising in the skin of the glans penis or the prepuce. 
It may be flat and infiltrating or warty in appearance (Figure 
79.23). The former often starts as leucoplakia or PeIN and 
the latter results from an existing papilloma. Local growth 
continues for months or years. T1 tumours are confined to the 
skin, with T2 tumours invading the corpus spongiosum or the 
corpus cavernosum. T3 tumours invade the urethra and T4 
tumours invade adjacent structures. The earliest lymphatic 
spread is to the inguinal (N1 and N2 disease) and then to the 
iliac nodes (N3 disease) (Figure 79.24). Distant metastatic 
deposits are infrequent.
Clinical features
Many patients present late (Figure 79.25), either because 
of embarrassment or because of misdiagnosis. About 10% of 
patients are under 40 years of age. By the time the patient 
presents, the growth is often large and secondary infection 
causes a foul, bloody discharge. There is typically little or no 
pain.
Around 50% have inguinal lymph node enlargement at 
presentation but the nodal enlargement often reflects infec-
tion. In many, the prepuce is non-retractile and must be split 
to view the lesion. A biopsy should be performed to make 
the diagnosis. Untreated, the whole glans may be replaced 
by a fungating offensive mass. Later, the inguinal nodes can 
erode the skin (Figure 79.24) of the groin and in rare cases, 
John Templeton Bowen , 1857–1940, American dermatologist, described this condition in 1912.
Auguste Queyrat , b.1872, dermatologist, Paris, France, described this condition in 1911.
Figure 79.22  Penile intraepithelial neoplasia affecting the glans 
penis.
Figure 79.23 A squamous cell cancer arising from the inner aspect 
of the prepuce.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1492 25/10/2017   10:18Carcinoma of the penis 1493
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
death of the patient can result from erosion of the femoral or 
external iliac vessels.
Treatment
Management is divided into treatment of the primary tumour 
and treatment of the inguinal nodes. For the primary tumour 
surgical excision is the mainstay of treatment, with the tradi-
tional view that a 2 cm margin of normal tissue be removed 
being superceded by a more recent, more conservative view , 
such that penile preserving surgery with excision of much 
lower margins of normal tissue are now accepted. Tumours 
affecting the glans penis require glansectomy, with more 
advanced tumours requiring partial penectomy. In advanced 
cases, total penectomy is required with formation of a perineal 
urethrostomy. Such surgery is indicated even in advanced 
metastatic disease for reasons of local control.
Treatment of any associated enlarged inguinal lymph 
nodes should be delayed until at least 3 weeks after local treat-
ment of the primary lesion. Enlargement caused by infection 
will usually show signs of subsiding with antibiotic treatment. 
For palpable nodes, ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration 
will confirm the diagnosis and a block dissection of both 
groins should be undertaken. The management of patients 
where the nodes are not palpable disease involves the use 
of sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) followed by inguinal 
node dissection if the SLNB is positive .
Management of the pelvic nodes is controversial. When 
they are involved on CT scanning, surgery probably has lit -
tle role, but when the iliac nodes are not enlarged in the 
presence of N2 disease, the options are observation, pelvic 
lympadenectomy or radiotherapy. Chemotherapy is relatively 
ineffective and currently is reserved for palliation in those 
with metastatic disease. The prognosis for tumours confined 
to the penis is good with 5-year survival rates in excess of 
80%. With nodal involvement the 5-year survival rate falls 
to around 40%.
Summary box 79.11
Carcinoma of the penis
●● A relatively uncommon tumour
●● Enlargement of superficial inguinal lymph nodes may be 
caused by infection or metastatic spread
●● Surgery is the mainstay of treatment
●● Nodal involvement indicates a poor prognosis
Figure 79.24 A late presenting squamous cell cancer of the penis.
Figure 79.25 A squamous cell cancer of the penis with an ulcerating 
groin node.
Abraham Buschke , 1868–1943, dermatologist, Berlin, Germany.
Ludwig Löwenstein , 1885–1959, dermatologist, Berlin, Germany
Buschke–Löwenstein tumour
The Buschke–Löwenstein tumour is uncommon. It has the 
histological pattern of a verrucous carcinoma. It is locally 
destructive and invasive but appears not to spread to lymph 
nodes or to metastasise. Treatment is by surgical excision.
Malignant melanoma of the penis
This is an uncommon tumour, with the principles of manage-
ment being the same as for squamous cell carcinoma. Bloo d 
borne metastatic disease is, however, more common.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1493 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1494
INFLAMMATION OF THE PENIS 
AND URETHRA
Urethral discharge
The commonest cause of urethral discharge in men is ure-
thritis and the two commonest causes of urethritis are 
non-specific urethritis (NSU) and gonococcal urethritis. 
Other related symptoms include dysuria and urethral pruri -
tis while epididymitis can also be present. A sexual history 
should be sought, particularly a history of unprotected inter -
course, oral sex and anal intercourse. A routine investigative 
screen includes Gram stain of the discharge, dipstick testing 
of a urine specimen, culture of a urine specimen and nucleic 
acid amplification testing (NAAT) of either a urine speci -
men or a urethral swab. If relevant, the same techniques can 
be used for vaginal, endocervical, anal and pharyngeal swabs. 
NAAT is a sensitive way of identifying both gonococcal and 
chlamydial urethritis. As with all sexually transmitted infec-
tions (STIs) the possibility of other infections (such as HIV) 
should always be borne in mind and, where appropriate, 
tested for.
Non-specific urethritis (syn: non-gonococcal 
urethritis)
NSU is a STI that is the commonest cause of urethritis in the 
Western world. In around 40% of cases it is due to Chlamydia 
trachomatis with other cases being caused by Ureaplasma ure-
alyticum, Trichomonas vaginalis or Mycoplasma genitalium. The 
causative agent in up to 50% of cases is unknown.
NSU can affect both men and women and asymptomatic 
infection is common in both. In men, dysuria and a white 
mucopurulent urethral discharge appear up to 6 weeks after 
sexual intercourse. Dysuria is usual. The urine appears to be 
clear but may contain ‘threads’ or pus cells. Epididymitis is 
common and urethral stricture is a potential late compli -
cation. In women, the condition is usually asymptomatic, 
although it can present as vaginal discharge or as a form of 
urethrotrigonitis. It may result in cervicitis or pelvic inflam -
matory disease.
Exclusion of gonorrheal infection is important. The diag -
nostic test of choice is NAAT and in men either a urine spec-
imen or a urethral swab can be used, while in women urine, 
endocervical or vaginal swabs can be used. If testing is posi -
tive, then partners should be screened.
The standard treatment regimes are azithromycin as a sin-
gle dose or doxycycline orally for 7 days. Treatment is usually 
effective, although relapse is common, especially in men, in 
whom the prostate may act as a reservoir of infection. It is 
important to treat both partners as reinfection is probable if 
this is not done, and re-testing of both partners at 3 months 
is recommended.
Gonorrhoeal urethritis
Gonorrhoea is a sexually transmitted disease caused by Neisse-
ria gonorrhoeae (gonococcus), a gram-negative kidney-shaped 
diplococcus that infects the anterior urethra in men, the ure-
thra and cervix in women and the oropharynx, rectum and 
anal canal in both sexes, but especially men. It is transmitted 
by unprotected sexual intercourse and is the second common-
est cause of urethritis in western countries.
Most men have symptoms of urethral discomfort and ure-
thral discharge within a few days of infection. There is often 
scalding dysuria. In women it is often asymptomatic. There 
can be mild dysuria or slight urethral discharge, which can 
go unnoticed by the patient. Cervicitis can occur with about 
10% suffering from pelvic inflammatory disease (salpingitis), 
which, if bilateral, may lead to infertility. A mother may 
transmit gonorrhea to her newborn during childbirth with 
the risk that blindness of the child can result. In addition, in 
both men and women exposed orally or anally, gonococcal 
infections can cause a predominantly asymptomatic pharyn-
gitis or proctitis.
Traditionally, the diagnosis was made by identification 
of pus and gonococci in a gram-stained urethral smear with 
subsequent culture. However, more recently, NAAT, which is 
more sensitive, has become the norm.
Complications are prevented by effective early treatment. 
In men complications include posterior urethritis, prostatitis 
(acute or chronic), acute epididymo-orchitis, periurethral 
abscess and urethral stricture. Gonococcal arthritis, iridocy -
clitis, septicaemia and endocarditis are unusual.
Treatment is with antibiotics, with ceftriaxone currently 
the treatment of choice as a consequence of the increasing 
prevalence of antibiotic resistance to more traditional anti -
biotics such as ciprofloxacin or penicillin. Contact tracing is 
important in controlling the spread of the disease and man -
agement is usually by a genitourinary physician. Failure to 
respond to first-line treatment should raise the possibility of 
antibiotic resistance or co-infection with chlamydia.
Reiter’s disease (syn: sexually 
acquired reactive arthritis)
Reiter’s disease is an autoimmune disease characterised by 
the triad of urethritis or diarrhoea, conjunctivitis and poly -
arthritis. Common triggers include chlamydial urethritis, less 
commonly gonococcal urethritis and diarrhoea secondary 
to Salmonella, Shigella or Campylobacter. It is an HLA-B27-  
associated condition. The conjunctivitis (present in around 
50%) and arthritis typically occur 1–3 weeks after the primary 
infection. Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds and treat -
ment is largely symptomatic, although antibiotic treatment 
of the precipitating infection is important. The urethritis and 
Hans Christian Joachim Gram  , 1853–1938, Professor of Pharmacology (1891–1900) and of Medicine (1900–1923), Copenhagen, Denmark, described this 
method of staining bacteria in 1884.
Albert Ludwig Siegmund Neisser , 1855–1916, Director of the Dermatological Institue, Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Hans Conrad Julius Reiter , 1881–1969, President of the Health Service and Honorary Professor of Hygiene, Berlin, Germany, described this condition in 1916. 
He was subsequently convicted of war crimes as a consequence of his involvement in the death of hundreds of inmates in Buchenwald.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1494 25/10/2017   10:18Inflammation of the penis and ur ethra 1495
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
conjunctivitis frequently subside after a few weeks but the 
arthritis may persist for months. Severe anterior uveitis and 
frequently recurrent attacks suggest a poor outlook.
Periurethral abscess
Periurethral abscesses were once common with high morbid -
ity, but are now rare. Clinical presentation is varied but may 
include fever, dysuria, urethral discharge and swelling of the 
penis or scrotum. In untreated cases urethral fistulation can 
occur and occasionally extensive cellulitis or necrotising fas -
ciitis can occur.
A penile periurethral abscess arises following a gonococcal 
or chlamydial infection of one of the glands of Littre. There 
may be delay in diagnosis or a coexisting urethral stricture. 
There is usually penile swelling with tender induration felt 
on the underside of the penis, which if left untreated, may 
discharge externally, often leaving a fistula. Diagnosis can 
be helped by ultrasound of the urethra. Treatment should 
include both antibiotic treatment, as for urethritis, combined 
with surgical drainage into the urethra .
A periurethral abscess in relation to the bulbar urethra is 
even more uncommon. It may be associated with a urethral 
stricture, urethral trauma or, rarely, a urethral cancer. The 
infecting organisms are varied and can include both strep -
tococci and anaerobic organisms. Extravasation of urine is 
not unusual. There is perineal pain with pyrexia, rigors and 
tachycardia. Tenderness and swelling rapidly spread from 
the perineum to the penis and the anterior abdominal wall. 
Ultrasound scanning and MRI are useful diagnostic aids and 
treatment with antibiotics are essential. Collections of pus 
should be drained and the urethra should be defunctioned by 
a suprapubic urinary catheter.
A chronic periurethral abscess sometimes results from a 
longstanding urethral stricture (Figure 79.26). The multi-
ple loculi of pus should be drained and the stricture treated. 
Urethral fistula occurs either spontaneously or as a result of 
incision of the abscess.
Genital ulcers
The commonest cause of a genital ulcer is genital herpes. 
Other less common causes include syphilis and chancroid. 
As with all STIs, the possibilitiy of other infections (such as 
HIV) should always be borne in mind and, where appropriate, 
tested for.
Genital herpes
Genital herpes is caused by sexual transmission of the herpes 
simplex virus (usually HSV-2, occasionally HSV-1). Infection 
is lifelong with recurrent symptomatic attacks occuring in 50% 
or more of cases. Pain along the distribution of the sensory 
nerve, usually the genitofemoral nerve, precedes the eruption 
by 2 days and may be particularly severe around the anus. A 
group of tiny vesicles rapidly erodes to form shallow ulcers, 
which are painful. The first attack occurs around 4 days after 
exposure and is typically accompanied by fever, myalgia and 
inguinal lymphadenopathy. In female patients, the ulcers often 
spread on to the thighs during the attack. Involvement of the 
urethra may cause retention of urine, which may persist for up 
to 14 days if there is radiculitis of the S2 and S3 nerve roots.
Diagnosis is made clinically or, when there is doubt, by 
either cell culture or by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-
based techniques. All primary infections should be treated by 
oral antiviral agents such as acyclovir or valacyclovir, which 
have been shown to be effective in treating genital herpes, 
although they do prevent recurrences.
A child born to a mother with active infection is suscep -
tible to a fatal generalised herpes infection in the neonatal 
period. Caesarean section should be considered in these cir -
cumstances. There is an increased risk of carcinoma of the 
cervix and annual cytology for life is recommended.
Syphilis
Syphilitic ulcers are typically painless, rubbery and indurated. 
Caused by the spirochaete Treponema pallidum, diagnosis was 
traditionally achieved by dark-field microscopy , but modern 
serological techniques are nowadays more appropriate. The 
incidence of syphilis is increasing since the advent of the ret-
rovirals used to treat HIV in the mid 1990s. Treatment is with 
long-acting penicillin.
Tropical sexually transmitted 
infections
Lymphogranuloma veneruem, lymphogranuloma inguinale 
and chancroid are rare conditions in the W estern world. 
However, they are still relatively common in some resource-
poor countries. As with all STIs, the possibilitiy of other 
infections (such as HIV) should always be borne in mind and, 
where appropriate, tested for.
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Lymphogranuloma venereum is a sexually transmitted disease 
caused by Chlamydia trachomatis (chlamydia A) types L1–L3 
Figure 79.26 Chronic periurethral abscess.
Alexis Littre , 1658–1726, surgeon and lecturer in Anatomy, Paris, France.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1495 25/10/2017   10:18CHAPTER 79  Urethra and penis
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1496
and is primarily an infection of the lymphatics and lymph 
nodes. It can affect both sexes. While it was considered rare 
in resource-rich countries, some recent outbreaks in Europe 
have occurred, usually in conjunction with HIV .
The primary lesion is a fleeting, painless, genital papule 
or ulcer that develops 1–4 weeks after infection and is often 
unnoticed by the patient. The inguinal glands become enlarged 
and painful around 2–6 weeks after the primary lesion. The 
masses of nodes mat together above and below the inguinal 
ligament to give the ‘sign of the groove’. The overlying skin 
reddens, there may be fluctuance and the mass occasionally 
ruptures. There may be a proctitis, which can go on to produce 
a rectal stricture if untreated. Lymphatic obstruction leads to 
lymphoedema in the perineum and, occasionally, the lower 
limbs. Urethritis and urethral stricture occur in men.
Diagnosis is confirmed clinically and by the detection of 
antibodies against the organism. Treatment is by a combina -
tion of antibiotics, which may include doxyclycine, azith -
romycin, erythromycin and ciprofloxacin. The multilocular 
lymphatic masses should not be incised, although aspiration 
is permissible to reduce discomfort.
Lymphogranuloma inguinale
This is a chronic and slowly progressive ulcerative tropical 
disease affecting the genitals and surrounding tissue, but occa-
sionally occurring elsewhere in the body. It is usually sexually 
transmitted and is caused by Klebsiella granulomatis and is most 
commonly seen among socially deprived people. The incuba-
tion period varies greatly but is typically between 7–30 days.
A painless vesicle or indurated papule, usually on the 
external genitals but occasionally elsewhere on the skin, 
gradually erodes into a slowly extending ulcer with a beefy-
red, granulomatous base. More chronic lesions may become 
greyish, especially at the edges, where, after months or years, 
malignant change may develop. The ulcerated area may bleed 
if touched but is usually surprisingly painless. Without treat -
ment healing is only partial and keloid is common.
Diagnosis is by microscopy of material from the edges of 
the ulcer, which shows the presence of short gram-negative 
rods within the cytoplasm of the large mononuclear cells. 
Treatment is with azithromycin, although doxycycline, eryth-
romycin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and gentamicin are 
alternatives.
Chancroid
Chancoid is a sexually transmitted, acute, ulcerative disease 
caused by Haemophilus ducreyi, a gram-negative facultative 
anaerobe. Following an incubation period of 3–10 days, a soft 
painful penile ulcer appears and is commonly followed by the 
development of inguinal lymphadenopathy . Diagnosis is by 
bacterial culture or by PCR techniques. Antibiotic treatment 
with ceftriaxone or azithromycin is usually effective therapy.
Condylomata acuminata (syn: 
genital warts)
Genital warts are caused by infection with HPV and are sexu-
ally transmitted. Infection is very common, with only a small 
proportion of infected patients actually having visible warts. 
Most commonly due to HPV types 6 and 11, these viruses do 
not cause cervical cancer. Ordinary skin warts can occur on 
the genitals by direct contact with a finger lesion, but they 
are less moist and soft and less often pedunculated than the 
genital variety. The lesions most commonly occur under the 
prepuce in the coronal sulcus but may be found elsewhere, 
including inside the urinary meatus and on the outer prepuce 
(Figure 79.27). In women, genital warts are most commonly 
found on the vulva but they may line the vagina and occur on 
the cervix. Perianal warts are common.
Other associated sexually transmitted diseases should 
be excluded: in women mainly candidiasis and Trichomonas 
infection and in men syphilis or gonorrhoea. Genital warts 
may complicate HIV infection.
Treatment is by chemical or physical means. Podophyl -
lin is often effective as a topical application. It is applied to 
the wart, taking great care to avoid the surrounding skin and 
washed off after 6 hours or so. An alternative agent is Imida -
quod. If chemical methods fail, the warts can be excised or 
they can be ablated with cryosurgery, electrosurgery or laser. 
Circumcision is sometimes advised if there are florid lesions 
under the foreskin.
FURTHER READING
Kaisary A V, Ballaro A, Pigott K. Lecture notes: urology, 7th edn. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2016.
Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, Partin A W , Peters CA. Campbell-Walsh  urology, 
11th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015.
Figure 79.27 Genital warts affecting the outer prepuce. These were 
treated by radical circumcision.
12_79-B&L27_Pt12_Ch79.indd   1496 25/10/2017   10:18Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • To recognise testicular maldescent and to appreciate 
the reasons for intervention
 • To recognise and manage testicular torsion
 • To be able to recognise and understand the 
management of the common scrotal swellings 
(varicocoele, hydrocoele and epididymal cysts)
 • To recognise and understand the management of 
testicular tumours
 • To understand the treatment options for infertile men
Chapter
T estis and scrotum
80
EMBRYOLOGY AND ANATOMY 
OF THE TESTIS
The testes develop in the retroperitoneum below the kidneys 
at around the 10th thoracic level. During the 7th week of 
fetal development, the gubernaculum forms within the folds 
of the peritoneum. The upper end is attached to the develop-
ing testis and the lower end is attached to the fascia between 
the developing abdominal wall muscles. At the same time an 
evagination of the peritoneum itself, the processus vaginalis, 
develops adjacent to the gubernaculum and over the subse-
quent weeks evaginates through the abdominal wall to cre -
ate the inguinal canal. The processus vaginalis initially picks 
up fibres of the internal oblique (which become the cremas-
teric muscle) and then fibres of the external oblique (which 
become the external spermatic fascia). As it elongates the 
processus carries with it the gubernaculum, which contains 
muscle fibres although it is not fully clear what part it plays 
in testicular descent. What is clear is that the testes lie at the 
internal inguinal ring at 3 months’ gestation and descend to 
the scrotum between 7 and 9 months. This latter descent into 
the scrotum is accompanied by shortening of the gubernacu -
lum. Final descent from the external ring to the base of the 
scrotum takes 4–6 weeks and is usually complete by birth.
The mechanisms that result in testicular descent are 
poorly understood but probably involve Müllerian inhibit -
ing substance. Maternal chorionic gonadotrophin stimulates 
growth of the testis and may stimulate its migration. Imper -
fectly developed testes tend to descend incompletely.
The anatomy of the adult testis reflects its embryonic 
development. The testicular arteries originate high up in the 
retroperitoneum from the abdominal aorta just below the 
renal arteries. The testicular veins drain into the renal vein 
on the left and the inferior vena cava on the right. For much 
of their course the testicular artery and vein run parallel to 
the ipsilateral ureter, for which they may be mistaken during 
retroperitoneal surgery. Lymphatic drainage also follows this 
route, such that it is the para-aortic nodes that are the drain-
ing lymph nodes, which is important in the assessment and 
staging of men with testicular cancer.
The epididymis lies on the posterior aspect of the testis 
and is palpable as a separate structure, with a head, a body 
and a tail. The seminiferous tubules enter the epididymis at 
the upper end of the epididymis (the head). From the head, 
sperm travel through the body and tail of the epididymis to 
enter the vas deferens at the lower pole of the testis. The vas 
curves up behind the testis and can be felt above the testis as 
a firm tubular structure entering the external inguinal ring. 
In the inguinal canal, the vas deferens is invested by the cre -
masteric muscle along with the other components of the sper-
matic cord.
INCOMPLETEL Y DESCENDED 
TESTIS (SEE ALSO CHAPTER 9)
Definitions
Incomplete descent of the testis occurs when the testis is 
arrested in some part of its normal path to the scrotum. An 
ectopic testis is a testis that is abnormally placed outside 
this path.
Johannes Peter Müller ,1801–1858, German physiologist and comparative anatomist, first described the paramesonephric (Müllerian) duct.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1497 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1498
Incidence
About 4% of boys are born with one or both testes incom -
pletely descended. About two-thirds of these reach the scro-
tum during the first 3 months of life, but full descent after 
that is uncommon. The incidence of testicular maldescent at 
the age of 1 year is around 1%. The condition is sometimes 
missed in the neonatal period and only discovered later in 
life. In a few cases, the presence of a hernia, testicular pain or 
acute torsion directs attention to the abnormality. In 10% of 
unilateral cases there is a family history.
Pathology
The condition is more common on the right and is bilateral 
in 20% of cases. In adults, secondary sexual characteristics are 
typically normal.
The testis may be:
 ● intra-abdominal; usually lying extraperitoneally just inside 
the internal inguinal ring;
 ● intracanalicular; it may or may not be palpable (Figure 
80.1);
 ● extracanalicular; usually at the scrotal neck;
 ● ectopic; an ectopic testis has taken a non-standard path 
through the body and has ended up in an unusual loca -
tion, the commonest site being the superficial inguinal 
pouch, which lies just inferior and medial to the super -
ficial inguinal ring. Other rarer ectopic sites include the 
femoral triangle, the root of the penis and perineum.
Incompletely descended testes are often macroscopically 
normal in early childhood, but by puberty the testis is typ-
ically smaller compared with its intrascrotal counterpart. 
Microscopic changes are apparent from 1–2 years including 
loss of Leydig cells, degeneration of Sertoli cells and decreased 
spermatogenesis. The higher the testis, the greater the degree 
of histological change.
Consequences
Infertility
Impaired fertility is a well-recognised consequence of testicu-
lar maldescent, with paternity rates around two-thirds of nor-
mal for unilateral undescended testes and one-third of normal 
for bilateral undescended testes. Although there has been a 
recent tendency to undertake surgical orchidopexy earlier in 
life, evidence to show that this benefits fertility is currently 
lacking.
Malignancy
The cancer risk for adults after cryptorchidism in childhood 
is 5–10 times greater than normal. The commonest cancer is 
a seminoma, and as with fertility , it is unclear whether early 
orchidopexy reduces the risk of malignancy. However, if a tes-
ticular tumour does develop, it is undoubtedly easier to iden -
tify in a testis that is within the scrotum.
Hernia
Around 90% of boys with an undescended testis have a pat -
ent processus vaginalis although the incidence of a clinically 
apparent hernia is much lower.
Testicular torsion
The undescended testis is more prone to testicular torsion, 
largely as a consequence of a developmental abnormality 
between the testis and its mesentery.
Franz von Leydig , 1821–1908, German zoologist and comparative anatomist, discovered the Leydig cells.
Enrico Sertoli , 1842–1910, Italian physiologist, discovered the Sertoli cells of the testis.
Figure 80.1 Undescended testes in a boy aged 12 years. Note the 
bilateral undescended testes with the underdeveloped scrotum. In 
cases of retractile testis, the scrotum is relatively well developed.
Clinical features
When assessing a child with suspected testicular maldesecent, 
it is helpful to have the boy as relaxed as possible and for him 
to be examined in a warm room, usually in a supine position. 
The important differential diagnosis is the so called ‘retrac -
tile testis’. During childhood the testes are mobile and the 
cremasteric reflex is active so that in some boys, any stimu-
lation of the skin of the scrotum or thigh causes the testis to 
ascend and to temporarily disappear into the inguinal canal. 
When the cremaster relaxes, the testis reappears only to van-
ish when the scrotal skin is touched again.
In comparison to a true undescended testis, the scrotum 
of a boy with such a retractile testis is normal as opposed to 
Summary box 80.1
Undescended testis
●● Testes that are absent from the scrotum after 3 months of age 
are unlikely to descend
●● Histological changes in the testis can be seen from 1 year of 
age
●● An incompletely descended testis tends to atrophy as puberty 
approaches
●● Boys with undescended testes are at greater risk of infertility, 
testicular malignancy, hernia and testicular torsion
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1498 25/10/2017   10:34Injuries to the t estis 1499
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
underdeveloped, while a retractile testis can be gently milked 
from its position in the inguinal region to the bottom of the 
scrotum. A diagnosis of true incomplete descent should be 
made only if this is not possible.
When the testis is impalpable, ultrasound may be helpful 
in identifying the intracanalicular testis, while laparoscopy 
may be needed to differentiate between the abdominal testis 
and a truly absent testis.
Failure to bring the testis down
Sometimes for a high undescended testis a two-stage surgical 
procedure is necessary. The testis is mobilised as far as possible 
and anchored with a suture and the mobilisation is completed 
6 months later. An alternative approach involves initial divi-
sion of the gonadal artery (which is usually ‘tighter’ than the 
vas deferens) such that the testis becomes dependent for its 
blood supply upon the cremasteric artery. The second stage 
procedure involves conventional orchidopexy. Orchidectomy 
should be considered if the incompletely descended testis is 
atrophic, particularly in the postpubertal boy if the other tes-
tis is normal.
INJURIES TO THE TESTIS
The testis can be damaged either by blunt or by penetrating 
trauma. Injuries can range from simple bruising, through sig -
nificant intratesticular haematomas to rupture of the tunica 
albuginea, with very significant collections of blood within the 
tunica vaginalis (haematocoele) (Figure 80.3). If the tunica 
ruptures, the blood can track into the groin and perineum.
Careful clinical assessment, together with the use of ultra-
sound examination, is central to the management of men 
with a scrotal injury. Ultrasound has excellent sensitivity 
and specificity in the diagnosis of testicular rupture. If there 
is testicular rupture, there is good evidence that early surgi -
cal exploration, with debridement and repair of the tunica 
albuginea, is more likely to preserve useful testicular function. 
Scrotal wall haematomas and injuries without rupture can 
usually be treated conservatively.
Surgical treatment
Orchidopexy
Orchidopexy is usually performed before the boy reaches 12 
months of age in an attempt to prevent the consequences 
described earlier. The testis and spermatic cord are mobilised 
and the testis is repositioned in the scrotum. The operation 
is performed through a short incision over the deep inguinal 
ring. The inguinal canal is exposed by division of the external 
oblique aponeurosis in the direction of its fibres.
Three manoeuvres help to gain the length required to 
bring the testis down into the bottom of the scrotum. First, 
the patent processus vaginalis should be indentified, sepa-
rated and ligated. Second, the coverings of the spermatic cord 
(including the cremasteric muscle) should be divided and 
third, lateral fibrous bands just inside the internal inguinal 
ring should be divided. Although these techniques are usu-
ally effective, the tiny vas and testicular vessels are vulnerable 
to injury. The empty hemiscrotum is stretched with a finger 
passed into it through the inguinal incision to give enough 
room for the testis, which is placed in a pouch constructed 
between the dartos muscle and the skin (Figure 80.2).
Summary box 80.2
Retractile testis
●● Retractile testes should be differentiated from true 
undescended testes
●● This is most easily done with the child relaxed in a warm room
●● Retractile testes are more common than true undescended 
testes
●● Retractile testes require no treatment
Summary box 80.3
Scrotal trauma
●● In cases of scrotal trauma, surgical exploration is indicated 
when there is testicular rupture or when there is a rapidly 
expanding scrotal haematoma
●● Ultrasound is invaluable in the assessment of the injury
(a)
(b)
(c) (d)
Figure 80.2 The testis is mobilised and retained in a pouch con -
structed between the dartos muscle and skin.
Figure 80.3 Longitudinal scan of a testicle with a haematocoele (H) 
at the lower pole.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1499 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1500
ABSENT TESTIS
‘Vanishing’ testis describes a condition in which a testis 
develops but disappears before birth. The most likely cause 
for this is prenatal torsion. True agenesis of the testis is rarer. 
Laparoscopy is useful in distinguishing these causes of clini -
cally absent testis from intra-abdominal maldescent.
TORSION OF THE TESTIS
Pathophysiology
Testicular torsion is a condition whereby the testicle twists in 
such a way that its blood supply becomes compromised. If left 
untreated the blood flow to the testicle ceases and the testicle 
dies. Testicular torsion is therefore a surgical emergency and 
the earlier the surgery to untwist the testis can be undertaken 
the better the outcome.
Torsion of the testis is uncommon because the normal tes-
tis is anchored and cannot rotate. For torsion to occur one of 
several abnormalities must be present:
 ● High investment of the tunica vaginalis causes the testis 
to hang within the tunica like a clapper in a bell (Figure 
80.4). This is the most common cause in adolescents and 
is typically a bilateral abnormality.
 ● Inversion of the testis. The testis is rotated so that it lies 
transversely or upside down.
 ● Separation of the epididymis from the body of the testis 
permits torsion of the testis on the pedicle that connects 
the testis with the epididymis (Figure 80.5).
Normally, when there is a contraction of the abdominal 
muscles, the cremaster contracts as well. In the presence of 
one of the abnormalities described above, the spiral attach -
ment of the cremaster favours rotation of the testis around the 
vertical axis. Sudden contraction of the cremasteric muscle, 
which may be a response to mechanical, sexual or thermic 
stimulation, may cause a rotational effect on the testis as it 
is pulled upward. Accordingly, straining on stool, lifting of a 
heavy weight, sexual activity and sport can all precipitate an 
episode.
The two main factors that determine the damage to the 
testis are the extent of the twist and the duration of the epi -
sode. T wists of 720° cause more rapid ischaemia than twists of 
360° or less, while if the testis can be untwisted within 6 hours 
of the torsion taking place there is nearly a 100% chance of 
testicular salvage compared with a 20% salvage rate if the sur-
gery is delayed for 24 hours.
Occasionally the testis untwists spontaneously without 
the need for surgical treatment and such episodes of inter -
mittent testicular torsion should be considered as a cause of 
intermittent testicular pain in adolescents.
Clinical features
Testicular torsion is most common between 10 and 25 years 
of age, although a few cases occur outside this age range. 
Typically there is sudden agonising pain in the groin and 
the lower abdomen and the patient feels nauseated and may 
vomit. Torsion of a fully descended testis is usually easily rec-
ognised. The scrotum is swollen and tender, while the skin is 
usually not erythematous initially (although it may become 
so with a prolonged history) and the patient is apyrexial. The 
testis itself is swollen and tender and seems high within the 
scrotum, while the tender twisted cord can often be palpated 
above it. The cremasteric reflex is lost.
Differential diagnosis
Redness of the skin and a mild pyrexia may result in the con-
dition being confused with epididymo-orchitis in the older 
patient; however, in epididymo-orchitis there will usually be 
dysuria associated with the accompanying urinary infection. 
Elevation of the testis reduces the pain in epididymo-orchitis 
while it makes it worse in torsion.
Torsion of a testicular appendage cannot always be dis -
tinguished with certainty from testicular torsion. The most 
common structure to twist is the appendix of the testis (the 
pedunculated hydatid of Morgagni). The twisted testicular 
appendages can sometimes be visible through the scrotal wall 
as a small dark spot. If the diagnosis is made clinically, then 
conservative management is possible, but if in doubt then 
(a) (b)
Figure 80.4 Testicular torsion: (a) normal attachment; (b) an abnor-
mally high attachment of the tunica vaginalis predisposes to torsion 
– the ‘bell-clapper’.
Figure 80.5 Testicular torsion. Separation of the testis from the epi-
didymis – torsion about the pedicle between them.
Giovanni Battista Morgagni , 1682–1771, Professor of Anatomy at the University of Padua, is associated with a number of eponymous structures including the 
aortic sinus, the appendix testis, the anal columns and the sternocostal triangles. He is regarded as the ‘Father of Morbid Anatomy’.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1500 25/10/2017   10:34Varicocoele 1501
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
surgical exploration should be undertaken with ligation and 
amputation of the twisted appendage.
In mumps orchitis, the cord is not particularly thickened 
and the condition is often bilateral.
Idiopathic scrotal oedema is an oddity that occurs between 
the age of 4 and 12 years and must be differentiated from tor-
sion. The scrotum is very swollen but there is little pain or 
tenderness. The swelling is usually bilateral and may extend 
into the perineum, groin and penis. It is thought to be an 
allergic phenomenon and occasionally there is eosinophilia. 
The swelling subsides after a day or so but may recur (Figure 
80.6).
Very occasionally, torsion can be convincingly mimicked 
by a small tense strangulated inguinal hernia compressing the 
cord and causing compression of the pampiniform plexus.
Management
The management of the case should be determined primarily 
on clinical grounds. While Doppler ultrasound scanning can 
confirm the absence of the blood supply to the affected testis, 
false-positive results can be seen so it is not routinely recom-
mended. If there is any doubt as to the diagnosis, then urgent 
scrotal exploration is indicated.
Exploration for torsion should be performed through a 
transverse scrotal incision. If the testis is viable when the 
cord is untwisted, it should be prevented from twisting again 
by fixation with three non-absorbable sutures between the 
tunica albuginea of the testis and the scrotal raphe. The use of 
absorbable sutures risks the possibility of recurrent torsion at 
some time in the future. The other testis should also be fixed 
because the anatomical predisposition is likely to be bilat -
eral. If there is clinical doubt as to testicular viability after 
detorsion of the testis, then it should be wrapped in a warm 
swab and observed over a few minutes. If a small incision in 
the tunica albuginea demonstrates bright red arterial bleed -
ing then the testis may survive. An infarcted testis should be 
removed – the patient can be counselled later about a pros-
thetic replacement.
In cases where there is a history of pain for several days, 
the affected testis will be dead. It is not possible to recover 
such a testis and although little is gained (other than pain 
relief) by immediate exploration, it is necessary to fix the con-
tralateral testis.
Figure 80.6 Idiopathic oedema of the scrotum.
Summary box 80.4
Testicular torsion
●● If the diagnosis of testicular torsion is possible, then surgical 
exploration is indicated
●● Prompt exploration, untwisting and fixation is the only way to 
save the torted testis
●● The patient should be counselled and consented for 
orchidectomy before exploration
●● The anatomical abnormality is bilateral and the contralateral 
testis should also be fixed
●● Three non-absorbable sutures should be used for the fixation 
of each testis
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
VARICOCOELE
A varicocoele is a varicose dilatation of the veins draining 
the testis.
Surgical anatomy
The veins draining the testis and the epididymis form the 
pampiniform plexus. The veins gradually join each other as 
they traverse the inguinal canal and at, or near, the inguinal 
ring, there are only one or two testicular veins, which pass 
upwards within the retroperitoneum. The left testicular vein 
empties into the left renal vein while the right empties into 
the inferior vena cava below the right renal vein. The tes -
ticular veins usually have valves near their terminations, but 
these are sometimes absent. There is an alternative (collat-
eral) venous return from the testes through the cremasteric 
veins, which drain mainly into the inferior epigastric veins.
Aetiology
Varicocoeles are common, affecting perhaps 15–20% of adult 
males and 90% are left sided, reflecting the proximal venous 
anatomy. They are unusual in boys and typically develop 
during late childhood and adolescence. In some cases, the 
dilated vessels are cremasteric veins and not part of the pam-
piniform plexus. The usual cause is absence or incompetence 
of valves in the proximal testicular vein. While most varico -
coeles are idiopathic, obstruction of the left testicular vein by 
a renal tumour or nephrectomy is a cause of varicocoele in 
later life; characteristically, in such cases the varicocoele does 
not decompress in the supine position.
Clinical features
While most varicocoeles are asymptomatic, those that 
are symptomatic tend to present in adolescence or early 
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1501 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1502
adulthood, when there may be an annoying dragging dis -
comfort that is worse on standing at the end of the day . This 
presumably reflects distension of the testicular veins. When 
examined in the erect position, the scrotum on the affected 
side hangs lower than normal (Figure 80.7); on palpation, 
with the patient standing, the varicose plexus feels like a bag 
of worms. There may be a cough impulse. If the patient lies 
down the veins empty by gravity and this provides an oppor -
tunity to ensure that the underlying testis is normal to palpa-
tion. In long-standing cases the affected testis is smaller and 
softer than its fellow, owing to a minor degree of atrophy.
Ultrasonography can be helpful in the diagnosis of small 
varicocoeles (Figure 80.8), and in older men with an appar -
ently recent onset of varicocoele, ultrasonography of the kid-
neys is important in excluding a left renal tumour.
Grading of the varicocoele is possible, with a Grade I var-
icocoele being impalpable (i.e. observed only on ultrasound), 
Grade II being palpable and Grade III being visible.
Varicocoele and spermatogenesis
Of all the possible causes of primary infertility, oligozoosper -
mia (reduced numbers of sperm in the ejaculate) is one of 
the most difficult to treat. Because varicocoeles are relatively 
common, some men with oligozoospermia will have a 
varicocoele, and it is tempting to blame this for the infertility. 
Certainly the varicocoele will tend to ‘warm’ the testis, which 
is usually around 2.5ºC below rectal temperature, and there 
is conflicting evidence regarding the effect of this tempera -
ture difference upon spermatogenesis. Unfortunately, there is 
little evidence that varicocoelectomy improves semen quality 
or the rate of conception.
Treatment
Operation is not indicated for an asymptomatic varicocoele. 
When the discomfort is significant, then percutaneous embo-
lisation of the gonadal veins is the usual first-line interven-
tion. If this is not possible, or if the varicocoele recurs (as it 
does in around 20% after embolisation), then surgical ligation 
of the testicular veins is the appropriate treatment, although 
recurrence can occur even after such surgery.
Figure 80.7 Large varicocoele in a pendulous scrotum. Note the left 
inguinal hernia.
Figure 80.8 Ultrasound of a varicocoele. Note the dilated veins at 
the lower pole of the testis.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 80.9 (a) V aginal hydr ocoele (very common); (b) ‘infantile’ 
hydrocoele; (c) congenital hydrocoele; (d) hydrocoele of the cord.
HYDROCOELE
A hydrocoele is an abnormal collection of serous fluid in a 
part of the processus vaginalis, usually the tunica vaginalis. 
Acquired hydrocoeles are primary or idiopathic, or secondary 
to epididymal or testicular disease.
Aetiology
A hydrocoele can be produced in four different ways (Figure 
80.9):
1 By connection with the peritoneal cavity via a patent pro-
cessus vaginalis (congenital).
2 By excessive production of fluid within the sac, e.g. a sec-
ondary hydrocoele.
Summary box 80.5
Varicocoele
●● Varicocoele is a common condition and 90% are left sided
●● Development of a left-sided varicocoele in later life may 
indicate the presence of a renal tumour
●● They are usually asymptomatic and as such rarely need 
treatment
●● First-line treatment is embolisation in symptomatic cases
●● Varicocoeles often recur, even after surgical treatment
●● The association of varicocoeles with subfertility is 
controversial
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1502 25/10/2017   10:34Hydrocoele 1503
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
3 By defective absorption of fluid; this appears to be the 
explanation for most primary hydrocoeles, although the 
reason why the fluid is not absorbed is obscure. They are 
sometimes called vaginal hydrocoeles.
4 By interference with the lymphatic drainage of scrotal 
structures.
A secondary hydrocoele is most frequently associated 
with acute or chronic epididymo-orchitis. It is also seen 
with torsion of the testis and with some testicular tumours. 
A secondary hydrocoele is usually lax and is typically small: 
the underlying testis is usually palpable. If a tumour is sus -
pected, the hydrocoele should not be punctured for fear of 
needle-track implantation of malignant cells. A secondary 
hydrocoele subsides when the primary lesion resolves.
Clinical features
Examination of a scrotal swelling should be undertaken in 
both the upright and supine position. The examiner should 
ask themselves a series of questions. First, is it possible to get 
above the swelling to palpate a normal cord? For instance, if it 
is not possible to achieve this, the swelling may represent an 
inguinal hernia that has entered the scrotum. Second, is the 
swelling primarily testicular or epididymal or is it enclosing 
both of those structures? Thirdly, does the swelling transillu-
minate? In almost all cases of scrotal swelling an ultrasound is 
a useful adjunct, both in clarifying the nature of the swelling 
and in determining whether the testis itself is diseased.
A hydrocoele is a swelling that encloses the testis and epi-
didymis such that they may be impalpable, and it is possible 
to get ‘above’ it to palpate a normal spermatic cord (Figure 
80.10). They are typically translucent.
A primary hydrocoele is seen most commonly in mid-
dle and later life, but can also occur in older children. The 
condition is particularly common in hot countries. Because 
the swelling is usually painless it may reach a prodigious size 
before the patient presents for treatment. Be wary of an acute 
hydrocoele in a young man since there may be a testicular 
tumour.
In congenital hydrocoele, the processus vaginalis is patent 
and connects with the peritoneal cavity. The communication 
is usually too small to allow herniation of intra-abdominal 
contents. Pressure on the hydrocoele does not always empty it 
but the hydrocoele fluid may drain into the peritoneal cavity 
when the child is lying down; thus, the hydrocoele may be 
intermittent. Ascites should be checked for if the swellings 
are bilateral.
An encysted hydrocoele of the cord is a smooth oval 
swelling that lies above the testis near the spermatic cord, 
which is liable to be mistaken for an inguinal hernia. The 
swelling moves downwards and becomes less mobile if the tes-
tis is pulled gently downwards.
Hydrocoele of the canal of Nuck is a similar condition in 
females. The cyst lies in relation to the round ligament and is 
always at least partially within the inguinal canal.
Treatment
Congenital hydrocoeles are treated by herniotomy if they do 
not resolve spontaneously (see Chapter 9).
Small acquired hydrocoeles do not need treatment. If 
they are sizeable and bothersome for the patient, then surgi -
cal treatment is indicated. Established acquired hydrocoeles 
often have thick walls. There are three main surgical tech -
niques for hydrocoeles;
 ● Plication. Lord’s operation is suitable when the sac is rea-
sonably thin-walled (Figure 80.11). There is minimal dis-
section and the risk of haematoma is reduced.
 ● Eversion. The sac is opened and everted behind the tes -
tis, with placement of the testis in a pouch prepared by 
dissection in the fascial planes of the scrotum (Jaboulay’s 
procedure) (Figure 80.12).
Figure 80.10 A right-sided hydrocoele. 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 79.10Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Figure 80.11 Lord’s operation. A series of interrupted absorbable 
sutures is used to plicate the redundant tunica vaginalis. When these 
are tied, the tunica bunches at its attachment to the testis.
Anton Nuck , 1650–1692, Professor of Anatomy and Medicine, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Peter Herent Lord , contemporary, formerly surgeon, Wycombe General Hospital, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, UK.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1503 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1504
 ● Excision. Unless great care is taken to stop bleeding after 
excision of the wall, haemorrhage from the cut edge is lia-
ble to cause a large scrotal haematoma. This approach is 
not recommended.
Aspiration of the hydrocoele fluid is simple, but the fluid 
always reaccumulates within a week or so. It may be suitable 
for men who are unfit for scrotal surgery, although hydrocoele 
surgery can be undertaken under local anaesthetic. Aspiration 
can result in bleeding into the hydrocoele sac and haema-
tocoele formation. Injection of a sclerosant, such as tetracy -
cline, is effective but painful.
are dense adhesions between the scrotum and its contents. 
Filarial elephantiasis supervenes in a small number of cases. 
Treatment is by rest and aspiration. The more usual chronic 
cases are treated by excision of the sac.
CYSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE 
EPIDIDYMIS
There are several types of cyst associated with the epididymis, 
including epididymal cysts and spermatocoeles.
Epididymal cysts
These are filled with a crystal-clear fluid. They are very com -
mon, usually multiple and vary in size at presentation. They 
represent cystic degeneration of the epididymis. Cysts of the 
epididymis are usually found in middle age and are often bilat-
eral. The clusters of tense cysts feel like a tiny bunches of 
grapes that lie posterior to, and quite separate from, the testis. 
They should transilluminate brilliantly. The diagnosis can by 
confirmed by ultrasound (Figure 80.13).
Aspiration is useless because the cysts are usually multi-
locular. If they are causing discomfort they should be excised. 
While single large cysts can be excised separately, recurrent 
or multilocular cysts usually require partial or total epididy-
mectomy. Excision should be expected to interfere with the 
transportation of sperm from the testis on that side and young 
men should be counselled regarding this.
Spermatocoele
This is a unilocular retention cyst derived from some por -
tion of the sperm-conducting mechanism of the epididymis. 
A spermatocoele typically lies in the epididymal head above 
Figure 80.12 Jaboulay’s procedure. The hydrocoele sac is everted 
and anchored with sutures.
Mathieu Jaboulay , 1860–1913, Professor of Surgery, Lyons, France.
Edward Gibbon , 1737–1794, the author of ‘The decline and fall of the Roman empire’, was greatly embarrassed by a large hydrocoele. The second time that it was 
tapped it became infected, and Gibbon died a few days later. The hydrocoele was associated with a large scrotal hernia, which had probably been punctured.
Otto Eduard Heinrich Wucherer , 1820–1873, German physician who practised in Brazil.
Joseph Bancroft , 1836–1894, English physician working in Australia.
Filarial hydrocoeles and chylocoeles
Filarial hydrocoeles and chylocoeles account for up to 80% 
of hydrocoeles in tropical countries, where the parasite 
Wuchereria bancrofti is endemic. Filarial hydrocoeles follow 
repeated attacks of filarial epididymo-orchitis. They vary in 
size and may develop slowly or very rapidly. Occasionally, the 
fluid contains liquid fat, which is rich in cholesterol. This is 
caused by rupture of a lymphatic varix with discharge of chyle 
into the hydrocoele. In long-standing chylocoeles, there 
Summary box 80.6
Hydrocoele
●● A hydrocoele is a collection of fluid within the tunica vaginalis
●● Primary hydrocoeles surround the testis and transilluminate 
brightly
●● Ultrasound examination is valuable, especially when the testis 
and epididymis are impalpable
●● Hydrocoeles can be treated conservatively unless they are 
large and symptomatic
●● Surgery is the mainstay of treatment
●● Testicular malignancy is an uncommon cause of hydrocoele 
that can be excluded by ultrasound examination
Figure 80.13 Ultrasound of an epididymal cyst.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1504 25/10/2017   10:34Epididymo-orchitis 1505
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
and behind the upper pole of the testis. It is usually softer 
and laxer than other cystic lesions in the scrotum but, like 
them, it transilluminates. The fluid contains spermatozoa and 
resembles barley water in appearance. Spermatocoeles are 
usually small and unobtrusive. Small spermatocoeles can be 
ignored. Larger ones should be excised.
Investigation should include a urethral swab, a urine spec-
imen for culture, nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) 
of either a urine specimen or a urethral swab and scrotal ultra-
sound. Urinalysis will usually show leukocytes and may show 
a formal urinary tract infection. NAA T is a sensitive way of 
identifying both gonoccal and chlamydial urethritis. Ultra -
sound is useful in the initial assessment of epididymitis and 
will identify abscess formation.
In adolescents, the differential diagnosis is testicular tor -
sion and if there is any clinical doubt as to the diagnosis then 
testicular exploration should always be performed.
Treatment
Either doxycycline (100–200 mg daily) or a quinolone should 
be the initial treatment in young men. There should be con -
tact tracing of the partner and treatment if necessary. Antibi-
otic treatment should continue for at least 2 weeks.
In older men, quinolones are the usual initial treatment, 
but if there is evidence of systemic sepsis, then intravenous 
antibiotics directed at urinary pathogens may be valuable. 
If an organism is isolated from the urine, this simplifies the 
choice of antibiotic.
All patients should drink plenty of fluid. Local measures 
including scrotal support and analgesia are helpful. Antibiotic 
treatment should continue for at least 2 weeks or until the 
inflammation has subsided. If suppuration occurs, drainage is 
necessary.
Chronic disease
Chronic non-tuberculous epididymitis usually follows the fail-
ure of resolution of an acute episode of epididymitis. Patients 
typically complain of intermittent episo des of discomfort 
and the epididymis feels thickened and tender. Treatment 
involves use of antibiotics (usually quinolones or doxycy-
cline) and anti-inflammatory agents for 4–6 weeks. Epidid -
ymectomy or orchidectomy can be considered if there is no 
resolution, although some patients continue to suffer from 
pain despite such surgery.
Summary box 80.7
Cysts associated with the epididymis
●● Lie posterior to and separate from the testis and they 
transilluminate
●● Diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasound examination
●● Can be treated conservatively unless they are large or 
uncomfortable
EPIDIDYMO-ORCHITIS
Inflammation confined to the epididymis is epididymitis; 
infection spreading to the testis is epididymo-orchitis.
Pathophysiology
Infection reaches the epididymis via the vas from a primary 
infection of the urethra, prostate or seminal vesicles. A gen -
eral rule is that epididymitis arises in sexually active young 
men from a sexually transmitted genital infection, while in 
older men it more usually arises from a urinary infection or 
may be secondary to an indwelling urethral catheter.
In young sexually active men, the most common cause 
of epididymitis is now Chlamydia trachomatis, but gonococ-
cal epididymitis is still occasionally seen. In older men with 
bladder outflow obstruction, epididymitis may result from a 
urinary infection – it is proposed that a high pressure in the 
prostatic urethra might cause reflux of infected urine up the 
vasa. Blood-borne infections of the epididymis are less com -
mon but may be suspected when there is epididymal infection 
without evidence of urinary infection; it is presumably the 
only possible mechanism in men who have previously under-
gone a vasectomy. Acute epididymo-orchitis can follow any 
form of urethral instrumentation and it is particularly com -
mon when an indwelling catheter is associated with infection 
of the prostate.
Infection usually starts in the tail of the epididymis and 
spreads to the rest of the epididymis and occasionally to the 
testis. Complications include abscess formation, testicular 
infarction, testicular atrophy, chronic induration and inflam-
mation and infertility.
Clinical features
While there may be initial symptoms of a urinary or a genital 
infection, such symptoms are not always seen. The develop-
ment of an ache in the groin and a fever can herald the onset 
of epididymitis. The epididymis and testis swell and become 
painful. The scrotal wall, at first red, oedematous and shiny, 
may become adherent to the epididymis.
Tuberculous epididymo-orchitis
Chronic tuberculous epididymo-orchitis usually begins 
insidiously. The frequency with which the lower pole of 
the epididymis is involved first indicates that the infection 
is usually retrograde from a tuberculous focus in the seminal 
vesicles.
Summary box 80.8
Acute epididymo-orchitis
●● In young men usually arises secondary to a sexually 
transmitted genital infection
●● In older men usually arises secondary to urinary infection
●● May be a complication of catheterisation or instrumentation of 
the urinary tract
●● May need aggressive treatment with parenteral antibiotics
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1505 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1506
Clinical features
Typically, there is a firm, uncomfortable discrete swelling of 
the lower pole of the epididymis. The disease progresses until 
the whole epididymis is firm and craggy behind a normal-
feeling testis. There is a lax secondary hydrocoele in 30% of 
cases, and a characteristic beading of the vas may be apparent 
as a result of subepithelial tubercles. The seminal vesicles feel 
indurated and swollen. In neglected cases, a tuberculous ‘cold’ 
abscess forms, which may discharge. The body of the testis 
may be uninvolved for years but the contralateral epididymis 
often becomes diseased. In two-thirds of cases there is 
evidence of renal tuberculosis or previous disease. Otherwise, 
patients typically appear healthy.
The urine and semen should be examined repeatedly for 
tubercle bacilli in all patients with chronic epididymo-orchitis. 
A chest radiograph should be performed, as should imaging 
of the upper urinary tract. Ultrasound will demonstrate a 
thickened epididymis.
Treatment
Secondary tuberculous epididymitis may resolve when the 
primary focus is treated. Treatment with antituberculous 
drugs is less effective in genital tuberculosis than in urinary 
tuberculosis. If resolution does not occur within 2 months, 
epididymectomy or orchidectomy is advisable. A course of 
antituberculous chemotherapy should be completed even if 
there is no evidence of disease elsewhere.
ORCHITIS
Mumps orchitis, which is the most common form of orchitis, 
develops in 20–30% of postpubertal patients with a mumps 
virus infection and it usually develops as the parotid swelling 
is waning. Evidence of IgM antibodies in the serum supports 
the diagnosis. The main complication is testicular atrophy , 
which may cause infertility if the condition is bilateral. Partial 
testicular atrophy is associated with persistent testicular pain.
Syphilitic orchitis is now uncommon. It can cause bilateral 
orchitis (which is a feature of congenital syphilis), interstitial 
fibrosis, which causes painless destruction of the testis, or, 
rarely, it may lead to a gumma of the testis, which presents as a 
unilateral slowly growing painless swelling. The latter presen-
tation may be difficult to distinguish from a neoplasm without 
surgical exploration. Diagnosis is confirmed by serology.
TUMOURS OF THE TESTES
Testicular cancer represents around 1–1.5% of male neoplasms 
and there is clear evidence of an increased incidence of these 
tumours in the past 30 years. The vast majority are germ cell 
tumours and the peak incidence of seminomas is in the 4th 
decade of life, with the non-seminomatous germ cell tumours 
(NSGCT) being more common in the 3rd decade of life. They 
are the commonest form of tumour in young men. Risk factors 
include a history of testicular maldescent, a history of a contra-
lateral testicular tumour and Klinefelter’s syndrome.
Classification and pathology
Tumours of the testis are classified according to their predom-
inant cellular type:
 ● germ cell tumours (90–95%) (these include seminoma, 
embryonal cell carcinoma, yolk sac tumour, teratoma, and 
choriocarcinoma);
 ● interstitial tumours  (1–2%) (these include Leydig cell 
tumours);
 ● lymphoma (3–7%);
 ● other tumours (1–2%).
Seminoma
A seminoma typically has a cut surface that is homogeneous 
and pinkish cream in colour. It appears to compress neigh -
bouring testicular tissue (Figure 80.14). It consists of oval 
cells with clear cytoplasm and large, rounded nuclei with 
prominent acidophilic nucleoli. Sheets of cells resembling 
spermatocytes are separated by a fine fibrous stroma. Active 
lymphocytic infiltration of the tumour suggests a good host 
response and a better prognosis. There are two histological 
variants, one with a more anaplastic appearance and another 
that is characterised by cells that closely resemble different 
phases of maturing spermatogonia (spermatocytic seminoma).
Seminomas metastasise mainly via the lymphatics (Figure 
80.15) and haematogenous spread is uncommon. The lym -
phatic drainage of the testes is to the para-aortic lymph nodes 
near the origin of the gonadal vessels. The contralateral 
para-aortic lymph nodes are sometimes involved by tumour 
spread, but the inguinal lymph nodes are affected only if the 
scrotal skin is involved.
Non-seminomatous germ cell tumours
These tumours may be tiny but can reach the size of a coco-
nut. The smaller tumours may not even distort the tunica 
albuginea (Figure 80.16). The usual type of teratoma is yel -
lowish in colour with cystic spaces containing gelatinous fluid 
(Figure 80.17). There are a number of histological types of 
NSGCT, which may coexist within a single tumour:
 ● embryonal carcinoma: highly malignant tumours that 
occasionally invade cord structures;
 ● yolk sac tumour: tumours with this component secrete 
alpha fetoprotein (AFP);
Figure 80.14  Seminoma 
of the testis.
Harry Fitch Klinefelter, Jr. , 1912–1990, American rheumatologist and endocrinologist.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1506 25/10/2017   10:34Tumours of the testes 1507
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
 ● choriocarcinoma: often produces human chorionic 
gonadotrophin (hCG). This is a highly malignant tumour 
that metastasises early via both the lymphatics and the 
bloodstream;
 ● teratoma: these tumours contain more than one cell 
type, with components derived from ectoderm, endoderm 
and mesoderm. Tumours may range from ‘mature’ with 
well-differentiated tissue elements, to ‘immature’ with 
undifferentiated primitive tissues. All can metastasise.
Interstitial cell tumours
Interstitial cell tumours arise from Leydig or Sertoli cells. A 
Leydig cell tumour masculinises; a Sertoli cell tumour fem-
inises. They are typically small well-circumscribed tumours 
with a yellow cut surface. Microscopically, the cells are usu -
ally uniform and closely packed. Approximately 10% are 
malignant.
Most prepubertal interstitial cell tumours (which account 
for around 25% of cases) produce androgens, which cause sex-
ual precocity including prominent external genitalia, supra -
pubic hair growth and a deep masculinised voice. Regression 
of the symptoms after orchidectomy may be incomplete. Most 
postpubertal interstitial cell tumours produce feminising hor-
mones, leading to gynaecomastia, erectile dysfunction, loss of 
libido and azoospermia.
Clinical features
Usually the patient presents with a painless testicular lump. 
A sensation of heaviness can occur if the testis is two or 
three times its normal size, but only a minority of patients 
experience pain. In a few cases, an episode of trauma calls 
attention to the swelling. Some cases may simulate epidid-
ymo-orchitis and, rarely, some patients present with severe 
pain and acute enlargement of the testis because of haem -
orrhage into the tumour. Such cases can occasionally mimic 
testicular torsion.
Rarely, the predominant symptoms are those of metastatic 
disease. Intra-abdominal disease may cause abdominal or lum-
bar pain and the mass may be discovered in the epigastrium. 
Lung metastases are usually silent, but they can cause chest 
pain, dyspnoea and haemoptysis in the later stages of the dis-
ease. The primary tumour may not have been noticed by the 
patient, and indeed may be so tiny that it can be detected 
only by ultrasonography (Figure 80.16).
On examination there is an intratesticular solid mass. If 
present, a lax secondary hydrocoele does not usually obscure 
the underlying tumour. The epididymis becomes more dif -
ficult to feel when it is flattened or incorporated in the 
growth. The vas is never thickened and rectal examination 
is normal. Around 5% of cases have gynaecomastia (mainly 
the NSGCT). Metastatic disease is rarely apparent clinically 
and is more usually identified by formal staging investiga-
tions. In 1–2% of cases the tumour is bilateral at the time of 
diagnosis.
Figure 80.15 Lymphatic drainage of the testes to para-aortic lymph 
nodes.
Figure 80.16 Ultrasound of a small intratesticular tumour with mini-
mal distortion of the tunica albuginea.
Figure 80.17 Teratoma of the testis – note the solid and cystic areas 
(courtesy of Dr Keith Simpson, London, UK).
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1507 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1508
Investigation and staging
The diagnosis is confirmed by ultrasound scanning of the tes-
tis (Figure 80.18), which is also able to assess the contra -
lateral testis. It is a mandatory test in all suspected cases of 
testicular tumour.
In confirmed cases, staging is an essential step in planning 
treatment. Blood is taken prior to orchidectomy to measure 
the levels of tumour markers, which are raised in around 50% 
of cases. A rise in AFP is seen in around 50–70% of NSGCTs 
and a rise in hCG is seen in 40–60% of NSGCTs and around 
30% of seminomas. When raised, these markers are used to 
monitor the response to treatment. The mean serum half-
lives of AFP and hCG are 5–7 days and 2–3 days respectively, 
and reassessment of the markers following orchidectomy can 
indicate whether all the tumour tissue has been removed.
While a chest x-ray will occasionally demonstrate the 
‘classical’ cannon ball metastases (Figure 80.19) computed 
tomography (CT) of chest, abdomen and pelvis has taken 
over as the most useful means of detecting metastatic disease 
and for monitoring the response to therapy. Such imaging is 
usually undertaken after the affected testis has been removed.
Staging of testicular tumours
While TNM staging is the most widely used system for the 
staging of testicular cancer, the older staging system of Stages 
I-IV is still considered valuable in determining the treatment 
options.
The stages are:
Stage I: Tumour is confined to the testis and epididymis.
Stage II: Nodal disease is present but is confined to nodes 
below the diaphragm.
Stage III: Nodes are present above the diaphragm.
Stage IV: Non lymphatic metastatic disease (most typically 
within the lungs).
Figure 80.18 Testicular ultrasound: the homogeneous tissue of the 
testicular teratoma on the left of the image pr oduces multiple ultra -
sound reflections.
Figure 80.19 Cannon ball metastases from carcinoma of the testis.
Treatment
Scrotal exploration and orchidectomy for 
suspected testicular tumour
The orchidectomy is undertaken via an inguinal incision. The 
spermatic cord is displayed by dividing the external oblique 
aponeurosis and a soft clamp is placed across the cord to stop 
dissemination of malignant cells as the testis is mobilised into 
the wound. Rarely, if there is doubt about the diagnosis, the 
testis should be bisected along its anterior convexity to exam-
ine its internal structure. If there is a tumour the cord should 
be double transfixed and divided at the level of the internal 
inguinal ring and the testis removed.
Management by staging and histological 
diagnosis (after orchidectomy)
The treatment of patients with germ cell tumours of the testis 
is usually successful, even in cases that are advanced at pre-
sentation. This largely reflects the excellent response of these 
tumours to platinum-based chemotherapy and (for semino -
matous tumours) to radiotherapy. Indeed in recent years the 
emphasis of clinical trials has been focused upon the identifi-
cation of those patients who do not need chemotherapy, and 
who therefore will escape the side effects of treatment.
STAGE I TUMOURS
Seminomas are radiosensitive and for many years adjuvant 
radiotherapy to the para-aortic nodes was the mainstay 
of treatment for stage I disease. However, there is also an 
Summary box 80.9
Testicular tumours
●● A solid testicular lump that cannot be felt separately from the 
testis may be a malignant tumour
●● Lymphatic spread is to the para-aortic lymph nodes
●● Ultrasound is a mandatory investigation in all cases of 
suspected testicular tumour
●● Tumour markers (AFP and hCG) should be measured prior to 
orchidectomy
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1508 25/10/2017   10:34The scrotum 1509
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
excellent response to platinum-based chemotherapy, which 
led to chemotherapy being intro duced as the primary treat -
ment for stage I seminoma. However, given that only around 
15–20% of men with stage I seminoma have subclinical met-
astatic disease, current protocols use CT and tumour mark-
er-based surveillance protocols, with chemotherapy being 
reserved for men who demonstrate relapse.
NSGCTs are not radiosensitive, but they are highly sen -
sitive to combination chemotherapy with bleomycin, etopo -
side and cis-platinum (so called BEP chemotherapy). Up to 
30% of NSGCT patients with stage I disease have subclini-
cal metastases and will relapse if surveillance alone is applied 
after orchidectomy. Accordingly, some NSGCTs with good 
prognoses can be managed by surveillance protocols (using 
regular CT scanning and tumour marker measurement), with 
the more high-risk cases receiving chemotherapy.
STAGE II–IV TUMOURS
Combination BEP chemotherapy is the mainstay of treat -
ment for stages II–IV seminoma and NSGCT. Retroperito -
neal lymph node dissection is sometimes needed in cases of 
NSGCT when retroperitoneal masses remain after chemo -
therapy (Figure 80.20). The tissue removed may contain 
only necrotic tissue, but some patients have foci of mature 
teratoma or active malignancy. The operation can be formi-
dable if the tumour mass is large, and retrograde ejaculation 
is likely unless steps are taken to preserve the sympathetic 
outflow to the bladder neck.
INTERSTITIAL TUMOURS
Most of these tumours are benign (around 80%), so conser -
vative treatment of small lesions with organ-sparing surgery 
is feasible, if the diagnosis is considered. For larger tumours, 
orchidectomy is necessary with multimodality treatment for 
those with the rare malignant forms of these tumours.
Prognosis
The prognosis of testicular tumours depends on several fac -
tors, including the histological type and the stage at presen -
tation. For seminoma, if there are no metastases, 90–95% of 
patients will be alive 5 years after diagnosis. If there are poor 
prognostic features, the survival rate drops to around 70%. For 
NSGCTs a 5-year survival rate of more than 90% is achiev -
able in patients with good prognosis tumours, while for more 
advanced tumours, the 5-year survival rate is about 60%.
Testicular tumours in children
These are usually anaplastic teratomas. They occur before the 
age of 3 years and are often rapidly fatal.
TUMOURS OF THE EPIDIDYMIS
These may be benign mesothelioma or malignant sarcoma 
or secondary carcinoma. They are extremely rare but should 
not be forgotten when the patient presents with a non-cystic 
lump in the epididymis.
THE SCROTUM
Fournier’s gangrene
Fournier’s gangrene is an uncommon and nasty condition 
(Figure 80.21) characterised by a polymicrobial infection of 
the soft tissues of the perineum, external genitalia and peri -
anal region. It is a form of necrotising fasciitis. There is rapid 
onset of gangrene leading to exposure of the scrotal contents. 
Although it can occur in conjunction with sepsis of the tes -
tis, epididymis or perianal region, an obvious cause is absent 
in over half the cases. It can arise following minor injuries 
or procedures in the perineal area, such as a bruise, scratch, 
urethral dilatation, injection of haemorrhoids or opening of a 
periurethral abscess. Many patients have concurrent illnesses 
that diminish their defences, most notably diabetes mellitus 
and alcoholism.
There is a mixed infection of aerobic and anaerobic bacte-
ria in a fulminating inflammation of the subcutaneous tissues, 
which results in an obliterative arteritis of the arterioles to the 
scrotal skin that in turn results in gangrene. The condition 
can spread rapidly to involve the fascia and skin of the penis, 
perineum and abdominal wall.
Figure 80.20 Computed tomography scan showing a large residual 
retroperitoneal mass after chemotherapy.
Summary box 80.10
Testis tumour staging and treatment
●● Tumour markers (AFP and hCG) help to make the diagnosis 
and to follow the response to treatment
●● Computed tomography scanning of chest, abdomen and 
pelvis is central to the staging of testicular tumours
●● Testicular tumours are extremely sensitive to platinum-based 
chemotherapy
●● Prognosis is excellent when the patient is treated with 
combination chemotherapy in a cancer centre
Jean Alfred Fournier , 1832–1915, syphilologist, founder of the Venereal and Dermatological Clinic, Hôpital St Louis, Paris, France.
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1509 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1510
Clinical features
There is sudden pain in the scrotum associated with pros-
tration, pallor and pyrexia. Cellulitis spreads rapidly (within 
hours) with small necrotic areas of skin which, if untreated, 
coalesce to involve the entire scrotal and penile coverings, 
which may then slough, leaving the testes exposed but 
healthy. There may be crepitus and a foul-smelling exudate. 
The patient typically becomes septic and severely unwell in a 
short period of time
Treatment
Treatment of a case of Fournier’s gangrene is a surgical emer-
gency. Initial management involves intravenous fluid resusci-
tation and early use of broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics. 
Urgent wide surgical excision of the dead and infected tissue 
is essential and the extent of the internal necrosis is typically 
much greater than the external appearances suggest, such 
that extensive debridement is often necessary. Urinary and 
faecal diversion may be necessary. Supportive care is essential, 
because the patients often become severely septic.
Early review of the wounds is helpful to confirm that all 
dead tissue has been removed, and when the infection has 
been controlled, vacuum-assisted dressing is helpful, if it is 
available. If the patient survives the acute episode, skin graft-
ing is often necessary. Despite best therapy, mortality rates as 
high as 50% are often reported.
accompanied by superadded infection and lymphangitis, 
resulting in swelling of the genital skin and skin of the lower 
limbs. In long-standing cases, the enormously swollen scro -
tum may bury the penis (Figure 80.22). Associated symp -
toms and signs include fever, epididymitis, hydrocoele and 
chyluria. The diagnosis is usually made clinically although 
immunological testing can be helpful.
Medical treatment involves the use of diethylcarbamazine 
(DEC), ivermectin and albendazole, with the exact regime 
depending upon geographical location. Surgical treatment 
is rarely helpful, although a range of procedures have been 
devised to remove redundant skin and to reconstruct the 
enlarged scrotum.
Non-filarial elephantiasis
Elephantiasis can occur in the absence of filariasis, most 
notably in sub-Saharan Africa. Non-filarial elephantiasis can 
result from fibrosis of the lymphatics caused by lymphogran-
uloma venereum, but in many cases it is thought to arise as a 
consequence of persistent contact with irritant soils.
Sebaceous cysts
Sebaceous cysts are common in the scrotal skin. They are usu-
ally small and multiple (Figure 80.23). If troublesome, then 
surgical excision is necessary.
Figure 80.21 Fournier’s gangrene with an area of necrotic skin over-
lying an area of scrotal inflammation.
Summary box 80.11
Fournier’s gangrene
●● Fournier’s gangrene requires early and aggressive treatment if 
the patient is to survive
●● Treatment involves urgent surgical debridement of necrotic 
tissue in combination with early use of intravenous broad 
spectrum antibiotics
Figure 80.22 Elephantiasis of the scr otum burying the penis (cour -
tesy of Mr S Bhattacharjee, Lucknow, India).
Filarial elephantiasis of the scrotum
Filarial elephantiasis of the scrotum is caused by obstruction 
of the pelvic lymphatics by worms, of which Wuchereria ban-
crofti accounts for 90% of cases. The condition is common 
in the tropics and is transmitted by mosquitoes. It is often 
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1510 25/10/2017   10:34Male factor infertility 1511
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Carcinoma of the scrotum
‘Chimney sweeps’ cancer’ was the first reported occupational 
cancer (described by Percival Pott in 1775). It is a rare can -
cer that has also been seen in other workers who come into 
contact with oil and coal products. Animal studies suggest 
that aromatic cyclic hydrocarbons are the aetiological factor. 
Nowadays, this tumour is rarely associated with any obvious 
aetiological factor. Unlike carcinoma of the penis, carcinoma 
of the scrotum is almost unknown in India and Asiatic 
countries.
The growth starts as a wart or ulcer (Figure 80.24) and 
as it grows it may involve the testis. The tumour should be 
excised with a margin of healthy skin. The management of 
the inguinal nodes parallels the management of penile can -
cer, and if nodal enlargement does not settle with antibiotics 
following treatment of the primary, then a bilateral groin dis-
section is indicated.
MALE FACTOR INFERTILITY
For couples of unknown fertility status, approximately 15% 
are unable to achieve a pregnancy within 1 year. The inabil-
ity to conceive may be due to female factor infertility, male 
factor infertility or a combination of these two factors and 
approximately 20% of cases of infertility are caused entirely 
by the male factor.
Aetiology
The two main causes of male factor infertility are either pri-
mary testicular causes or obstruction at the level of either the 
vas or the epididymis. A few cases reflect endocrinological 
abnormalities such as hypogonadism or hyperprolactinaemia.
Testicular causes include chromosomal problems (e.g. 
Klinefelter’s syndrome), microdeletions of the Y chromo-
some, cryptorchidism, mumps orchitis, drugs and radiation 
damage. In most cases however, the cause is unclear. In these 
cases, there may be reduced numbers of sperm in the ejaculate 
(oligozoospermia) or a complete absence of sperm in the ejac-
ulate (azoospermia).
Obstructive causes include congenital absence of the vasa 
(often in association with cystic fibrosis), surgical damage 
to the vasa and epididymitis. Azoospermia is inevitable in 
these cases.
Assessment and investigation
Given the interplay between male and female factors, the 
man should not be investigated in isolation from his female 
partner. A careful history is the mainstay of the assessment 
with a careful search for aetiological factors. Physical exam -
ination is usually normal, but occasionally the testes may 
feel small (suggestive of a testicular cause), the vasa may be 
absent, there may be evidence of endocrine abnormalities 
Figure 80.23 Sebaceous cysts of the scrotum (courtesy of Dr R 
Kaje MS, Jipmer, India).
Percival Pott , 1714–1788, surgeon, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK, described chimney sweeps’ cancer of the scrotum in 1775. In those days the chimney 
sweep’s apprentice climbed up inside the chimney.
Figure 80.24 Scrotal cancer. 
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1511 25/10/2017   10:34CHAPTER 80  Testis and scrotum
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1512
(gynaecomastia or abnormal hair distribution) or there 
may be a varicocoele. The relation of any varicocoele to 
the infertility is controversial and treatment is not usually 
indicated.
The woman should be also be assessed. It is important to 
remember that female fertility declines from the age of 35 
years in a way that is not true of men. The age of the woman is 
therefore important and the regularity of menstruation should 
be confirmed either by temperature testing or by endocrino -
logical testing.
The assessment of the man includes semen analysis, which 
should be tested within 2 hours of the semen being produced. 
T wo or three samples should be tested. The volume of the 
ejaculate, the numbers of sperm, their motility and the per -
centage of abnormal or damaged sperm are all predictive 
of male fertility. An endocrine screen should be performed 
including serum testosterone, prolactin, follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH) and luteinising hormone (LH).
Treatment
Sperm counts of less than 15 million sperm per millilitre are 
defined as oligozoospermia. If there is a reversible cause, it 
should be treated. However, in many cases, some form of 
assisted conception is required.
Azoospermia (the complete absence of sperm from the 
ejaculate) is either due to obstruction of the pathway of sper-
matozoa from the testis to the ejaculatory ducts or due to 
severe testicular failure. In the latter the serum FSH is typ -
ically raised, while in obstructive cases, the FSH is typically 
normal. If there is doubt as to the cause, then testicular biopsy 
is mandated to check for the presence of spermatogenesis, 
combined with vasography to assess the presence and location 
of any obstructive lesion. If the site of the obstruction can be 
identified it may be possible to perform a bypass operation. 
Unfortunately, even in the best hands, the results of epididy-
movasostomy are poor.
Assisted conception including in vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) has revolution-
ised the management of male factor infertility regardless of 
the cause of the problem. In ICSI, spermatozoa harvested 
from the ejaculate, by aspiration of the epididymis or even 
from testicular biopsy, can be injected in vitro into ova 
obtained from the mother. Embryos are then transferred into 
the mother’s uterus at the four- to six-cell stage.
FURTHER READING
Kaisary A V, Ballaro A, Pigott K. Lecture notes: urology, 7th edn. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2016.
McDougal WS, Wein AJ, Kavoussi LR, et al. Campbell-Walsh urology, 
11th edn. Elsevier, 2015.
Vasectomy for sterilisation
Vasectomy for sterilisation is a common and effective contra-
ceptive procedure. It should be undertaken only after the cou-
ple has been carefully counselled. Both partners need to know 
that the operation is performed to make the man permanently 
sterile. They should be warned that normal contraceptive 
precautions should continue until the success of the opera -
tion is confirmed by semen analysis performed 12–16 weeks 
after surgery. They should also be warned of the possibility of 
spontaneous recanalisation, which may restore fertility unex-
pectedly and of the possibility of chronic testicular pain that 
may occur in up to 5% of men.
Vasectomy is easily and painlessly performed under local 
anaesthetic. The vasa are delivered through tiny bilateral 
scrotal incisions or through a single midline scrotal incision. 
For medico-legal reasons it is wise to remove a segment of 
each vas to prove that it has been successfully divided. Bury -
ing the cut ends, fascial interposition or turning them back on 
themselves helps to prevent them rejoining.
Reversal of vasectomy may not restore fertility even if 
the surgery is technically successful because of damage to the 
testis secondary to the vasectomy. Although patency rates of 
80% or more are commonly reported, successful fertility rates 
are much lower, and diminish with increasing delay from the 
time of vasectomy.
Summary box 80.12
Male infertility
●● Atrophy of the testis is associated with raised levels of follicle-
stimulating hormone in the blood
●● Testicular biopsy will show whether azoospermia is a result of 
obstruction or failure of sperm production
●● If spermatozoa can be harvested they can be used in 
intracytoplasmic sperm injection with a fertility rate of 
around 30%
Summary box 80.13
Vasectomy
Counselling before vasectomy should include mention that:
●● The operation is not immediately effective and that 
contraceptive precautions should be continued until there 
have been two negative semen analyses
●● The procedure should be considered irreversible
●● Spontaneous recanalisation is rare, but can occur
●● There is a risk of chronic scrotal pain postoperatively
12_80-B&L27_Pt12_Ch80.indd   1512 25/10/2017   10:34Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
To understand:
 • The pelvic anatomy and reproductive physiology
 • The common causes of vaginal bleeding and acute pain 
in early pregnancy
 • The surgical management of acute pelvic inflammatory 
disease, endometriosis, uterovaginal prolapse, uterine 
fibroids and ovarian tumours.
Chapter
Gynaecology
81
ANATOMY
The reproductive structures of the dividing embryo differ -
entiate after the seventh week of development. The gonads, 
internal and external genitalia consititute the sex organs. In 
the female, the Müllerian ducts develop into the uterus, Fal -
lopian tubes, cervix and upper third portion of the vagina. 
The urogenital sinus in turn forms the lower two-thirds of the 
vagina.
The female external genitalia are described as the vulva, 
which is bordered by the mons veneris anteriorly and the labi-
ocrural folds posterolaterally. The opposing skin that covers 
the introitus is known as the labia majora. The labia minora 
are folds of skin that fuse anteriorly around the clitoris, which 
contains erectile tissue similar to the penis in the male. The 
posterior part of the introitus is referred to as the fourcette, 
and this stretches considerably during childbirth to allow 
delivery of the baby.
The vagina is an elastic, distensible tube, approximately 
6–7 cm in length, passing upwards and backwards from the 
introitus. The cervix protrudes into the vault of the vagina, 
dividing it into the anterior , posterior and lateral fornices. 
Pelvic structures can be felt in the posterior and lateral for -
nices on bimanual examination, as the vaginal vault sits just 
below the pouch of Douglas (the area at the bottom of the 
pelvic cavity bordered by the uterus anteriorly and rectum 
posteriorly). The urethra and bladder neck sit above the ante-
rior wall of the vagina; the perineal body and rectum behind 
the posterior wall (Figure 81.1).
The uterus consists of a body and a cervix (neck of the 
uterus), and is an upside-down pear-shaped structure that is 
flattened anteroposteriorly, giving its cavity a flat, triangular 
shape. The uterus is supported partly by ligaments attached 
to the cervix (transverse cervical, pubocervical and utero-
sacral) consisting of condensed connective tissue. The 
cervix is a canal, approximately 2–3 cm in length in the non- 
pregnant woman, connecting the external os, which can be 
seen on speculum examination, to the internal os, where 
the cervix enters the uterine cavity. The uterine cavity to 
cervical length ratio varies through hormonal influences and 
the developmental phases, with the uterine bo dy increasing 
in size as puberty progresses.
Johannes Peter Müller , 1801–1858, Professor of Anatomy and Physiology, Berlin, Germany, described the paramesonephric duct in 1825.
Gabriele Falloppio (Falloppius) , 1523–1563, Professor of Anatomy, Surgery and Botany, Padua, Italy. He carried out what may have been the first clinical trial in 
over 1,000 men of the use of condoms to prevent transmission of syphilis.
James Douglas , 1675–1742, anatomist, midwife and physician to Queen Caroline, London, UK, helped expose the fraudulent claims of Mary Toft who, in 1726, 
famously tricked a number of doctors into believing that she had given birth to rabbits.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.01Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
Ovary Cervix
Pouch of
Douglas Rectum
AnusIntroitus
Urethra
Bladder
Uterus
Figure 81.1 Female anatomy.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1513 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1514
The uterine walls are 1–2  cm thick and composed of 
smooth muscular tissue (myometrium). The uterine cavity 
is lined with endometrium, a tissue that undergoes cyclical 
changes in response to ovarian hormones (refer to Reproduc-
tive physiology below). The endometrium has both a basal 
and functional layer. The basal layer lies adjacent to the myo-
metrium and from it develops the functional layer. The basal 
layer is not shed during menstruation, unlike the functional 
layer. The functional layer is influenced by oestrogen and pro-
gesterone, which thicken it, preparing the lining for implan -
tation. This layer is completely shed during menstruation 
should conception not occur.
At the uterine fundus, on either side, are the cornua, 
connecting the uterus to the Fallopian tubes. These are thin, 
muscular tubes, approximately 10  cm in length. They are 
divided into four parts: intramural, isthmus, ampulla and the 
fimbriated opening, which picks up the oocyte following its 
release at the time of ovulation. The tubes are very narrow 
in the isthmic and intramural parts but they widen at the 
ampullary region. Each tube is contained within the upper 
part of the broad ligament, a fold of peritoneum on either 
side of the uterus, which also contains blood vessels as well 
as the round and ovarian ligaments. The fimbriated opening 
and part of the ampulla, however, are free and closely associ -
ated with the ovary on either side. The ovaries are flattened, 
ovoid structures, approximately 3–4  cm in dimension, sus -
pended from the back of the broad ligament on either side 
of the pelvic side wall by the ovarian ligament, which orig -
inates from the uterine body. The ovarian blood vessels are 
contained within the infundibulopelvic ligaments, which are 
continuations of the broad ligament to the pelvic brim on 
either side.
The cervical canal is located within the centre of the bony 
cavity of the pelvis, with the uterus pivoted around this point. 
It is more commonly angled forwards (anteverted), relative to 
the vagina. It is usually freely mobile, with filling of the blad-
der or changes in position rotating it backwards. In others, the 
uterus can be retroverted, as a variation of normal, second -
ary to either weak ligaments or because the uterus becomes 
adherent as the result of a disease process such as endome-
triosis. The uterus may also be angled forwards (anteflexed) 
relative to the cervix, or backwards (retroflexed), which can 
be determined through bimanual examination.
In the lean patient the uterine size can also be estimated 
on palpation. This is usually a subjective assessment outside of 
imaging modalities. The most common cause of an enlarged 
uterus, outside of pregnancy, is fibroids (benign tumours of 
the myometrium) growing inside or outside of the uterus. 
In the presence of fibroids, the overall size of the uterus is 
often described in terms of weeks of pregnancy if it expands 
forwards and upwards into the abdominal cavity, similar to 
increasing gestational age.
REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY
The menstrual cycle is under the control of circulating 
hormones pro duced within the hypothalamic-pituitary-  
ovarian axis and works as part of a negative feedback pathway 
(Figure 81.2). Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
is produced by the hypothalamus and, in turn, stimulates the 
pituitary to produce and secrete follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) and luteinising hormone (LH). FSH and LH act on 
the ovary (theca and granulosa cells), controlling folliculo -
genesis (oocyte development) and ovulation. The ovary is 
responsible for production of the hormones oestrogen, pro -
gesterone and androgen. These hormones have an effect 
on a number of structures within the body, principally the 
endometrium, which prepares itself to receive a fertilised egg 
(embryo) during the course of the menstrual cycle. In the first 
half (proliferative or follicular phase) of the cycle, following 
menstruation the endometrium starts to regrow or proliferate 
in response to oestrogen produced by the growing ovarian fol-
licle(s). The endometrium becomes thick and spongy during 
this phase of the cycle, and is associated with considerable 
angiogenesis.
Ovulation occurs midcycle, i.e. 14 days prior to the onset 
of the next menstrual cycle, which is equivalent to day 14 
of a 28-day cycle (day 1 defined as the first day of menstrua -
tion). After ovulation the remnant follicle is transformed into 
a corpus luteum, which is responsible for the immediate pro -
duction of progesterone. During the second half (secretory or 
luteal phase) of the cycle, the endometrium thickens further 
under the influence of progesterone in preparation to receive 
a fertilised ovum.
Fertilisation takes place within the ampullary region of 
the Fallopian tube, usually within 24 hours after ovulation. 
The fertilised egg is then transported along the Fallopian 
tube into the uterine cavity through movement of ciliae and 
tubal musculature, ideally implanting into the endometrium 
approximately 5–6 days after ovulation. Through the secre -
tion of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), the corpus 
luteum is signalled to maintain progesterone production. 
If fertilisation does not occur, or if the fertilised egg fails to 
implant, the endometrium is shed as the hCG signal is miss -
ing or lost, leading to a fall in progesterone (and oestrogen) 
levels. Menstruation, (a ‘period’) lasts on average for 4 days, 
but can range between 2 and 7 days. Typically, 40 mL of blood 
is lost during each period; heavy menstruation is described 
when more than 80 mL of blood loss occurs, which is difficult 
to assess and can be subjective. The whole process then starts 
again in the next menstrual cycle.
E2
P
FSH
Follicular phase Luteal phase
Ovulation
LH
Figure 81.2 Endocrine cycle. E2, oestrogen; FSH, follicle-stimulating 
hormone; LH, luteinising hormone; P, progesterone.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1514 25/10/2017   10:35Vaginal bleeding in the non-pr egnant state 1515
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
If fertilisation does occur, the duration of the pregnancy 
(gestational age) is traditionally calculated from the first day 
of the last menstrual perio d (LMP); however, ovulation may 
occur earlier or considerably later than day 14 and is depen -
dent on the woman’s cycle length, or the woman’s recollec-
tion of the date of the LMP may be incorrect, potentially 
making calculation of the gestational age on the basis of the 
LMP alone inaccurate. This explains the alternative practice 
of calculating gestational age using ultrasound measurements 
of fetal size, ideally during the first trimester.
VAGINAL BLEEDING IN EARL Y 
PREGNANCY
A miscarriage is defined as the loss of an intrauterine preg -
nancy at less than 24 weeks’ gestation. An early miscarriage 
refers to pregnancy loss before 12 weeks’ gestation (‘first tri-
mester’). A late miscarriage refers to pregnancy loss between 
12 and 24 weeks’ gestation (‘second trimester’). Approx-
imately 20% of pregnancies will miscarry. However, this 
number is highly influenced by maternal age and can reach 
approximately 50% in a 45-year-old woman.
A miscarriage can be diagnosed on transvaginal ultra -
sound scan in the absence of a visible fetal heartbeat with a 
crown–rump length of 7.0 mm or more, or, in the absence of a 
fetal pole in the presence of a mean gestational sac diameter 
of 25.0 mm or more.
A miscarriage often begins with painless vaginal bleeding, 
at which point it is defined as a threatened miscarriage. The 
bleeding may then become heavier with associated uterine 
cramps and an opening of the cervical os, at which point it 
is defined as an inevitable miscarriage. Blood clots and pro d-
ucts of conception (i.e. fetal and placental tissue) are passed 
through the cervical os until the uterus is emptied (defined 
as a complete miscarriage). If some of the products of con -
ception are retained within the uterus, this is referred to as 
an incomplete miscarriage. A missed miscarriage occurs when 
no fetal heart beat can be detected on ultrasound scan, but no 
clinical signs of a miscarriage as described above are present.
Management of a miscarriage ranges from expectant 
management to medical or surgical intervention. For medi-
cal management, medications such as prostaglandins can be 
given that support uterine contractions and cervical soften-
ing. Surgical management of a miscarriage (SMOM) can be 
conducted using manual vacuum aspiration under local anaes-
thesia, or surgically under general anaesthesia. The operation 
involves passing a plastic suction curette through the cervi -
cal opening and into the uterine cavity. A SMOM should be 
considered in the presence of persistent excessive bleeding, 
haemodynamic instability, evidence of infected retained tis-
sue or suspected gestational trophoblastic disease. Serious 
operative complications, which are fortunately rare, include 
uterine perforation (up to 5 in 1000 women) with the pos -
sibility of intra-abdominal trauma (e.g. bowel damage), cer -
vical tears, haemorrhage (risk of needing a blood transfusion 
is 1–2 in 1000 women) and infection (3 in 100 women). 
Approximately 5 in 100 women may require a repeat surgi -
cal evacuation. In view of the potential risk of organ damage, 
women should concomitantly be consented for a laparoscopy 
and laparotomy. Furthermore, anti-D immunoglobulin should 
be prescribed to all non-sensitised rhesus (Rh)-negative 
women undergoing surgical treatment for a miscarriage or in 
cases with excessive bleeding in conservative or medical man-
agement of miscarriage.
Vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy may also result from a 
local cause such as a cervical lesion (which may first manifest 
itself as bleeding after intercourse) or, rarely, trauma.
VAGINAL BLEEDING IN THE 
NON-PREGNANT STATE
Bleeding in the non-pregnant state may occur at the time of 
an expected menstrual period, between perio ds (intermen-
strual bleeding; IMB), after intercourse (postcoital bleeding; 
PCB) or following the menopause (postmenopausal bleeding; 
PMB). It may also occur after surgical instrumentation of the 
uterus and/or cervix, including insertion of an intrauterine 
contraceptive device (IUCD). The principal causes of uterine 
or vaginal bleeding in the non-pregnant state can be divided 
into structural and non-structural (Table 81.1) and relation-
ship to menses or coitus (Table 81.2).
TABLE 81.1 Structural and non-structural causes of 
uterine and vaginal bleeding.
Structural Polyp
Fibroids (leiomyoma)
Endometrial hyperplasia
Malignancy of the genital tract
Non-structural Coagulopathy, e.g. thrombocytopaenia, 
von Willebrand’s disease
Ovulatory dysfunction, e.g. polycystic 
ovary syndrome
Endometrial, e.g. endometritis
Iatrogenic, e.g. exogenous sex steroid 
adminstration, IUCD
Other, e.g. arteriovenous malformations, 
chronic renal/hepatic disease
IUCD, intrauterine contraceptive device.
TABLE 81.2 Causes of uterine and vaginal bleeding in the 
non-pregnant state.
Menstrual Endometrial polyp/malignancya
Fibroids
Intermenstrual Vaginal trauma/malignancya
Cervical polyp/malignancy
Endometrial polyp/malignancya
Postcoital Vaginal malignancya
Cervical ectropion/polyp/malignancy
a These cancers occur principally in postmenopausal women.
Erik Adolf von Willebrand , 1870–1949, physician, Helsinki, Finland.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1515 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1516
The mainstay of management is to identify and treat the 
associated pathology (except in women <40 years of age with 
heavy menstrual perio ds in whom malignancy is very rarely 
found; these women are best managed symptomatically). 
Investigations include a pregnancy test and ultrasound assess-
ment of the pelvic anatomy (2D/3D ultrasonogram or saline 
sonogram) as well as an endometrial biopsy of the uterine 
cavity, either performed under direct vision at hysteroscopy 
or blindly with a Pipelle ® biopsy. Hysteroscopy combined 
with endometrial biopsy improves the sensitivity and speci -
ficity for detection of endometrial pathology compared with 
either performed alone. A colonoscopy may also be indicated 
to exclude colorectal pathology as a potential cause for the 
bleeding. The indications for undertaking an endometrial 
biopsy are shown in Summary box 81.1.
Women known to have Lynch syndrome (hereditary 
non-polyposis colorectal cancer) and those considered at risk 
of inheriting a mismatch repair gene abnormality are another 
special group, as their lifetime risk of developing endometrial 
cancer is as high as 60%. Unlike sporadic cases of endometrial 
cancer, which are usually diagnosed during the sixth and sev-
enth decades, the mean age at diagnosis in Lynch syndrome is 
the fifth decade. However, it appears that the 5-year survival 
rate in patients with Lynch syndrome associated endome -
trial cancer is similar to that in women with sporadic disease. 
International guidelines suggest that these women should be 
screened annually from the age of 35 years with transvaginal 
ultrasound to measure the endometrial thickness and with an 
endometrial biopsy.
Abnormal bleeding can also be caused by invasive carci-
noma of the cervix, the incidence of which has been reduced 
by screening programmes that aim to detect the precancer -
ous state – cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) – using 
cervical cytology. In the UK, this is carried out every 3 years 
in women aged 25–49 years of age, and 5-yearly in women 
aged 50–64 years. Infection with certain human papillo-
mavirus (HPV) serotypes (16, 18, 31 and 33) is associated 
with an increased risk of invasive disease. Current vaccina -
tion programmes against HPV serotypes are aimed at reduc -
ing the incidence of cervical carcinoma. The vaccination is 
offered to girls aged 12–13 years. Abnormalities in cervical 
cytology are followed up by microscopic examination of the 
cervix (colposcopy). CIN may be treated with local ablation 
(cryocautery, cold coagulation, electrodiathermy or laser) 
or excision (large loop excision of the transformation zone 
(LLETZ)).
Menstrual bleeding may be excessively heavy, irregular or 
frequent in the absence of pathology; this is known as dys -
functional uterine bleeding. The UK’s National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has suggested a three-
step hierarchal treatment approach to the management of 
heavy menstrual bleeding: (1) medical therapy; (2) mini -
mally invasive uterus-conserving surgey; (3) major surgical 
procedures. The management plans are individualised for 
the patient, taking into account the concomitant symptoms 
and fertility requirements. Medical treatments used to reduce 
the amount of menstrual blood loss include tranexamic acid, 
mefenamic acid and the combined or progestin-only oral 
contraceptive pill (COCP or POP , respectively). It may be 
necessary to stop the bleeding completely using high-dose 
progestagens, the COCP taken continuously or a gonado -
trophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogue with or with -
out add-back hormone replacement therapy (HRT), which 
induces a menopause-like state. Increasingly, an intrauterine 
system (IUS) similar to a conventional coil, which releases 
levonorgestrel, is offered to patients as an alternative; it has 
the added advantage of being a reliable long-acting reversible 
contraceptive (up to 5 years). After 1 year of usage, there is 
a 71–95% reduction in menstrual blood loss with approxi -
mately 50% of women becoming amenorrhoeic.
The surgical treatments for excessive bleeding and their 
principal operative complications are described in Table 81.3.
Women taking tamoxifen, a selective oestrogen receptor 
modulator used in the treatment of breast cancer, represent a 
special group, as the drug can induce uterine abnormalities in 
10–40% of women, such as the development of endometrial 
polyps, hyperplasia, cancer and, rarely, uterine sarcomas, which 
are much more aggressive. Tamoxifen treatment results in a 
doubling of the risk of endometrial cancer after 1–2 years and 
a quadrupling after 5 years of usage. The relationship is time 
dependent but dose independent. The risk does not decrease 
on cessation of treatment. There is no consensus regarding the 
need for screening and which method to use; the alternative, 
more common approach, is to investigate only those women 
who develop abnormal uterine bleeding with tamoxifen use. 
Aromatase inhibitors such as anastrozole, letrozole and exemes-
tane, also used in the treatment of breast cancer, but whose 
effects are not mediated via the oestrogen receptor, have been 
associated with less endometrial pathology than tamoxifen. 
They may also reverse abnormalities induced by tamoxifen use.
Summary box 81.1
Indications for endometrial biopsy
Endometrial biopsy should be considered in the following women:
●● Suspected endometrial pathology
●● All women >45 years of age in whom medical treatment has 
been unsuccessful
●● Persistent intermenstrual bleeding
●● Endometrial thickness of >4 mm in postmenopausal women or 
>16 mm in premenopausal women and >7 mm in women with 
known polycystic ovarian syndrome
●● Irregular or unscheduled bleeding while on hormone 
replacement therapy after the initial 3 months
●● Younger women with major risk factors for endometrial 
hyperplasia/ cancer:
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
Obesity
Treatment with tamoxifen
●● Irregular bleeding while on unopposed oestrogen therapy
●● Irregular bleeding in high-risk populations, such as family 
history of endometrial/colon cancer, especially hereditary non-
polyposis colorectal cancer
Henry T Lynch , b.1928, Professor of Preventative Medicine, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1516 25/10/2017   10:35Acute pelvic pain in early pregnancy 1517
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
The aim of ablative methods is to reduce the menstrual  
bleeding by ablating the endometrium down to the basalis 
layer using electrical, thermal or laser energy. More than 90% 
of women report a reduction in menstrual blood loss without 
the need for further treatment at 2 years of follow-up, with 
25–35% experiencing amenorrhoea. The criteria for endome-
trial ablation are described in Table 81.4.
TABLE 81.4 Criteria for suitability for endometrial ablation.
Uterus is <10 cm in length (and 14 cm in length for microwave 
ablation)
Absence of major intrauterine pathology that would distort the 
uterine cavity
No history of previous endometrial ablation procedures
No evidence of endometritis
Family is complete
A hysterectomy can be carried out by three different 
routes: vaginally, abdominally or laparoscopically. The route 
of entry is dependent on a number of factors, including: uter-
ine size; presence of other pathology; mobility and descent of 
the uterus; history of previous surgery; and skill of the operat-
ing surgeon. A total or subtotal (conservation of the cervix) 
hysterectomy can be performed. No difference in prolapse 
symptoms, sexual satisfaction or pelvic pain has been reported 
between the two techniques. Furthermore, it is now recom -
mended that the Fallopian tubes are removed in conjunction 
with the uterine body, whether the ovaries are conserved or 
not. The Fallopian tubes have no continued functionality fol-
lowing a hysterectomy, but can be a potential source of malig-
nancy if retained. Conservation or removal of the ovaries is 
dependent on the woman’s age, presence of coexisting pathol-
ogy and/or risk factors for malignancy.
ACUTE PEL VIC PAIN IN EARL Y 
PREGNANCY
Ectopic pregnancy
An ectopic pregnancy refers to a pregnancy that grows outside 
of the uterine cavity, most commonly within the Fallopian 
tube, with rarer sites including the ovary , cervix, broad liga-
ment and abdominal cavity. As the ectopic pregnancy grows, 
the placental tissue can infiltrate the blood vessels surround -
ing the Fallopian tube, leading to bleeding within the tube 
and into the peritoneal cavity. Further growth of the ectopic 
pregnancy can rupture the Fallopian tube, causing significant 
intraperitoneal blood loss. This constitutes a gynaecologi -
cal emergency. An ectopic pregnancy occurs in 11 per 1000 
pregnancies, and a maternal mortality rate of 0.2 per 1000 
estimated ectopic pregnancies. The major risk factors for an 
ectopic pregnancy are shown in Summary box 81.2.
TABLE 81.3 Surgical treatments for excessive vaginal bleeding.
Treatment Route Major operative risks
Uterus-conserving surgery:
●● Hysteroscopic polypectomy
●● Endometrial ablation
●● Transcervical resection of the endometrium
●● Focal fibroid destruction (MRI-guided focused 
ultrasound, radiofrequency ablation)
●● Uterine fibroid embolisation
●● Uterine artery occlusion
●● Transcervical resection of fibroids
●● Laparoscopic myomectomy
●● Open myomectomy
Vaginal
Vaginal
Vaginal
Transcutaneous 
Transcutaneous
Vaginal/abdominal
Vaginal
Abdominal
Abdominal
Uterine perforation; damage to surrounding organs
Fluid overload; thermal injury to surrounding organs
 
Fluid overload; thermal injury to surrounding organs
Injury to surrounding organs
Injury to surrounding organs
Non-uterus conserving surgery:
●● Hysterectomy (subtotal or total) Vaginal/abdominal Damage to internal organs; fistula formation
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Summary box 81.2
Risk factors for an ectopic pregnancy
●● Previous pelvic inflammatory disease
●● Smoking
●● History of infertility
●● Use of an intrauterine contraceptive device
●● Previous ectopic pregnancy
●● Previous abdominal/pelvic surgery
●● Previous tubal surgery, e.g. sterilisation, salpingostomy, 
tuboplasty
●● Endometriosis
An ectopic pregnancy may be suspected on clinical 
grounds but making the diagnosis can be difficult (Table 81.5).
TABLE 81.5 Symptoms and signs of an ectopic pregnancy.
Symptoms Signs
Abdominal or pelvic pain
Vaginal bleeding
Gastrointestinal symptoms
Dizziness, fainting, syncope
Shoulder tip pain
Asymptomatic
Pelvic, abdominal and/or adnexal 
tenderness or fullness
Signs of peritonism
Cervical motion tenderness (pain 
on moving the cervix)
Tachycardia, hypotension
The presentation of an ectopic pregnancy is very variable 
and the differential diagnoses include:
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1517 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1518
 ● ectopic pregnancy;
 ● miscarriage;
 ● urinary tract infection;
 ● ovarian cyst accident;
 ● appendicitis.
A transvaginal ultrasound scan should be performed if the 
diagnosis is suspected. The complete absence of an intrauter-
ine gestational sac with a positive pregnancy test increases 
the probability of an ectopic pregnancy, unless the pregnancy 
is not sufficiently advanced for the sac to be seen on ultra -
sound scan. An ectopic pregnancy is more likely if free fluid 
is seen in the pouch of Douglas, or an adnexal mass is seen on 
ultrasound scan.
In equivocal cases, serial measurements of serum beta-  
human chorionic gonadotrophin ( β-hCG) levels, 48 hours 
apart, can help to establish the diagnosis. A rise in β-hCG 
levels by at least 63% is more indicative of a viable intra-
uterine pregnancy. Levels that halve when taken 48 hours 
apart are more suggestive of a failing pregnancy. Levels that 
remain static, or show a suboptimal increase or decrease 
over a 48-hour period, are more likely to be representative 
of an ectopic pregnancy. Furthermore, a single level above 
approxi mately 1500 IU/L, in association with an empty uterus 
on ultrasound scan, is highly suggestive of an ectopic preg -
nancy. Laparoscopy can also be used as a diagnostic tool (Fig-
ure 81.3); occasionally however, a false-negative diagnosis 
is obtained, when the pregnancy is not sufficiently advanced 
and is therefore too small to be seen within the Fallopian tube.
Management of an ectopic pregnancy can be divided into 
expectant, medical (methotrexate) or surgical treatment. The 
choice of treatment is dependent on: the haemodynamic sta-
bility of the patient; ultrasonographic features of the ectopic 
pregnancy (presence of free fluid, presence or absence of a fetal 
heartbeat); serum β-hCG level; and the patient’s understand-
ing of the diagnosis, commitment to follow-up and choice.
Methotrexate is a folic acid anatagonist that interferes 
with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis. Significant side 
effects include hepatotoxicity. Further pregnancies should be 
avoided for a minimum of 3 months following treatment with 
methotrexate. Careful patient selection is vital. Furthermore, 
some patients fail to respond to this medication and will 
require surgical management.
Surgical management occurs in the form of a salpingec -
tomy (removal of the Fallopian tube) or salpingostomy (open-
ing of the Fallopian tube and extraction of the pregnancy 
tissue). This is ideally performed laparoscopically in the stable 
patient, as it is associated with shorter operative times, less 
intraoperative blood loss, shorter hospital stays and similar 
subsequent intrauterine pregnancy rates. A laparotomy may 
be required if the woman is haemodynamically unstable. A 
salpingectomy is the preferential technique in the presence 
of a contralateral healthy Fallopian tube. A salpingostomy is 
associated with an 8% risk of persistent trophoblastic tissue, 
intra-abdominal bleeding and an increased risk of a repeat 
ectopic pregnancy. These patients are subsequently followed 
up with monitoring of serum β-hCG levels until a negative 
result is obtained, to exclude the presence of residual tropho-
blastic tissue. If a further ectopic pregnancy occurs within the 
same Fallopian tube, then a salpingectomy is recommended 
regardless of the condition of the contralateral tube.
The management of non-tubal ectopic pregnancies (e.g. 
interstitial ectopics, caesarean section scar ectopics) can be 
complex and associated with more significant complications, 
such as bleeding and the risk of needing a hysterectomy. 
These cases are best managed in tertiary centres. The man-
agement plan will be guided by the haemodynamic stability of 
the patient and the location of the ectopic pregnancy, includ-
ing the expertise of the clinician managing the case.
These patients should be counselled regarding their 
increased risk of further ectopic pregnancies in subsequent 
conceptions. In view of this, they are encouraged to present 
as early as possible in any subsequent pregnancy to establish 
its location.
INFECTION
The overwhelming majority of cases of pelvic inflammatory 
disease (PID) are caused by ascending infection, most com -
monly sexually transmitted, leading to endometritis, salpingi-
tis, tubo-ovarian abscess formation and/or pelvic peritonitis. 
Rarer causes include spread from other pelvic organs, e.g. the 
appendix. Chlamydia trachomatis is the most common organ -
ism responsible for PID; the prevalence of Neisseria gonor -
rhoeae varies depending upon the locality. Other organisms 
commonly found in the vagina may also be implicated. Risk 
factors include young age at first sexual activity, a high num-
ber of sexual partners and current use of an IUCD; infection 
may also follow a surgical procedure, e.g. termination of 
pregnancy.
There are no definitive criteria for making a diagnosis of 
PID. Most clinicians rely instead upon the presence of one 
Figure 81.3 Laparoscopy showing an ectopic pregnancy.
Albert Ludwig Siegmund Neisser , 1855–1916, Director of the Dermatological Institute, Breslau, Germany, (now Wroclaw, Poland).
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1518 25/10/2017   10:35Infection 1519
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
or more of the following features, which are suggestive of the 
diagnosis:
 ● lower abdominal pain and tenderness, more commonly 
bilateral;
 ● deep dyspareunia (pain on intercourse);
 ● abnormal vaginal bleeding;
 ● abnormal cervical discharge, commonly purulent;
 ● cervical excitation and adnexal tenderness;
 ● fever ≥38°C;
 ● elevated white blood cells (neutrophils) and platelets.
It should be noted that some patients are asymptomatic or 
may present with non-specific symptoms, and a high degree 
of clinical suspicion is needed to avoid a delay in making the 
diagnosis.
The differential diagnoses include:
 ● endometriosis;
 ● urinary tract infection;
 ● appendicitis;
 ● gastrointestinal dysfunction;
 ● ectopic pregnancy;
 ● ovarian cyst accident.
Raised inflammatory markers (white cell count, neutro -
phil count and C-reactive protein (CRP)) support the diag -
nosis. Ultrasound scan assessment of the pelvis can detect the 
presence of hydrosalpinges and/or a tubo-ovarian abscess. All 
women with suspected PID should be screened for N. gonor-
rhoeae and C. trachomatis; however, an absence of infection 
does not exclude a diagnosis of PID. Chlamydia trachomatis  
is an intracellular organism; therefore, samples obtained for 
diagnostic purposes should contain cellular material. If an 
endocervical swab is to be used to obtain a specimen, then it 
is important to clean the cervix of excessive discharge before 
inserting the swab inside the cervical os.
acute PID effectively are extremely significant: chronic pel -
vic pain; infertility; increased risk of an ectopic pregnancy 
(6%; approximately 10 times higher than the background 
population); and Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome (an extrapelvic 
manifestation of PID associated with right upper quadrant 
pain, most probably resulting from the inflammation of the 
liver capsule and diaphragm). Approximately 20% of women 
treated for PID will become infertile, secondary to tubal dam-
age; >50% of tubal factor infertility cases arise from infection 
secondary to Chlamydia; however, interestingly, many of these 
women do not report a history of PID.
Treatment should be commenced as soon as samples have 
been obtained for culture, without the need to wait for the 
results, but changing the antibiotics once the sensitivities 
become available; it should include a broad-spectrum anti -
biotic against coliforms and anaerobic species, which are 
responsible for secondary infection. Contact tracing (a min-
imum of 6 months within the onset of symptoms) and treat-
ment are essential.
Summary box 81.3
Chlamydia and gonorrhoea testing
There is a need to test women (especially those sexually active 
under the age of 25 years) who present with:
●● purulent vaginal discharge
●● postcoital/intermenstrual bleeding
●● change in vaginal bleeding pattern
●● mucopurulent cervicitis
●● inflamed/friable cervix (which may bleed on contact)
●● urethritis
●● suspected pelvic inflammatory disease
●● reactive arthritis
Thomas Fitz-Hugh Jr. , 1894–1963, physician, Chief of the Hematological Section, The University Hospital, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA. 
Arthur H Curtis , 1881–1955, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Northwestern Medical School, Chicago, IL, USA. Fitz-Hugh and Curtis were not the 
first to describe the syndrome: it was described in 1920 by Stajano, a Uruguyan Professor of Surgery, but the paper was written in Spanish.
The majority of suspected cases are treated within the 
community, with a review advised after 72 hours. Hospital 
admission is advisable if there is doubt about the diagnosis, 
or if the symptoms/signs are severe. If an IUCD is in situ, this 
is better removed under antibiotic coverage, with adequate 
counselling regarding pregnancy risk, and emergency contra -
ception prescribed in appropriate circumstances. Counselling 
should also cover future contraception.
A tubo-ovarian abscess can develop in severe cases of PID; 
this is where the Fallopian tube and ovary become blended 
into a single, pus-filled, inflammatory mass, which is usually 
adherent to the uterus and surrounding bowel. The infection 
may have progressed from a milder form of PID or, increas -
ingly, it may result from the introduction of infection or 
bowel damage at transvaginal oocyte aspiration in a patient 
undergoing in vitro fertilisation (IVF). Modern medical prac -
tice is to manage the tubo-ovarian abscesses (Figure 81.4) 
conservatively, unless the patient fails to respond to intrave -
nous antibiotics and systemic support. The response is judged 
to be inadequate if the woman remains systemically unwell, 
her symptoms do not improve, fever is not reduced, the white 
blood cell count does not fall and there is no radiological evi-
dence of the abscess becoming smaller. In such circumstances, 
surgical treatment is necessary, i.e. adhesiolysis and drainage 
of the abscess, at laparotomy or laparoscopy. As most women 
with a tubo-ovarian abscess are in the reproductive years, the 
intention is always to be as conservative as possible at surgery. 
Rarely, however, if the abscess has ruptured (Figure 81.5) and 
the patient is extremely ill, then a hysterectomy and bilateral 
salpingo-oophorectomy may become necessary.
Abscess drainage under radiological guidance, e.g. a 
transgluteal approach via the greater sciatic foramen under 
computed tomography (CT), is sometimes performed. Trans-
vaginal ultrasound-guided aspiration has also been advocated. 
Current guidelines recommend a low threshold for empir-
ical treatment because the consequences of failing to treat 
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1519 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1520
It is clearly less invasive and there are claims that the method 
is as effective as surgery; however, it carries additional risks 
such as bowel damage and tracking of the infection along the 
root of entry of the needle.
ENDOMETRIOSIS
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial-like 
tissue in extrauterine sites. The most commonly affected sites 
are the pelvic organs and peritoneum, although distant sites 
such as the lungs are occasionally affected (resulting in symp-
toms such as recurrent haemoptysis at the time of menstrua -
tion or recurrent pneumothoraxes) (Figure 81.6). The exact 
pathogonomic mechanism remains elusive, but it is widely 
believed that most endometriotic lesions develop from retro -
grade menstruation. It is estimated to affect 5–10% of women 
mainly of reproductive age, with the incidence reported to 
be higher in certain subgroups, e.g. women with a history of 
infertility. Endometriosis may be associated with a number of 
Summary box 81.4
Treatment of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
●● A low threshold for the initiation of empirical treatment for 
PID is recommended, because of the lack of definitive clinical 
diagnostic criteria
●● Women with suspected PID should be screened for  
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis
●● Testing for gonorrhoea should be undertaken with an 
endocervical specimen, via culture (direct inoculation onto a 
culture plate or transport of the swab to the laboratory within 
24 hours) or using a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT). 
Screening for chlamydia should also be from the endocervix, 
preferably using a NAAT. Taking an additional sample from 
the urethra increases the diagnostic yield for gonorrhoea and 
chlamydia. A first-catch urine sample provides an alternative 
source
●● A pregnancy test should be undertaken and screening 
for other sexually-transmitted infections, such as human 
immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis
●● Out-patient antibiotic treatment should be commenced as 
soon as the diagnosis is suspected. Treatment should be 
based on one of the following regimens:
 – Ofloxacin 400 mg orally twice a day + metronidazole 400 mg 
orally twice a day for 14 days (ofloxacin should be avoided 
in cases at high risk of gonococcal PID due to increasing 
resistance against quinolone antibiotics in the UK); or,
 – Ceftriaxone 500 mg intramuscular as a single dose, 
followed by doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day + 
metronidazole 400 mg twice a day for 14 days
●● Admission to hospital is appropriate in the following 
circumstances:
 – Surgical emergency cannot be excluded
 – Clinically severe disease
 – Tubo-ovarian abscess
 – PID in pregnancy
 – Lack of response to oral therapy
 – Intolerance to oral therapy
●● In more severe cases, in-patient antibiotic treatment should 
be based on intravenous therapy, which should be continued 
until 24 hours after clinical improvement and followed by oral 
therapy. Recommended regimens are:
 – Ceftriaxone 2 g intravenously daily + doxycycline 100 mg 
intravenously twice a day (oral doxycycline may be used if 
tolerated), followed by doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a 
day + metronidazole 400 mg orally twice a day for a total of 
14 days; or
 – Clindamycin 900 mg intravenously three times a day + 
gentamicin 2 mg/kg loading dose followed by 1.5 mg/kg 
intravenously three times a day (a single daily dose of  
7 mg/kg may be substituted), followed by clindamycin 
450 mg orally four times a day to complete 14 days, or 
doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day + metronidazole 
400 mg orally twice a day to complete 14 days
●● Abstinence or the use of barrier contraception is advised until 
resolution of the condition on repeat testing
●● Treatment in the presence of pregnancy should take account 
of local policies and guidelines with consideration to the 
treatment’s teratogenic potential, but parental therapy is 
advised secondary to the increased risk of maternal and fetal 
morbidity
●● Surgical drainage of a pelvic abscess may be indicated in the 
absence of clinical improvement with medical therapy
Figure 81.4 Pelvic inflammatory disease.
Figure 81.5  Pelvic inflammatory disease with rupture of a pelvic 
abscess.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1520 25/10/2017   10:35Endometriosis 1521
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
symptoms, but the predictive value of any one symptom or 
set of symptoms remains uncertain as each can have other 
causes (e.g. irritable bowel syndrome or interstitial cystitis), 
with a significant proportion of affected women remaining 
asymptomatic. The most common symptom is pain. Other 
symptoms include: cyclical and non-cyclical pain; deep dys -
pareunia (pain during intercourse); dyschezia (pain on open -
ing the bowels); and dysuria. Many women also suffer from 
fatigue, haematuria, chronic pelvic pain, infertility and rectal 
bleeding.
The extent of the disease varies from a few small lesions 
on otherwise normal pelvic organs to large ovarian endome -
triotic cysts (endometriomas). There can be extensive fibrosis 
in structures such as the uterosacral ligaments (Figure 81.7), 
and adhesion formation causing marked distortion of the pel-
vic anatomy (Figure 81.8). Disease severity can be assessed 
by describing the operative findings, or quantitatively using 
various classification systems, but there is little correlation 
between such systems and the type or severity of symptoms 
experienced.
Endometriosis typically appears as superficial ‘pow -
der-burn’ or ‘gunshot’ lesions on the ovaries, serosal surfaces 
and peritoneum – black, dark-brown or bluish puckered 
lesions, nodules or small cysts containing old haemorrhage 
surrounded by a variable extent of fibrosis. Atypical or ‘subtle’ 
lesions are also common, including red implants (petechial, 
vesicular, polypoid, haemorrhagic, red flame-like) and serous 
or clear vesicles. Other appearances include white plaques or 
scarring and yellow-brown peritoneal discolouration of the 
peritoneum. Ovarian endometriomas usually contain thick 
fluid-like tar. They are distinguishable from simple haemor -
rhagic ovarian cysts because typically they are densely adher-
ent to the peritoneum of the ovarian fossa. The surrounding 
fibrosis may involve the bowel. Deeply infiltrating endometri-
otic nodules represent another disease type. They can extend 
more than 5 mm beneath the peritoneum and may grow into 
the uterosacral ligaments, vagina, bowel, bladder or ureters; 
when such lesions grow into the vagina they may be visible 
on speculum examination as ‘blue-domed’ cystic lesions in 
the posterior fornix. Lesions infiltrating the bowel may mimic 
cancer in their presentation.
The gold standard for making a diagnosis of endometriosis 
is through laparoscopy, ideally with histological confirmation; 
non-invasive diagnostic tools, such as ultrasound scanning, 
can reliably detect only severe forms of the disease, i.e. endo-
metriomas. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can detect 
haemosiderin deposits in deeply infiltrating disease.
The treatment options are limited because the cause is 
uncertain. These include: conservative management; medical 
management (simple analgesia or hormonal drugs to suppress 
ovarian function (progestins, the levonorgestrel-IUS)); and 
surgical management (ablation or excision of endometriotic 
lesions). Women may require multiple admissions for sur -
gery and/or prolonged treatment with costly drugs that can 
have problematic side effects. Lastly, endometriosis is asso -
ciated with an increased risk of ovarian cancer (especially 
Figure 81.6 Endometriosis seen on the peritoneal surface of the dia-
phragm.
Figure 81.7 Endometriosis seen on the uterosacral ligament.
Figure 81.8 Bilateral ovarian endometriosis with pelvic adhesions.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1521 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1522
endometrioid and clear-cell types) and non-Ho dgkin’s 
lymphoma, which adds to the burden of the disease.
Finding pelvic tenderness, a fixed retroverted uterus, ten-
der uterosacral ligaments or enlarged ovaries on examination 
is suggestive of endometriosis. The diagnosis is more certain 
if deeply infiltrating nodules are found on the uterosacral lig -
aments or in the pouch of Douglas and/or visible lesions are 
seen in the vagina or on the cervix. The findings may, how -
ever, be normal.
For a woman who has completed her family, hysterectomy 
plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and removal of all of 
the endometriosis present offers a good chance of cure. How-
ever, surgical treatment in a woman who wishes to conceive 
in the future aims to be as conservative as possible, ensuring 
in particular that ovarian function is preserved. The aim is to 
remove all of the endometriotic tissue and restore anatomy 
to normal by lysing adhesions. The standard (preferably 
laparoscopic) methods used are ovarian cystectomy and tissue 
excision or ablation with electrodiathermy, thermal coagula -
tion or laser. The surgical risks include those for any laparo -
scopic procedure, as well as damage to the ureters and bowel; 
the risks are increased if deeply infiltrating disease is present, 
particularly if there is bowel wall involvement. Rarely, infec-
tion in an endometrioma will result in the formation of a 
tubo-ovarian abscess.
UROGYNAECOLOGY
Uterovaginal prolapse
Pelvic organ prolapse refers to the protrusion or displacement 
of the pelvic organs from their normal anatomical position 
into or through the vagina to varying degrees (Figure 81.9). 
It is said to affect up to 40% of women at some time in their 
Thomas Hodgkin , 1798–1866, curator of the Museum and demonstrator of Morbid Anatomy, Guy’s Hospital, London, UK.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.06aTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(a)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.06bTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(b)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.06cTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(c)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.06eTitle: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(e)
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.06d    Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:   2      ISBN: 9781444121278
(d)
Figure 81.9  Uterovaginal prolapse: (a) urethr ocoele/cystocoele; 
(b) uterine prolapse; (c) enterocoele; (d) vaginal vault prolapse; 
(e) rectocoele.
(a) (b)
(d)(c)
(e)
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1522 25/10/2017   10:35Urogynaecology 1523
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
lifetime. A prolapse can have a detrimental impact on normal 
organ performance, including anorectal, urinary and sexual 
function.
Prolapse is more common in certain groups, including:
 ● older women;
 ● parous women, increased parity, prolonged labours, vagi -
nal deliveries;
 ● obese women;
 ● sufferers of chronic constipation;
 ● occupations that involve heavy lifting;
 ● oestrogen-deficient women;
 ● women with a family history or genetic risk;
 ● connective tissue disorders, e.g. Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, 
Marfan’s.
Women with a minor degree of prolapse may be asymp -
tomatic, but with more significant degrees the patient usually 
complains of a sensation of ‘something coming down’. A cysto-
coele (bladder prolapse) and a cystourethrocoele (prolapse of 
the bladder and urethra) lead to the sensation of a lump in the 
vagina, and may be associated with urinary urgency (overac -
tive bladder symptoms) and recurrent urinary tract infections. 
Uterine descent can lead to a lump in the vagina or a dragging 
sensation; with complete prolapse of the uterus (procidentia) 
there may be vaginal discharge, ulceration of the vaginal skin 
and bleeding. A rectocoele (prolapse of the rectum into the 
vagina) may cause difficulties with defaecation or a sensation 
of incomplete emptying, which can be relieved by digital 
reduction of the prolapse.
The degree of prolapse is graded in terms of descent. 
Currently, the commonly used grading systems is the Pelvic 
Organ Prolapse Quantification System (POP-Q).
Non-surgical management of uterovaginal prolapse 
includes: lifestyle changes (avoidance of constipation); phys-
iotherapy to help strengthen the pelvic floor muscles; HRT 
for oestrogen deficiency and to help increase tissue strength 
and elasticity; and vaginal pessaries. There are a number of 
different pessaries available and they are replaced every 3–6 
months, with the ring pessary being the most frequently used. 
It is inserted between the posterior fornix and the pubic bone. 
The main complications are vaginal ulceration and infection 
leading to discharge and bleeding; it is advisable, therefore, to 
replace the ring frequently.
Surgical management aims to correct the prolapse. 
The surgical procedures are intended to restore the utero -
vaginal anatomy and position. They may be carried out 
using a vaginal or abdominal approach or, increasingly , by 
a laparoscopic or minimal access approach, with the use of 
polypropylene mesh to augment weak connective tissue  
(Table 81.6).
Edvard Laurits Ehlers , 1863–1937, dermatologist, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Henri-Alexandre Danlos , 1844–1912, dermatologist, Paris, France.
Antoine Bernard-Jean Marfan , 1858–1942, paediatrician, Paris, France.
Milton Lawrence McCall , 1911–1963, obstetrician, Magee-Womens’ Hospital, Pittsburg, PA, USA.
TABLE 81.6. Surgical treatments for uterovaginal prolapse.
Condition Treatment Complications
Urethrocoele/cystocoele
(Figure 81.9a)
Traditionally, an anterior vaginal wall repair (anterior 
colporrhaphy) was performed vaginally. The use of mesh 
has been utilised but is falling out of favour with the current 
controversies
Bleeding, infection, fistula formation, 
voiding dysfunction, unmasking of 
occult stress urinary incontinence, 
failure, recurrence
Uterine prolapse (Figure 81.9b) If the patient’s family is complete, a vaginal hysterectomy 
with an anterior vaginal wall repair if necessary can be 
performed. Uterus-preserving surgery includes: amputation 
of the cervix with suturing of the transverse cervical 
ligaments vaginally (Manchester repair); laparoscopic 
plication of the uterosacral ligaments (McCall suture); or 
hysteropexy, which may be vaginal (attaching the cervix to 
the sacrospinous ligaments using non-absorbable sutures) or 
laparoscopically (using a polypropylene mesh to suspend the 
uterus to the sacral promontory)
Bleeding, infection, injury to the 
bladder, bowel or ureters, voiding 
dysfunction, dyspareunia, failure, 
recurrence, conversion to a laparotomy. 
A Manchester repair can specifically be 
associated with infertility, miscarriage 
and dystocia
Enterocoele (Figure 81.9c) A similar technique to repair of a hernia is used. The vaginal 
skin is opened and the hernial sac repaired
Bleeding, infection, rectal or small bowel 
injury (fistula formation), dyspareunia, 
failure, recurrence
Vaginal vault prolapse (Figure 
81.9d)
Sacrospinous fixation performed vaginally: the vault is 
attached to the right sacrospinous ligament using a non-
absorbable suture/mesh, avoiding the rectosigmoid colon 
on the left. Sacrocolpopexy perfomed abdominally or 
laparoscopically: the vaginal vault is attached to the sacral 
promontory using a mesh
Bleeding, infection, injury to the bowel 
or ureter, unmasking of occult urinary 
stress incontinence, right buttock pain, 
sexual dysfunction
Rectocoele (Figure 81.9e) Posterior colperineorrhaphy: the posterior vaginal wall is 
opened, the rectum returned to its normal position and 
redundant vaginal skin excised
Bleeding, infection, rectal or small bowel 
injury (fistula formation), dyspareunia, 
failure, recurrence
Approximately 30% of women in their lifetime report a recurrence of their symptoms following surgical treatment. This figure increases with subsequent 
procedures. 
The Manchester repair was introduced at St Mary’s Hospital for Women and Children, Manchester, UK.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1523 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1524
Urinary incontinence
Urinary incontinence is defined as the involuntary leakage of 
urine. It is said to affect approximately 30% of women, with 
a higher prevalence seen in older age groups. It can have a 
significant impact on their quality of life.
Incontinence can be classified into:
 ● stress urinary incontinence (involuntary leakage of urine 
secondary to increased intra-abdominal pressure, e.g. cough-
ing, sneezing);
 ● overactive bladder;
 ● mixed urinary incontinence (combination of both urge 
and stress incontinence).
It can result from both functional and anatomical causes, 
including:
 ● multiparity;
 ● vaginal delivery;
 ● menopause;
 ● fistulae;
 ● urethral diverticulum/congenital anomalies, e.g. ectopic 
ureters;
 ● immobility, constipation or urinary tract infection;
 ● neurological disorders, e.g. multiple sclerosis;
 ● secondary to pelvic masses.
Common symptoms and complaints include:
 ● frequency (increased frequency of more than 8 times during 
the day);
 ● nocturia (increased frequency of voiding more than once 
a night);
 ● urgency;
 ● urinary incontinence with increased coughing;
 ● altered stream, e.g. slow/intermittent stream or hesitancy;
 ● incomplete bladder emptying;
 ● postmicturition dribbling;
 ● nocturnal enuresis;
 ● haematuria (in women >40 years of age, additional inves-
tigations should be performed to rule out malignancy).
Investigations include:
 ● urine analysis and mid-stream urine sample for micros-
copy, culture and sensitivity;
 ● urodynamics if conservative measures have failed;
 ● ultrasound kidney, ureters and bladder in cases with recur-
rent urinary tract infections/haematuria;
 ● cystoscopy if pathology is suspected.
Management can be divided into conservative methods, 
medical therapy or surgical intervention (Table 81.7). The 
treatment of choice is dependent on the underlying cause.
Treatments can be combined and are individualised for 
the patient. Should initial therapy be unsuccessful or repeat 
procedures be required, then the patients should be discussed 
within a multidisciplinary team setting.
TUMOURS
Uterine fibroids (leiomyoma)
Fibroids are usually benign, well-circumscribed, smooth mus-
cle tumours of the uterus. Less than 1% of fibroids undergo 
malignant transformation (leiomyosarcoma). They are more 
common in certain populations (African-Caribbean women) 
and vary in size and number. They are typically found in the 
following locations (Figure 81.10):
 ● subserosal – may cause pressure-type symptoms; if pedun-
culated, they can be difficult to distinguish from an ovar -
ian tumour;
TABLE 81.7. Management options for urinary incontinence. 
Method Techniques Complications
Conservative Lifestyle changes (i.e. limit fluid intake, avoid diuretics such as tea/coffee, weight loss)
Behavioural modification (i.e. bladder drills)
Review of coexistent medications (i.e. diuretics)
Pelvic floor exercises (physiotherapy)
Bladder catheterisation
Infection
Medical Antibiotics for a urinary tract infection
Topical oestrogen therapy in postmenopausal women with urogenital atrophy
Antimuscarinic drug therapy (e.g. oxybutynin (avoid in elderly frail women), tolterodine)
Selective β3 adrenoreceptor agonist (e.g. mirabegron)
Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (e.g. duloxetine) (can be used in stress 
urinary incontinence when conservative measures have failed and surgical treatment is 
contraindicated or declined)
Desmopressin
Intravesical botulinum toxin A/urethral bulking agents (e.g. silicone)
Neuromodulation
Dry mouth
Repeated procedures
Surgical Management of pelvic masses
Bladder reconstruction (augmentation cystoplasty)
Urinary diversion
Sling procedures (e.g. transvaginal tapes/transobturator tapes)
Burch colposuspension
Bladder neck suspension
Artificial sphincter
Fistulae/ectopic ureter surgical correction
Dependent on the material 
used for augmentation
Bladder voiding difficulties, 
organ perforation, de novo 
incontinence, bleeding, 
erosion, dyspareunia, 
suprapubic pain
John C Burch , 1900–1977, gynaecologist, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1524 25/10/2017   10:35Tumours 1525
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
 ● intramural – may similarly cause pressure-type symptoms; 
associated with infertility and heavy periods;
 ● submucosal – associated with infertility, recurrent preg -
nancy loss and heavy perio ds; if pedunculated, may occa-
sionally extrude through the cervical os;
 ● rare – sites include the broad ligament and cervix.
Women with uterine fibroids may present with heavy 
and/or irregular menstrual bleeding, anaemia, pressure-type 
symptoms or infertility, especially if the fibroid is distorting 
the uterine cavity. The pressure-type symptoms include pelvic 
discomfort, urinary incontinence, frequency and retention, 
constipation and backache. When large fibroids are present, 
back pressure may cause or exacerbate varicosities. Although 
these symptoms are common, it is important to note that 
some women with fibroids are asymptomatic. Rarely, women 
may present acutely with pain arising from torsion of a pedun-
culated fibroid or red degeneration, especially in pregnancy.
A diagnosis can usually be made on bimanual and/or 
abdominal examination, in the presence of an enlarged uterus 
with attached swellings. The principal differential diagnosis is 
an ovarian tumour; in general, if an ovarian tunour is present, 
the uterus is felt separately on vaginal examination, although 
not if the structures are adherent to each other. A pelvic 
ultrasound scan is a good first-line investigation; if not, MRI 
can be clinically useful (Figure 81.11) but, sometimes, it may 
be necessary to perform a laparoscopy to distinguish between 
the two pathologies (Figure 81.12).
Treatment can be divided into: conservative if the woman 
is asymptomatic; medical to control menstrual bleeding in 
the form of hormonal manipulation, or newer treatment to 
shrink the fibroids; or surgical (uterus conserving or non-  
conserving). The choice of treatment depends upon the 
woman’s age and fertility intentions, the size and number of 
fibroids as well as their location. Emergency surgical treat -
ment is only required if there is substantial menstrual bleed -
ing or uncontrollable pain; these are rare events.
GnRH agonists aim to shrink the fibroids by inducing a 
hypo-oestrogenic state. However, this class of drug has the 
disadvantage that treatment cannot be continued indefi-
nitely because of the associated loss in bone mineral density; 
in addition, the fibroids tend to regrow to their original size 
when treatment is discontinued. Ulipristal acetate (Esmya®), 
a selective progesterone receptor modulator (SPRM), can be 
used preoperatively to shrink the size of the fibroids through 
inhibition of cell proliferation. However, these drugs should 
not be used in conjunction with POP , a progesterone-releasing 
intrauterine device or the COCP . Uterine artery embolisation 
(UAE) is becoming increasingly popular as an alternative to 
surgery. It involves blocking the blood supply to the fibroids 
using a technique in which particles are embolised into 
each uterine artery via an angiographic catheter in a similar 
manner to the well-established technique for treating mas -
sive postpartum haemorrhage (Figure 81.13). The aim is to 
shrink the fibroids, bringing symptomatic relief, i.e. decreased 
menstrual bleeding and fewer pressure symptoms. This tech -
nique has shown more value in the presence of a single large 
fibroid than in a multifibroid uterus. Complications include 
arterial injury at the site of catheter insertion, severe pain 
as a result of uterine ischaemia, infection, ovarian damage 
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: 80.07Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Subserosal
Pedunculated
submucosal
Pedunculated
subserosal
Fallopian
tube
Submucosal
Cervix
Vagina
Uterus
Uterine cavity
Intramural
Figure 81.10 Uterine fibroids.
Figure 81.11 Magnetic resonance imaging of uterine fibroids.
Figure 81.12 Laparoscopic view of a fibroid of the uterine fundus.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1525 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1526
and thromboembolism (a small number of deaths have been 
reported from uterine infection and pulmonary embolism). 
There is no consensus regarding the suitability of the tech-
nique for women who wish to conceive. Numerous pregnan -
cies have been reported in women who have undergone UAE, 
but concern still exists regarding the possible adverse effects 
on the endometrium, myometrial strength and ovarian func -
tion, which might affect a woman’s chances of conceiving, 
carrying the pregnancy and delivering normally. Other newer 
focal fibroid treatments include MR-guided focused ultraso -
nography, laparoscopic uterine artery occlusion with/without 
utero-ovarian occlusion, transvaginal Doppler-guided uterine 
artery occlusion and bipolar radiofrequency ablation (intra -
uterine ultrasound guided or laparoscopic guided).
A myomectomy (performed through a laparotomy, or 
increasingly at laparoscopy) involves the removal of pedun -
culated, subserosal and/or (rarely) intramural fibroids, with 
closure of the defects left in the uterine wall. Surgical com-
plications include bleeding and damage to surrounding struc-
tures, with the risk of conversion to a hysterectomy <1% 
secondary to uncontrollable blood loss. Fibroids within the 
uterine cavity can be removed hysteroscopically (transcer -
vical resection of a fibroid (TCRF)); complications include 
hyponatraemic fluid overload and thermal injury to surround-
ing structures. This occasionally needs to be performed as a 
two-stage procedure to avoid the risk of fluid overload and 
manage the roof of the fibroid, which can protude into the 
cavity following excision of its base.
Benign ovarian tumour and cysts
Overall, 90% of ovarian tumours are benign, with an increased 
risk of malignancy in older women: the malignant potential of 
an ovarian cyst in a premenopausal woman is 1:1000, increas-
ing to 3:1000 at the age of 50 years. Ovarian tumours are 
subdivided into five main categories according to the World 
Health Organisation’s classification system (Table 81.8).
TABLE 81.8 Classification of ovarian tumours.
Epithelial tumours Represent approximately 75% of all 
ovarian tumours and 90–95% of ovarian 
malignancies
Further classified by cell type (serous, 
mucinous, endometrioid, clear cell, 
transitional cell, epithelial stromal)
Germ cell tumours Represent approximately 15–20% of all 
ovarian neoplasms
Sex cord–stromal 
tumours
Represent approximately 5–10% of all 
ovarian neoplasms
Metastatic tumours Represent approximately 5% of ovarian 
malignancies; usually arise from the breast, 
colon, endometrium, stomach and cervical 
cancers
Other/miscellaneous A small number of other types of 
neoplasms, which develop from ovarian 
soft tissue or non-neoplastic processes
The most common solid tumours in young women are 
cystic teratomas (known more commonly as dermoid cysts), 
which typically contain a variety of tissues including hair, 
teeth and bone. Benign ovarian tumours are often asymp-
tomatic and may present incidentally, for example when an 
abdominal radiograph reveals the appearance of a tooth in the 
abdomen or pelvis. Conversely, they may present with pain, 
abdominal swelling and pressure-type symptoms. The pain 
may result from torsion or bleeding into the cysts. Manage -
ment will depend on the age of the woman and the character-
istics of the cyst. In older women, a conservative approach is 
reasonable only if the risk of malignancy is low (refer to Ovar-
ian cancer below). In perimenopausal women, the cyst can be 
followed by serial ultrasound scanning as many will regress. 
If there is uncontrollable pain, haemodynamic compromise, 
suspicion of torsion or the cyst does not regress, then surgical 
management is advised. In most cases this would involve a 
laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy with conservation of ovar -
ian tissue as the treatment of choice. As the vast majority of 
oocytes lie within 5  mm of the surface of the ovary, a care -
fully carried out cystectomy can leave a normally functioning 
ovary (Figure 81.14).
Figure 81.13 Pre-embolisation angiogram showing catheterisation 
of left uterine artery and blood supply to large fundal fibroid (courtesy 
of Dr Mark Bratby, Consultant Vascular and Interventional Radiologist, 
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK).
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer is the sixth most common malignancy in 
women, behind breast, lung, bowel, uterine cancer and 
malignant melanoma. In the UK, over 7000 women are diag-
nosed with ovarian cancer each year . Over 90% of cancers 
Christian Johann Doppler , 1803–1853, Professor of Experimental Physics, Vienna, Austria, enunciated the ‘Doppler Principle’ in 1842.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1526 25/10/2017   10:35Tumours 1527
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
The common presenting symptoms are:
 ● abdominal distension and/or pain;
 ● change in appetite;
 ● weight gain and increased girth (ascites);
 ● urinary obstruction.
However, over half of all women present initially to a 
speciality other than gynaecology , with often vague symp -
toms caused by metastatic disease, e.g. shortness of breath, 
gastrointestinal disturbance or a change in bowel habit. 
Consequently, it is important to include ovarian cancer in 
the differential diagnosis of any woman presenting with a 
recent onset of persistent, non-specific, abdominal symptoms 
(including those whose abdomen and pelvis appear normal on 
clinical examination).
Ultrasound, more specifically a transvaginal ultrasound 
scan, is the first-line investigation if an ovarian mass is sus -
pected on clinical grounds. The features suggestive of malig -
nancy on ultrasound include the presence of:
 ● cyst complexity (number of locules, wall structure, thick -
ness of septae, fluid echogenicity, irregularity, size ≥10 cm);
 ● solid papillary projections into the cyst (at least four);
 ● bilateral lesions;
 ● ascites;
 ● intra-abdominal metastases;
 ● strong blood flow.
Serum tumour markers can also be performed to aid 
diagnosis. CA-125 is a glycoprotein expressed on tissue 
derived from coelomic and Müllerian epithelia; the normal 
cut-off value is 35  U/mL. Elevated levels are found in 50% 
of patients with stage I disease and >90% of those with 
advanced disease. It primarily detects epithelial ovarian can -
cers. However, CA-125 is a non-specific marker with raised 
levels also seen in other cancers, e.g. pancreatic, breast, lung 
and colon. Levels may also be increased during menstruation; 
in benign conditions such as endometriosis, PID and liver 
disease; if ascites or other effusions are present; and after a 
recent laparotomy. Combining menopausal status, ultrasono-
graphic features and CA-125 measurements using the Risk 
of Malignancy Index (RMI) algorithm, guides management 
and helps to identify those patients who require referral to a 
gynaecological oncologist in a cancer centre. Summary boxes 
81.6 and 81.7 address the basic tests that can be conducted to 
diagnose ovarian malignancy.
Figure 81.14 Ovarian cystectomy.
Summary box 81.5
Management of benign ovarian cysts
●● Commonly, an incidental finding, but may be suggested by 
symptoms and signs
●● A pregnancy test is done to exclude an ectopic pregnancy 
(however, it is important to note that hCG can also be positive 
in dysgerminomas and choriocarcinoma)
●● Transvaginal ultrasonography (mainstay diagnostic tool) can 
usually confirm the diagnosis. If the results are indeterminate, 
MRI or CT imaging may help (MRI is more useful than CT for 
the assessment of complex cysts/endometriosis). Masses 
with radiographic characteristics of cancer (e.g. cystic 
and solid components, surface excrescences, multilocular 
appearance, irregular shape) require removal
●● Tumour markers may help in the diagnosis of specific masses 
(refer to Ovarian cancer)
●● In women of reproductive age, simple, thin-walled cystic 
adnexal masses of a maximum diameter of 50 mm without 
characteristics of cancer do not require further investigation 
unless they persist for more than 3 months. A follow-up scan 
can be arranged for 4 months to check for resolution. In 
postmenopausal women, this is conducted every 4 months 
with cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) levels for 1 year, and if no 
change is detected, then the women can be discharged
●● Perimenopausal women with simple cysts 50–70 mm should 
undergo annual ultrasound follow-up
●● Women with larger cysts (>70 mm) or persistent cysts may 
benefit from an MRI scan or surgical intervention
●● Cyst removal (ovarian cystectomy) is preferrably performed 
laparoscopically. Cyst aspiration is not recommended as it is 
associated with a high risk of recurrence. Bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy is preferable for postmenopausal women, if 
surgery is indicated
●● An oophorectomy may become necessary if the cyst cannot 
be surgically removed from the ovary
Summary box 81.6
Risk of malignancy index (RMI)
●● RMI = U × M × CA-125
U, ultrasonographic features scoring 1 for each malignant 
feature (multilocular, solid components, metastases, 
ascites, bilateral lesions); M, menopausal status with 1 for 
premenopausal and 3 for postmenopausal; CA-125,  
CA-125 level in U/mL
●● Other tumour markers include lactate dehydrogenase, 
α-fetoprotein (α-FP), inhibin and β-hCG. They are particularly 
recommended in women <40 years of age, with a suspected 
complex ovarian mass, to exclude germ cell tumours
arise from the surface epithelium of the ovary (which has the 
same embryological origins as the peritoneum); the majority 
arise sporadically rather than secondary to inheritance. The 
peak incidence is in the age range of 65–69 years. The overall 
5-year survival rate is less than 50% because approximately 
two-thirds of women present with advanced disease.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1527 25/10/2017   10:35CHAPTER 81  Gynaecology
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY1528
Unfortunately, there are still no effective screening meth-
ods for ovarian cancer for the general population. Hence, the 
preliminary results of the UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian 
Cancer Screening are of great interest. The study recruited 
over 200 000 women, aged 50–74 years, who were randomised 
to a control arm or one of two screening strategies: primary 
screening using measurement of serum CA-125 levels fol -
lowed by transvaginal ultrasound as a second-line test, or 
transvaginal ultrasound alone. The two screening procedures 
were similar in terms of sensitivity for all primary ovarian and 
Fallopian tube cancers, but specificity was higher with com -
bined screening.
There is also no consensus regarding how to screen women 
who are at high risk for ovarian cancer secondary to a family 
history, i.e. those with a first-degree relative affected by can -
cer within a family that meets one of the following criteria:
 ● two or more individuals with ovarian cancer, who are 
first-degree relatives of each other;
 ● one individual with ovarian cancer at any age and one 
with breast cancer diagnosed at <50 years, who are first- 
degree relatives of each other (or second-degree relatives 
if the transmission is paternal);
 ● one relative with ovarian cancer at any age and two with 
breast cancer diagnosed at <60 years, who are connected 
by first-degree relationships (or second-degree relation -
ships if the transmission is paternal);
 ● a known carrier of relevant cancer gene mutations (e.g. 
BRCA1 or BRCA2);
 ● an untested first-degree relative of a predisposing gene  
carrier;
 ● three or more family members with colon cancer or 
two with colon cancer and one with stomach, ovarian, 
endometrial, urinary tract or small bowel cancer in two 
generations. One of these cancers must be diagnosed at  
<50 years (Lynch syndrome);
 ● an individual with both breast and ovarian cancer.
Some genetic mutations are known to predispose women 
to ovarian cancer, e.g. BRCA1 and BRCA2 and the mismatch 
repair genes associated with Lynch syndrome families. BRCA1 
mutations confer a 39% lifetime risk of ovarian cancer up 
to the age of 70 years; the figure for BRCA2 mutations is 
11–17% up to the age of 70 years. The mismatch repair genes 
confer an increased lifetime risk of ovarian cancer of 9–12%, 
in addition to the increased risk of endometrial cancer (refer 
to Vaginal bleeding in the non-pregnant state). Referral to 
a specialist cancer genetics service is advisable. Women at 
high risk of ovarian cancer may be offered prophylactic bilat-
eral salpingo-oophorectomy, especially as they may also be at 
increased risk of breast cancer and there is some evidence to 
suggest that oophorectomy reduces breast cancer risk in these 
women. Unfortunately, there is currently no proven role for 
screening in women at high risk.
Staging (Table 81.9) is performed at laparotomy via a mid-
line incision if disease is suspected preoperatively, by:
 ● careful evaluation of all peritoneal surfaces;
 ● four washings of the peritoneal cavity: diaphragm, right 
and left abdomen, pelvis;
 ● infracolic omentectomy;
 ● selected lymphadenectomy of the pelvic and para-aortic 
lymph nodes;
 ● biopsy and/or resection of suspicious lesions, masses and 
adhesions;
 ● random blind biopsies of normal peritoneal surfaces, 
including that from the undersurface of the right hemi -
diaphragm, bladder reflection, cul-de-sac, right and left 
paracolic recesses and both pelvic side walls;
 ● total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-  
oophorectomy;
 ● appendicectomy for mucinous tumours; if a routine 
appendicectomy results in an intraoperative suspicion of a 
mucinous tumour, the surgeon should take washings and a 
biopsy from suspicious area(s).
TABLE 81.9 Staging of ovarian cancer.
Stage I Growth limited to the ovaries
Stage II Growth involving one or both ovaries with pelvic 
extension
Stage III Tumour involving one or both ovaries with 
histologically confirmed peritoneal implants outside 
the pelvis and/or positive retroperitoneal or inguinal 
nodes. Superficial liver metastases are considered 
stage III. Tumour is limited to the true pelvis but with 
histologically proven extension to the small bowel or 
omentum
Stage IV Growth involving one or both ovaries with distant 
metastases. If pleural effusion is present there must 
be positive cytology to classify a case as stage IV. 
Parenchymal liver metastasis equals stage IV
Summary box 81.7
Basic tests on suspicion of ovarian malignancy
●● Ultrasonography: findings that suggest cancer include a solid 
component, surface excrescences, size >5 cm, irregular shape 
and low vascular resistance on transvaginal Doppler flow 
studies
●● A pelvic mass plus ascites usually indicates ovarian cancer 
but sometimes indicates Meigs’ syndrome (a benign fibroma 
with ascites and the presence of a pleural effusion)
●● CT or MRI is usually carried out before surgery to determine 
the extent of the cancer
●● Tumour markers, including β-hCG, lactate dehydrogenase, 
α-FP , inhibin and CA-125, CA 19-9, CEA (carcinoembryonic 
antigen) are measured
●● CA-125 is elevated in 80% of advanced epithelial ovarian 
cancers but may also be mildly elevated in endometriosis, 
PID, pregnancy, fibroids, peritoneal inflammation and non-
ovarian peritoneal cancer
Joe Vincent Meigs , 1892–1964, gynaecological surgeon, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1528 25/10/2017   10:35Further reading 1529
PART 12 | GENITOURINARY
Ovarian cancer is chemosensitive; however, a staging 
laparotomy and histological findings provide accurate infor -
mation about prognosis and postoperative therapy. The 
general principle is cytoreductive surgery followed by combi-
nation chemotherapy; only a minority of patients with ovar -
ian cancer need bowel resected during the primary procedure 
or surgery for recurrent disease. The only exception to this 
rule is a young woman with stage I disease or a borderline 
tumour who requests unilateral oophorectomy to conserve 
her fertility.
Stage IA or IB/grade 1 epithelial adenocarcinoma requires 
no postoperative therapy. Stage IA or IB/grade 2 or 3 can -
cers and stage II cancers require six courses of chemotherapy 
(typically, paclitaxel and carboplatin). Stage III or IV cancer 
requires six courses of similar chemotherapy. Intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy or high-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow 
transplantation is under study. Radiotherapy is used infre-
quently. Even if chemotherapy results in a complete clinical 
response (i.e. normal physical examination, normal serum 
CA-125 and negative CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis), 
approximately 50% of such patients with stage III or IV can-
cer will have residual disease. Of patients with persistent ele-
vation of the CA-125, 90–95% will have residual tumour.
Ovarian stimulation with oocyte or embryo cryopreser -
vation has been reported in patients with low-grade tumours 
(grade IA/B) who wish to preserve their fertility, but the effect 
of this on the underlying disease is as yet unknown and it 
must therefore be carried out with caution. Newer techniques 
include ovarian tissue cryopreservation with the potential risk 
of cancer reoccurence following autologous transplantation.
FURTHER READING
Cervical screening programme. Available online at: https://www.gov.uk/
guidance/cervical-screening-programme-overview.
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE) 
guideline on the management of women with endometriosis. 
Available online at https://www.eshre.eu/Guidelines-and-Legal/
Guidelines/Endometriosis-guideline.aspx
NHS Evidence – women’s health. Available online at: http://www .
library.nhs.uk/womenshealth.
NICE Guidance on ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and 
initial management and heavy menstrual bleeding: assessment 
and management. Available online at: https://www.nice.org.uk/
Guidance/CG154
Prat J, FIGO Committee on Gynecologic Oncology. FIGO Guidelines. 
Staging classification for cancer of the ovary, fallopian tube, and 
peritoneum. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2014; 124 (1): 1–5.
RCOG Green-top guidelines on ovarian cysts in postmenopausal wom -
en, management of suspected ovarian masses in premenopausal 
women, pregnancy and breast cancer. A vailable online at: http://
www.rcog.org.uk.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of epithelial 
ovarian cancer. No. 135. Available online at: http://www.sign.ac.uk/ 
guidelines.
UK National Guideline for the management of pelvic inflammatory 
disease. British Association for Sexual Health and HIV . Available 
online at: https://www.bashh.org/documents/3572.pdf
12_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1529 25/10/2017   10:3512_81-B&L27_Pt12_Ch81.indd   1530 25/10/2017   10:35
PART
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
82 Transplantation ........................................................................................1532
Transplantation
13
13-82A-B&L27_Pt13.indd   1531 25/10/2017   10:36Chapter
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Learning objectives
 • To appreciate the immunological basis of allograft 
rejection
 • To know the principles of immunosuppressive therapy
 • To be aware of the side effects of non-specific 
immunosuppression
 • To be familiar with the major issues concerning organ 
donation
 • To appreciate the main indications for organ 
transplantation
 • To know the surgical principles of organ implantation
 • To be able to give an account of the causes of graft 
dysfunction
 • To know the likely outcomes after transplantation
 • To be aware of potential future developments in 
transplantation
T ransplantation
82
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Since early times, the idea of tissue and organ transplantation 
has captured the imagination of successive generations and, 
over the centuries, numerous fanciful descriptions of success-
ful transplants have been recorded.
The modern era of transplantation began in the 1950s 
(Table 82.1) and relied on surgical techniques for anasto -
mosing blood vessels that had been developed at the start of 
the twentieth century by Mathieu Jaboulay and Alexis Car -
rel. The first successful kidney transplant was a living-donor 
transplant performed between identical twins in 1954 at the 
Brigham Hospital in Boston by Joseph Murray and colleagues. 
This, and other kidney transplants between identical twins, 
demonstrated the technical feasibility of kidney transplan -
tation, but attempts to perform renal transplantation when 
the donor and recipient were not genetically identical failed 
because no effective immunosuppressive therapy was avail-
able (Figure 82.1). Then, in 1959, Schwartz and Dameshek 
discovered that 6-mercaptopurine had immunosuppressive 
properties, and Calne showed that azathioprine, a derivative 
of 6-mercaptopurine, prevented rejection of canine kidney 
transplants. From the early 1960s, a combination of azathio -
prine and corticosteroids was used with moderate success in 
the clinic to prevent graft rejection after kidney transplanta -
tion. These chemical agents were sometimes supplemented 
with a polyclonal anti-lymphocyte antibody.
Mathieu Jaboulay , 1860–1913, Professor of Surgery, Lyons, France.
Alexis Carrel , 1873–1944, surgeon, Lyons, France, who worked at the Rockefellar Institute for Medical Research in New York, NY, USA. He received the Nobel 
Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1912 ‘In recognition of his works on vascular suture and the transplantation of blood vessels and organs’.
Joseph E Murray , 1919–2012, Professor of Plastic Surgery, Harvard University Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, shared the 1990 Nobel Prize for Physiology or 
Medicine with E Donnall Thomas for his work on organ and cell transplantation.
Robert S Schwartz , Professor of Medicine, the Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
William Dameshek , 1900–1969, American physician and haematologist.
Figure 82.1 One of the early Boston recipients of a kidney trans -
plant from an identical twin, shown here with her twin sister and their 
children. 
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1532 25/10/2017   10:38Graft rejection 1533
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
The ciclosporin era began in the late 1970s after its dis-
covery by Borel at the Sandoz laboratories in Basle and the 
demonstration, by Calne in Cambridge, UK, of its potent 
immunosuppressive properties in clinical transplantation. 
The introduction of ciclosporin was a major advance and cic-
losporin (usually given together with azathioprine and ster -
oids) not only improved the results of renal transplantation, 
but also allowed transplantation of the heart and liver to be 
undertaken with acceptable results. Organ transplantation 
is now well established as an effective treatment for selected 
patients with end-stage organ failure. Kidney, liver, pancreas, 
heart and lung transplantation are all routine procedures with 
good outcome, and transplantation of the small intestine is 
becoming more widely practised. Transplant activity is lim -
ited only by the shortage of donor organs.
TABLE 82.1 Milestones in organ transplantation.
1954 Joe Murray performed successful kidney transplantations 
between identical twins (Boston, MA, USA)
1962 Roy Calne demonstrated the efficacy of azathioprine in 
preventing rejection of kidney allografts (Boston, MA, 
USA)
1963 Tom Starzl performed the first human liver transplantation 
(Denver, CO, USA)
1966 Tom Starzl and colleagues used anti-lymphocyte globulin 
immunosuppression (Denver, CO, USA)
1966 Richard Lillehei and William Kelly performed first human 
whole organ pancreas transplantation (along with a kidney 
transplantation) (Minneapolis, MN, USA)
1967 Christiaan Barnard performed the first human heart 
transplantation (Cape Town, South Africa)
1968 Fritz Derom performed the first human lung 
transplantation (Ghent, Belgium)
1969 Geoff Collins developed Collins solution – a new kidney 
preservation solution
1974 David Sutherland and John Najarin performed the first 
human pancreatic islet transplantation (Minneapolis, MN, 
USA)
1978 Roy Calne introduced ciclosporin into clinical practice 
(Cambridge, UK)
1981 Bruce Reitz and Norman Shumway performed the first 
successful human heart–lung transplantation (Stanford, 
CA, USA)
1987 Fokert Belzer and colleagues developed University of 
Wisconsin (UW) solution – a new liver and pancreas 
preservation solution (Wisconsin, USA)
1988 Rudolf Pichlmayr performed the first splitting of a donor 
liver for use in two recipients (Hannover, Germany)
1989 Tom Starzl demonstrated clinical efficacy of FK506 
(tacrolimus) (Pittsburgh, PA, USA)
1991 Kil Park performed the first living-donor kidney paired 
exchange to overcome antibody incompatibility (Seoul, 
South Korea)
1995 Lloyd Ratner and colleagues first described laparoscopic 
living-donor nephrectomy (Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA)
Jean-Francois Borel , b.1933, research scientist working in Switzerland.
Sir Roy York Calne , Emeritus Professor of Surgery, the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. In 1968 he performed Europe’s first liver transplantation. He was 
associated with the world’s first liver, heart and lung transplantation in 1987. He was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in 1974. He is an accomplished painter 
who has painted many of his transplant recipients and has had exhibitions worldwide.
Sir Peter Brian Medawar , 1915–1987, zoologist and immunologist, Director of the National Institute of Medical Research, London, UK. He shared the 1968 
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with Sir Frank Macfarlane Burnet, for his research into immunological tolerance.
GRAFT REJECTION
Allografts provoke a powerful immune response that results 
in rapid graft rejection unless immunosuppressive therapy is 
given. The pioneering studies of Medawar in the 1940s and 
1950s firmly established that allograft rejection was due to 
an immune response and not a non-specific inflammatory 
response and subsequent studies demonstrated that T lym-
phocytes play an essential role in mediating rejection.
Allografts trigger a graft rejection response because of 
allelic differences at polymorphic genes that give rise to his -
tocompatibility antigens (transplant antigens) of which ABO 
blood group antigens and human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) 
are the most important.
ABO blood group antigens
The ABO blood group antigens are expressed not only by 
red blood cells, but also by most other cell types. It is vitally 
important, for all types of organ allograft, to ensure that recip-
ients do not unintentionally receive a graft that is ABO blood 
group incompatible otherwise naturally occurring anti-A or 
anti-B antibodies will likely cause hyperacute graft rejection.
Permissible transplants are from:
 ● group O donor to group O, A, B or AB recipient;
 ● group A donor to group A or AB recipient;
 ● group B donor to group B or AB recipient;
 ● group AB donor to group AB recipient.
There is no need to take account of rhesus antigen com -
patibility in organ transplantation.
Summary box 82.1
Definitions
●● Allograft: an organ or tissue transplanted from one individual 
to another
●● Alloantigen: transplant antigen
●● Alloantibody: transplant antibodies
●● HLA: human leukocyte antigen, the main trigger to graft 
rejection
●● Xenograft: a graft performed between different species
●● Orthotopic graft: a graft placed in its normal anatomical site
●● Heterotopic graft: a graft placed in a site different from that 
where the organ is normally located
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1533 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1534
HLA
Allograft rejection (in blood group-compatible grafts) is 
directed predominantly against HLA – a group of highly poly-
morphic cell-surface molecules. HLA are strong transplant 
antigens by virtue of their special physiological role as antigen 
recognition units for display of antigens from foreign patho -
gens for recognition by T lymphocytes. Their existence was 
first demonstrated by Dausset in 1958, through their role in 
stimulating graft rejection responses, and hence their descrip-
tion as major histocompatibility antigens (MHA). second signal by the interaction of co-stimulatory molecules 
on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell and T cell (Fig-
ure 82.3).
Effector mechanisms of rejection
HLA expressed by graft cells activate T cells and stimulate 
them to proliferate in response to interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 
other T-cell growth factors. Activated CD4 T cells, through 
release of cytokines, play a central role in orchestrating the 
various effector mechanisms responsible for graft rejection 
(Figure 82.4). The cellular effectors of graft rejection include 
cytotoxic CD8 T cells, which recognise donor HLA class I 
antigens expressed by the graft and cause target cell death 
through the release of lytic molecules such as perforin and 
granzyme. Graft-infiltrating CD4 T cells, which recognise 
donor HLA class II antigens, mediate direct target cell dam-
age and are also able, by releasing proinflammatory cytokines 
such as interferon-γ, to recruit and activate macrophages that 
act as non-specific effector cells. Finally, CD4 T cells provide 
essential T-cell help for B lymphocytes which differentiate 
into plasma cells and produce alloantibodies that bind to graft 
antigen and induce target cell injury directly or through anti-
body-dependent, cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
Summary box 82.2
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
●● Are the most common cause of graft rejection
●● Their physiological function is to act as antigen recognition 
units
●● Are highly polymorphic (amino acid sequence differs widely 
between individuals)
●● HLA-A, -B, -C (class I), and -DR, -DP and -DQ (class II) are 
most important in organ transplantation
Jean Dausset , 1916–2009, French immunologist, Professor of Experimental Medicine at the College of France, Paris, France, shared the 1980 Nobel Prize for 
Physiology or Medicine with George Snell and Baruj Benacerraf for his discovery of the HLA antigens.
There are two types of HLA molecule: HLA class I and 
HLA class II (Table 82.2). They are broadly similar in struc -
ture (Figure 82.2) but have different cell expression profiles. 
HLA class I antigens are present on all nucleated cells, whereas 
HLA class II antigens have a more restricted distribution and 
are expressed most strongly on antigen-presenting cells, such 
as dendritic cells, macrophages and B lymphocytes. T cells 
recognize HLA molecules via their T-cell receptor, but full 
T-cell activation also requires the delivery of an additional or 
TABLE 82.2 Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and 
HLA class II molecules.
Class I Class II
HLA loci HLA-A, -B and -C HLA-DR, -DP and -DQ
Structure Heavy chain and 
β2-microglobulin
α- and β-chain
Distribution All nucleated cells B cells, dendritic cells, 
macrophages
(a) HLA-Aw68 (class I) (b) HLA-DR1 (class II)
α1
β2m
α2
α3
α1
α2
β1
β2
Figure 82.2  The three-dimensional structure 
of the extracellular domains of human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) class I and class II. The α1 and α 2 
domains of class I and the α1 and β1 domains of 
class II form a cleft that is floored by a β-pleated 
sheet and walled by two α-helices. The cleft binds 
an antigenic peptide and displays it on the cell sur-
face for recognition by a T lymphocyte. (Redrawn 
with permission from Stern and Wiley (1994) Struc-
ture 2: 245–52.)
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1534 25/10/2017   10:38Graft rejection 1535
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
Types of allograft rejection
Allograft rejection can be divided into three distinct types:
1 hyperacute rejection (occurs immediately);
2 acute rejection (usually occurs in the first 6 months);
3 chronic rejection (occurs months and years after trans -
plantation).
the presence and severity of allograft rejection after organ 
transplantation.
Hyperacute rejection
This is due to the presence in the recipient of preformed anti-
bodies against HLA class I antigens expressed by the donor . 
These arise from a previous blood transfusion, a failed trans -
plant and pregnancy. This type of rejection also occurs if 
an ABO blood group-incompatible organ graft is performed 
inadvertently. After revascularisation of the graft, antibodies 
bind immediately to the vasculature, activate the comple -
ment system, and cause extensive intravascular thrombosis, 
interstitial haemorrhage and graft destruction within minutes 
and hours. Kidney transplants are particularly vulnerable to 
hyperacute graft rejection, whereas heart and liver transplants 
are relatively resistant. It is not clear why the liver is resis -
tant to hyperacute rejection. One factor may be that it is less 
susceptible to ischaemia than the kidney by virtue of its dual 
Summary box 82.3
Types of graft rejection
●● Hyperacute rejection
Immediate graft destruction due to ABO or preformed anti-
HLA antibodies
Characterised by intravascular thrombosis and interstitial 
haemorrhage
●● Acute rejection
Usually occurs during first 6 months
T-cell dependent
May be cell mediated, antibody mediated or both
Usually reversible
●● Chronic rejection
Occurs after first 6 months
Most common cause of graft failure
Antibodies play an important role
Non-immune factors contribute to pathogenesis
Characterised by myointimal proliferation in graft arteries 
leading to ischaemia and fibrosis
T cell
Antigen-
presenting
cell
MHC/peptideCD3
TCR
CD4/8
CD28 CD80/86
Signal
1
Signal
2
CD154 CD40
Figure 82.3 Molecular events involved in T-cell activation by an anti-
gen-presenting cell. T-cell activation requires the delivery of two dis -
tinct signals to the T cell. The first signal is delivered by ligation of the 
TCR/CD3 complex with the human leukocyte antigen (HLA)/peptide 
complex. The second signal is delivered after the interaction between 
pairs of co-stimulatory molecules such as CD28 with CD80/86 and 
CD154 with CD40.
APC
CD4
T cell
DTHEndothelial
activation
Speci/f_ic
cytotoxicity
Non-speci/f_ic
cytotoxicity
Antibody
Plasma
cell
B cellMf
Activated
Mf
Tcp
Tc
NK
cell
Activated
NK cell
MHC
TCR
IL-2 IL-2
IL-4
IL-2
IL-4
IL-5
Figure 82.4 The central role of the CD4 T cell in 
orchestrating the various ef fector mechanisms 
responsible for allograft rejection. APC, anti-
gen-presenting cell; DTH, delayed-type hypersen -
sitivity; IFN-γ, interferon-gamma; IL, interleukin; 
MΦ, macrophage; MHC, major histocompatibility 
complex; NK, natural killer; Tc, T-cytotoxic cell; Tcp, 
T-cytotoxic precursor cell; TCR, T-cell receptor.
Allograft rejection manifests itself as functional failure of 
the transplant and is confirmed by histological examination. 
Biopsy material is obtained from renal and pancreas grafts 
by needle biopsy, and from hepatic grafts by percutaneous or 
transjugular liver biopsy. Cardiac grafts are biopsied by trans-
jugular endomyocardial biopsy and lung grafts by transbron-
chial biopsy. After small intestinal transplantation, mucosal 
biopsies are obtained from the graft stoma or more proximally 
by endoscopy. A standardised histological grading system, 
termed the Banff classification (named after the Canadian 
town where the initial scientific workshop was held), defines 
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1535 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1536
 ● long cold ischaemia time;
 ● cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection;
 ● raised blood lipids;
 ● inadequate immunosuppression (including poor compli-
ance).
The single most important risk factor for chronic rejection 
after kidney transplantation is acute rejection (with vascu-
lar inflammation) and recurrent episodes of acute rejection. 
As non-immune factors often contribute significantly to the 
long-term failure of a kidney transplant, the term ‘chronic 
allograft nephropathy’ is sometimes used.
The histological picture of chronic rejection after organ 
transplantation is dominated by vascular changes, with the 
development of myointimal proliferation in arteries, which 
results in ischaemia and fibrosis (Figure 82.7). In addition to 
blood supply: 60% of the hepatic blood supply is derived from 
the portal vein and 40% from the hepatic artery.
Hyperacute rejection can be avoided by ensuring ABO 
blood group compatibility and performing a cross-match test 
on recipient serum to ensure that there are no clinically rele-
vant antibodies directed against HLAs expressed by a pro -
spective kidney donor.
Acute rejection
This usually occurs during the first 6 months after transplan -
tation but may occur later. It is mediated predominantly by T 
lymphocytes, but alloantibo dies may also play an important 
role. Acute rejection is characterised by mononuclear cell 
infiltration of the graft (Figure 82.5). The mononuclear cell 
infiltrate is heterogeneous and includes cytotoxic T cells, B 
cells, natural killer (NK) cells and activated macrophages. 
Antibody-mediated damage may also be present, as evidenced 
by the deposition of the complement component C4d within 
the graft microvasculature (Figure 82.6). All types of organ 
allograft are susceptible to acute rejection (typically occurring 
in around 20–30% of grafts). Most episodes of acute cellular 
rejection can be reversed by additional immuno  suppressive 
therapy. Acute antibody-mediated rejection is more difficult 
to treat effectively and may require plasmaphoresis or 
immuno adsorption.
Chronic rejection
This usually occurs after the first 6 months. All types of trans-
plants are susceptible to chronic rejection, and it is the major 
cause of allograft failure. Interestingly, the liver is more resis-
tant than other organs to the destructive effects of chronic 
rejection. The pathophysiology of chronic rejection is not 
well understoo d, although the underlying mechanisms are 
immunological, and alloantibodies are thought to be a major 
cause and cellular effector mechanisms may also contribute. 
Alloantigen-independent factors also contribute. The risk 
factors for chronic rejection of a kidney transplant are:
 ● previous episodes of acute rejection;
 ● poor HLA match;
Figure 82.5  Severe acute r enal allograft rejection with a heavy 
mononuclear cell infiltrate and intimal arteritis.
Figure 82.6 Acute antibody-mediated renal allograft rejection. There 
is widespread staining for the complement component C4d within the 
peritubular capillaries (arr ows), which indicates alloantibody binding 
to the graft vasculature.
Figure 82.7  Chronic r enal allograft rejection. The arteriole shows 
severe myointimal pr oliferation and luminal narrowing, resulting in 
ischaemic fibrosis.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1536 25/10/2017   10:381537
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATIONHLA matching
vasculopathy, there are organ-specific features of chronic graft 
rejection. These are:
 ● kidney: glomerular sclerosis and tubular atrophy;
 ● pancreas: acinar loss and islet destruction;
 ● heart: accelerated coronary artery disease (cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy);
 ● liver: vanishing bile duct syndrome;
 ● lungs: obliterative bronchiolitis.
Chronic rejection causes functional deterioration in the 
graft, resulting after months or years in complete graft failure. 
Unfortunately, currently available immunosuppressive ther -
apy has had little effect in preventing chronic rejection.
Graft-versus-host disease
Although the main immunological problem after transplan -
tation is graft rejection, the reciprocal problem of graft- 
versus-host reaction is occasionally seen after certain types of 
organ transplantation. Some donor organs (particularly liver 
and small bowel) contain large numbers of lymphocytes, and 
these may react against HLAs expressed by recipient tissues, 
leading to graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). GVHD fre -
quently involves the skin, causing a characteristic rash on 
the palms and soles. It may also involve the liver (after small 
bowel transplantation) and the gastrointestinal tract (after 
liver transplantation). GVHD is a serious and sometimes fatal 
complication.
HLA MATCHING
HLA molecules are encoded by the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC), a cluster of genes situated on the short arm 
of chromosome 6 (Figure 82.8). The HLA class I antigens 
comprise HLA-A, -B and -C, and the HLA class II antigens 
comprise HLA-DR, -DP and -DQ. Expression of MHC genes 
is co-dominant, i.e. the genes on both the maternally derived 
and the paternally derived chromosomes are expressed. 
Consequently, an individual may express between 6 and 12 
different HLA antigens, depending on the degree of homozy-
gosity (shared genes) at individual loci.
The HLA haplotype inherited from each parent is usually 
inherited as a complete haplotype, according to simple mende-
lian genetics (Figure 82.9). In deceased donor renal transplan-
tation (but not other types of organ transplantation), attempts 
are usually made to match the donor and recipient for as many 
of the relevant HLAs as possible. In addition to reducing the 
risk of graft loss from rejection, a well-matched kidney allograft 
that subsequently fails is less likely to cause sensitisation to the 
HLAs that it expresses. It is particularly important in children 
and young adults to avoid, where possible, grafts that are mis-
matched for common HLAs because, if retransplantation is 
required subsequently, it may be difficult to find an organ donor 
who does not express the antigens to which the recipient has 
become sensitised. In terms of organ transplantation, HLA-
A, -B and -DR are the most important antigens to take into 
account when matching donor and recipient in an attempt to 
reduce the risk of graft rejection (Figure 82.10).
HLA matching has a relatively small but definite beneficial 
effect on renal allograft survival (HLA-DR > HLA-B > HLA-
A). Recipients who receive well-matched renal allografts 
may require less intensive immunosuppression and are also 
troubled less by rejection episodes. It is common practice to 
express the degree of HLA matching between the donor and 
recipient in terms of whether or not there are mismatches at 
each locus for HLA-A, -B and -DR. A ‘000 mismatch’ is a 
‘full-house’ or complete match, whereas a ‘012 mismatch’ is 
matched at HLA-A loci, has one mismatched HLA-B anti-
gen and is mismatched for both -DR antigens. Deceased donor 
kidneys are allocated in some countries, including the UK, 
by a points system that optimises HLA matching but also 
takes into account other factors, such as time on the waiting 
list, sensitisation to HLA antigens and the age relationship 
between the donor and the recipient. Allocation of organs for 
transplantation must also take into account the relative size 
of the donor and recipient. This is not an issue in renal trans-
plantation, and adult kidneys can be readily used for children 
(and vice versa). However, in the case of heart, lung, liver and 
A ppro ximate number
of alleles de/f_ined
by  molecular typing
124
74
258
268
58
99
A
C
B
DR
DQ
DP
Centromer e
Genes coding
for HLA class I
Genes coding
for HLA class II
A
C
B
DR
DQ
DP
Figure 82.8 The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system on the short 
arm of chromosome 6.
Gregor Johann Mendel , 1822–1884, Austrian monk and naturalist, became Abbot of the Augustinian Monastery at Brunn, former Czechoslovakia and discovered 
the laws of inheritance by studying the edible pea. In 1865 he described ‘dominant’ and ‘recessive’ traits in hybrids. His work passed unnoticed for 35 years.
Mother Father
Child 1
A
AA
Child 2 Child 3 Child 4
B
B
BCC
C
DD
D
Figure 82.9 Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) inheritance. Children 
acquire one HLA haplotype (depicted as A–D) fr om each parent. As 
shown, child 1 shares one HLA haplotype (haploidentical) with child 
2 and child 3, but does not share either haplotype with child 4. The 
chances that two siblings will share the same parental haplotypes, or 
that they will share neither HLA haplotype, is one in four. The chance 
that they will share one HLA haplotype is one in two.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1537 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1538
small bowel transplantation, it is important to consider size 
compatibility between the donor and the recipient. In the case 
of liver transplants, HLA matching does not confer an advan-
tage and, although it is beneficial in cardiac transplantation, 
it is not practicable because of the relatively small size of the 
recipient pool and the short permissible cold ischaemic time.
THE TISSUE-TYPING 
LABORATORY
Successful organ transplantation requires a close working 
relationship between the tissue-typing laboratory and the 
clinical transplant team. The tissue-typing laboratory car -
ries out three key tasks. First, they determine the HLA type 
(‘tissue type’) of all potential organ transplant recipients and 
organ donors. This is achieved by applying polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)-based DNA-typing techniques to samples of 
peripheral blood. Second, they perform a cross-match test to 
exclude the presence in a recipient of clinically significant 
circulating antibodies to HLAs expressed by a potential organ 
donor that would result in rapid or hyperacute graft rejection. 
This involves incubating recipient sera with donor lympho -
cytes prepared from either blood or lymphoid tissue. The 
presence of anti-donor antibodies is detected in a conven -
tional cytotoxic cross-match assay by adding rabbit comple -
ment, along with indicator dyes, and visualising target cell 
death. More often a flow cytometric cross-match is performed 
as well as, or instead of, a cytotoxic cross-match. Third, the 
 tissue-typing laboratory determines the HLA specificity of 
circulating anti-HLA antibodies in recipients before and after 
organ transplantation to guide organ allocation and immu -
nosuppressive therapy. This task has been revolutionised by 
the availability of solid phase assays, particularly Luminex 
technology, where patient sera are incubated with a panel of 
latex beads coated with purified HLA molecules and antibody 
binding detected by flow cytometric analysis.
Patients on the renal transplant waiting list should be 
screened for the development of HLA antibodies on a regular 
basis and especially after potential priming to HLA antigens 
by blood transfusion.
If, when considering renal transplantation, the cross-
match test is strongly positive, transplantation should not 
proceed, or hyperacute rejection is likely. Antibodies directed 
against HLA class II antigens, unlike those to HLA class I, do 
not usually cause hyperacute rejection but are associated with 
acute rejection and a poor clinical outcome. Patients await-
ing heart transplantation are also screened for the presence 
of HLA antibodies and those with preformed antibodies are 
subjected to a prospective cross-match test. Although heart 
allografts rarely undergo hyperacute rejection, transplanta -
tion in the presence of a positive cross-match is associated 
with graft loss from accelerated acute rejection. Even in the 
presence of a strongly positive cross-match test, liver trans -
plants rarely undergo hyperacute rejection, although long-
term survival is reduced.
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE 
THERAPY
A range of different agents are available that act at different 
sites during T-cell activation to prevent rejection (Table 82.3 
and Figure 82.11). They can be classified according to their 
principal mode of action.
Calcineurin inhibitors (ciclosporin 
and tacrolimus)
Ciclosporin and tacrolimus are the mainstay of most mod-
ern immunosuppressive protocols for organ transplantation. 
Although structurally distinct, they exert their principal 
immunosuppressive effect through the same intracellular 
pathway. Each of the two agents binds within the T cell to 
a cytoplasmic protein or immunophilin (ciclosporin binds 
Figure 82.10  Beneficial effect of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
matching (HLA-A, -B and -DR) on first deceased donor renal allograft 
survival (courtesy of Collaborative Transplant Study, CTC-K-21101-
0816). MM, antigen mismatch.
TABLE 82.3 Immunosuppressive agents.
Agent Principal mode of action
Corticosteroids Widespread anti-inflammatory effects
Azathioprine Prevents lymphocyte proliferation
Mycophenolic acid 
preparations
Prevents lymphocyte proliferation
Calcineurin inhibitors 
(ciclosporin/tacrolimus)
Blocks IL-2 gene transcription
mTOR inhibitors Blocks IL-2 receptor signal transduction
ALG Depletion and blockade of lymphocytes
Anti-CD25 mAb Targets activated T cells
Anti-CD52 mAb Depletion of lymphocytes
Anti-CD20 Depletion of B lymphocytes
CTLA-4Ig Blocks T-cell costimulation
IL-2, interleukin-2.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1538 25/10/2017   10:38Immunosuppressiv e therapy 1539
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
to cyclophilin and tacrolimus to FK-binding protein). The 
resulting immunophilin–drug complex then blocks the activ-
ity of calcineurin (a phosphatase) within the cytoplasm of 
the T cell. Calcineurin plays a critical role in facilitating 
the transcription of IL-2, the main T-cell growth factor, and 
other cytokines after T-cell activation. By blocking cytokine 
synthesis, ciclosporin and tacrolimus exert a potent immuno-
suppressive effect. The two agents share a number of side 
effects, the most notable of which is nephrotoxicity (Table 
82.4). Ciclosporin sometimes causes cosmetic side effects 
(hirsutism and gingival hypertrophy) that may be distressing, 
particularly in younger female recipients. The calcineurin 
inhibitors (CNIs) have a relatively small therapeutic window. 
Their immunosuppressive action, as well as their side effects, 
is dependent on their blood concentration, and monitoring 
of whole-blood drug levels is an important guide to optimal 
therapy. Ciclosporin and tacrolimus are broadly equivalent 
in terms of long-term graft survival but increasing evidence 
suggests that tacrolimus is more effective in reducing acute 
rejection. The choice between the two agents depends on the 
preference of the transplant unit and on individual patient 
tolerance to the different side effects of the two agents.
Antiproliferative agents 
(azathioprine and mycophenolate)
Lymphocytes are among the most rapidly proliferating cells in 
the body, and lymphocyte proliferation and clonal expansion 
are an integral part of the immune response to an allograft. 
The antiproliferative agents available for immunoprophylaxis 
are azathioprine and mycophenolic acid preparations (myco -
phenolate mofetil [MMF] and mycophenolic acid sodium 
[MPAS]). Azathioprine is converted in the liver to its active 
metabolite, 6-mercaptopurine, which blocks purine metabo-
lism and thereby inhibits cellular proliferation. Mycophenolic 
acid (MPA) preparations are more expensive than azathio -
prine but have largely replaced it as the agent of choice. 
After ingestion, MMF is converted to its active metabolite 
MPA. It inhibits the enzyme inosine monophosphate dehy -
drogenase, which is the rate-limiting enzyme in the de novo 
pathway of purine nucleotide synthesis. As lymphocytes do 
not have a salvage pathway for purine synthesis, their ability 
to proliferate is selectively impaired. The main side effects 
of azathioprine and MPA are bone marrow suppression and 
gastrointestinal symptoms.
Steroids
Steroids are an important component of many immunosup -
pressive regimens. Glucocorticoids are potent anti-inflam -
matory agents and have wide-ranging effects on the immune 
response. As a result of their numerous and well-known side 
effects, some centres attempt to gradually withdraw steroids 
from patients who have stable graft function after transplan -
tation, but this sometimes precipitates a rejection episode and 
necessitates recommencement of steroids.
Antibody therapies
Monoclonal antibodies directed against the IL-2 receptor on 
T lymphocytes (CD25) are commonly given at the time of 
Anti-CD25 Anti-proliferatives
MPA
Azathioprine
Calcineurin blockers
Ciclosporin
Tacrolimus
Depleting antibodies
ATG
Alemtuzumab
Costimulatory blockade
CTLA-4Ig
Resting
T cell
Early
activation
Late
activation Proliferation
mTOR inhibitors
Sirolimus
Everolimus
CD25
 
Figure 82.11  Site of action of immunosuppressive 
agents on T cell. ATG, anti-thymocyte globulin; MP A, 
mycophenolic acid derivatives; mTOR, mammalian tar-
get of rapamycin.
TABLE 82.4 Agent-specific side effects of 
immunosuppressive agents used in organ transplantation 
(all immunosuppressive agents increase the risk of 
infection).
Agent Side effects (not comprehensive)
Corticosteroids Hypertension, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, 
osteoporosis, avascular necrosis, cushingoid 
appearance
Azathioprine Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
hepatotoxicity, gastrointestinal symptoms
Mycophenolic 
acid derivatives
Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
gastrointestinal symptoms
Ciclosporin Nephrotoxicity, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, 
hirsutism, gingival hyperplasia
Tacrolimus Nephrotoxicity, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, 
neurotoxicity, diabetes
mTOR inhibitors Thrombocytopenia, dyslipidaemia, 
pneumonitis, impaired wound healing
ALG Infusion reactions, leukopenia and 
thrombocytopenia
Anti-CD25 Uncommon
CTLA-4Ig ? Increased risk of PTLD
Anti-CD52 Infusion reaction and autoimmune disease
Anti-CD20 Infusion reactions and pulmonary toxicity
ALG, anti-lymphocyte globulin; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; 
PTLD, post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1539 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1540
transplantation to temporarily augment the effects of calci -
neurin blockade during the early post-transplant period. Their 
effect lasts for a few weeks only and they lack any significant 
agent-specific side effects. Polyclonal antibo dy (anti- 
thymocyte globulin [ATG]) and monoclonal antibody 
preparations (alemtuzumab [anti-CD52 expressed on T cells 
and dendritic cells]) are also quite widely used as more potent 
and alternative induction agents. They cause a temporary 
depletion of circulating lymphocytes that reduces rejection 
but may lead to an increase in infection and malignancy. In 
addition to their use as induction agents, antibody prepara -
tions may be used to treat acute rejection episodes that fail to 
respond to steroid therapy.
The monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody (rituximab) 
depletes B lymphocytes, and is widely used as a component 
of protocols to enable ABO and HLA antibody-incompatible 
renal transplantation. It may also be helpful for the treatment 
of antibody-mediated acute rejection, although its efficacy 
here is limited because it does not deplete antibody-producing 
plasma cells.
Mammalian target of rapamycin 
inhibitors (sirolimus and everolimus)
Sirolimus and its structural analogue everolimus are, similar 
to tacrolimus, macrolides that bind within T lymphocytes to 
FK-binding protein. However, their mode of action is com-
pletely different to that of both ciclosporin and tacrolimus. 
They act by inhibiting an intracellular kinase called mamma-
lian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and interfere with intracel-
lular signalling from the IL-2 receptor, arresting T-cell division 
in the G1 phase. In contrast to CNIs they are not nephro-
toxic. However, their side-effect profile includes lymphocele 
formation, impaired wound healing, an adverse effect on the 
blood lipid profile, thrombocytopenia and very occasionally 
pneumonitis. The mTOR inhibitors may have anti-tumour 
activity and the potential value of this effect in transplant 
recipients is under investigation. Although the negative 
effect on wound healing and lymphocele formation limits 
the immediate use of mTOR inhibitors after transplantation, 
switching from CNIs to mTOR inhibitors is sometimes used 
as a strategy to minimise CNI-induced nephrotoxicity.
T-cell co-stimulatory blockers
CTLA-4Ig (belatocept, LEA29Y) is a fusion protein com-
prising the extracellular domain of CTLA-4 fused to human 
immunoglobulin (Ig) Fc. It binds to the co-stimulatory ligands 
CD80 and CD86 expressed on antigen-presenting cells and, 
as a result, prevents them from delivering the co-stimulatory 
signals to the T cells that are required for full T-cell activa -
tion. It has recently been shown in renal transplantation to 
provide an effective alternative to CNIs when given by reg-
ular intravenous injection, thereby avoiding the metabolic, 
cardiovascular and nephrotoxic effects of CNIs. Although 
its future looks very promising, a potential concern is that it 
may be associated with an increased risk of post-transplant 
lympho proliferative disease (PTLD).
Immunosuppressive regimens
When selecting an immunosuppressive regimen, the chal -
lenge is to provide levels of immunosuppression that are suf -
ficient to protect the graft from rejection without exposing 
the recipient to excessive risk from infection and malignancy 
as a result of non-specific immunosuppression. Immunosup -
pressive therapy is started at the time of transplantation and 
is continued indefinitely (as maintenance therapy), although 
the requirement for immunosuppression is highest in the first 
few weeks after transplantation when the risk of acute rejec -
tion is greatest. Immunosuppressive protocols vary, but all use 
a combination of immunosuppressive agents acting at differ -
ent points in the pathway of lymphocyte activation. Most 
currently include a CNI (ciclosporin or tacrolimus) as the 
main agent, and this is often supplemented with anti-CD25 
monoclonal antibody induction therapy. CNIs are usually 
combined with an anti-proliferative agent (most often MMF) 
and steroids, so-called triple therapy. Less often, a CNI is used 
with an anti-proliferative agent alone or with steroids alone 
(dual therapy). When there is particular concern about acute 
rejection, polyclonal or monoclonal antibody preparations 
are administered followed by a CNI, an anti-proliferative 
agent and steroids.
The principles of immunoprophylaxis are similar for 
all types of organ transplantation. Interestingly, liver grafts 
seem to be less susceptible to rejection for reasons that are 
still unclear. The mTOR inhibitors have been shown to be 
effective immunosuppressive agents for preventing acute 
rejection after kidney transplantation, and they provide a 
non-nephrotoxic alternative to CNIs for maintenance ther -
apy. They have a similar safety profile to CNIs in terms of 
post-transplant infection, but some of their agent-specific 
side effects are of potential concern and their clinical niche 
has still to be fully determined. Similarly, the potential role 
that CTLA-4Ig will find as an alternative to CNIs remains 
to be seen.
Acute rejection occurs in up to around 30% of transplant 
recipients but usually responds to a short course of high-dose 
steroid therapy. If the response to steroids is inadequate or if 
acute rejection recurs, acute rejection can often be treated 
successfully by recourse to anti-lymphocyte globulin (ALG) 
therapy.
Summary box 82.4
Principles of immunosuppression
●● Principles are the same for all types of organ transplantation
●● Aim is to maximise graft protection with minimum of side 
effects
●● Most regimens are based on calcineurin blockade and include 
steroids and an anti-proliferative agent
●● Need for immunosuppression is highest in the first 3 months 
but indefinite treatment is needed
●● Immunosuppression increases the risk of infection and 
malignancy
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1540 25/10/2017   10:38Complications of immunosuppression 1541
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
COMPLICATIONS OF 
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
As well as the agent-specific side effects already mentioned, 
the immunosuppressive agents used in organ transplantation 
cause non-specific immunosuppression and increase the risk 
of both infection and malignancy.
Viral infection
The risk of viral infection is highest during the first 6 months 
after transplantation and the most common problem is CMV 
infection. CMV disease may arise because of either reactiva -
tion of latent infection or primary infection that can be trans-
mitted by an organ from a CMV-positive donor. Recipients at 
most risk from CMV infection are those who are CMV sero -
negative (i.e. those who have not been infected previously 
with CMV) and receive an organ from a CMV-seropositive 
donor (about half of all UK donors are CMV seropositive). 
Unfortunately, matching seronegative donors with seronega-
tive recipients is not practicable. Without prophylaxis, CMV 
disease typically presents at 4–8 weeks with a high swinging 
fever, lethargy and leukopenia. The severity of the disease is 
variable and the clinical picture depends on the organ system 
most affected. It may present as:
 ● pneumonia
 ● gastrointestinal disease
 ● hepatitis
 ● retinitis
 ● encephalitis.
Severe CMV disease is potentially fatal. Prophylaxis for 
CMV consists of administration of antiviral agents, most com-
monly valganciclovir; aciclovir and valaciclovir are cheaper 
but less effective alternatives. A diagnosis of active CMV 
infection is confirmed by PCR to detect viral DNA in whole 
blood, and by histological examination of biopsy material. 
Treatment is with antiviral agents (either oral valganciclovir 
or intravenous ganciclovir), and is more effective when given 
pre-emptively on the basis of increased viral load detected by 
quantitative PCR analysis of peripheral blood.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is common after 
transplantation and is usually due to reactivation of latent 
infection. It causes mucocutaneous lesions around the mouth 
and sometimes the genitalia. These usually respond to topical 
treatment with aciclovir, but in severe cases systemic antiviral 
therapy is needed. Disseminated HSV infection is rare.
BK virus is emerging as an important cause of graft dys -
function after renal transplantation. Infection with BK virus 
is almost universal during childhood, with latent infection 
in the epithelium of the urinary tract. Immunosuppression 
causes lytic BK virus replication with graft involvement in 
1–5% of renal transplants. The only effective treatment is 
to reduce the level of immunosuppression to allow natural 
immune mechanisms to regain control of the virus.
Herpes zoster infection, as a result of reactivation of latent 
varicella-zoster virus, occurs more frequently in transplant 
recipients and should be treated with systemic antiviral ther-
apy. Primary varicella-zoster virus infection (chickenpox) is 
potentially very serious in immunosuppressed patients but 
is relatively uncommon because most adults have acquired 
immunity.
Fungal infection
Pneumocystis jiroveci (previously designated P neumocystis 
carinii and wrongly classified as a protozoa) is one of the more 
important fungal infections after transplantation. It occurs 
Summary box 82.5
Side effects of non-specific immunosuppression
●● Infection
Transplant recipients are at high risk of opportunistic 
infection, especially by viruses
Bacterial and fungal infections are also common
Risk of infection is greatest during the first 6 months
Chemoprophylaxis is important for high-risk patients
Viral infection may result from reactivation of latent virus or 
from primary infection
Cytomegalovirus is a major problem
Pre-transplant vaccination against community-acquired 
infection should be considered
●● Malignancy
Most types of cancer are more common after 
transplantation (approximately twofold)
Recipients, especially children, are at risk of post-
transplant lymphoproliferative disease
There is a very high risk of squamous cancer of the skin 
and recipients should have a regular skin review
Infection
Transplant recipients receiving immunosuppressive therapy 
are at high risk from opportunistic infection, especially by 
viruses. Opportunistic infection is a potential problem in all 
transplant recipients, but those receiving aggressive immuno-
suppressive therapy are most at risk. Chemoprophylaxis is 
important in high-risk recipients, and early recognition fol-
lowed by prompt and aggressive treatment of infection is 
essential in all transplant recipients. Pre-transplant vaccina -
tion against community-acquired infections should be 
considered.
Bacterial infection
The risk of bacterial infection is highest during the first 
month after transplantation. Transplant recipients are, simi -
lar to any patient undergoing major surgery, at risk of bacterial 
infections in the wound, respiratory tract and urinary tract. 
It is standard practice to give a broad-spectrum antibiotic to 
cover the perioperative period as prophylaxis against wound 
infection and possible bacterial contamination of the donor 
organ. The risk of bacterial infection is greatest in transplant 
recipients who are critically ill before or after surgery, and are 
in the intensive care unit with indwelling catheters and lines. 
After recovery from surgery, the risk of bacterial infection is 
much reduced. Tuberculosis is a concern in patients who have 
previously had mycobacterial infection and in patients from 
the Indian subcontinent, and it is usual to give them chemo -
prophylaxis for a period of 6–12 months after transplantation.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1541 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1542
during the first few months and presents with respiratory 
symptoms. The diagnosis is made by examination of broncho-
alveolar lavage fluid or lung biopsy material for evidence of 
fungal infection (Figure 82.12). Chemoprophylaxis is highly 
effective and usually continued for up to 6 months after trans-
plantation.
Other types of invasive fungal infections are uncommon 
in renal transplant recipients but infection with Candida or 
Aspergillus spp. is more common after other types of organ 
transplantation. Fungal infection usually occurs in the first 3 
months after transplantation, and early diagnosis and aggres-
sive treatment are essential to avoid fatal infection.
Malignancy
After transplantation, there is an increased risk of develop -
ing most types of malignant disease but the risk is particu-
larly high for those types of tumour in which viral infection 
plays an aetiological role. The increased risk of malignancy 
is particularly high for skin cancer and PTLD. Most of the 
skin cancers seen are squamous cell carcinomas, but basal cell 
carcinoma and malignant melanoma are also more common 
than in the general population. The risk of skin cancer after 
transplantation rises with age and exposure to sunlight, and 
it has been predicted that 50% of transplant recipients will 
develop a skin malignancy within 20 years of transplanta-
tion. Patients must be warned of this risk before they undergo 
transplantation and be advised to take precautions to protect 
their skin from excessive sunlight. They should undergo regu-
lar review of their skin to detect early malignancy, and when 
malignant lesions occur they must be treated promptly and 
aggressively.
PTLD is an abnormal proliferation of B lymphocytes, usu-
ally in response to Epstein–Barr virus infection. The condition 
presents in a variety of ways including as an infectious mono-
nucleosis-type illness or lymphadenopathy, or with involve -
ment of extranodal sites such as the tonsils, gastrointestinal 
tract, lung, liver or the transplanted organ (Figure 82.13). 
PTLD occurs in around 1–3% of kidney and liver transplant 
recipients and the incidence is considerably higher in chil -
dren. Those patients at most risk are those who have received 
aggressive immunosuppression. PTLD is a serious condition 
with an overall mortality rate of up to 50%. If it is identified 
at an early stage, reduction or cessation of immunosuppres -
sive therapy may cause disease regression and result in a cure. 
Chemotherapy is often given and antiviral therapy, surgery 
and radiotherapy may also have a role in treating established 
disease. Disseminated PTLD and central nervous system 
(CNS) involvement have a very poor prognosis.
Transplant recipients also have a 300-fold increased risk of 
developing Kaposi’s sarcoma, although this malignancy is still 
very uncommon after transplantation.
ORGAN DONATION
The number of organs required to satisfy the needs of trans -
plantation far exceeds the number of donor organs avail -
able. In the case of renal transplantation in the UK there 
are approximately 6000 patients waiting for transplantation, 
Figure 82.12 Transbronchial lung biopsy from a renal allograft recip-
ient with Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia. The silver stain used 
reveals fungal cysts, each containing several intracystic bodies or 
spores, distributed widely within the biopsy material.
Figure 82.13 (a) Intestinal post-transplant lymphoproliferative dis -
ease (PTLD). Note multiple lesions in the terminal ileum and colon. (b) 
Atypical B lymphocytes stained positive with a probe for Epstein–Barr 
virus DNA (courtesy of C Watson, R Chavez-Cartaya and D Wight).
(a)
(b)
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1542 25/10/2017   10:38Organ donation 1543
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
but only around 3000 transplantations performed annually, 
which has led to a median waiting time for transplantation 
of around 3 years. Similar shortages exist for liver and pan -
creas transplantation. For cardiothoracic organs the shortage 
is even worse and not all patients who might benefit from 
transplantation are listed.
Organs may be obtained from living donors or from 
deceased donors (DD) and DD may be either brain-stem-
dead, heart-beating donors (donation after brain death or 
DBD donors) or donation after circulatory death (DCD) 
donors. Living donation is limited to donation of the kidney 
and, to a much lesser extent, liver or lung lobe. DBD donors 
provide most of the organs for transplantation for all organ 
types, although DCD donors provide an increasing number 
of kidneys, livers, pancreas glands and lungs for transplanta -
tion. The approach to referral and consent for organ donation 
varies between countries. Some have ‘required request’ or 
‘required referral’ systems in place, where all patients dying in 
intensive care settings have to be referred for their potential 
suitability to be organ donors assessed. Some countries (e.g. 
Austria and Spain) have an ‘opt-out’ or ‘presumed consent’ 
system, where the assumption is made that individuals wished 
to donate their organs for transplantation unless they specif -
ically registered their objection before death. There is debate 
about whether such a policy alone increases organ donation 
and a concern expressed by some that individuals who may 
not have wanted to become organ donors may fail to opt out 
before death, and that conflict may occur with relatives and 
next of kin who may oppose organ donation.
because it allowed the possibility for removal of viable organs 
from brain-dead patients before their circulation failed.
In the UK and many other countries, brain death is 
defined in terms of permanent functional death of the brain 
stem as neither consciousness nor spontaneous respiration is 
possible in the absence of a functional brain stem. A diag -
nosis of brain-stem death should be considered only when 
certain preconditions have been met. The patient must have 
suffered major brain damage of known aetiology, be deeply 
unconscious and require ventilatory support. Particular care 
must be taken to ensure that muscle relaxant agents and drugs 
with known CNS depressant effects are not contributing to 
the clinical picture. Hypothermia, profound hypotension, 
and metabolic or hormonal conditions that may contribute 
to CNS depression and confound the diagnosis of brain-stem 
death must also be excluded. When the necessary precondi -
tions have been satisfied, formal clinical assessment of the 
brain-stem reflexes can be undertaken (Table 82.5). The UK 
guidelines state that the tests should be performed on two sep-
arate occasions by two clinicians experienced in this area. At 
least one of the two clinicians should be a consultant and nei-
ther should be connected with the transplant team. The time 
that must elapse between the two sets of brain-stem tests is 
not specified in the guidelines and is determined on the basis 
of clinical judgement. In the UK, there is no requirement to 
perform electrophysiological or brain perfusion studies to aid 
the diagnosis of brain-stem death. Particular care is required 
in the diagnosis of brain-stem death in neonates and infants.
Donation after circulatory death 
donors
The number of potential DBD donors has remained relatively 
static or even declined as a result of changes in neurosurgi -
cal practice and improved road safety. T o address the rising 
demand for organ transplantation there has been a major 
trend towards increasing use of organs from DCD donors.
Donation after brain death donors
Most DD organs are obtained from patients in whom brain-
stem death has been diagnosed. Such donors were previously 
called ‘heart-beating deceased donors’ and in most brain 
death results from stroke or traumatic head injury. Brain death 
occurs when severe brain injury causes irreversible loss of the 
capacity for consciousness combined with the irreversible loss 
of the capacity for breathing. In most countries, it is accepted 
that the condition of brain death equates in medical, legal 
and religious terms with death of the patient. The concept 
of brain death arose through necessity in the management of 
patients with irreversible brain damage on life support when 
there was no prospect for recovery. It was not in the interest 
of such patients, their relatives or the hospital in which they 
were being treated to delay their inevitable demise by con -
tinuing with futile life support. Acceptance of the concept of 
brain death had major implications for organ transplantation 
Summary box 82.6
Overcoming the shortage of organs for transplantation
●● Maximising donation after brain-death (DBD) donation
●● Use of marginal DBD deceased donors
●● Use of donation after circulatory death (DCD) donor
●● Increased use of split-liver transplantation
●● Increased living donor kidney (and liver) transplantation
TABLE 82.5 Clinical testing for brain-stem death.
Absence of cranial 
nerve reflexes
Pupillary reflex
Corneal reflex
Pharyngeal (gag) and tracheal (cough) reflex
Oculovestibular (caloric) reflex
Absence of motor 
response
The absence of a motor response to painful 
stimuli applied to the head/face and the 
absence of a motor response within the 
cranial nerve distribution to adequate 
stimulation of any somatic area is an indicator 
of brain-stem death. The presence of spinal 
reflexes does not preclude brainstem death
Absence of 
spontaneous 
respiration
After pre-ventilation with 100% O2 for at 
least 5 minutes, the patient is disconnected 
from the ventilator for 10 minutes to confirm 
absence of respiratory effort, during which 
time the arterial Pco2 level should be >8 kPa 
(60 mmHg) to ensure adequate respiratory 
stimulation. To prevent hypoxia during the 
apnoeic period, O2 (6 L/min) is delivered via 
an endotracheal catheter
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1543 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1544
DCD donors can be grouped according to the Maastricht 
classification as follows:
 ● category 1: dead on arrival at hospital;
 ● category 2: resuscitation attempted without success;
 ● category 3: ‘awaiting cardiac arrest’ after withdrawal of 
support;
 ● category 4: cardiac arrest while brain dead;
 ● category 5: cardiac arrest and unsuccessful resuscitation in 
hospital.
Maastricht categories 1, 2 and 5 donors are sometimes 
referred to as uncontrolled DCD donors. The warm ischaemic 
time of organs from these three categories of donor is usually 
longer and less predictable than in the case of categories 3 
and 4 (controlled) donors. Most DCD donor organs used for 
transplantation in the UK, USA and several other European 
countries are from controlled (category 3) donors who have 
died in intensive care after planned withdrawal of futile 
cardio respiratory support.
Kidneys may be also be recovered from carefully selected 
patients who are dead on arrival at the hospital or who have 
died after unsuccessful resuscitation. In Spain and France 
most DCD kidneys are obtained from uncontrolled donors.
Evaluation of the deceased donor
After a deceased donor has been referred to the transplant 
team with a view to organ donation, the general suitability of 
the potential organ donor must be carefully assessed. Partic -
ular care must be taken to assess the donor from the point of 
view of transmissible infectious agents and malignancy. The 
medical history should be scrutinised and evidence sought 
of risk factors for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
and hepatitis B and C virus infection, such as intravenous 
drug abuse. The presence of Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease is an 
absolute contraindication to organ donation. Organs from 
HIV-infected donors should not be used for transplantation, 
except sometimes in recipients who are already infected by 
HIV . Hepatitis B infection (in most countries) and active sys-
temic sepsis, e.g. major abdominal infection, are contraindi -
cations to donation. The presence of malignancy within the 
past 5 years is usually an absolute contraindication to organ 
donation with the exceptions of primary tumours of the CNS, 
non-melanotic tumours of the skin and carcinoma in situ of 
the uterine cervix. If there are no general contradictions to 
organ donation, consideration is then given to organ-specific 
selection criteria.
As a result of the high demand for donor organs there has 
been a progressive relaxation in the organ-specific selection 
criteria. The chronological age of the donor is less important 
than the physiological function of the organs under consider-
ation for transplantation.
The organs to be donated should generally be free from 
primary disease. Potential kidney donors should have a rea -
sonable urine output and relatively normal serum urea and 
creatinine, although acute terminal elevations are accept -
able. Liver donors should not have hepatic disease, although 
impaired liver function tests are common in deceased donors 
and do not necessarily preclude donation. Heart donors 
should have a normal electrocardiogram and, in doubtful 
cases, echocardiography may be necessary. For lung donors the 
chest radiograph and gas exchange should be satisfactory, and 
bronchial aspirates should be free from fungal and bacterial 
infection. Elevations of blood glucose and serum amylase are 
not uncommon in deceased donors and do not preclude pan -
creas donation. The use of organs from suboptimal or ‘mar -
ginal’ deceased donors has increased markedly in an attempt 
to address the demand for transplantation. The definition of 
a marginal donor depends on the organs being considered for 
transplantation and varies between countries. In the case of 
kidney transplantation an extended criteria donor is defined 
in the USA as a donor age >60 years or one between the ages 
of 50 and 60 years with two of the following: hypertension, 
death from stroke and a terminal creatinine >132  mmol/L. 
Organs from ‘marginal donors’ generally lead to less satisfac-
tory transplant outcomes than those from standard donors.
Organ recovery from deceased 
donors
In DBD donors, once brain-stem death has been confirmed, 
management of the donor is aimed at preserving the functional 
integrity of the organs to be recovered. Brain-stem death pro-
duces profound metabolic and neuroendocrine disturbances, 
leading to cardiovascular instability. Careful monitoring 
and management of fluid balance is essential. V asopressin is 
often given to allow reduction or cessation of catecholamine 
pressors and, along with DDA VP , to treat diabetes insipidus. 
Donors are also usually given methylprednisolone to aid fluid 
and metabolic management, together with triiodothyronine 
(T3) to help cardiovascular stability.
Recovery of multiple organs from a DBD donor requires 
cooperation between the thoracic and abdominal surgical 
teams. A midline abdominal incision and median sternotomy 
are used to obtain access. After dissection of the organs to 
be recovered, they are perfused in situ. The heart is perfused 
with cold cardioplegia solution via a cannula in the ascend -
ing aorta and the lungs are perfused via a cannula in the 
pulmon ary artery. The abdominal organs are perfused with 
chilled organ preservation solution via an aortic and portal 
cannula. Blood and perfusate are vented from the left atrial 
appendage and the inferior vena cavae. This pro duces rapid 
cooling of the organs, reduces their metabolic activity and 
preserves their viability. Additional surface cooling of the 
abdominal organs may be achieved by application of saline 
ice slush. The heart and lungs are excised simultaneously 
with the liver and pancreas, followed by the kidneys, either 
en bloc or separately. The extent to which the abdominal 
organs are dissected before cold flush depends on the pref -
erence of the surgical team. Some surgeons perform minimal 
dissection before cold perfusion and complete the dissection 
Maastricht  is a city in the province of Limburg, in The Netherlands.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1544 25/10/2017   10:38Organ donation 1545
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
of the abdominal organs in situ or on the back table after 
the organs have been removed en bloc. During recovery of 
the liver, care is taken to ensure that, if there is an aberrant 
hepatic artery arising from the superior mesenteric artery, it is 
included in the aortic patch. An adult donor liver cannot be 
transplanted into a child because of the size mismatch, and 
there are insufficient deceased paediatric donor livers avail -
able for transplantation. One solution is to undertake split-
liver transplantation, which was first performed by Pichlmayr 
in 1988. The liver from a deceased donor is split and the left 
lobe or left lateral segments are used for a child and the right 
lobe for an adult recipient (Figure 82.14).
When removing the donor kidneys care is taken to ensure 
that any polar renal arteries are included on an aortic patch 
with the renal artery (Figure 82.15). In older kidney donors 
with atherosclerosis the aortic segment may be too diseased 
to use as an arterial patch, and the donor renal artery and 
any polar arteries are divided shortly after their origin and, if 
necessary, reconstructed before implantation (Figure 82.16). 
In the case of the pancreas, a Y graft of donor iliac artery 
is excised and used to reconstruct the divided splenic and 
superior mesenteric arteries of the graft before implantation 
(Figure 82.17).
In DCD donors there is an inevitable period of warm 
ischaemia (up to 45 minutes is acceptable) between the diag-
nosis of death (cardiorespiratory arrest) and cold perfusion of 
the organs. The aim during organ recovery is to minimise the 
period of warm ischaemia, although the approach used differs 
according to whether the donor is a controlled or uncontrolled 
DCD donor. It is important to note that only around 50% of 
all patients considered as potential controlled DCD donors 
have a cardiorespiratory arrest within the period of time (usu-
ally 3 hours) considered practicable for the surgical team to 
stand by for organ recovery. After cardiorespiratory arrest 
there is an obligatory ‘hands off’ period before certification 
of death of at least 5 minutes, before the surgical procedure 
for organ recovery can begin. If not already in the operating 
theatre, the DCD donor is transferred immediately to the 
operating room and the abdomen opened to allow rapid 
cannulation of the aorta and cold perfusion of the organs to 
be recovered. In the case of uncontrolled DCD donors the 
warm ischaemic time can be minimised by rapid insertion 
of a double balloon catheter introduced into the aorta via 
a femoral cut-down and used to cool the kidneys in situ by 
chilled perfusate preferably within 30 minutes of circulatory 
arrest (Figure 82.18). This allows time to gain consent from 
relatives for organ donation to proceed if it is not already 
available and to assemble the surgical team for organ recovery.
IVC
LHV
VII VIII IV
V VI
II
III
FL
LHDHA
CHD RPV
RHA
LPV
Figure 82.14 An adult liver may be split (according to Couinar d’s 
segments) so that the left lateral segment (segments II and III) can be 
transplanted into a child and the right lobe (together with segment IV) 
can be transplanted into an adult. CHD, common hepatic duct; FL, 
falciform ligament; HA, hepatic artery (on aortic patch); IVC, inferior 
vena cava; LHD, left hepatic duct; LHV, left hepatic vein; LPV, left por-
tal vein; RHA, right hepatic artery; RPV, right portal vein.
Rudolph Pichlmayr , 1932–1997, surgeon, Hannover, Germany.
Figure 82.15 Deceased donor kidney with multiple renal arteries 
on an aortic patch. The aortic patch has been shortened to limit the 
length of the anastomosis needed when joining the donor patch to 
the side of the recipient external iliac artery (Medical Photography, 
Addenbrooke’s Hospital).
Figure 82.16 Deceased donor kidney from elderly (>70 years) donor 
illustrating the technical challenges of using kidneys from mar ginal 
donors. The aorta shows severe atherosclerosis with extensive plaque 
formation and ulceration, and is not suitable for use as an aortic patch. 
A lower polar artery has already been divided. The two arteries can be 
joined together before implantation or implanted separately.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1545 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1546
After removal from the donor, the organs may undergo 
a further flush with chilled preservation solution before they 
are placed in double or triple sterile bags and stored at 4°C by 
immersion in ice, while they are transported to the recipient 
centre and await implantation. Once the donor organs have 
been excised, samples of donor spleen and mesenteric lymph 
nodes are obtained for confirmation of tissue type and use in 
the cross-match test.
Various organ preservation solutions are available for flush-
ing organs before cold storage. They all contain impermeants 
to limit cell swelling, buffers to counter acidosis and electro-
lytes, the composition of which reflects that of intracellular 
rather than extracellular fluid. Commonly used preservation 
solutions include University of Wisconsin (UW) solution 
and Euro-Collins solution, but there are many others. The 
use of UW solution (Table 82.6) (developed by Belzer and 
colleagues in Wisconsin, USA) is particularly effective for 
liver grafts, and after perfusion with UW solution the liver 
can be stored safely for up to 24 hours. The length of time 
for which an organ can be stored before transplantation var -
ies depending on the type of organ (Table 82.7). Although 
minimising the duration of organ storage is important for all 
organs, it is essential that organs from DCD donors be trans -
planted with the minimum possible cold storage time. Most 
organs for transplantation are stored by static cold storage 
in an icebox. However, there is a recent trend towards stor -
ing deceased donor kidneys by pulsatile machine perfusion, 
Figure 82.17 Donor pancreas viewed from the posterior aspect after 
preparatory bench surgery. The duodenal component of the graft has 
been sutured closed proximally and distally, and a Y graft of donor 
iliac artery used to reconstruct the divided splenic and superior mes -
enteric arteries. The bile duct (ligated) and portal vein are anterior and 
not seen in this view.
Double-balloon
triple-lumen catheter
Distal balloon
Left kidney
Right kidney
Inferior vena cava
Aorta
Proximal balloon
Foley catheter
Figure 82.18  In situ perfusion of kidneys in a non-heart-beating 
donor (donation after cardiac death [DCD]). A double-balloon aortic 
catheter is introduced through a groin incision and 10–15 litres of 
chilled preservation solution is administered. The perfusate is vented 
through a Foley catheter introduced into the femoral vein.
The University of Wisconsin  is at Madison, WI, USA.
Fokert O Belzer , 1931–1995, surgeon, Madison, WI, USA.
TABLE 82.6 Composition of University of Wisconsin (UW) 
solution.
Potassium lactobionate (mmol/L) 100
Sodium phosphate (mmol)  25
Magnesium sulphate (mmol)   5
Adenosine (mmol/L)   5
Allopurinol (mmol/L)   1
Glutathione (mmol/L)   3
Raffinose (mmol/L)  30
Hydroxethyl starch (g/L)  50
Insulin (U/L) 100
Dexamethasone (mg/L)   8
Potassium (mmol/L) 135
Sodium (mmol/L)  35
Osmolality (mosmol/L) 320
pH     7.4
TABLE 82.7 Maximum and optimal cold storage times 
(approximate).
Organ Optimum (hours) Safe maximum 
(hours)
Kidney <18 36
Liver <12 18
Pancreas <10 18
Small intestine  <4  6
Heart  <3  6
Lung  <3  8
(Assuming zero warm ischaemic time and organs obtained from a non-
marginal donor.)
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1546 25/10/2017   10:38Organ donation 1547
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
where the kidneys are placed inside a purpose-designed perfu-
sion machine that pumps cold preservation solution through 
the renal artery in an attempt to reduce ischaemic injury. 
Machine perfusion can be started immediately after kidney 
recovery or as soon as practicable thereafter, and is usually 
continued until the time of implantation. The benefit of 
machine perfusion over simple cold storage is currently the 
subject of considerable debate.
Living kidney donors
Living-donor renal transplants account for around 30% of 
the total renal transplant activity in the UK, but in some 
countries (notably the Scandinavian countries and the USA) 
this figure is much higher (>50%). The justification for liv -
ing-donor renal transplantation is based on the shortage of 
deceased donor transplants and the superior results obtained. 
Traditionally, most living-donor transplants were between 
genetically related individuals. However, living-donor kidney 
transplantations performed between genetically unrelated 
individuals also fare better than even well-matched deceased 
donor grafts, and this observation gave rise to a steady 
increase in living-unrelated kidney transplantation activity, 
usually between spouses or partners. It is essential to ensure 
that, in all cases of living donation, the prospective donor is 
fully informed and free from coercion to donate, and that the 
risk to the donor is small. In the UK, all living-donor trans -
plants (irrespective of whether they are or are not genetically 
related) require prior approval by the Human Tissue Author-
ity (HTA). An independent person (one not associated with 
the transplant team) approved by the HTA must provide 
confirmation to the HTA that the donor and recipient under-
stand the implications of the proposed operation and that 
there is no evidence of coercion or financial inducement.
Live donation should proceed only after prospective 
donors have undergone rigorous assessment to ensure that 
they are suitable. Before the donation, it is essential to per -
form imaging (usually magnetic resonance angiography or 
computed tomography-guided angiography), to delineate the 
anatomy of the arterial supply to the kidneys. If the left kid-
ney has a single renal artery (10% of kidneys have two or more 
renal arteries), it is usually chosen for transplantation because 
the longer left renal vein simplifies the transplant operation. 
The presence of multiple renal arteries does not necessarily 
preclude donation, although implantation of living-donor 
kidneys with multiple renal arteries may increase the chances 
of vascular complications developing after implantation.
Live donor nephrectomy was historically undertaken 
either through a loin incision and retroperitoneal approach 
or through a midline abdominal incision and transperitoneal 
approach. In most transplant units, nephrectomy is now under-
taken laparoscopically (totally laparoscopic or hand assisted). 
Laparoscopic nephrectomy is associated with less wound pain 
in the donor, allows more rapid mobilisation after surgery and 
reduces hospital stay. Initial concerns that kidneys removed 
by the laparoscopic technique may have more ureteric com -
plications after implantation have proven unfounded. After 
removal from the donor the kidney is flushed immediately 
with chilled organ preservation solution (Figure 82.19). The 
mortality rate for live donation is less than 0.05%, and around 
half of reported deaths are due to pulmonary embolic disease, 
so it is essential to ensure prophylaxis to reduce deep-vein 
thrombosis (DVT). The major complication rate after live 
donor nephrectomy is <5%: potential complications include 
haemorrhage requiring blood transfusion or surgery, infec-
tion (chest, abdomen, renal tract and wound), damage to an 
intra-adominal viscus, adverse reaction to drugs and anaes -
thetic agents, and DVT and pulmonary embolus. In the long 
term, kidney donors may be at increased risk from hyperten -
sion and donors should have their blood pressure and urine 
checked annually.
Around 35% of potential living donor transplant recip -
ients will be ABO blood group incompatible with their 
intended donor and until recently this precluded transplan-
tation. However, there are now two potential solutions to 
this problem. The first is ‘paired exchange’ where incompat-
ible donor/recipient pairs exchange kidneys between pairs 
to allow ABO-compatible transplantation (Figure 82.20). 
Figure 82.19 After removal from the donor, the kidney is flushed with 
chilled organ preservation solution and, if necessary, stored briefly on 
ice until transplanted into the recipient.
Donor
Pair 1
Pair 2
Blood
group A
Blood
group A
Blood
group B
Blood
group B
Recipient
Figure 82.20  Paired living-donor kidney transplantation. Pair ed 
donation allows patients with willing but blood group-incompatible 
donors to be transplanted by pairing them with other incompatible 
donor–recipient pairs. In the example shown, the two willing donors 
are incompatible with their intended recipient (blood groups A to B 
and B to A) but by paired donation each recipient can receive an 
ABO-compatible kidney transplant (blood groups A to A and B to B).
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1547 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1548
Recruitment of more than two pairs to facilitate ‘pooled 
donation’ increases the likelihood of matching donors with 
compatible recipients and, although such schemes pose con -
siderable logistical challenges, they are now operating suc -
cessfully in several countries. An alternative approach is to 
transiently deplete ABO antibodies from potential recipients 
by passing their blood through special absorption columns 
or by performing plasmaphoresis along with administration 
of pre-transplant immunosuppressive agents (Figure 82.21). 
Perhaps surprisingly, graft outcome after desensitisation is 
similar to that after paired donation. Both paired donation 
and antibody depletion strategies are also potentially appli -
cable to recipients in whom HLA antibodies preclude 
transplantation from an intended living donor, but graft 
survival after depletion of HLA antibodies is lower than 
when the recipient receives a kidney from an HLA antibody- 
compatible donor.
Living liver donors
Living donor liver transplantation is now undertaken in a 
number of transplant centres worldwide and is relatively com-
mon practice in some countries where deceased donation is 
not practised for cultural or religious reasons, notably Japan 
and Korea. The concept was first pioneered to allow children 
to receive the left lobe or left lateral segment from an adult 
donor and has been very successful. It has now been extended 
to adult-to-adult live liver transplantation (Figure 82.22). 
The majority of such transplants require a right liver lobe to 
provide adequate hepatic function. For adult-to-adult live 
liver donation, the donor procedure has a reported mortality 
rate of around 0.5% and a major complication rate of up 
to 15%. One of the more common donor complications is 
bile leak.
Living donors: other organs
Occasionally, living donors have provided segments of pan -
creas, small bowel and lung for transplantation, but this is 
more controversial. In the USA, living-donor, combined kid-
ney and segmental pancreas transplantation has been under -
taken to treat people with type 1 diabetes with end-stage 
renal disease. In occasional patients, living-donor small bowel 
transplantation has been performed using a small bowel graft, 
which comprises a length of around 1.5  m of ileum. Finally, 
a small number of living-donor segmental lung transplanta -
tions have been performed. To provide sufficient pulmonary 
tissue without compromising the donor, it is necessary to use 
segments from two different donors for each recipient. The 
ethical issues raised by living donation for extrarenal organs 
are understandably complex.
Resumption of function after organ 
transplantation
It is crucial that, after a heart, lung or liver transplantation, 
the transplanted organ resumes satisfactory function immedi-
ately. If primary non-function occurs, the only option is rapid 
re-transplantation. After kidney , pancreas or small bowel 
transplantation, immediate graft function is desirable but 
not vital. Kidneys obtained from DCD donors invariably suf-
fer a variable degree of ischaemic damage, and delayed graft 
function is more common (typically 50% for category 3 DCD 
donors) than for kidneys obtained from DBD deceased donors 
(typically 25%). Irreversible ischaemic necrosis occasionally 
occurs and the graft never functions adequately (primary 
non-function). However, graft survival results for kidneys 
from controlled DCD kidneys are similar to those obtained 
from DBD deceased donors. Livers obtained from DCD 
donors have an increased incidence of primary non-function 
and biliary complications, including biliary anastomotic stric-
tures, bile leak and ischaemic cholangiopathy.
Tacrolimus
Mycophenolate mofetil
Prednisolone
Campath (anti-CD52) or
Basilixumab (anti-IL-2R)
Rituximab
(anti-CD20)
Day –28 Day –14 Day Tx Day 7
Plasmaphoresis/immunoadsorption
Figure 82.21  Typical desensitisation pr otocol for ABO or human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibody-incompatible live-donor kidney 
transplant.
Figure 82.22 Living donor hepatectomy . A CUSA (cavitron ultra -
sonic aspirator) is being used to divide the right and left lobes of the 
liver so that the right lobe can be transplanted into an adult recipient.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1548 25/10/2017   10:38Kidney transpl antation 1549
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
KIDNEY TRANSPLANTATION
Patient selection
Renal transplantation is the preferred treatment for many 
patients with end-stage renal disease because it provides a 
better quality of life for them than dialysis. Transplantation 
releases patients from the dietary and fluid restrictions of 
dialysis and the physical constraints imposed by the need 
to dialyse. Transplantation is also more cost-effective than 
dialysis and improves patient survival.
In the UK, around 100 people per million of the popu -
lation develop end-stage renal disease, and the incidence 
increases with age. The causes of end-stage renal disease are 
numerous and include the following:
 ● glomerulonephritis;
 ● diabetic nephropathy;
 ● hypertensive nephrosclerosis;
 ● renal vascular disease;
 ● polycystic kidney disease;
 ● pyelonephritis;
 ● obstructive uropathy;
 ● systemic lupus erythematosus;
 ● analgesic nephropathy;
 ● metabolic disease (oxalosis, amyloid).
Sometimes, the primary cause of end-stage renal disease 
is uncertain. For renal transplantation, as for other types of 
organ transplantation, careful patient selection is essential. 
Before acceptance as suitable candidates on the transplant 
waiting list, a transplant surgeon and nephrologist should for-
mally assess all patients. A significant number of patients are 
likely to be considered unsuitable for renal transplantation 
because of major comorbid disease, especially cardiovascular 
disease. In the UK, around 30–40% of the dialysis population 
are on the waiting list for renal transplantation.
The nature of the primary renal disease does not gener -
ally affect the decision to proceed to transplantation. Many 
of the glomerulonephritides (especially IgA, focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis, and mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis 
types I and II) may recur in a kidney transplant, and some-
times can lead to early graft failure (especially focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis). In the case of primary oxalosis, combined 
kidney and hepatic transplantation is usually undertaken to 
eliminate the metabolic defect and thereby prevent early graft 
failure from the formation of further oxalate stones.
The age of patients with end-stage renal failure accepted 
for dialysis has gradually risen over the last two decades, and 
in the UK the mean age of patients starting dialysis is around 
70 years. There is no absolute upper age limit to renal trans -
plantation, but inevitably older patients (aged >65 years) 
are less likely to be considered suitable candidates because of 
major cardiovascular and other comorbid diseases.
A careful assessment of comorbid disease that might sig-
nificantly reduce the chances of successful outcome after 
transplantation is essential. Rigorous evaluation of the car -
diovascular system is particularly important. Cardiovascular 
disease is very common in the dialysis population, especially 
those with diabetes, and is the major cause of death after 
transplantation. Before listing patients for transplantation, it 
is important to ensure that their urinary tract is functional and 
that there is no need for corrective urological surgery. Only 
when there is intractable renal sepsis or very large polycystic 
kidneys that intrude into both iliac fossae is native nephrec-
tomy required before transplantation (Figure 82.23). Finally, 
the prospective transplant recipient must be deemed able to 
cope with the psychological consequences of transplantation 
and likely to comply with immunosuppressive therapy.
Summary box 82.7
Factors determining organ function after 
transplantation
●● Donor characteristics
Extremes of age
Presence of pre-existing damage in transplanted organ
Haemodynamic and metabolic instability
●● Procurement-related factors
Warm ischaemic time
Type of preservation solution
Cold ischaemic time
●● Recipient-related factors
Technical factors relating to implantation
Haemodynamic and metabolic stability
Immunological factors
Presence of drugs that impair transplant function
Summary box 82.8
Evaluation of potential recipients for organ 
transplantation
●● Evaluation undertaken by appropriate multidisciplinary team 
including surgeon and physician
●● Determine presence of comorbid disease
●● Exclude malignancy and systemic sepsis
●● Evaluate against organ-specific criteria for transplantation
●● Determine probable ability to cope psychologically with 
transplant and comply with immunosuppression
●● Evaluate need for any preparative surgery needed to facilitate 
transplantation
●● Optimise recipient condition before transplantation
Immunosuppressive therapy impairs the protective 
response to both malignancy and infection. Consequently, 
pre-existing malignancy is an absolute contraindication and, 
even after curative treatment, transplantation should not usu-
ally be considered for at least 3 years. Similarly, the presence 
of active infection is a contraindication to transplantation.
Technique of renal transplantation
The transplant kidney is placed in the iliac fossa, in the ret -
roperitoneal position, leaving the native kidneys in situ. After 
induction of general anaesthesia, a central venous line and 
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1549 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1550
a urinary catheter are inserted. It is helpful to distend the 
bladder with saline containing methylene blue to allow it 
to be identified with certainty before ureteric implantation. 
A curved incision is made in the lower abdomen and, after 
dividing the muscles of the abdominal wall, the peritoneum is 
swept upwards and medially to expose the iliac vessels. These 
are dissected free so that they can be controlled with vascular 
clamps. The kidney is then removed from ice and the donor 
renal vein is anastomosed end to side to the external iliac 
vein. The donor renal artery on a Carrel patch of donor aorta 
is anastomosed end to side to the external iliac artery (Figure 
82.24a). If the donor renal artery lacks an aortic patch, as 
in the case of a living-donor transplant, it may be preferable 
to anastomose the donor artery end to end to the recipient 
internal iliac artery (Figure 82.24b). While the vascular 
anastomoses are being undertaken, the kidney is kept cold by 
application of topical ice.
After completion of the venous and arterial anastomoses, 
the vascular clamps are removed and the kidney is allowed 
to reperfuse with blood. The ureter, which is kept reasonably 
short to avoid the risk of distal ischaemia, is then anastomo -
sed to the bladder (Figure 82.25). This is achieved by direct 
implantation of the ureter into the dome of the bladder with 
a mucosa-to-mucosal anastomosis, followed by closure of the 
muscular wall of the bladder over the ureter to create a short 
tunnel, the Lich–Gregoir technique. A double-J ureteric stent 
should be left in situ, to reduce the risk of urine leak or early 
obstruction, and removed after several weeks by cystoscopy. If 
the donor ureter is too short to reach the bladder, the native 
ureter can be divided and the distal segment anastomosed to 
the ureter or renal pelvis of the donor kidney. The proximal 
segment of the native ureter can usually be ligated and the 
native kidney left in situ without causing a problem. Before 
closing the transplant wound, it is very important to ensure 
that the kidney is lying in a satisfactory position without 
Figure 82.23 Computed tomography scan of a patient with very 
large polycystic kidneys that extend well into both iliac fossa. The 
patient r equires removal of one of the polycystic kidneys to make 
room for a subsequent renal transplant. Nephrectomy should be per-
formed several weeks before transplantation.
(a)
IVC Aorta
Internal
iliac artery
Exter nal iliac
artery and vein
(b)
IVC Aorta
Pro ximal internal
iliac artery
Ligated inter nal
iliac artery
(a)
IVC Aorta
Internal
iliac artery
Exter nal iliac
artery and vein
(b)
IVC Aor ta
Pro ximal internal
iliac artery
Ligated inter nal
iliac artery
Figure 82.24 Implantation of renal allograft: (a) the renal artery on 
a Carr el patch is anastomosed to the external iliac artery; (b) the 
renal artery is anastomosed end to end to the internal iliac artery. IVC, 
inferior vena cava.
Robert Lich Jr , urologist, Louisville, KY, USA.
Willy Gregoir , Chef de Clinique Urologique, Brussels, Belgium 1962–1987.
Muscle
Mucosa
Figure 82.25 Ureteric implantation by direct anastomosis to a small 
cystomy: Lich–Gregoir technique. 
kinking or torsion of the renal vessels. In small children receiv-
ing an adult donor kidney, the abdomen is opened through a  
midline incision and the graft is placed intra-abdominally with 
anastomosis of the renal vessels to the aorta and vena cava.
Technical complications
Vascular complications
The incidence of vascular complications after renal transplan-
tation is quite low. Renal artery thrombosis occurs in approx-
imately 1% of cases. Renal vein thrombosis is more common 
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1550 25/10/2017   10:38Kidney transpl antation 1551
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
(up to 5% of cases) and, although sometimes due to technical 
error, the aetiology is often uncertain. It presents during the 
first week after transplantation with sudden pain and swelling 
at the site of the graft. The diagnosis is confirmed by Doppler 
ultrasonography. Urgent surgical exploration is indicated, and 
in most cases transplant nephrectomy is required. The inci -
dence of renal vein thrombosis can be minimised by giving 
low-dose heparin or aspirin prophylaxis. Renal artery stenosis 
usually presents late (often years) after transplantation with 
increasing hypertension and decreasing renal function. It may 
occur in up to 10% of grafts and is diagnosed by angiogra -
phy. Renal artery stenosis is best treated by angioplasty, but if 
angioplasty fails or is not technically possible then the condi-
tion can be treated successfully by open surgery and vascular 
reconstruction.
Urological complications
Urological complications occur in around 5% of patients in 
the early post-transplantation period, but their incidence can 
be reduced markedly by leaving a temporary ureteric stent in 
situ. Urinary leaks result from technical errors at the ureteric 
anastomosis or because of ureteric ischaemia. They present 
with discomfort and leakage of urine from the wound and usu-
ally require surgical intervention and reimplantation of the 
ureter into the bladder or anastomosis of the transplant ureter 
to the ipsilateral native ureter. Obstruction of the transplant 
ureter may occur early or late. Causes of obstruction include 
technical error, external pressure from a haematoma or lym -
phocele and ischaemic stricture. Ureteric obstruction presents 
with painless deterioration in graft function and is confirmed 
by demonstrating hydronephrosis and ureteric dilatation on 
ultrasound examination. Initial treatment is by percutane-
ous anterograde nephrostomy and insertion of a stent. Some 
ureteric strictures may be amenable to treatment by balloon 
dilatation but most are best treated by surgical intervention, 
reimplanting the donor ureter into the bladder or anastomos-
ing it to the native ureter.
Lymphocele
Peri-transplant lymphoceles are usually asymptomatic, but 
occasionally they become large enough to cause ureteric 
obstruction or oedema of the ipsilateral leg. Initial treatment 
is usually by ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage. In the 
case of large or recurrent lymphoceles, surgical intervention 
may be needed to drain a persistent lymphocele into the 
peritoneal cavity, and this can often be achieved by an ultra-
sound-guided laparoscopic approach.
Investigation of graft dysfunction
Graft dysfunction during the early postoperative period is a 
common problem. Possible causes are:
 ● acute tubular necrosis;
 ● arterial/venous thrombosis;
 ● urinary leak/obstruction;
 ● CNI toxicity;
 ● hyperacute/accelerated acute rejection.
Delayed graft function (defined as the need for dialysis 
post-transplantation) as a result of acute tubular necrosis 
occurs in around 25% of kidneys from DBD and up to 50% 
of kidneys from DCD donors, but is uncommon (<5%) after 
living-donor transplantation. Often, recipients pro duce sig -
nificant volumes of urine from their native kidneys, making 
the diagnosis of delayed graft function more difficult. The 
incidence of delayed function can be minimised by optimising 
donor management before kidney procurement and reducing 
the cold ischaemia time by avoiding unnecessary delay before 
implantation. As a first step in the management of early graft 
dysfunction, the urinary catheter should be irrigated in case it 
is occluded by a blood clot. Hypovolaemia, if present, should 
be corrected with the aid of central venous pressure (CVP) 
monitoring. A Doppler ultrasound examination of the graft 
is the single most important investigation because it allows 
exclusion of vascular thrombosis and urinary obstruction 
as causes of graft dysfunction. Renal radionuclide scanning 
provides information on renal perfusion and excretion and 
may be helpful but is used infrequently. If graft dysfunction is 
still present after several days, it is usual to perform an ultra -
sound-guided needle biopsy of the kidney to ensure that graft 
rejection is not present, and then to repeat the investigation 
every week or so until graft function occurs. CNI toxicity may 
cause graft dysfunction and it is important to monitor CNI 
blood levels to avoid nephrotoxicity. Acute tubular necrosis 
usually resolves within the first 4 weeks of transplantation, 
but a small number of grafts (<5%) suffer primary non-  
function (i.e. never function).
Allograft dysfunction developing late (>1 month after 
transplantation) may be due to:
 ● acute/chronic rejection;
 ● drug toxicity;
 ● ureteric obstruction (lymphocele/ureteric stricture);
 ● recurrent disease;
 ● urinary tract infection.
Blood levels of ciclosporin or tacrolimus are assessed to 
ensure that they are not unduly elevated, and ultrasound 
Summary box 82.9
Causes of allograft dysfunction
●● Early
Primary non-function (irreversible ischaemic damage)
Delayed function (reversible ischaemic injury)
Hyperacute and acute rejection
Arterial or venous thrombosis of the graft vessels
Drug toxicity (e.g. calcineurin inhibitor toxicity)
Infection (e.g. cytomegalovirus disease in graft
Mechanical obstruction (ureter/common bile duct)
●● Late
Chronic rejection
Arterial stenosis
Recurrence of original disease in graft (glomerulonephritis, 
hepatitis C)
Mechanical obstruction (ureter, common bile duct)
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1551 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1552
examination of the graft is performed to determine whether 
ureteric obstruction is present. If obstruction is detected, it is 
further investigated by percutaneous anterograde urography 
and treated as outlined above. If there is uncertainty about 
the cause of graft dysfunction, a transplant biopsy should be 
performed to establish whether allograft rejection is present.
Outcome after transplantation
The results of organ transplantation are generally defined 
in terms of patient and graft survival. Patient survival after 
deceased donor renal transplantation is >95% at 1 year and 
>85% at 5 years. Graft survival is around 90% at 1 year and 
80% at 5 years. Graft survival after a second transplant is only 
marginally worse than after a first graft. After living-related 
kidney transplantation, overall graft survival is around 95% at 
1 year and 85% at 5 years. Graft survival after transplantation 
can also be expressed in terms of the half-life of the graft. The 
half-life of grafts obtained from living donors is substantially 
longer than that of DD grafts:
 ● deceased donor grafts, 13 years;
 ● living-unrelated grafts, 16 years;
 ● living-haploidentical grafts, 17 years;
 ● living-identical sibling grafts, 27 years.
In addition to graft survival, it is important to consider 
the extent to which transplantation improves the physical 
and mental wellbeing of the patient and allows them to lead 
a satisfactory social life. In the case of a kidney, as in other 
types of solid organ transplant, successful transplantation 
undoubtedly leads to a substantial improvement in quality of 
life. However, although some recipients return to a normal or 
near-normal life, others fare much less well and, for the group 
overall, the quality of life after transplantation falls short of 
that seen in normal healthy individuals. Renal transplanta -
tion is best regarded, therefore, as an effective form of therapy 
rather than a complete cure.
PANCREAS TRANSPLANTATION
Successful pancreas transplantation restores normal control of 
glucose metabolism and obviates the need for insulin therapy 
in patients with diabetes mellitus. Improved control of blood 
glucose levels in diabetes reduces the progression of secondary 
complications such as retinopathy, peripheral vascular disease 
and nephropathy. However, in considering the indications for 
pancreas transplantation, these advantages have to be weighed 
carefully against the risks posed by both the transplantation 
procedure itself and the immunosuppressive therapy required 
to prevent graft rejection. For most patients with diabetes, 
the additional risks associated with pancreas transplanta-
tion and immunosuppression are such that the operation can 
be justified only when kidney transplantation for diabetic 
nephro pathy is also being undertaken. The additional risks of 
pancreas transplantation relate to the transplantation oper -
ation itself and the need for enhanced immunosuppressive 
therapy compared with kidney transplantation alone. In the 
USA, around a half of all patients with diabetes undergoing 
kidney transplantation also receive a pancreas transplant. In 
most cases, the kidney and pancreas are obtained from the 
same donor, so-called simultaneous pancreas and kidney 
(SPK) transplantation. Pancreas transplantation is sometimes 
performed in patients who have already undergone successful 
kidney transplantation, pancreas-after -kidney (PAK) trans -
plantation. Occasionally, pancreas transplantation alone 
(PTA) can be justified to treat life-threatening diabetic 
complications such as hypoglycaemic unawareness.
Careful patient selection is essential to avoid excessive 
mortality and morbidity. The procedure is usually reserved for 
those patients with type 1 diabetes who are relatively young 
(aged <60 years) and do not have advanced coronary artery 
disease or advanced peripheral vascular disease. Investigation 
of the heart’s response to stress, either using echocardiography 
or nuclear medicine imaging is usual.
Surgical technique
The whole pancreas gland together with a segment of duo -
denum is transplanted, essentially as pioneered by Lillehei 
in 1966. SPK transplantation is usually performed through a 
midline incision (Figure 82.26). The pancreas graft is placed 
intraperitoneally in the pelvis, usually on the right, and the 
If a kidney transplant fails late after transplantation, the 
graft can often be left in situ and immunosuppression stopped, 
but transplant nephrectomy may be indicated if the graft is 
causing symptoms. The operation is undertaken via the orig -
inal wound, but the kidney is dissected free from the renal 
capsule and delivered into the wound. The renal vessels are 
then ligated and divided, leaving behind the original vascular 
anastomosis.
Summary box 82.10
Outcome after transplantation
●● Transplantation improves the quality and duration of life in 
most recipients
●● Transplant outcome has improved progressively over the last 
two decades and continues to improve
●● Improved outcome is due to better immunosuppression, 
organ preservation, chemoprophylaxis and technical 
advances
●● Graft survival after kidney, liver and heart transplantation is 
>90% at 1 year and >80% at 5 years
●● The results of lung and small bowel transplantation are less 
good
●● Chronic rejection is the most common cause of graft failure 
after all types of solid-organ transplant
●● Recurrence of the original disease necessitating 
transplantation may also lead to graft failure
●● Death with a functioning transplant from cardiovascular 
disease is relatively common
●● Up-to-date transplant outcomes for the different organs can 
be found at the online national and international transplant 
databases (see end of chapter for website addresses)
Richard Lillehei , surgeon, the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MI, USA.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1552 25/10/2017   10:38Pancreas transpl antation 1553
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
kidney graft is placed on the left side. The donor vessels of the 
pancreas graft are anastomosed to the recipient iliac vessels 
and the exocrine secretions are most commonly dealt with by 
anastomosing the graft duodenum to the small bowel (enteric 
drainage) often via a Roux-en-Y loop, although the duodenum 
may sometimes be anastomosed to the bladder (urinary drain-
age). The pancreas graft functions immediately after revas -
cularisation, although supplementary insulin may be required 
for a few days. Technical complications usually occur early 
and include vascular thrombosis of the graft (5%) and duo -
denal anastomotic leaks. Graft pancreatitis is very common, 
but usually mild and unlikely to need intervention. Wound 
infection occurs in up to 10% of patients, and intra-abdominal 
infection is relatively common. The specific complications of 
enteric drainage include intra-abdominal sepsis and adhesive 
small intestinal obstruction. Bladder drainage of the exocrine 
pancreas may result in the following complications:
 ● bladder/duodenal anastomotic leaks;
 ● cystitis (owing to effect of pancreatic enzymes);
 ● urethritis/urethral stricture;
 ● reflux pancreatitis;
 ● urinary tract infection;
 ● haematuria;
 ● metabolic acidosis (due to loss of bicarbonate in the 
urine).
Urinary drainage of the pancreas has the advantage that 
urinary amylase levels can be used to monitor for graft rejec -
tion. However, after bladder drainage, urinary complications 
are common, and in around 20% of cases their severity neces-
sitates conversion to enteric drainage. Most centres now pre-
fer primary enteric drainage after SPK transplantation. Acute 
rejection after SPK transplantation is relatively common 
(10–20%) and if detected early responds to treatment with 
steroids. Biopsy confirmed that acute renal allograft rejection 
may be a surrogate for pancreas rejection, but acute rejection 
of the kidney or pancreas graft may occur in isolation. Serum 
lipase and amylase levels are useful indications of pancreas 
graft inflammation of which acute rejection is one cause. 
Elevation of blood glucose level is a late feature of acute rejec-
tion and often indicates the process is beyond reversal.
Results of pancreas transplantation
The principal aim of pancreas transplantation is to prolong 
life in patients with diabetes who otherwise have a high mor-
tality at 10 years after receiving a kidney transplant alone. It 
also provides freedom from insulin treatment and improves 
quality of life.
The results of pancreas transplantation have improved 
significantly over the last decade. After SPK transplantation, 
the 1-year patient survival rate is greater than 95% and the 
1-year graft survival rates for pancreas and kidney grafts are 85 
and 95%, respectively. Most deaths are due to cardiovascular 
complications or overwhelming infection. Patient and kidney 
graft survival after SPK transplantation in patients with dia-
betic nephropathy is at least as good as after kidney transplan-
tation alone in this group. The results of PTA are not as good 
as after SPK transplantation (1-year pancreas graft survival 
rate of 75%) because acute rejection is more difficult to mon-
itor in the absence of a kidney allograft.
Transplantation of isolated 
pancreatic islets
Treatment of diabetes by transplantation of isolated islets 
of Langerhans is a more attractive concept than vascular -
ised pancreas transplantation because major surgery and the 
potential complications of transplanting exocrine pancreas 
are avoided. Pancreatic islets for transplantation are obtained 
by mechanically disrupting the pancreas after injection of col-
lagenase into the pancreatic duct. The islets are then purified 
from the dispersed tissue by density-gradient centrifugation 
and can be delivered into the recipient liver (the preferred site 
for transplantation) by injection into the portal vein. Until 
recently, human islet transplantation had been performed 
intermittently and with very disappointing results. How -
ever, in 2000, Shapiro and colleagues in Edmonton, Canada, 
reported success with islet transplantation in seven patients 
with type 1 diabetes. Sequential islet transplantation from 
two or three donor pancreas glands was required to produce 
insulin independence and, although the long-term success is 
less than initially hoped for, some patients remained free from 
exogenous insulin and other units are now undertaking islet 
transplantation with variable results.
As an alternative to preventing islet rejection through 
immunosuppressive therapy, attempts have been made to 
protect isolated islet cells from rejection by encapsulating 
them inside semipermeable membranes. The protective 
Small bowel
Duodenum Pancreas
‘Y’ graft
Common
iliac
artery
AortaInferior
vena
cava
Figure 82.26  Pancreas transplantation operation with enteric 
drainage of the exocrine secretion via a duodenoenter ostomy. A 
‘Y’ graft using donor iliac artery is usually used to reconstruct the 
divided splenic and superior mesenteric arteries of the graft before 
implantation.
Paul Langerhans , 1847–1888, Professor of Pathological Anatomy, Freiberg, Germany, described the islets in 1869.
Andrew Mark James Shapiro , Chairman of Clinical Research in Transplantation, CHRI/Wyeth Canada, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1553 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1554
membranes are designed with a pore size that allows insulin 
to pass through but prevents antibodies and leukocytes from 
reaching the islets, thereby avoiding the need for immunosup-
pressive therapy. A major attraction of this approach is that 
islets isolated from animals can be used and bioartificial pan -
creas grafts containing xenogeneic islets are currently under  
evaluation.
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
Starzl first attempted liver transplantation in 1963 and, by 
1967, had achieved prolonged survival. The first liver trans-
plant performed outside the USA was performed in Cam -
bridge, UK by Calne in 1968. Throughout the 1970s, liver 
transplantation remained a hazardous procedure that fre-
quently failed. However, since then, the results have pro -
gressively improved as a result of better patient selection, 
improved immunosuppression and chemoprophylaxis, better 
organ preservation, refinements in the surgical technique, 
and advances in per- and postoperative management.
Indications and patient selection
The indications for liver transplantation fall into four groups:
1 cirrhosis;
2 acute fulminant liver failure;
3 metabolic liver disease;
4 primary hepatic malignancy.
The most common indication for transplantation is 
chronic liver failure. In adults the most common causes 
are alcoholic liver disease, viral liver disease (hepatitis C 
in Europe and the USA, and hepatitis B in some other 
countries), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, primary biliary 
cirrhosis and sclerosing cholangitis. In children, who account 
for around 10–15% of all liver transplantations, biliary atresia 
is the most common indication for transplantation. Acute 
fulminant liver failure requiring transplantation on an urgent 
basis accounts for approximately 10% of liver transplant 
activity and is usually viral or drug induced (e.g. paracetamol 
overdose in the UK). There are a variety of metabolic 
diseases for which transplantation offers the prospect of cure, 
including Wilson’s disease, oxalosis and familial amyloid 
polyneuro pathy. Primary hepatic malignancy is more common 
in patients with cirrhosis, especially virally induced disease, 
and may be best treated by transplantation because the field 
changes in the cirrhotic liver predispose to further primary 
malignancies. Cholangiocarcinoma has a high recurrence 
rate and is seldom an indication for liver transplantation.
Technique of liver transplantation
A transverse abdominal incision with a midline extension 
is usually made and the diseased liver is mobilised (Figure 
82.27). As a result of portal hypertension, the recipient 
hepatectomy is often the most difficult part of the operation, 
especially if there has been previous upper abdominal surgery. 
The common bile duct is divided, as is the hepatic artery. The 
inferior vena cava is clamped and divided above and below 
the liver, and the portal vein is clamped and divided, allow -
ing the recipient liver to be removed. Occlusion of the vena 
cava and portal vein results in a reduction in cardiac out -
put and may necessitate the use of venovenous bypass. The 
bypass circuit delivers blood from the inferior vena cava and/
or portal vein and back to the heart via a cannula inserted 
into the internal jugular vein. After placing the donor liver 
in position, the supra- and infrahepatic caval anastomo-
ses are performed. The portal vein and the hepatic arterial 
anastomoses are then completed and the graft is re-perfused. 
Finally, biliary drainage is re-established usually by a duct-
to-duct anastomosis (without the use of a T-tube). It may 
be necessary, for example in recipients with biliary atresia or 
sclerosing cholangitis, to reconstruct the biliary drainage by 
a bile-duct-to-Roux-loop anastomosis. An alternative caval 
preservation technique of liver transplantation allows the 
recipient liver to be removed without cross-clamping the 
vena cava and the donor liver to be implanted using a ‘piggy-
back’ technique on to the recipient hepatic veins, or using a 
side-to-side cavo-cavoplasty.
Many patients undergoing liver transplantation are 
extremely ill, and the surgery involved can be very techni -
cally demanding. Optimal perioperative management is cru -
cial to a successful outcome and presents a major challenge. 
Blood loss during and after the transplantation procedure 
can be very considerable, and management of coagulopathy 
is particularly important. Coagulation is assessed repeatedly 
throughout the transplantation period and corrected with 
appropriate clotting factors if required. Many centres rou -
tinely use thromboelastography to perform dynamic assess-
ment of coagulation.
Thomas Earl Starzl , Professor of Surgery, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson , 1878–1936, Professor of Neurology, King’s College Hospital, London, UK, described this condition in 1912.
(a) (b)
1
2
4
5 3
Figure 82.27 (a) Incision used for liver transplantation; (b) com-
pleted implantation. The anastomoses, in order of performance, ar e: 
(1) suprahepatic cava; (2) infrahepatic cava; (3) portal vein; (4) hepatic 
artery; (5) bile duct.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1554 25/10/2017   10:38Small bowel transplantation 1555
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
Technical complications
Haemorrhage
Meticulous haemostasis during the transplantation operation 
is important in order to minimise the risk of early haemorrhage. 
It may be necessary, occasionally, to pack the peri-transplant 
area for 2–3 days to achieve adequate haemostasis when there 
is diffuse oozing despite correction of coagulopathy. Evacua -
tion of extensive peri-hepatic haematoma may be required to 
avoid secondary infection.
Vascular complications
Hepatic artery thrombosis may occur spontaneously or as a 
result of acute rejection and is more common in children and 
in adults with primary sclerosing cholangitis. It may present 
as a rise in serum transaminase levels, unexplained fever or 
bile leak. Doppler ultrasonography or angiography is used 
to confirm the diagnosis, and urgent re-transplantation is 
usually required. Portal vein thrombosis is rare and presents 
with the features of portal hypertension. Hepatic vascular 
occlusion often presents with increasing ascitic fluid losses 
over the postoperative period. A cavogram with hepatic vein 
pressure studies should be undertaken to confirm the diag -
nosis, and insertion of vascular stents, surgical correction or 
re-transplantation may be required to treat the problem.
Biliary complications
Biliary leaks are now relatively uncommon and biliary steno-
sis is the more common problem. It usually occurs within the 
first few months of transplantation and is managed by endo -
scopic dilatation and stenting or by surgical correction.
Outcome after liver transplantation
The outcome after liver transplantation depends on the 
underlying liver disease and the best results are seen in 
patients with chronic liver disease (Figure 82.28). Patients 
undergoing transplantation as a result of acute liver failure 
have a higher mortality in the early post-transplantation 
period because of multiorgan failure, but those who make a 
satisfactory recovery have very good long-term liver allograft 
survival. Conversely, patients transplanted for tumour have 
a very good early outcome but ultimately fare much less well 
because of recurrent malignancy. Patients receiving a liver 
transplantation after hepatitis B or hepatitis C infection may 
develop graft failure as a result of recurrent viral disease. How-
ever, the availability of improved antiviral therapy has largely 
eliminated this problem in recipients with hepatitis B infec -
tion and in the near future is expected to do so in those with 
hepatitis C infection.
SMALL BOWEL 
TRANSPLANTATION
Progress in small bowel transplantation has lagged behind 
that of other types of organ transplantation but it is now a 
well-established therapy for highly selected recipients. Intes -
tinal transplants stimulate a particularly strong graft rejection 
response, probably because the small intestine contains very 
large amounts of lymphoid tissue. Moreover, ischaemia and 
rejection increase intestinal permeability and allow transloca-
tion of bacteria from the lumen of the bowel. Added to this, 
the operation is often complex and is made technically diffi -
cult because of repeated previous abdominal surgery. Conse -
quently, graft rejection and infection remain major problems 
after small bowel transplantation and the results obtained are 
inferior to those seen after other types of organ transplanta -
tion. Small bowel transplantation is a treatment option for 
patients with intestinal failure requiring long-term parenteral 
nutrition. Intestinal failure may result from short bowel syn -
drome after resection of the intestine or from intestinal dys -
function. Conditions that may give rise to intestinal failure 
include the following:
 ● intestinal atresia;
 ● necrotising enterocolitis;
 ● volvulus;
 ● disorders of motility;
 ● mesenteric infarction;
 ● Crohn’s disease;
 ● trauma;
 ● desmoids tumours.
As a result of the substantial risks associated with small 
bowel transplantation, the procedure is considered only for 
those patients in whom long-term total parenteral nutrition 
(TPN) has failed, usually because venous access has become 
impracticable or because of frequent life-threatening line 
sepsis. The need for small bowel transplantation is estimated 
at around 0.5–1.0 patients per million of the population. 
Previously 50% of cases were children but improvements in 
parenteral nutrition have reduced the role of small bowel 
transplantation in children.
Small bowel transplantation may be carried out as an 
isolated procedure, performed together with a liver trans-
Original disease
Figure 82.28 Outcome after liver transplantation according to the 
initial liver disease. Patients transplanted for acute liver disease have 
a higher early mortality but good long-term outcome. Patients trans -
planted because of liver tumour have a good initial outcome but sur -
vival continues to decline progr essively (courtesy of Collaborative 
Transplant Study, L-75101-0816). Bil, biliary; Cirrh, cirrhosis; Chol, 
cholangitis; Hep, hepatitis; Scle, sclerosing.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1555 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1556
plantation or undertaken as a component of a multivisceral 
transplantation. When possible, isolated small bowel trans -
plantation is undertaken because patient survival is higher.
A small bowel transplant from a deceased donor comprises 
the entire small bowel, and may include the ascending colon 
in the graft. The superior mesenteric artery of the graft (with 
an aortic patch) is anastomosed to the recipient aorta, and the 
superior mesenteric vein is anastomosed to the inferior vena 
cava or to the side of the portal vein. The proximal end of the 
small bowel graft is anastomosed to the recipient jejunum or 
duodenum. The distal end of the graft is anastomosed to the 
side of the colon (with a loop ileostomy) or is fashioned as an 
end-ileostomy. A gastrostomy tube (to overcome delayed gas-
tric emptying) and a feeding jejunostomy tube are inserted.
About 10–20% of all patients who require small bowel 
transplantation have cholestatic liver disease secondary to 
TPN and require combined liver and small bowel transplanta-
tion. When combined liver and small bowel transplantation 
is carried out, the two grafts are transplanted en bloc. The 
donor aorta is fashioned into a conduit including the superior 
mesenteric and coeliac arteries and anastomosed to the recip-
ient aorta. There is no requirement for a portal vein anasto -
mosis and venous drainage is exclusively by the inferior vena 
cava (Figure 82.29).
Multivisceral or ‘cluster’ transplants may be necessary in 
the case of large desmoid tumours when excision of both the 
small bowel and adjacent organs is required, when there has 
been extensive thrombosis of the splanchnic vessels and for 
generalised disorders of gastrointestinal motility.
The 1-year graft survival rate after small bowel trans -
plantation is about 80% for both isolated small bowel 
transplantation and combined liver and small bowel trans-
plantation. After 3 years, the graft survival rate is around 
70% after isolated small bowel transplantation and 50% 
after multivisceral transplantation. Most of the mortality 
after small bowel transplantation is due to sepsis and multi -
organ failure. The risk of infection after small bowel trans -
plantation is heightened by the additional requirements 
for immunosuppression in order to control graft rejection. 
This accounts for the relatively high incidence of lympho -
proliferative disease (around 10%) observed in patients who 
have undergone small bowel transplantation. As a result of 
the large amount of donor lymphoid tissue transplanted, 
GVHD may be an added complication. Despite the hazards, 
small bowel transplantation offers patients with intestinal 
failure a chance to lead an active life free from the con -
straints of long-term nutritional support.
THORACIC ORGAN 
TRANSPLANTATION
Heart transplantation
Dr Christiaan Barnard performed the first human heart 
transplantation in Cape Town, South Africa, in 1967. The 
operation was based on the experimental work of Lower and 
Shumway in Stanford, and Shumway subsequently went on to 
pioneer successful cardiac transplantation in the clinic. Heart 
transplantation is now considered an effective treatment for 
selected patients with end-stage cardiac failure. The most 
common indications for heart transplantation are ischaemic 
heart disease and idiopathic cardiomyopathy, but other indi -
cations include valvular heart disease, myocarditis and con -
genital heart disease.
Transplantation is considered only in patients with end-
stage heart disease that has failed to respond to all other 
conventional therapy and when predicted survival without 
transplantation is only 6–12 months. Transplantation is usu -
ally limited to patients under the age of 65 years who do not 
have irreversible damage to other organ systems. The preop-
erative assessment is rigorous, and measurement of pulmonary 
vascular resistance is mandatory because when it is raised the 
perioperative mortality is high.
Technique of heart transplantation
A median sternotomy is performed and the patient is given 
systemic heparin, placed on cardiopulmonary bypass and 
cooled to 29°C. After cross-clamping the aorta, the recipient 
heart is excised at the mid-atrial level. The donor heart is 
then prepared and the left atrium is opened by making inci-
sions (Figure 82.30) in the posterior wall, between the ori -
fices of the pulmonary veins, to create an atrial cuff. The left 
and then right atrial anastomoses are performed and the pul -
monary and aortic arterial anastomoses are then completed 
(Figure 82.31). The patient is then rewarmed and weaned 
from cardiopulmonary bypass. Occasionally, heterotopic car -
diac transplantation is undertaken, when the donor heart is 
placed adjacent to and augments the recipient’s own heart.
Figure 82.29 Combined liver and small bowel transplant in an adult 
shortly after reperfusion of the grafts. The small bowel is well per -
fused via the superior mesenteric artery anastomosed to the aorta on 
a patch along with the coeliac axis, and the venous blood drains into 
the portal vein via the superior mesenteric vein.
Christian Neethling Barnard , 1922–2001, Professor of Cardiac Surgery, the University of Cape Town, Cape Town, the Republic of South Africa.
Richard Rowland Lower , contemporary, thoracic surgeon, Richmond, VA, USA.
Norman Edward Shumway , 1923–2006, cardiothoracic surgeon, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1556 25/10/2017   10:38Thoracic organ transplantation 1557
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
Heart–lung, single-lung and double-
lung transplantations
Pulmonary transplantation became a clinical reality when Dr 
Bruce Reitz performed the first successful combined heart–
lung transplantation in 1981. Combined heart–lung trans-
plantation is still sometimes performed, usually in patients 
with pulmonary vascular disease in whom there is cardiac 
dysfunction due to congenital (e.g. Eisenmenger’s syndrome, 
in which the left-to-right shunt is reversed owing to pulmon-
ary hypertension) or acquired cardiac dysfunction. For most 
patients with end-stage pulmonary disease, however, single- 
or double-lung transplantation has now replaced heart–lung 
transplantation. Lung transplantation is more economical in 
terms of organ use, although, if heart–lung transplantation 
is undertaken for isolated respiratory disease, the healthy 
native heart can be used for transplantation, the so-called 
‘domino procedure’. Heart–lung transplantation is performed 
through a median sternotomy, taking particular care to avoid 
injury to the phrenic, vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves 
during excision of the recipient heart and lungs. The recipi -
ent right atrium and aorta are divided as for orthotopic car -
diac transplantation and the donor heart–lung block readied 
for implantation, incising the right atrium from the divided 
inferior vena cava. An end-to-end tracheal anastomosis is 
performed and the right atrial and aortic anastomoses are per-
formed as for cardiac transplantation.
Single- and double-lung transplantation are effective 
therapies for selected patients with end-stage chronic lung 
disease, in whom declining lung function limits life expec -
tancy despite optimal medical therapy. Common indications 
are pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, emphysema 
and cystic fibrosis. Single-lung transplantation can be per -
formed for pulmonary fibrosis. Single-lung transplantation 
is performed through a posterolateral thoracotomy and dou -
ble-lung transplantation through a bilateral thoracotomy or 
median sternotomy. During lung transplantation, the donor 
pulmonary veins on a left atrial cuff are anastomosed to the 
recipient left atrium. Next, the bronchial anastomosis and 
the pulmonary arterial anastomosis are completed. Cardio-
pulmonary bypass is usually required if pulmonary hyperten-
sion is present. Dehiscence of the airway anastomosis used 
to be common after heart–lung and lung transplantation, but 
improvements in organ preservation and surgical technique 
have dramatically reduced the incidence of this often fatal 
complication to <5%. Late airway stenosis at the bronchial 
anastomosis due to ischaemia occurs in around 10% of bron -
chial anastomoses and is treated by dilatation.
Outcome after thoracic organ 
transplantation
The 1- and 5-year graft survival rates after heart transplanta -
tion are around 85% and 70%, respectively. The results after 
Pericardium
above diaphragm
Diaphragm
IVC
IPV
SPV
PA
Ao
SVC
RA LA
Figure 82.30 Recipient cardiectomy. After median sternotomy, the 
recipient is placed on car diopulmonary bypass. Venous cannulae for 
bypass are sited in the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena 
cava (IVC) via punctures in the right atrium (RA), and oxygenated 
blood is returned via a cannula in the ascending aorta (Ao). The dis -
eased recipient heart is excised, leaving behind cuffs of right and left 
atria (courtesy of J Dunning). PA, pulmonary artery; IPV/SPV, inferior/
superior pulmonary veins; LA, left atrium.
RA appendage
RA
RA
LA
LA
LV
PA
Ao
Figure 82.31 Implantation of the donor heart. The donor left atrium is 
opened by an incision connecting the four pulmonary veins, excising 
the central portion. The left atrial anastomosis is performed, starting 
at the lateral wall of the donor and continuing inferiorly and superiorly, 
concluding with the interatrial septum. The right atrial anastomosis 
is performed matching the recipient atrium by an incision towards 
the donor right atrial appendage (dotted line), which avoids the sinus 
node at the cavoatrial junction. Finally, the pulmonary artery and aortic 
anastomosis are completed. Abbreviations as for Figure 82.30; LV, left 
ventricle.
Bruce Arnold Reitz , thoracic surgeon, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
Victor Eisenmenger , 1864–1932, German physician.
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1557 25/10/2017   10:38CHAPTER 82  Transplantation
PART 13 | TRANSPLANTATION1558
heart–lung and lung transplantation are less good, with 1-year 
graft survival rates of around 75% and 5-year survival rates of 
around 50%.
FUTURE PROSPECTS
The two major problems in organ transplantation are:
1 chronic graft rejection and the side effects of non-specific 
immunosuppression;
2 the shortage of organs for transplantation.
New immunosuppressive agents that have fewer or differ-
ent agent-specific side effects than existing therapy are likely 
to enter clinical practice and there is continuing research 
into the development of non-invasive biomarkers (in urine 
or blood) that will allow early diagnosis of graft rejection. 
A long-standing goal in organ transplantation has been the 
development of strategies for inducing specific immunologi -
cal tolerance. Transplantation tolerance would eliminate the 
need for long-term, non-specific, immunosuppressive agents, 
leaving the immune system intact for defence against infec-
tion. It has long been possible to induce transplant tolerance 
in experimental animals with a variety of preconditioning 
regimens that often involve pre-treatment schedules using 
donor bone marrow cells or donor antigen. So far, however, 
there is no clinically applicable strategy for inducing trans -
plant tolerance.
agents, and there is particular concern about the risks posed 
by the porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV). Last, there are 
unanswered questions about the extent to which pig organs 
are able to fulfil the physiological demands required of them 
after transplantation into a human.
Finally, looking to the future, there is optimism that human 
pluripotent stem cells may ultimately provide a source of tis -
sue transplants for treating a wide range of diseases. Attempts 
are now under way to define the cell signals needed to guide 
human embryonic and adult-induced pluripotent stem cells 
to differentiate in vitro into functional tissue of the desired 
cell type. These include insulin-producing cells, cardiac myo-
cytes and neuronal tissue. Although cell transplantation is 
the initial goal, by combining the developments in stem cell 
medicine with those taking place in tissue engineering and 
biomaterials it may one day be possible to engineer more com-
plex vascularised grafts for transplantation.
FURTHER READING
Clavien PA, Trotter J (eds). Medical care of the liver transplant patient, 4th 
edn. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.
Hricik D (ed.). Primer on transplantation, 3rd edn. Oxford: Wiley-Black-
well, 2011.
Morris PJ, Knechtle SJ (eds). Kidney transplantation: principles and prac-
tice, 7th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2008.
Oniscu G, Forsythe J. Abdominal organ retrieval and transplantation 
bench surgery. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
Rainer WG, Sutherland DER. Transplantation of the pancreas. New 
York: Springer, 2011.
Vigneswaran W , Garrity E. Lung transplantation: principles and prac -
tice. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2015.
WEBSITE ADDRESSES FOR 
SELECTED NATIONAL AND 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSPLANT 
DATABASES
European Liver Transplant Registry: www.eltr.org
NHS Blood and Transplant: www.nhsbt.nhs.uk
United Network for Organ Sharing (USA): www.unos.org
Collaborative Transplant Study (Europe): www.ctstransplant.org
Scandiatransplant: www.scandiatransplant.org
REFERENCES/WEBSITES FOR 
USEFUL CLINICAL GUIDELINES 
IN ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION
UK guidelines for living-donor kidney transplantation: www.bts.org.uk
UK guidelines on CMV in transplantation: www.bts.org.uk
UK guidelines on solid organ transplantation from DCD donors: www.
bts.org.uk
Antibody incompatible transplantation: www.bts.org.uk
Kidney Disease: Improving global outcomes (KDIGO): www.kdigo.org
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: http://www .
ishlt.org
The demand for human organs for transplantation is so 
great that deceased donors can never satisfy it. Many consider 
that the solution is to perfect xenotransplantation, and there 
is general agreement that the pig is the most suitable source 
of xenogeneic organs. However, all humans have preformed 
antibodies directed against carbohydrate antigens expressed 
by pig organs, and these cause hyperacute rejection. The 
dominant carbohydrate antigen responsible is gal-1, 3 α-gal. 
Progress has been made towards circumventing hyperacute 
xenograft rejection and pigs that have been genetically engi-
neered not to express the gal-1, 3α-gal antigen have been 
produced. However, organs from genetically modified pigs 
are still rejected within a few weeks by primates, despite the 
use of potent immunosuppressive agents. In addition to the 
complex immunological problems posed by xenotransplanta-
tion, there is a risk that pig organs may transmit infectious 
Summary box 82.11
Future developments in transplantation
●● Novel immunosuppressive agents
●● Non-invasive biomarkers for early diagnosis of graft rejection
●● Donor-specific immunological tolerance
●● Xenotransplantation
●● Stem cell medicine and tissue engineering
13_82B-B&L27_Pt13_Ch82.indd   1558 25/10/2017   10:381 Common instruments used in general surgery ................................1560
2 Fundamental principles in the operating theatre and the  
importance of global health ................................................................1563
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Appendices
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1559 25/10/2017   10:40Appendix
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
1
Common instruments used in  
general surgery
This is a list of some of the instruments used in open (as opposed to minimal access surgery) ‘general surgery’ with information on 
how they are used and about the people associated with them. It is hoped that this information will help the general surgical trainee 
answer questions on operative surgery in postgraduate examinations.
Langenbeck retractor. This small general purpose retractor is useful for holding open 
wounds, as in an open appendicectomy. They are often used in pairs (one in each of 
the assistant’s hands). They stay in position best if the handles are lifted slightly so that 
the tips lock in under the fascia. The width of the lip of the retractors varies. Bernhard 
Rudolf Konrad von Langenbeck (1810–1887) was Professor of Surgery successively 
at Kiel and Berlin, Germany. He performed the first internal fixation of a femoral neck 
fracture in 1850.
Morris retractor. This is a big retractor which is useful for giving maximum exposure in 
large incisions such as those used in the abdomen. It can be used to improve visibility 
on one side of an incision (by pulling firmly in that direction); so is valuable during 
the initial phase of a laparotomy. Sir Henry Morris (1844–1926) was a surgeon at the 
Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.
Deaver retractor. This retractor is specifically designed for holding the liver up out of 
the way during a cholecystectomy. It needs to be used carefully to avoid damaging 
the liver. Some surgeons protect the liver with an abdominal pack before placing 
the blade on top. John Blair Deaver (1855–1931) was Professor of Surgery at the 
University of Pennsylvania Medical School, Philadelphia, PA, USA. He also described a 
paramedian incision for appendicectomy.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.4Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Dyball retractor. Used in major abdominal surgery to retract deeper parts of the 
abdominal wall or the bladder or the uterus while operating on the rectum and 
entering the rectovesical or rectouterine pouch. It has a lip at the bottom of the blade 
to prevent slippage. Care should be taken if it is used to retract the liver in operations 
in the region of the right upper quadrant as it may damage the liver parenchyma. 
Brennan Dyball was a distinguished West Country surgeon from Exeter. He also 
excelled as a carpenter and motor mechanic. He died in 1934 at the age of 62 leaving 
a great professional legacy to the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.05Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Joll retractor. This is a self-retaining retractor used in thyroid surgery. After making the 
collar incision and raising the lower and upper flaps fully, this retractor is then inserted. 
The two clips on the upper and lower edges are attached to the skin preferably with a 
swab over the skin edge. The central segment is then unscrewed to separate the two 
edges to obtain full exposure. Cecil Augustus Joll was a surgeon in London who first 
qualified as a dentist. He was regarded as ‘a brilliant technician and an extraordinarily 
versatile surgeon’ who operated on conditions ‘from knees to necks and stomach to 
perineum’. A keen ornithologist, he was a connoisseur of all things good – furniture, 
pottery, food, wines and cigars. He died in 1945 at the age of 59.
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1560 25/10/2017   10:41APPENDIX  1  Common instruments used in general surgery  1561
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.06Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Goligher retractor. This is a self-retaining retractor used in operations on the sigmoid 
colon and rectum, such as anterior resection and upper end of abdominoperineal 
resection. Once the abdomen has been opened and laparotomy performed, the 
patient is placed head down and all the small bowel is packed to the upper end of the 
abdomen. The retractor is then inserted with the side blades to separate the edges of 
the abdominal wall. The central blade is then inserted to keep the small bowel well 
tucked away from the operation site. All three blades come in different widths to fit 
in with the patient’s build. John Cedric Goligher (1912–1998), Ulsterman by birth, 
Professor of Surgery at Leeds, his contributions to colorectal surgery in the world have 
been legendary. His operating theatres at Leeds General Infirmary ‘have been the 
Mecca for surgeons from all over the world’. His book, Surgery of the Anus, Rectum and 
Colon, was regarded as the ultimate authority on the subject and had five editions.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:A1.07Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
St Mark’s perineal retractor. This is used for the perineal part of an abdominoperineal 
resection. After making the perineal incision and adequate dissection of the perineal 
wound, the retractor is inserted. As the dissection proceeds, the retractor has to be 
repositioned. The pointed ends are directed towards the front. St Mark’s Hospital, 
Harrow, UK, is recognised as a national and international referral centre for intestinal 
and colorectal disorders. It was founded in a small room in No. 11 Aldersgate Street. 
Established in 1854 on City Road in Hackney as St Mark’s Hospital for Fistula and other 
Diseases of the Rectum. It was so named as it was opened on St Mark’s Day, 25 April. 
In 1994, it moved to its present site in Harrow.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.08Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Travers retractor. This is a self-retaining retractor used for intermediate-type 
operations, such as heriorrhaphy, groin dissection for varicose veins and femoral 
embolectomy. It retracts skin and subcutaneous tissues; as the incision is deepened, 
the retractor has to be repositioned. If used incorrectly, it can traumatise the skin. For 
longer incisions, two such retractors may be used, one at each end of the incision for 
good exposure. Benjamin Travers (1783–1858) was a surgeon to the London Infirmary 
for Disease of the Eye (now Moorfields Ophthalmic Hospital). He is regarded as the first 
general hospital surgeon in England to devote himself specially to disease of the eye. 
He later became surgeon to St Thomas’s Hospital and Vice-President and President of 
Royal College of Surgeons of England and a Fellow of the Royal Society. As an operator, 
he was regarded as clumsy and nervous. He had ‘exquisite polish of manners, took off 
his hat and acknowledged salutes more elegantly than any contemporary dandy’.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.09Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
West retractor. Used in a similar manner to the Travers retractor, this is ideal for 
minor procedures under local anaesthetic where the surgeon is operating without an 
assistant, e.g. lymph node biopsy, temporal artery biopsy. After making the incision 
and undermining the edges, the retractor is then inserted and the jaws are prised open 
gently. Charles Ernest West (1873–1951) ‘aural surgeon’ of St Bartholomew’s Hospital 
is credited with devising this retractor. It is possible that he got the idea from Franz 
Weitlaner, an Austrian physician who published the first description of his retractor 
in the Vienna Clinical Review in 1905. He became known as ‘the great spreader of 
surgery’. It would be safe to presume that the present retractor is West’s modification 
of Weitlaner’s spreader.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.10Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Czerny retractor. This is a double-ended retractor used to retract wound edges for 
intermediate-type procedures. One end has a blade with a lip which helps to retract 
without the edge slipping. The other end has two prongs and helps to retract the ends 
of an incision. When using it, a slight upward tilt gives a better exposure. It is used 
where a Langenbeck retractor can also be used, but the lip here is broader making it 
more versatile. Vincenz Czerny (1842–1915) was Professor of Surgery at Freiberg and 
Heidelberg in Germany. He was a disciple of Theodor Billroth. He was the originator of 
the concept of multidisciplinary management in cancer.
McIndoe scissors are used by surgeons to perform dissection respecting anatomical 
planes. The closed blades are inserted into a fascial plane, and then gently opened. 
The tissue to be divided can then be seen clearly and divided without risk of damage 
to vital structures. Sir Archibald Hector McIndoe (1900–1960) was a plastic surgeon at 
St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, and the Queen Victoria Hospital, East Grinstead, 
UK. He was born in New Zealand (cousin of Harold Gillies) and became a consultant 
plastic surgeon to the RAF during the Second World War. He supervised the 
rehabilitation of badly disfigured airmen who later formed the Guinea Pig Club.
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1561 25/10/2017   10:41Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
APPENDIX  1  Common instruments used in general surgery  1562
DeBakey forceps allow the surgeon to grasp tissues firmly while minimising damage 
to the tissue held in the jaws of the forceps. They are useful for holding vessel walls 
in vascular surgery. Michael Ellis DeBakey (1908–2008) was Professor of Surgery 
at Baylor University College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. He was the first to 
successfully implant an artificial heart; he also performed the first successful carotid 
endarterectomy.
Gillies forceps have teeth and are ideal for holding tough tissues, such as skin. 
Sir Harold Gillies (1882–1960) was a plastic surgeon at St Bartholomew’s Hospital, 
London, UK. He was born in New Zealand (cousin of Archibald McIndoe) and became 
one of the founders of British plastic surgery. He originated the tubed pedicle flap.
Adson forceps are non-toothed, and so are ideal for holding delicate tissues, such as 
bowel. Alfred Washington Adson (1887–1951) was Professor of Neurosurgery at the 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. He was one of the first to use sympathectomy for the 
treatment of hypertension, and cervical sympathectomy for Raynaud’s syndrome.
Allis forceps are used to hold soft tissues for a long period while minimising tissue 
damage. Using the ratchet they can be locked on to tissue, such as bowel, and can be 
used to provide gentle traction. Oscar Huntington Allis (1836–1921) was a surgeon at 
the Presbyterian Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No: A1.16Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Babcock forceps. This is used to grasp any part of the bowel. The jaws are atraumatic 
and cause minimal tissue damage. Used commonly in appendicectomy to grasp the 
appendix and deliver it out of the wound. Care is taken when using it not to perforate 
the inflamed appendix. William Wayne Babcock (1872–1963), Professor and Head of 
the Department of Surgery at the Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia 
for 40 years. ‘He was the inventor of the acorn-shaped vein stripper, introduced the 
alloy steel wire sutures, wire mesh in hernia repairs, and zinc chloride in the treatment 
of osteomyelitic sinus’.
Spencer Wells forceps. These were one of the first ratchet forceps ever designed and 
are still very useful. They are often used in pairs for clamping an artery before dividing 
it. The cut ends of the artery are then tied off, and the forceps removed (carefully!). Sir 
Thomas Spencer Wells (1818–1897) was a surgeon at the Samaritan Free Hospital for 
Women and Children, London, UK. He was one of the earliest surgeons to make use of 
anaesthetics in operation.
www.cactusdesign.co.uk
Fig No:A1.18Title: Bailey & Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 26th Ed Proof Stage:  1      ISBN: 9781444121278
Kocher dissector. This is used during a thyroidectomy to dissect the upper pole of 
the thyroid. The instrument is blunt and therefore the surgeon is highly unlikely to 
inadvertently damage the superior thyroid artery or the external laryngeal nerve. It 
is used to dissect the superior pedicle, the superior thyroid artery. Once it has been 
isolated, the dissector is pushed under the pedicle. A tie is then put through the eye 
of the dissector which at this stage doubles up as an aneurysm needle. The pedicle 
is thus tied three times as close to the gland as possible. With the dissector under 
the tied pedicle, a fine knife is now used to cut leaving two ties in the patient. The 
presence of the dissector under the pedicle prevents any damage to the underlying 
structures. Emil Theodor Kocher (1841–1917), Professor of Surgery at Berne, 
Switzerland, was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1909 for his 
work on the thyroid. The first surgeon to be a Nobel Laureate.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
With thanks to Steven Kerr, Librarian, Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh.
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1562 25/10/2017   10:41Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Appendix
2
Fundamental principles in the  
operating theatre and the importance  
of global health
INTRODUCTION
Historically, operating theatres were designed to encourage 
large audiences of observers. Surgeons often wore their out -
door clothes and no consideration was given to sterility . The 
outcomes of surgery were less than satisfactory.
The modern operating theatre, safety checks, accepted 
theatre etiquette and theatre instrument sterilisation process 
have made a significant positive impact on outcomes after 
surgery.
A basic knowledge of the principles of theatre design, 
theatre etiquette and sterilisation are important for surgeons, 
aiding them to work with the ‘flow’ in theatres, preserve the 
sterile field, and communicate effectively with other mem -
bers of the theatre and sterilisation team. This fundamental 
knowledge is applicable in a global setting.
PRINCIPLES OF THEATRE 
DESIGN
Optimisation of location and spaces
When building new operating theatres, both the principle of 
locating the operating theatre away from passing traffic (at a 
terminal location) and the concept of maintaining optimum 
‘patient flow’ should be considered. Operating theatres are 
often co-located near wards and the intensive care unit to 
minimise transfer time, thereby increasing efficiency and pro-
ductivity in the theatre.
Operating theatres should have both easy access to sterile 
services and sufficient space for all necessary equipment to be 
stored. The concept of good ‘flow’ should be extended to staff 
(in the location of their changing, rest and office areas) and 
surgical equipment (to and from sterile services). 
A reception area for patient safety checks, an area for the 
patient to be anaesthetised (this may be done in a separate 
anaesthetic room or in the operating theatre itself) and a 
recovery area must be included in the theatre design. 
The importance of the sterile 
surgical field
The principle of maintaining the sterile surgical field is at 
the heart of theatre design. To maintain this field, clean and 
contaminated areas of the theatre complex are separated 
into ‘zones’. Although there are different individual designs, 
the principle of minimising the risk of cross-contamination 
between the ‘clean’ and ‘dirty’ zones remains.
Materials used to construct operating theatres should be 
smooth and easy to clean. Doors disrupt airflow and should 
be kept closed whenever possible. Sliding doors (electrically 
operated) cause less airflow disruption than swinging doors. 
Doors (when closed) and windows should be sealed.
Operating theatres should be large enough for the purpose 
for which they are used. There should be sufficient space to 
allow those ‘circulating’ to move freely without risk of con -
taminating the sterile surgical field. Modern operating the -
atres often have a ‘modular’ design where commonly used 
equipment is stacked together and mounted on movable gan-
tries to improve cleaning and reduce clutter. 
After surgery, contaminated instruments and equipment 
are physically isolated and removed from the clean to the 
contaminated zone, where the waste is disposed of and instru-
ments decontaminated and reprocessed for sterilisation. This 
is often through the use of a ‘dirty’ corridor. 
Theatre air and ventilation
Specialised ventilation in the operating theatre aids in the 
maintenance of clean and dirty zones because airborne bac -
teria are prevalent. Between 5000 and 55  000 skin particles 
laden with bacteria are shed each minute by each individual 
in the operating room. 
Positive pressure ventilation forces airflow from clean to 
contaminated areas with 15–25 theatre air exchanges taking 
place per hour using conventional ventilation systems. These 
systems deliver atmospheric filtered air with positive pres -
sure (15–25  N/m2) through a downward displacement over 
the operating table. This ventilation allows for clearance of 
airborne particles, bacteria and waste anaesthetic gases. Ven-
tilation ducts allow contaminated air to be expelled from the 
operating theatre.
Ultra-clean ventilation systems use high-efficiency par -
ticulate air (HEPA) filters that remove 99.9% of particulate 
matter >0.3 mm in diameter (bacteria are 0.5 mm). They also 
use vertical laminar airflow over the operating table to min -
imise turbulence, reduce contamination at the surgical site 
(horizontal laminar air flow is less effective (Salvati et al. 
1982)). Laminar airflow theatres have an air exchange every 
2–3 minutes.
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1563 25/10/2017   10:41APPENDIX  2  Fundamental principles in the operating theatre and the importance of global health   1564
The operating lights disturb the laminar airflow and are 
optimally placed to either side of the operative wound with 
0.6 m between the lights to minimise obstruction to the verti-
cal airflow (Refaie et al. 2015). Temperature in the operating 
theatre should be between 18 and 25°C.
STERILISATION
Preoperative checks
When equipment is taken from storage for use, careful check-
ing of the instrument packaging must be carried out. Care 
must be taken to ensure that the instrument set is complete, 
without torn packaging, and has undergone sterilisation 
within the recommended time.
Postoperative checks
After the instruments have been used, they must go through 
decontamination. This process is standardised and includes 
cleaning the instruments thoroughly with water immediately 
after use. Staff involved in this decontamination should wear 
personal protection. In addition to using water, mechanical 
agitation aided by chemical cleansing and heat are all needed. 
Instruments can be decontaminated by hand (for delicate 
instruments) or in industrial washers.
After decontamination, instruments are checked for dam-
age, sharpened and otherwise maintained. Broken or dam -
aged instruments are replaced. This process is helped by the 
surgeon during the final step of the surgical safety checklist, 
when all instrument issues are noted. After maintenance, the 
instruments are packaged into sets and double wrapped before 
sterilisation.
Sterilisation for most instruments is carried out in a steam 
autoclave. For some equipment gas sterilisation is used. Accu-
rate documentation of the sterilisation procedure, expiry dates, 
the contents of packaged sterile instruments, and missing or 
damaged instruments on labels before storage is imperative.
THEATRE ETIQUETTE AND 
INFECTION CONTROL
Personnel factors
At the start of an operating list, it is important, as part of the 
team brief, for each member of the team to introduce him- 
or herself. For members of staff arriving after the start, it is 
important to introduce themselves to the theatre practitioner 
in charge of the operating theatre at the outset. Behaviour 
and discipline of staff are a key aspect in the maintenance of 
patient safety and adequate infection control.
Scrub staff will wear a hat, mask with visor or protective 
glasses. They will then don a sterile gown and use a closed-
glove technique to don their sterile gloves. It is also important 
that other members of the circulating team take account of 
universal precautions, including the use of non-sterile gloves 
when handling or transferring a patient and consideration of 
the use of masks and protective glasses. Careful handling of 
sharps is paramount.
Staff clothing is also important. It acts as an effective bar-
rier against the spread of infection. Each operating theatre 
suite will have specific policies that should be adhered to. 
The principles are that within the clean zone of the operating 
theatre all staff must wear scrubs. These scrubs should not be 
worn in dirty zones if the member of staff is to walk back into 
the clean zone. If scrubs are soiled, these should be changed 
for a fresh pair. Hair should be covered by an appropriate hat.
Many policies state that masks should be worn when 
sterile instruments are opened or in the presence of an open 
wound. In contaminated surgery, some policies allow for sur -
geons to dispense with the mask, but consideration must be 
given for personal protection from fluids on to the face. Both 
mask visors and/or protective goggles protect the eyes from 
potential cross-contamination from the patient.
Shoes used in the operating theatre should have a solid 
covering over the dorsum of the foot, enclosing the toes, 
and not have multiple holes. This is protection in case sharp 
instruments fall to the floor, resulting in foot injuries. Shoes 
should be cleaned after every case to ensure that there is no 
cross-contamination.
Environmental factors
A number of different skin disinfectant surgical preparation 
fluids have been described in either an aqueous or an alco -
holic base. The antiseptic is normally iodine based (e.g. Beta-
dine) or chlorhexidine based. Chlorhexidine comes in two 
concentrations – 0.5% or 2% weight:volume (w/v) – and a 
number of different trials have shown the latter to be the most 
effective. 
Surgical drapes that are used to isolate the surgical wound 
will be resistant to mechanical stress, impenetrable to liquids 
and ideally absorbent. Depending on the hospital situation, 
disposable or reusable drapes can be used if they fit these cri -
teria. The use of incision drapes has some advantages, but 
recent evidence has shown that those incision drapes that are 
impregnated with iodine are more effective at reducing the 
skin bacterial load than non-iodine-impregnated drapes.
The number of people in the operating theatre also 
increases the risk of contamination of the sterile field. The 
number should be kept to the minimum. At least 1   metre 
must be kept between non-scrubbed staff and any sterile 
instrument tray or the operating table. Non-scrubbed staff 
should never pass between the sterile instrument tray and the 
operating table with the patient on it. When the doors are 
opened to the operating theatre a disturbance is made to the 
ventilation system. The number of times the doors are opened 
during the operation should be kept to the minimum. This 
often requires a high level of advance planning to ensure that 
all the necessary equipment is available at hand in the oper -
ating theatre.
GLOBAL HEAL TH AND SURGERY
The previous sections identify fundamental principles relat -
ing to surgery wherever it is practised around the world. By 
way of contrast, in Chapter 33 the differing surgical options 
for spinal surgery in different global settings were highlighted.
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1564 25/10/2017   10:41APPENDIX  2  Fundamental principles in the operating theatre and the importance of global health   1565
In the last two decades, the interest in global health has 
notably increased. There are many reasons for this. First, 
there is better global communication, such that what happens 
in one part of the world is known almost instantaneously in 
the rest of the world. Second, there is an increased under -
standing that the world is a small place, and that the health 
needs of the poorest in the planet should be the concern of 
the whole planet. Global health as a concept started with the 
treatment of medical and infectious diseases such as malaria 
and tuberculosis (TB), but in the last few years there has been 
an increasing interest in global surgery. In 2013 the Lancet 
journal commissioned a group of surgeons, health planners, 
health economists and politicians to prepare a report on the 
state of surgery in the world. It was published in 2015 (Meara 
et al. 2015) and has been a major influence in world surgery, 
with five key messages that clarify the levels of disparity in 
surgical services globally; however, it ends with a strong eco -
nomic argument for the surgeons of the world to engage with 
the global need. 
The five key messages from the 
Lancet Commission
5 billion people cannot access safe, 
affordable surgery when needed
The World Health Organization (WHO) has previously 
stated that 2 billion people had no access to surgery . This 
is true, but when one adds a quality measure to the surgery 
available, and also an affordability measure, the number of 
people who cannot access surgery for themselves or their fam-
ily within a reasonable time period is increased to 5 billion, 
which is most of the people on the planet. 
143 million more surgical procedures are 
needed each year
This is the number of operations needed to bring the world up 
to a reasonable standard of surgery. 
33 million individuals and families face 
catastrophic expenditure each year paying 
for surgery and anaesthesia
This figure is in fact higher if one adds the incidental expenses 
associated with having surgery, such as transport and accom -
modation for family members during the operation. The 
annual total then rises to US$81 million.
Investing in surgery is affordable, saves lives 
and promotes economic growth
The cost of improving surgical services across the world to 
a satisfactory level over the next 15 years is enormous, and 
has been estimated at US$350 billion, or just over US$20 
billion per year. However, the cost of not investing in surgery 
is many times higher at US$12.3 trillion over 15 years, or 
US$820 billion a year because of lost economic growth result-
ing from untreated surgical conditions. Figure 1 shows the 
estimated economic loss due to untreated surgical conditions. 
The graph clearly shows that untreated cancer and trauma are 
the two big causes of such economic loss.
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Year
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
Annual GDP loss (US$ trillions)
Cumulative GDP loss (US$ trillions)
Injury
Neoplasm
Neonatal
Maternal
Digestive
Cumulative
Figure 1 The graph illustrates the estimated economic loss due to untreated surgical conditions; untreated cancer and trauma represent the 
two largest causes of such economic loss (with permission of Meara et al. 2015).
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1565 25/10/2017   10:41APPENDIX  2  Fundamental principles in the operating theatre and the importance of global health   1566
Surgery is an indivisible, indispensable part 
of health care
This is a message that is directed more to health planners and 
public health teams. Surgery has in the past been seen as a 
minor and expensive part of a country’s health plan. Most 
public health interventions are measured in terms of disabil-
ity-adjusted life-years (DALYs) averted. The methodology 
involves calculating how much it costs to avert 1 year of 
suffering due to a disability. When measured in these terms, 
surgery competes well with the treatment of malaria and TB. 
The fact that surgery saves lives, surgery changes lives and 
surgery is a boost to the economy should encourage health 
planners to put surgery in the essential group of services in 
any national health strategy. 
References and further reading
Booth C. Operating room principles: environment. In: Porteous M, Bau-
erle S (eds), Techniques and principles for the operating room. Stuttgart: 
Thième, 2010: pp 45–56.
Meara JG, Leathe AJ, Haganda l et al. Global surgery 2030: evidence and 
solutions for achieving health, welfare, and economic development. 
Lancet 2015; 386: 569–624.
Refaie R, Jameson S, Reed M. Prevention of periprosthetic joint infec -
tion. J Trauma Orthop 2015; 3: 50–2. Video: www.youtube.com/user/
orthopodresearch
Salvati EA, Robinson RP , Zeno SM, Koslin BL, Brause BD, Wilson PD. 
Infection rates after 3175 total hip and total knee replacements per-
formed with and without a horizontal unidirectional filtered air-flow 
system. J Bone Joint Surg 1982; 64A: 525–35.
Van Rie I. Operating room principles: instrumentation. In: Porteous M, 
Bauerle S (eds), Techniques and principles for the operating room. Stutt-
gart: Thième, 2010: pp 58–67.
83_01-B&L27_Appendices1.indd   1566 25/10/2017   10:41Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Bailey & Love Bailey & Love Bailey & Love
Index
eABCD protocol, 323–6
abdomen
abscesses, 1055–7
anatomic extent of, 365
differences in paediatric/adult, 
119, 120
examination, 1019–21
auscultation, 1021
hernia sites, 1021
inspection, 1019–20
palpation, 1020–1
percussion, 1021
history of symptoms, 1016–17
pressure within, 1022
abdominal aortic aneurysm 
(AAA)
asymptomatic, 961
incidence, 961
investigations, 213, 961, 
961–6, 962
repair, 265, 961–4
endovascular, 962–4
open surgery, 961–2
postoperative complications, 
965–6
rupture, 964–5
symptomatic, 965
abdominal compartment 
syndrome, 380, 1045
abdominal examination
acute pancreatitis, 1223
intestinal obstruction, 1286, 
1296
intussusception, 1287
LUTS (male), 1461
rectal cancer, 1329
abdominal masses, 1020–1
abdominal pain, 1017
abdominal wall movement, 
1020
acute appendicitis, 1302–3
acute in children, 130–2
acute non-specific, 130
after laparoscopic surgery, 115
gallstones, 1018–19, 1199
intestinal obstruction, 1285–6
large intestine, 1258
palpation, 1020
patient observation/review, 
1021
in peritonitis, 1050
sites of, 1019
abdominal paracentesis, 1053, 
1059, 1166
abdominal reflex, superficial, 
472–3
abdominal trauma, 372–6, 1061
blast, 431
categories, 372
children, 123–4
CT imaging, 207, 208
investigation, 372–3
pancreas, 1220–1
retroperitoneum, 376
specific organs, 373–6
spleen, 123, 208, 374
stomach, 375
abdominal wall
anatomy, 1022
closure, 86
cutaneous fistula, 1045
defects, 135
incisions, 86
infections, 1044–5
innervation, 1018
necrotising fasciitis, 30, 50
neoplasms, 1045
transplant, 649
varicose veins, 983
abdominoperineal excision of 
rectum, 1336
abductor pollicis brevis, 446, 469
abductor pollicis longus, 
tenosynovitis (De Quervain’s 
disease), 443, 469, 507–8
Aberdeen knot, 95
ABO blood groups, 21, 22
organ transplantation, 1533, 
1547–8
Abrams–Griffiths nomogram, 
1397
abscesses
abdominal, 1055–7
amoebic, 57–60, 1169
anorectal, 1362–3
appendix, 1312
bone, 204, 587–8, 589
brain, 656–7
breast, 866–7
‘cold’, 77–8
collar-stud, 78, 757
colonic diverticula, 1274
epidural, 481
liver, 1168–9
lungs, 937
orbit, 721–2
pancreas, 1227–8
parapharyngeal, 737
pelvic, 1055, 1312
perirenal, 1404
peritonsillary (quinsy), 735–6
periurethral, 1495
prostatic, 1475
psoas, 1065
renal cortical, 1404
renal corticomedullary, 1404
retropharyngeal, 737
sinus/fistula formation, 48
surgical, 47–8
tubo-ovarian, 1519–20
abuse, children, 138
acalculous cholecystitis, 1200
acanthamoeba, 677
access to surgery, 1565
acetabular index, 571
acetabulum, 511
augmentation, 570–1
acetazolamide, 1407
achalasia, 223, 1095–9
Achilles tendon
examination, 460
rupture, 382, 383, 403, 468, 
529
tendinosis, 529
tenotomy, 578
achondroplasia, 564–5
acid burns, 622, 632
oesophagus, 1075–6
acidosis
hyperchloraemic, 1454–5
lactic, 12, 14, 17
acinar cells, 1212
acne rosacea, 603
AcoRD guidance, 165
acoustic neuromas, 666–7, 706, 
715–16
acral lentiginous melanoma, 610
acrocyanosis, 967–8
acromial spur, 489, 491
acromioclavicular joint
arthritis, 489, 495
injury, 469
ACTHoma, 849
actinic (solar) keratoses, 606
Actinomyces, 56
Actinomyces israelii, 1249
actinomycetoma, 71, 72, 73, 74
actinomycin D, 156
actinomycosis
abdominal, 1249
breast, 867
activated partial thromboplastin 
time (APTT), 258
activated protein C, 987
acute coronary syndromes 
(ACS), 889
acute peripancreatic fluid 
collection, 1226
acute phase protein response, 
4, 7–8
acute traumatic coagulopathy 
(ATC), 18, 427
adalimumab, 1245, 1269
adamantinoma, 542
Adams forward bend test, 472, 
581
Addison’s disease, 13, 844
adductor pollicis, 446
weakness, 502
adductor pollicis brevis, 446
adenitis, mesenteric, 1062
adenocarcinoma
anal canal, 1371
bladder, 1448
duodenum, 1141
gastro-oesophageal junction, 
1132
histology, 239, 241
lung, 925
nose/sinuses, 724
oesophagus, 1083, 1086, 1087
small bowel, 1250
adenoid cystic carcinomas, 724, 
778
adenoidectomy, 732–3
adenoids, enlarged, 732
adenoma–carcinoma sequence, 
1261
adenomas
adrenal glands, 839
colorectal, 1259, 1261
duodenal, 233
duodenal villous, 1141
kidneys, 1416
liver, 1172
parathyroid glands, 826–30
pituitary, 665–6, 841, 842
rectum, 1326
Note: Page references in italic refer to figures or tables.
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1567 25/10/2017   10:44Index1568
salivary glands, 777–8, 784, 
787, 788, 790, 793
thyroid follicular, 816
adenoma sebaceum (tuberous 
sclerosis/Bourneville 
disease), 602–3
adenomatous polyposis coli 
(APC) gene, 1259, 1261, 
1329
adenomatous polyps, large 
intestine, 1259, 1261
adhesions, 1049, 1060–1
after appendicectomy, 1314
causes, 1283
intestinal obstruction, 1060, 
1283
pathophysiology, 1060
pelvic, 1521
prevention, 1060–1
treatment, 1292
adhesive capsulitis (frozen 
shoulder), 492, 493
adjuvant therapies, 151–3
breast cancer, 155–7, 877–9
colorectal cancer, 1266
oesophageal cancer, 1093–4
pancreatic carcinoma, 1237
adnexa, 592–3
adolescents
fractures, growth plate, 387
hip dysplasia, 568, 570
tendon injuries, 464
adrenalectomy, 847–8
Conn’s adenoma, 841
Cushing’s syndrome, 842
laparoscopic, 847–8
open, 848
adrenal glands
acute insufficiency, 844
anatomy, 838
chronic insufficiency, 844
embryology, 839
function, 839
ganglioneuroma, 847
histology, 839
hydatid cyst, 65
hyperaldosteronism, 840–1
incidentaloma, 839–40
metastases, 842
neuroblastoma, 847
phaeochromocytoma, 839, 
844–7, 857, 936
primary insufficiency 
(Addison’s disease), 844
resection, 847–8
tumours, in MEN 1 syndrome, 
856, 857
adrenaline (epinephrine), 3,  
839
adrenal vein catheterisation, 
selective, 840–1
adrenocortical carcinoma, 843
adrenocortical suppression, 260
adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH), 3, 4, 839
excess, 841–2, 844
insufficiency, 844
tumours secreting, 666
a-adrenoreceptor blockers, 846
bladder outflow obstruction, 
1468
BPH, 1464
Adson forceps, 1562
Advance Decisions, 173
Advanced Trauma Life Support 
(ATLS), 312, 322, 365
advancement flaps, 641, 642
anal, 1353, 1370
adverse events, reporting, 181–2
aerobic glycolysis (Warburg 
effect), 142
inhibitors, 158
Afghanistan war, 426
aflatoxins, 146
aflibercept, 158
agenesis, renal, 1399
AIDS
ENT system, 738
gastritis, 1116
intestinal complications, 1249, 
1273
proctitis, 1325
see also HIV infection
aircraft
conflict zones, 425
major disasters, 411
air cysts (bullae), lungs, 937
air embolism, 956
air enema, 129
airway
burns, 618, 620–1
children, 120, 122
dysfunction in craniofacial 
anomalies, 687, 688
foreign body, 132
obstruction, 924–5
postoperative obstruction, 292
preoperative assessment, 261, 
262
airway management
burns patient, 620–1, 629
cleft lip/palate, 691
emergency procedures, 744–9
general anaesthesia, 271–2
maxillofacial trauma, 323, 355, 
356
severe trauma, 323
alanine transaminase (ALT), 
1155
albendazole, 63, 66, 1169
albumin, serum, 7, 279
Alcock’s canal, 1319
alcohol use
and acute pancreatitis, 1222
associated cancers, 145, 760, 
1086
and chronic pancreatitis, 1230
and hepatocellular carcinoma, 
1173
aldosterone, 9, 839
aldosterone:cortisol ratio (ACR), 
841
alemtuzumab, 157
alfuzosin, 1468
alimentary tract, duplications, 
136
alkali burns, 622, 631–2
oesophagus, 1075–6
alkaline encrusting cystitis, 1443
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 826, 
1155, 1471
alkalosis, 128, 1130
Allen’s test, 443, 444, 890
allergies, 1017, 1361
Allis forceps, 1562
Allison hiatus hernia repair, 1079
allografts, 649–50
rejection, 1533–7
allopurinol, 1407
alpha fetoprotein (AFP), 483, 
667, 1506, 1508
ALPPS procedure, 1172
Altemeier’s procedure, 1323
Alvarado score, 1307
alveolar bone grafting, 698–9
Alzheimer’s disease, 1459
amaurosis fugax, 954–5
amazia, 865
American Cancer Society 
(AJCC) cancer staging, 148, 
149
American Society of 
Anaesthesiologists (ASA) 
scoring system, 263, 264
American Spinal Injury 
Association (ASIA), spinal 
injury evaluation, 341, 342
aminoglycosides, 56
aminosalicylates, 1245
5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA), 
1245, 1269, 1324
amoebiasis, 57–60, 1272–3
colonic ulcers, 1272
intestinal, 1272–3
liver abscess, 58, 1169
pathogenesis, 57–8
treatment, 59–60
amoeboma, 58, 60, 1272
amoxicillin, 56, 1009
ampicillin, 56
AMPLE mnemonic, 381
ampulla of Vater, 1188, 1207, 
1213, 1214
adenoma, 1234
carcinoma, 1234, 1235, 1236, 
1237
amputation, 957–60
above knee, 957, 959
below knee, 957, 958–9
blast trauma, 432
complications, 960
diabetic foot, 559
distal, 957
mycetoma, 74, 75
phantom limb pain, 276
postoperative care, 959–60
through knee, 959
transmetatarsal, 957
amylase, serum, 77, 1051, 1214, 
1223, 1228
anaemia
haemolytic, 1183–4
preoperative management, 
258–9
anaesthesia
day case surgery, 304
ground rules, 270
history, 269
intravenous agents, 269
local, 273–5
minimising myocardial 
ischaemia, 265
monitoring, 273
muscle relaxation, 272, 273
perivenous tumescent, 978
preparation, 270
rapid sequence induction, 270
total intravenous (TIVA),  
270
ventilation, 272–3, 1563
anaesthetist, role of, 269
anal advancement flap, 1353
anal canal
anatomy, 1339–40
blood supply, 1341
congenital abnormalities, 
1345–7
embryology, 1344–5
epithelium and subepithelial 
structures, 1340–1
examination, 1342–3
injuries, 1321
lymphatic drainage, 1341
malignant tumours, 155, 
1371–2
venous drainage, 1341
anal cancer, 155, 1371–2
anal continence, 1343–4
anal dilatation, 1356, 1370
anal fissure, 1351–3
analgesia
after laparoscopic surgery, 115
burns, 626
chronic pancreatitis, 1231
day case surgery, 304, 305
end-of-life care, 173
lung resection, 933–4
lymphoedema, 1008, 1009
peritonitis, 1052
sports injuries, 470
thoracotomy, 931
anal glands, 1342
infection, 1362
anal hypertonia, 1355
anal incontinence, 1349–51
after haemorrhoid treatment, 
1360
assessment, 1344
causes, 1349
treatment, 1349–51
anal intraepithelial neoplasia 
(AIN), 1368–9
anal papillae, hypertrophy, 1353
anal sphincters
artificial, 1350, 1351
assessment, 1344, 1345
augmentation, 1350–1
examination, 1343
external, 1319, 1339
internal, 1340
spasm, 1369
internal sphincterotomy, 
1352–3
intersphincteric plane, 1340
repair, 1349–50
anal stenosis, benign, 1369–70
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1568 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1569
anal stricture, benign, 1360, 
1369–70, 1371
anal veins, 1341
anal warts, 1368
anaphylaxis, 13
anaplastic carcinoma, thyroid, 
816, 817, 820
anastomoses
bowel, 97–9
laparoscopic, 99
oesophagogastric, 1093
stapling devices, 96
vascular, 99
anastrozole, 156, 878, 1516
Anderson–Hynes pyeloplasty, 
1412–13
androgen ablation, 156, 1473, 
1474
androgenic hormones, 1457
androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(testicular feminisation), 124
aneurysmal bone cyst, 541, 542
aneurysms
abdominal aorta, see abdominal 
aortic aneurysm
classification, 960
clinical features, 960
ectactic, 960
femoral artery, 966
hepatic artery, 1163, 1163
iliac artery, 966
intracranial, 658–9, 1403
popliteal artery, 966
splenic artery, 1179, 1180
thoracic aorta, 908–9
angina, 257, 889
angiodysplasia, 1276
angioectasia, colon, 231
angioembolisation, 209, 319, 
365, 378
angioendothelioma, malignant 
(angiosarcoma), 615
angiofibroma
juvenile, 719
nasopharynx, 733
angiogenesis, tumours, 140
angiography
arteriovenous malformation, 
661, 662
liver disease, 1159
parathyroid, 828
pelvic injuries, 319
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
659, 660
upper GI tract, 1113
angioma
kidney, 1416
venous, 993, 994
angiomyolipoma (AML), 1385, 
1386, 1416
angiosarcoma, 146, 615
angiosomes, 593, 594
angiotensin I/II, 839
angular deformities, knee, 454
ankle
anatomy, 524
clinical examination, 457–62
fractures, 401–2
fusion (arthrodesis), 528
instability, 460–1, 530
movements, 458–9, 524
osteochondral lesions, 531
reconstructive surgery, 645
rheumatological disease, 529
sports injuries, 468
sprains, 468
synovitis, 531
total replacement (TAR), 528
ankle–brachial pressure index 
(ABPI)
arterial disease, 945–6, 947
lymphoedema, 1009
venous ulcers, 985
ankylosing spondylitis, 261, 481
spinal fractures, 348
spinal surgery, 481, 482
ankylosis, elbow, 499
annuloplasty, 898, 899
anoderm, 1340–1
anoplasty
anal stricture, 1370
imperforate anus, 1346
anorectal abscesses, 1362–3
anorectal malformations, 136–7, 
1345–7
anorectal ring, 1339
anosmia, 664
antalgic gait, 437, 453
antenatal diagnosis, cleft lip and 
palate, 691
anterior (accessory) saphenous 
vein (ASV), 969–70
anterior cruciate ligament 
(ACL), 454, 455, 518, 519
injuries, 520–1
reconstruction, 521
anterior draw test
ankle stability, 461
knee stability, 455, 456
anterolateral thigh (ALT) flap, 
769, 771, 774
anthropometry, 279–80
antibiotic prophylaxis, 53
acute severe pancreatitis, 1225
cholecystecomy, 1202
colorectal surgery, 1263–4
gastrointestinal endoscopy, 
219–20
heart valve surgery, 896
rectal cancer surgery, 1334
splenectomy, 1187
antibiotics
acute osteomyelitis, 556
appendicitis, 1308
causing urine discolouration, 
1376
Crohn’s disease, 1245
gallstone disease, 1200
gas gangrene, 420
H. pylori eradication, 1114
intestinal obstruction, 1290
lower urinary tract infections, 
1442
lymphoedema, 1009
military wounds, 433
MRSA, 44
necrotising fasciitis, 419
osteomyelitis, 552
ototoxicity, 714
pelvic inflammatory disease, 
1520
peritonitis, 1049, 1052, 1053
prostatitis, 1475
septic arthritis, 554, 586–7
surgical infections, 55–6
torso trauma, 380
antibodies, cell surface antigens, 
157
antibody therapies, 
immunosuppression, 1539–40
anti-CD20 antibody (rituximab), 
157, 1540
anticholinergic agents, 1433
anticoagulants
DVT management, 990
‘novel’, 990
anticoagulation
day case surgery, 304
endoscopy patients, 220–1
heart valve surgery, 896
preoperative, 258, 260–1
anticonvulsants, 261, 276
antidiuretic hormone (ADH/
vasopressin), 9, 13
antiepileptic drugs, brain 
tumours, 663
antigen presenting cells, 1534, 
1535
anti-motility drugs, 284
antipituitary hormone drugs, 277
antiplatelet drugs
endoscopy, 220–1
peripheral arterial disease, 948
preoperative withdrawal, 261
anti-tetanus globulin (ATG), 
417–18
antithyroid drugs, 812, 815
antrectomy, 1080, 1123
antrochoanal polyp, 733
anus, imperforate, 136–7, 1345–7
AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für 
Osteosynthesefragen) 
classification, 349, 386–7
aorta
cannulation, 884–5
dissection, 909–11
thoracic, rupture, 366, 369–70
aortic aneurysms
abdominal, see abdominal 
aortic aneurysm
thoracic, 908–9
aortic bifurcation, embolus, 954
aortic coarctation, 906
aortic enteric fistula, 966, 1129
aortic pulsations, 1020
aortic valve
anatomy, 894
replacement, 902
transcatheter implantation 
(TA VI), 902
aortic valve disease, 899–902
regurgitation, 900–2
stenosis, 899–900
aortofemoral bypass, 949, 950–1
aortoiliac occlusion, 943, 944
reconstructive surgery, 949, 
950–1
Apert syndrome, 687, 689, 701
Apfel score, 299
apical ectodermal ridge, 561
apixaban, 990
apocrine glands, 593
apoptosis, 242
cancer cell evasion, 140, 249
inducers of, 157, 158
appendicectomy
children, 130
conventional, 1309–10
laparoscopic, 1309, 1311–12
postoperative complications, 
1313–14
problems encountered during, 
1312
retrograde, 1311
appendices epiploicae, 1258
appendicitis
acute, 1301–8
aetiology, 1301–2
clinical diagnosis, 1302–3
differential diagnosis, 
1304–7
investigation, 21, 211, 1307, 
1308
non-operative management, 
1308
pathology, 1302
special features, 1304
surgery, see appendicectomy
children, 130
diagnosis, 211, 212
gangrenous, 1302, 1304
investigation, 1307, 1308
peritonitis in, 1302, 1308
recurrent acute, 1314
role of omentum, 1061
scoring systems, 1307
appendicolith (faecolith), 1301–2
appendicostomy, antegrade 
colonic enema, 137
appendicular artery, 1300
appendix
abscess, 1312
‘absent’, 1312
anatomy, 1299–300, 1304
carcinoid tumours, 1315
epithelial tumours, 1315–17
mass, 1312–13
mesentery (mesoappendix), 
1300, 1301
microscopic anatomy, 1300–1
pelvic, 1299, 1304
postileal, 1299, 1304
retrocaecal, 1299, 1304
appendix testis (hydatid of 
Morgagni), 126, 1376, 1500
apprehension test
patellar, 456–7
shoulder instability, 450, 496
aprotinin, 1225
aqueous humour, 673
arachnoid cyst, 667
arcade of Struthers, 501
areola, 860
aresenic trioxide, 157
argentaffin (Kulchitsky) cells, 
1300, 1315
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1569 25/10/2017   10:44Index1570
argentaffinoma, 1315
argon plasma coagulation (APC), 
231, 1171
Arnold–Chiari malformation, 
484, 668
aromatase inhibitors, 156, 878, 
1516
arrhythmias
after CABG, 891
postoperative, 294
preoperative management, 
258, 265
arterial blood gases, 256, 918
arterial bruit, 944
arterial dissection
aorta, 909–11
cerebral, 336
arterial injuries
neck, 756
thoracic aorta, 366, 369–70
arterial stenosis/occlusion
acute, 953–6
chronic, 942–52
arteriotomy, closure, 99
arteriovenous fistula, 966–7
arteriovenous malformations 
(A VMs), 658, 661–2
arteritis, 967–8
temporal, 683, 967
arthritis
sexually-acquired reactive 
(Reiter’s disease), 681, 
1494–5
in ulcerative colitis, 1267
see also osteoarthritis; 
rheumatoid arthritis; 
septic arthritis
arthrodesis
ankle, 528
elbow, 499
hand joints, 505, 506
hip, 515
knee, 521
shoulder, 495
arthrography, MRI, 201–2, 496, 
497
arthrogryposis multiplex 
congenita (AMC), 564
arthroplasty
extremity fractures, 393–4
joint infection following, 
554–6
see also hip replacement; knee 
replacement; shoulder 
replacement
arthroscopy
hip, 515
knee, 521
shoulder, 491
articles
analysis, 167–8
publishing, 168
articular cartilage, imaging, 
201–2
artificial limb, 960
asbestos exposure, 146, 922
ascariasis, 60–2
bile/pancreatic ducts, 60, 61, 
62, 1205, 1207
intestinal obstruction, 60–1, 
1282–3
treatment, 61–2
ascites, 1057–9, 1166
chronic liver disease, 1058, 
1166
chylous, 1003, 1013, 1059
clinical features, 1058
congestive heart failure, 1058
investigation, 1058
pancreatic, 1228
pathophysiology, 1057
treatment, 1058–9, 1166
ASEPSIS wound score, 48
aseptic surgery, 43
Ashkenazi Jewish populations, 
880–1, 1241
asiatic cholangiohepatitis, 62–3, 
1207
aspartate transaminase (AST), 
1155
aspirin, 158, 221
preoperative withdrawal, 261
assisted conception, 1512
Aster–Coller staging, 149
asthma, 259
astrocytomas, 664–5
ataxia–telangiectasia, 145
ataxic gait, 437
atelectasis, 293
atherosclerosis, 887
carotid stenosis, 951–2
mesenteric/coeliac vessels, 1254
peripheral arterial disease, 945, 
947
Atlanta classification, acute 
pancreatitis, 1223
atlantoaxial instability, 346
atlantoaxial ligaments, 339
atlantoaxial subluxation (AAS), 
481
atlas
anatomy, 338
fractures, 346
atracurium, 273
atresia
biliary, 135–6, 1196–7
duodenal, 133–4, 1293–4
oesophageal, 133
atrial fibrillation, 258, 265
atrial flutter, 258
atrial myxoma, 911–12
atrial septal defect (ASD), 905, 
907
closure, 907
types, 907
atrophie blanche, 973
attorney, power of, 173
audiometry, 705–6, 712–13
evoked-response, 712
audit, clinical, 161–2, 175, 185–6
Auerbach’s plexus, 1067, 1095, 
1107, 1296–7
auscultation, abdomen, 1021
autoantibodies, thyroid, 802–3, 
808
autocannibalism, 8–9
autoimmune disease
gastritis, 1115
oesophagus, 1100–1
pancreatitis, 1230
thyroiditis, 821–2
autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia, acquired, 1183
autonomic dysreflexia, 354
autonomy, patients, 170–1
autopsy, 251
avascular necrosis (A VN)
carpal bones, 508–9
femoral head, 512–13, 571
osteochondroses showing 
radiographic appearance 
of, 571, 572
proximal femoral epiphysis 
(Legg–Calvé–Perthes 
disease), 571–3
axillary artery, cannulation, 885
axillary lymph nodes, 860–1
axillary nerve, injury, 448
axillary vein
compression, 991–2
thrombosis, 992
axiltinib, 156
axis
anatomy, 338
odontoid fractures, 346–7
traumatic spondylolisthesis 
(hangman’s fracture), 347, 
348
axonotmesis, 385
Ayurvedic method, 1367
azathioprine, 1245, 1269, 1532, 
1538, 1539
Babcock’s forceps, 1229, 1310, 
1562
Babinski response, 473
Bacille Calmette–Guérin (BCG), 
intravesical, 1447, 1448, 1450
Bacillus fusiformis, 1325
back pain
children, 583
epidemiology, 471
investigations, 474
malignancy, 544–5
non-spinal causes, 472
patient history, 472
physical examination, 472–3
red flags, 472, 583
backslab, 390
bacteraemia, 50–1, 53, 54
after prostatectomy, 1466
GI endoscopy, 219
bacteria, large intestinal flora, 
46–7, 1048–9
bacterial infections
biliary tract, 1168
lower urinary tract, 1441–2
mastitis, 866–7
peritonitis, 1049, 1053
sialadenitis, 786
surgical, 44–7
see also named bacteria
bacterial overgrowth, 1255–6
bacterial translocation, 46–7,  
288
bacterial virulence factors, 1441
Bacteroides spp., 45, 50, 56, 1049
b-adrenergic blocking drugs, 
thyrotoxicosis, 813, 815
Baker’s cyst, 989
balance disorders, 714–15
balanitis xerotica obliterans 
(BXO), 127, 1377, 1482, 
1486, 1487
balanoposthitis, 127, 1489
Balkan nephropathy, 1446
ballet dancers, injuries, 466
ballistic injuries, 315, 428
see also gunshot wounds
ballistics, 427–8
balloon catheter, percutaneous 
transluminal angioplasty, 
948–9
balloon dilatation, achalasia, 
1098
balloon tamponade, oesophageal 
varices, 1164
bandaging, four-layer system, 
984–5
banding, haemorrhoids, 1356, 
1357
band ligation
mucohaemorrhoidal prolapse, 
1322
oesophageal varices, 222,  
1164
bands, intestinal obstruction, 
1283
Bankart’s lesion, 496, 497
BAP1 mutant disease, 1418
Barcelona Clinic Liver Group 
staging system, 1174, 1174
barefoot walking, 1005
bariatric surgery
complications, 1150–1
cost effectiveness, 1145–6
eligibility criteria, 1146
follow-up, 1151
laparoscopic, 1147
‘metabolic/diabetes’ surgery, 
1145
outcomes, 1145, 1151
rationale, 1145
RCTs, 1145, 1147
service setup, 1146–7
types of operation, 1147–50
barium enema
amoebiasis, 59
caecal volvulus, 1290
colorectal cancer, 1263
Hirschsprung’s disease, 136
barium studies
peptic ulcers, 1117, 1118
radiation doses, 192
roundworm infestation, 60, 61
small bowel obstruction, 193
tuberculosis, 80
barium swallow, 730, 1068
achalasia, 1097–8
pharyngeal pouch, 739
Barlow test, 568
barotrauma, oesophagus, 1072–3
Barrett’s oesophagus, 221, 224, 
233, 241–2, 1077, 1081–3, 
1087
Barron’s banding, 1356, 1357
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1570 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1571
basal cell carcinoma (BCC), 
604–5, 616
eyelids, 674
basal cell naevus (Gorlin) 
syndrome, 145, 595
basal cell papilloma (seborrhoeic 
keratosis), 599
Bascom’s technique, 1348
base deficit, 17
basketball, 466
Bassini’s operation, 1032
Batson’s venous plexus, 537
batteries, ingestion, 132, 1072
Battle’s sign, 332, 333
b-catenin protein, 1329
B-cell lymphomas, 1251
Beahrs’ triangle, 802
bed sores, 953
see also pressure sores
beetroot, urine discolouration, 
1376
Beger procedure, 1227, 1232
Behçet’s disease, 681
Bell’s palsy, 715
Belsey mark IV operation, 1079
Bence Jones proteins, 545
benign paroxysmal positional 
vertigo, 714
benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(BPH), 1456, 1458–60
assessment, 1461–2
bladder outlet obstruction, 
1459–60, 1461
indications for prostatectomy, 
1463
LUTS, 1459
management, 1463–7
Bentall’s operation, 909
benzodiazepines, 219, 1111
benzpyrones, 1011
benzylpenicillin, 56
Berry’s ligament, 802, 813
best practice, 186
beta-thalassaemia, 1183
betel nut, 760
bevacizumab, 157, 158, 1420
bias, clinical studies, 164–5
bicalutamide, 156, 1474
bicarbonate (HCO3), in GI 
secretions, 281
biceps muscle
injuries, 469
long head rupture, 469, 495–6
Bier’s block, 275, 632
bile, 1155, 1189, 1190
vomiting, 1123
in children, 128, 134
bile ducts, 1188, 1189
benign tumours, 1207–8
cancer (cholangiocarcinoma), 
1167, 1208–9
dilation, 1157–8
injuries, 184, 1203–4
stones, 228, 1204–5, 1206, 
1216
stricture
after cholecystectomy, 1204
after liver trauma, 1163
benign, 1206
investigation, 1206
malignant, 1208, 1209
bile peritonitis, 1052, 1053
bile salts, 283, 1241
bilharziasis, see schistosomiasis
biliary atresia, 135–6, 1196–7
classification, 1196, 1197
clinical features, 1196
treatment, 1197
biliary colic, 1017, 1018–19
imaging, 212–13
biliary dilatation, 228
biliary tract
anatomy, 1188–9
ascending bacterial infection, 
1168
congenital abnormalities, 
1168, 1195–8
cystic disease, 1197–8
imaging, 1190–5
intraoperative, 1194–5
injuries
classification, 1204
iatrogenic, 184, 1203–4
traumatic, 374
tumours, 1207–11
biliopancreatic diversion (BPD), 
1147, 1149
bilirubin, 1155, 1206
Billroth I gastrectomy, 1120, 
1123
Billroth II gastrectomy, 1118, 
1120–1, 1221
bimanual examination, bladder 
cancer, 1449
bimaxillary osteotomy, 701, 702
Biobrane®, 630
bioelectrical impedence analysis 
(BIA), 280
bioengineering, 650
see also tissue engineering
biofeedback, constipation, 1279
biofilm, 550
biological dressings, 985
biomarkers, bone and joint 
infection, 550
biomedical scientists (BMSs), 
236
biopsy
bone, 545–6
breast, 862–3
endometrium, 1516
lung, 928–9, 930
prostate, 1385, 1387, 1470–1
rectal (amoebiasis), 1272
sentinel node
breast cancer, 877
malignant melanoma, 612
thyroid, 809
bipolar electrosurgery devices, 
104
birthmarks, 613
Birt–Hogg-Dubé syndrome, 1418
birth order, and hip dysplasia, 567
Bismuth–Corlette classification, 
cholangiocarcinoma, 1209, 
1210
bisphosphonates, 485, 567, 826, 
831
bite wounds, 27, 138, 363
bivalirudin, 990
Bjork flap, 745–6
BK virus, 1541
b-lactamases, 43, 44, 56
extended spectrum, 43, 45
bladder
anatomy, 1423
calculi, 1383, 1434–6
cystoscopy, 1379–85
denervation, 1434
descent through inguinal/
femoral hernia, 1030, 1438
diverticulae, 1384, 1436–8
endometriosis, 1452
exstrophy, 1424–5, 1453
foreign bodies, 1434, 1435, 
1436
function assessment, 1395–7
innervation, 1423–4
neck, disorders causing 
obstruction, 1467–8
neuropathic, 1428–9
in children, 131
normal cystoscopy, 1382
overactivity, 1429–30, 1432, 
1460
treatment, 1433
urodynamics, 1396, 1397
pain, 1374
papillary tumours, 1384, 1445, 
1446
reconstruction, 1453–4
removal (cystectomy), 1451–2
schistosomiasis, 1443–5
small capacity, 1430, 1433
substitution/augmentations 
procedures, 1433–4, 1443, 
1454
trauma, 375–6, 1425–6, 1466, 
1481
wall trabeculation, 1383
bladder cancer, 1446–55
adenocarcinoma, 1448
causes, 146
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155
clinical features, 1448–9
imaging, 194
in situ carcinoma, 1448
investigation, 1449, 1450
muscle-invasive, 1448
treatment, 1451–2
non-muscle invasive, 1447–8
treatment, 1450–1
squamous cell carcinoma, 1448
staging and grading, 1447
treatment, 1450–2
urinary diversion, 1452–5
urothelial cell carcinoma, 
1446–7
bladder outflow obstruction 
(BOO)
flow rate assessment, 1395, 
1396
male, 1459–60
bladder neck pathology, 
1467–8
in BPH, 1458–9, 1463–7
urodynamic studies, 1396, 
1397, 1430, 1431, 1460, 
1462
blast, 429–30
blast injuries, 430–3
blast lung, 430
bleeding
gastrointestinal, in endoscopy, 
220
punctate, 635
bleomycin, 155
blind loop syndrome, 1255–6
blisters, burn wounds, 631
Blom–Singer valve, 753
blood
autologous, 21
donation, 20
viscosity, 945
blood clots, evacuation, 114
blood gases, 256, 918
blood groups, 21–2
organ transplantation, 1533, 
1547–8
blood loss
classification, 19
see also haemorrhage
blood pressure
postoperative, 293–4
shock, 14, 15
trauma, 323–4
see also hypertension; 
hypotension
blood products, 20–1
blood substitutes, 23
blood tests
extremity trauma, 384
oesophageal cancer, 1089
peritonitis, 1051
preoperative, 256
prostate cancer, 1471
urinary disorders, 1377–9
blood transfusion, 20–3
blood/blood products, 20–1
complications, 22–3
history of, 20
indications for, 21
massive, 427
preoperative, 258–9
transfusion reactions, 22
blood volume, 19
Bloom syndrome, 145
Blount’s disease, 576
blue naevus, 601, 602
blunt trauma, 314–15, 1061
diaphragm, 370
liver, 1161
renal, 1413–14
Boari operation, 1415
body composition, after injury/
critical illness, 8–9
body mass index (BMI), 260
calculator, 303
and day surgery, 303–4
and nutritional status, 279
obesity, 1144
thresholds for bariatric surgery, 
1146
body proportions, at various ages, 
316
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1571 25/10/2017   10:44Index1572
body temperature
after trauma, 317
children, 119–20
postoperative, 299
body weight, children, 120
Boerhaave’s syndrome, 1072–3, 
1075
bolus obstruction, intestines, 
1282
bone, biopsy, 545–6
bone cyst
aneurysmal, 541, 542
simple, 541, 546
bone disease
aggressive, 202–3
metabolic, 205, 485
bone grafting
alveolar, 698–9
oral cavity cancers, 771, 773, 
774, 774–5
bone healing, 25, 388, 394
direct, 388
indirect, 388
pathological fractures, 548
bone metastases, 537, 547–8
breast cancer, 534, 881
common sites of, 538
pathological fracture, 407
prostate cancer, 1382, 1383–4, 
1471–2, 1474
scintigraphy, 199
thyroid carcinoma, 817
treatment, 547–8
tumours commonly 
metastasising, 534
bone mineral density, 205, 474, 
825, 833
bone-morphogenetic protein-4 
(BMP4), 37
bone remodelling, 388
bone scans, 474
hyperparathyroidism, 825, 833
metabolic bone disease, 205
prostate cancer, 1392, 1393–4, 
1472
spinal osteoblastoma, 480
bone tumours, 535–44
chondrogenic, 539–41
classification, 535
classification by site, 542
evaluation and investigation, 
544–6
giant cell, 541, 542
osteogenic, 538–9
pathological fractures, 406–7
spine, 480
staging, 543
treatment, 546–7
boretezomib, 156
Bosniak classification (renal 
cysts), 1389–90
botulinum toxin
anal fissure, 1352
cerebral palsy, 585
detrusor overactivity, 1432
lower oesophageal sphincter, 
223, 1099
sphincter of Oddi, 1233
Bouchard’s nodes, 443, 506
Bourneville disease (adenoma 
sebaceum), 602–3
boutonnière deformity, 443, 504
bowel anastomoses, 97–9
extramucosal technique, 97–8
two-layer technique, 97, 98
bowel habit alteration
colorectal cancers, 1262, 1319, 
1329
inflammatory bowel disease, 
1017
bowel injury, blast, 431
bowel preparation, 98, 1263, 
1334
bowel sounds, 1021
intestinal obstruction, 1286
Bowen’s disease, 606, 607, 1492
bow legs, 563, 576
boxing injuries, 469
brachial plexopathy, neonatal, 
586
brachial plexus block, 274
brachycephaly, 668
brachytherapy
oesophageal cancer, 1095
prostate cancer, 1473
bradycardia, 294
B-RAF protein, 612
brain abscess, 656–7
brain death, 671, 1543
brain herniation, 328–9, 331,  
333
brain injury
deaths, 364
minor/mild, 329–30
moderate and severe, 330–7
timeline of management, 312, 
313
brain tumours, 663–7
aetiology, 662, 663
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155–6
in children, 667
classification, 662, 663
glioma, 664–5
meningioma, 665
metastatic, 663, 664, 665
pituitary, 664, 665–7
presentation, 662–3, 664
branchial cyst, 753–4
branchial fistula, 754
BRCA1; BRCA2 genes, 144, 
880–1, 1528
breast
aberrations of normal 
development and 
involution (ANDI), 
868–9
abscesses, 866–7
actinomycosis, 867
anatomy, 860–1
changes throughout life, 868
congenital abnormalities, 865
cysts, 861, 868, 869
diffuse hypertrophy, 865
duct excision, 865, 868
fibroadenoma, 868, 870
fistula, 867, 868
galactocoele, 869
inflammatory, 866–8
injuries, 866
investigation of symptoms, 
861–3, 871
lumps, 863, 869
male, disorders of, 69–70, 871, 
882, 1507
needle biopsy/cytology, 862–3
nipple disorders, 863–5, 873
pain (mastalgia), 869
phyllodes tumour, 870
reconstruction, 879–80
sarcoma, 882
tuberculosis, 867
breast carcinoma, 871–81
aetiological factors, 871–2
clinical presentation, 873–4
diagnosis, 861–3
ductal, 872
familial, 144, 880–1
follow-up, 879
genetics, 144, 871, 880–1
Her2-positive, 249, 872, 878
and HRT, 871, 881
inflammatory, 872
in situ, 872–3
lobular, 872
local spread, 873
lymphoedema, 879, 1005
male breast, 871, 882
metastases, 534, 548, 873, 881, 
882
oestrogen receptor status, 872
pathology, 872–3
phenomena of lymphatic 
obstruction, 879
and pregnancy, 881
prognosis, 875
risk in benign disease, 871
screening, 880
sentinel node biopsy, 877
staging, 874, 875
treatment, 875–9
adjuvant systemic therapy, 
155–7, 877–9
advanced disease, 881
costs, 158
multidisciplinary team, 875
radiotherapy, 877
surgery, 875–7
breastfeeding, 871
breathing, mechanics, 914–15
breech presentation, 567
Breslow thickness, 611, 612
bridge plating, 393
British Association for Parenteral 
and Enteral Nutrition, 280
British Journal of Surgery (BJS), 
168
British Obesity and Metabolic 
Surgery Society (BOMSS), 
1145, 1151
British Society of 
Gastroenterology, 218
brittle bone disease, 566–7
Brodie’s abscess, 589
bromocriptine, 156, 869
bronchial tree, anatomy, 914, 915
bronchiectasis, 936
bronchioalveolar carcinoma 
(BAC), 925
bronchodilators, 266
bronchogenic cyst, 936
bronchoplastic lung resection, 
933
bronchopleural fistula, 933
bronchoscope, fibreoptic 
intubating, 271, 272
bronchoscopy, 923–4
flexible, 923, 924
lung cancer, 928
oesophageal cancer, 1089
rigid, 924
Brown Kelly syndrome, 740
Brown-Sequard syndrome, 353
brown tumours, 825
Brugia spp., 63
bruising, periorbital, 332, 359, 
362
bruits
aortic and iliac, 1021
arterial, 1021
Brunner’s glands, 1108, 1141
buccal mucosa, squamous cell 
carcinoma, 772
Budd–Chiari syndrome, 991, 
1057, 1058, 1156, 1166–7
Buerger’s disease, 967, 990
bullae, lungs, 937
bunion, 458, 525
bupivacaine, 273
buprenorphine, 276
Burhenne technique, 1205, 1206
Burkitt’s lymphoma, 1251
burns
airway and respiratory injury, 
617, 618, 620–1
analgesia, 626
assessment, 621–2
causes and likely depth, 622
chemical, 631–2, 679–80
children, 624
circumferential, 619, 624–5
contamination, 625
contractures, 32
depth, 622, 623
diathermy, 103
dressings, 625–6
electrical, 631, 632
extent, 619, 621
eye, 679–80
fluid resuscitation, 622–4
healing, 630–1
immediate care, 620–1, 628
incidence, 617
infection, 627, 630–1
inflammatory and circulatory 
changes, 618–19
metabolic poisoning, 618, 621
minor/outpatient, 628, 630
nursing care, 627
nutritional support, 626–7
psychological impacts, 627
radiation, 632
surgery for acute, 627–8, 
629–30
treatment, 624–6
burns unit, admission criteria, 620
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1572 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1573
Burow’s triangles, 641, 642
bursae, sports injuries, 464
bursitis, olecranon, 500–1
burst fractures
cervical, 348
decompression, 345
lumbar spine, 345, 350
Busche–Löwenstein tumour, 
1368, 1493
buserelin, 156
business performance 
methodology, 187–8
buttocks, strapping, 1361
button batteries, ingestion, 132, 
1072
CA 19-9, 1167, 1208, 1211, 1235
CA-125, 1527, 1528, 1529
cABCDE protocol, 323–6
cabergoline, 156
caecocystoplasty, 1443
caecum, 1258, 1259, 1299–300
carcinoma, 1262, 1264, 1306
volvulus, 1288, 1289–90, 1295
café-au-lait spots, 595, 596, 600
Caisson disease, 512
calcaneonavicular bar, 563
calcaneus, fractures, 208, 402
calcimimetics, 831, 834, 835
calcineurin inhibitors (CNI), 
1538–9, 1540
calciphylaxis, 833–4
calcitonin, 802, 825, 826, 845
medullary thyroid carcinoma, 
820
calcium
daily requirements, 281
homeostasis, 824–5
soft-tissue deposits, 833
supplementation, 831
see also hypercalcaemia; 
hypocalcaemia
calcium channel antagonists, 
967, 1099
calcium receptor gene (CAST), 
832
calcium sensing receptor (CaR), 
extracellular, 831
calculi
bladder, 1383, 1434–6
pancreatic duct, 1216, 1217, 
1231–2
parotid gland, 787
preputial, 1489
prostatic, 1468
renal, see renal calculi
submandibular salivary glands, 
780–1
urethral, 1484
calf muscle pump, 971
Calne, Sir Roy York, 1533
calorie requirements, 282
Calot’s triangle, 1188, 1189
dissection, 1202, 1203
Campbell de Morgan spots, 613, 
614
camptodactyly, 580
Campylobacter jejuni, 1248, 1272
canal of Nuck, 1503
cancer
bone, 202–3
causes, 143
diagnosis and classification, 
147–8
environmental causes, 145–6
gene changes, 249
histological diagnosis, 238–41
inherited syndromes associated 
with, 144–5
non-surgical treatment, 150–4
pain management, 276–7
‘precision medicine’, 251
prevention, 143, 146
radiation-induced, 145, 191
screening, 146–7
staging, 148, 149, 213, 251
tumour growth, 142–3
see also named cancers; tumours
cancer cells, 139–42
dissemination and 
implantation, 141
cancer-en-cuirasse, 873–4, 879
cancer management, 143
end-of-life care, 159
multidisciplinary teams, 148, 
149
palliative therapy, 150, 158–9
cancer surgery
metastatic disease, 150
primary disease, 150
principles, 148–50
candidiasis
chronic hyperplastic, 763
oesophageal, 1103–4
Cantlie’s line, 1155
capacitance coupling, 103
capacity, 173, 267
capecitabine, 155
capillaries, lymphatic, 995–6
capillary haemangioma, 613
orbit, 676
capillary pressure, 1057
capillary refill time, 14, 943–4
capillary vascular malformations, 
613
capitellum, osteochondritis 
dissecans, 500
capsule endoscopy, 226–7, 1244
carbapenems, 56
carbimazole, 812, 813, 815
carbohydrate, daily requirements, 
282
carbon monoxide toxicity, 618
carboplatin, 155
carboxyhaemoglobin, 618, 621
carbuncle, renal, 1404
carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA), 1172, 1228, 1266
carcinogens, urothelial, 1446
carcinoid syndrome, 854, 855, 
1251
carcinoid tumours
appendix, 1315
pancreas, 849
small bowel, 853, 1250–1
stomach, 1130
carcinoma, histology, 239, 240
carcinomatosis peritonei, 1059
cardiac arrest, after cardiac 
surgery, 912–13
cardiac failure
ascites, 1058
high-risk patients, 265
cardiac isoenzymes, 888
cardiac massage, internal, 912–13
cardiac output
after cardiac surgery, 892
aortic stenosis, 900
monitoring, 17
shock, 14
cardiac surgery
cardiac arrest following, 
912–13
valvular heart disease, 894–5
see also coronary artery bypass 
grafting
cardiac tamponade, 123, 367–8, 
911
cardiectomy, transplant recipient, 
1556, 1557
cardiogenic shock, 13
cardioplegic solutions, 885
cardiopulmonary bypass circuit, 
895
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), 
884–6
cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR), and emergency 
thoracotomy, 371
cardiopulmonry exercise testing, 
257, 264–5, 888
cardiovascular disease, 
preoperative management, 
256–8
cardiovascular system 
complications, 293–4
Carney complex, 911
Caroli’s disease, 1168, 1197
carotid arteries, injuries, 756
carotid artery stenosis, 662, 946, 
951–2
carotid body tumour 
(chemodectoma), 711, 
757–8
carotid cavernous fistula, 661–2
carotid duplex scan, 265
carotid endarterectomy, 662, 
951, 952
indications, 265, 952
carpal bones
avascular necrosis, 508–9
fractures, 396–7
instability, 397
carpal tunnel syndrome, 508
Carpentier–Edwards 
annuloplasty, 898, 899
cartridge, structure, 427
caruncle, urethral, 1377, 1485–6
Casanova test, 833
case-controlled study, 164
cassava (tapioca), 76, 1230
castration, medical, 1474
casts, 390–1
Sarmiento patella tendon 
below knee, 406
catabolism
burns patient, 626–7
post-trauma, 5–7, 279
cataract surgery, 683
catecholamines, 839
excess, 845
cationic trypsinogen gene 
(PRSS1), 1222, 1230
Catterall classification, 572
cauda equina, 340
cauda equina syndrome, 475–6, 
1428–9
cavernomas, 662
cavernous sinus thrombosis, 721
cavitron ultrasonic aspirator 
(CUSA), 1548
CD4 T cells, 1534
ceftriaxone, 1520
cell seeding techniques, 39–40
cell surface antigens, antibodies 
against, 157
cellulitis, 48–9, 597
periorbital, 722
pinna, 707
central venous access, 287
central venous pressure (CVP), 
16
centre–edge (CE) angle, 571
cephalosporins, 56
cerebral blood flow (CBF), 328
cerebral contusions, 336
cerebral palsy, 584–5
classification, 584
cerebral perfusion pressure 
(CPP), 328, 337
cerebral vasospasm, 660
cerebritis, 656, 657
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
analysis in SAH, 659
disorders of flow, 655
drainage, 654, 655
excessive production, 653, 655
flow pathways, 653
leaks, 362
rhinorrhoea, 717
volume, 653
cerium nitrate, 625
cervical canal, 1514
cervical cancer, 146, 1516
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 
(CIN), 1368, 1516
cervical lymphadenitis, 
tuberculosis, 77–8, 757
cervical lymph nodes, 800–1
anatomy, 728–9, 764
metastatic disease, 729, 764
resection, 758–9
cervical rib, 939, 952, 992
cervical smear specimen, 238
cervical spine
anatomy, 338–9, 338–40
clinical examination, 439–40
degenerative disorders, 474–5
immobilisation, 323, 340
injuries, 345–9
assessment, 340–2
associated with head injury, 
332
functional outcomes, 353
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1573 25/10/2017   10:44Index1574
imaging, 342–4
management, 344–5
subaxial spine, 348, 349
upper spine, 345–8
instability, 261
lordosis, 439, 440, 471
movement, 440
nerve root entrapment, 440
stability, 339
cervical sympathectomy, 968
cervicothoracic junction injury, 
338–9
cervix, anatomy, 1513, 1514
cetuximab, 157, 158
CFTR gene, 1216, 1230
Chagas’ disease, 1095, 1104, 1298
chalazion, see meibomian cyst
chalmoogra oil, 70
Chance fractures, 350–1
chancroid, 1496
Charcot foot, 528, 532–3
Charcot–Leyden crystals, 60
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, 
458, 531
Charcot retaining orthotic walker 
(CROW), 533
Charcot’s triad, 1168, 1205
Charles procedure, 1012
checklists, surgical safety, 182–4
cheilectomy, 527
chemical burns, 631–2, 679–80
oesophagus, 1075–6
chemicals
associated with bladder 
carcinoma, 1446
associated with cancers, 146, 
1208
chemodectoma (carotid body 
tumour), 711, 757–8
chemoradiotherapy
anal cancer, 1371
oesophageal cancer, 1094
pancreatic cancer, 1238–9
principles, 157–8
rectal cancer, 1337–8
chemotherapy, 154–8
adjuvant, 151–3
anal malignancy, 1371
bladder cancer, 1451
breast cancer, 878–9
classes of drugs, 155–7
colorectal cancer, 1266
colorectal liver metastases, 
1173
gastric cancer, 1139
neuroblastoma, 847
oesophageal cancer, 1093
ovarian cancer, 155, 1529
pancreatic cancer, 1237, 1238
prostate cancer, 1474
rectal carcinoma, 1337–8
targeted, 154, 157–8
renal cell carcinoma, 1420–1
Chernobyl nuclear disaster, 816
chest drain, 100, 920, 921
pneumothorax, 919–20, 921
post-pneumonectomy, 933
thoracotomy, 931
underwater sealed, 100, 366
chest pain, oesophageal disease, 
1069, 1077
chest radiography
aortic disruption, 369
aortic stenosis, 900
congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia, 939
inhaled foreign body, 132
lung cancer, 926, 928
mitral regurgitation, 896
mitral stenosis, 897–8
pectus excavatum, 939
perforated peptic ulcer, 1125
peritonitis, 1051, 1054
pneumoperitoneum, 210–11
post-pneumonectomy, 934
preoperative, 256, 259
pulmonary hydatid disease, 67
retrosternal goitre, 803
rolling hiatus hernia, 1084
testicular cancer metastases 
(‘cannon ball’), 1508
trauma, 205, 366, 372
chest trauma, 375–81, 938
children, 122–3
‘deadly dozen’, 367
chest wall
burns injuries, 621
congenital abnormalities, 
939–40
tumours, 938
chest wound, sucking, 366
Chiari malformations, 668
Chiari I, 668
Chiari II, 484, 668
Chicago Classification, 1096
chief cells, 1107, 1108
Chilaiditi’s syndrome, 210
child abuse, 138
children
acute abdominal pain, 130–2
age terminology, 119
ankle and foot abnormalities, 
577–80
appendicitis, 1303, 1304, 1308
differential diagnosis, 
1304–5
atherosclerosis, 887
basic physiological data, 120
body proportions, 316
body temperature, 119–20
brain tumours, 667
burns, 624
cleft lip and palate, 688–700
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 
844
congenital and developmental 
skeletal abnormalities, 
564–6
congenital hearing loss, 712
congenital malformations, 
132–8
abdominal wall, 135
alimentary tract 
duplications, 136
anorectal, 136–7
biliary system, 135–6
diaphragmatic hernia, 133
Hirschsprung’s disease, 136
intestinal atresias, 133–4, 
135
oesophageal atresia, 133
urinary tract, 137–8
craniofacial anomalies, 686–8
Crohn’s disease, 1243
epiglottitis, 743
examination, 121
fluid administration, 120–1
fractures, 403–6
growth plate, 387
hernias
inguinal, 124, 1032
midline, 127
hip abnormalities
DDH, 567–71
slipped upper femoral 
epiphysis (SUFE), 382, 
404–5, 573–5
idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, 1182–3
inguinoscrotal disorders, 124–6
intussusception, 129–30, 
1283–4
differentiation from 
appendicitis, 1304
treatment, 1293
knee and lower leg 
abnormalities, 575–7
laryngotracheobronchitis 
(croup), 743
limb development, 561
limping, 568, 589
metabolic bone disease, 566–7
necrotising enterocolitis, 138
neuroblastoma, 138, 847
neuromuscular conditions, 
583, 584
nocturnal enuresis, 1432
non-accidental injuries (NAI), 
138, 311, 315, 316, 330, 
589–90
normal limb variants, 562–4
oncology, 138
operative surgery, 121–2
long-term outcomes, 122
techniques, 122
parotitis, 786
penile disorders, 126–7
primary lymphoedema, 1002
primary peritonitis, 1053
pyloric stenosis, 127–8
retinoblastoma, 676
safeguarding, 138
spinal deformities, 581–3
stridor, 742–3
swallowed/inhaled foreign 
bodies, 132, 743–4
testicular tumours, 1509
trauma, 122–4
umbilical hernias, 1036–8
upper limb abnormalities, 
580–1
vomiting, 128, 134
Wilms’ tumour, 138, 152, 156, 
832, 1421–2
see also infants; neonates
Child–Turcotte–Pugh (CTP) 
classification, 1156–7, 1175
China, cancer incidence, 1086, 
1131
Chlamydia spp., prostatitis, 1475
Chlamydia trachomatis, 1049, 
1306, 1495–6, 1505, 
1518–19
chloramphenicol, 82
chlorhexidine, 1564
chlorine, in GI secretions, 281
‘choke’ vessels, 593, 594
cholangiocarcinoma, 1167, 
1208–9, 1210
cholangiography
percutaneous transhepatic, 
1159, 1193–4
perioperative, 1194, 1195
cholangiohepatitis, Asiatic 
(clonorchiasis), 62–3, 1207
cholangioscopy, 1158–9
cholangitis, 1205
ascending, 1168
immunoglobulin G4-related, 
1207
primary sclerosing, 1159, 1167, 
1167, 1206–7, 1208
cholecystectomy, 1202–5
common bile duct injury, 184
complications, 1203–5
gallbladder polyps, 1211
gallstone disease, 1200
indications, 1203
laparoscopic, 1202
late symptoms, 1204–5
open, 1202–3
cholecystitis
acalculous, 1200
acute, 212–13, 1018, 1199
severity grading, 1200
emphysematous, 1190, 1191
Salmonella, 1201–2
cholecystitis glandularis 
proliferans, 1201
cholecystohepatic duct, 1196
cholecystojejunostomy, 1237
cholecystokinin (CCK), 1214
cholecystitis, acute, differential 
diagnosis, 1199
choledochal cysts, 1197–8
choledochojejunostomy, 63
choledocholithiasis, post-
cholecystectomy, 1204–5
choledochoscopy, 1194
choledochotomy, 1205, 1206
cholelithiasis, see gallstones
cholescintigraphy, 192, 1192, 
1204, 1232
cholesterosis (strawberry 
gallbladder), 1201
chondroblastoma, 540–1, 542
chondromatosis, synovial, 500
chondrosarcoma, 536–7, 541
clear cell, 541, 542
treatment, 546
chordee, 1491
choriocarcinoma, 1507
choroid, melanoma, 676–7
chromoendoscopy, 233
chromogenic in situ hybridisation 
(CISH), 247
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1574 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1575
chromogranin A, 852, 853
Chvostek’s sign, 831
chylocoeles, 1504
chylolymphatic cyst, 1063
chylothorax, 1013
chylous ascites, 1003, 1013, 1059
chyluria, 1003, 1004, 1013
ciclosporin, 1245, 1269, 1533, 
1538–9
Cierny and Mader classification, 
557–8
cinacalcet, 831, 834
CINAHL, 163
ciprofloxacin, 220
circle of Willis, aneurysms, 658, 
659
circular stapling devices, 96, 97
circumcision, 126–7, 1487–8
in adolescents/adults, 1487–8
diathermy, 103
indications, 127, 1487
in infants, 1487
and penile carcinoma, 1492
cirrhosis, 1206
ascites, 1058, 1166
portal hypertension, 1163–6
primary biliary, 1167–8
cis-platinum, 155
c-kit oncogene, 1140, 1251
clam cystoplasty, 1434
clamps, vascular, 99
clarithromycin, 1114
claudication
intermittent, 943, 947
spinal, 476
claudication distance, 943
Clavian–Dindo system, 292
clavicle
fracture, 400
lateral end excision, 495
clavulanic acid, 56
claw hand, 69
claw toes, 69, 458
clean intermittent self-
catheterisation (CISC), 
1428–9
clear cell carcinoma, 241
clear cell chondrosarcoma, 541, 
542
cleft lip and palate, 688–700
aetiology, 686, 688–9
airway management, 691
alveolar bone grafting, 698–9
antenatal diagnosis, 691
cleft lip alone, 688, 689, 697–8
dental issues, 695, 696
feeding, 691
hard palate, 690, 691
hearing problems, 694–5
incidence, 687, 688
primary surgery, 692–4
secondary surgery, 695–8
soft palate, 689–90
speech problems, 695
clindamycin, 420, 1009, 1520
Clinical-aEtiology-Anatomy-
Pathophysiology (CEAP) 
classification, 974
clinical audit, 161–2, 175, 185–6
clinical microsystems, 180
clinical outcomes, 185–6
clinical research
article analysis, 167–8
differentiation from audit, 161, 
162
ethics, 166, 174
identifying a topic, 162–3
integrity, 166
presenting and publishing, 168
project design, 163–6
qualitative vs quantitative, 164
regulation, 165, 174
regulatory approvals, 166
statistical analysis, 166–7
study protocol, 165
study types, 164
clinodactyly, 580
cloaca, 1344–5
persistent, 1346
clonality analysis, 247, 248, 249
clonorchiasis, 1207
Clonorchis sinensis, 62–3, 1208
clopidogrel, 220, 948
Clostridium difficile, 44
antimicrobials effective 
against, 56
infection control, 52
proctitis, 1325
pseudomembranous colitis, 
44–5, 1269, 1273
Clostridium perfringens, 44, 45, 
49–50, 420, 1049
Clostridium septicum septicaemia, 
1307
Clostridium tetani, 45, 50, 417
ClosureFast™, 978
clothing, operating theatre, 1564
clotting screen, 256
clubbing, 926
club foot (congenital talipes 
equinovarus), 577–9
club hand, radial, 580
coagulopathy
acute traumatic, 427
during/following transfusion, 
22–3
trauma-induced, 18
co-amoxiclav, 56
coarctation of the aorta, 906
Cobb angle, 482, 582
cocaine, topical, 274
cochlea, 703–5
cochlear duct, 703, 704
cochlear implant, 712
Cochrane Collaboration, 163, 
168
Cochrane Library, 163, 168
Codman’s triangle, 73
coeliac disease, 1255
coeliac plexus block, 277
coiling, 659, 660
cold injuries, 422, 632, 953, 954
colectomy
colorectal cancer, 1264–5
diverticular disease, 1276
nutritional consequences, 283
subtotal in ulcerative colitis, 
1270
Coleman’s block test, 460
colic
biliary, 1017, 1018–19
intestinal obstruction, 1285–6
renal/ureteric, 213, 1017, 1305, 
1374, 1407
colitis
C. difficile, 44–5, 1269, 1273
Crohn’s, 1242, 1271–2
indeterminate, 1271
infective, 1269, 1272–3
ischaemic, 1276–7
see also ulcerative colitis
‘collagen disease’, 1024
collar and cuff, 391–2
collateral circulation, 942, 943, 
954
collateral ligaments, knee, 454–5, 
518, 519
Colles’ fascia, 1480
Colles’ fracture, 398
Collis gastroplasty, 1081
Collis–Nissen operation, 1081
colloid cyst, 667
colloid fluids
burns patient, 624
composition, 281
coloanal anastomosis, 1370
colocutaneous fistula, 1274
colon
acute obstruction, 1294–5
anatomy, 1258–9
angioectasia, 231
benign tumours, 1259–61
Crohn’s disease, 1271–2
diversion of urine into, 1453
diverticular disease, 1273–6
duplicated, 136
functions, 283, 1259
injuries, 375
ischaemia, after AAA repair, 
965–6
perforation, 232, 1274
pseudo-obstruction, 1297–8
stricture, malignant, 1281
transit times, 283
volvulus, 1284–5, 1288, 1290
colonic polyps
children, 131
endoscopic resection, 230–1, 
232
colonoscopy, 229–32
appendicitis, 1301
colorectal cancer, 1262–3
complications, 231–2
Crohn’s disease, 1244
diverticular disease, 1274–5
indications, 230
practical performance, 229–30
rectal cancer, 1330
therapeutic, 230–1
ulcerative colitis, 1268
virtual CT, 1263
colorectal cancer, 142, 1261–6
adjuvant therapy, 1266
aetiology and risk factors, 
1261, 1268, 1328
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155, 157
clinical features, 1017, 1262
distribution by site, 1262
epidemiology, 1261, 1328
follow-up, 1266
hereditary non-polyposis 
(HPCC), 144, 1260–1
investigation, 1262–3
malignant obstruction, 231
metastatic disease, 195, 1172–
3, 1262, 1266
molecular testing, 250–1
pathology, 1261
prognosis, 1266
risk in adenomas, 1259
risk in ulcerative colitis, 1268
screening, 230, 1263
spread, 1262
staging systems, 149, 1262
surgery, 1263–5
emergency, 1265
laparoscopic, 1265
postoperative care, 1265
colostomies, 1277–8
anal stricture, 1370
bags/appliances, 1277
colon injury, 375
complications, 1043, 1278
end, 1277, 1278, 1336
loop, 1277
rectal cancer, 1336, 1337
colour duplex scanning, 946
colovaginal fistula, 1274
colovesical fistula, 1274, 1275–6
colposuspension, open, 1431–2
combined modality therapy 
(CMT), 1371
common bile duct (CBD), 1188
ascariasis, 60, 61, 62
imaging, 213, 1159
in liver resection, 1170
malignant stricture, 1217
obstruction, 1193
relation to pancreatic duct, 
1213, 1214
stones, 1204–5, 1206, 1216
communication
healthcare workers, 182
and patient safety, 178, 181
comorbidity, day surgery, 302
compartment pressure 
monitoring, 406
compartment syndrome, 28
abdominal, 380, 1045
acute postoperative, 85
acute arterial occlusion, 955–6
causes, 408, 422
crush injuries, 422
diagnosis, 382–3, 408
limb, 382, 408, 955–6
postoperative, 298
compensatory anti-inflammatory 
response syndrome (CARS), 
3
competence, 181
complaints, patient/carer, 181–2
complications, see postoperative 
complications
compression
lymphoedema, 1009–10
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1575 25/10/2017   10:44Index1576
pneumatic, 1010
varicose veins, 977
venous leg ulcers, 984–5
compression garments, 1010
compression hosiery, 977
compression injury, liver, 373
compression plating, 390
compressive neuropathies
foot, 533
median nerve, 443, 508
ulnar nerve, 501–2, 508
computed-integrated surgery 
(CIS), 108
computed tomography (CT), 
195–6, 197
abdominal aortic aneurysm, 
961–2
abdominal hernias, 1026
abdominal trauma, 373
children, 123
advantages, 196
amoebiasis, 59
angiography (CTA), 213
extremity trauma, 197, 383, 
384
aortic disruption, 369
aortic dissection, 910
aortoiliac stent-graft, 964
appendicitis, 211, 212, 1301, 
1307, 1308
recurrent, 1314
arthrography, 202
ascites, 1058
biliary tract, 1190, 1192
bone tumours, 536
bowel obstruction, 210
brain abscess, 656, 657
cholangiocarcinoma, 1209
colonic diverticular disease, 
1274
colorectal cancer, 1263
Conn’s adenoma (adrenal 
gland), 840, 841
Crohn’s disease, 1244
disadvantages, 196
diverticulitis, 212
ear, 706
enterocutaneous fistula, 1256
extremity trauma, 384, 396
FNA guidance, 928–9
GISTs, 1140
glioblastoma multiforme, 664
hydatid disease, 65, 66, 1169
hydronephrosis in BOO, 1461
intestinal obstruction, 1289
ischaemic heart disease, 888
kidneys, ureter, bladder (KUB), 
213
leiomyosarcoma, 994
liver, 1158
abscess, 1168
colorectal metastases, 1173, 
1266
injury, 1162
lung cancer, 926, 928
lymphoedema, 1006
mediastinal cyst, 936
mesenteric cyst, 1064
multidetector (MDCT), 1062
multiphase (4D-CT), 828
oesophageal cancer, 1086, 
1090, 1091
oesophageal perforation, 1073
optic nerve meningioma, 684
oral cancer, 766
orbital abscess, 721–2
osteomyelitis, 551
pancreas, 1215, 1216
pancreatic carcinoma, 1215, 
1216, 1235
pancreatic trauma, 1220
pancreatitis, 212, 1051, 1224, 
1226–7, 1231
paranasal sinuses, 717, 721
parathyroid glands, 828
pelvic abscess, 1056
peritonitis, 1051, 1054
with PET (PET-CT), 1091, 
1112, 1113
pharynx, larynx, neck, 730
polycystic kidney disease, 1550
principles, 195–6
pulmonary embolism, 989
pulmonary hydatid disease, 68
radiation doses, 191, 192, 196, 
317
retroperitoneal mass, 1509
spinal osteoblastoma, 480
spine, 474
spiral, 962, 964, 1158
spleen, 1178, 1179, 1180
stomach, 1112
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
659
subphrenic abscess, 1056, 1057
thoracic trauma, 366
thymoma, 935
thyroid, 803, 804
thyroid eye disease, 675
trauma, 207–8, 317, 324
head injury, 197, 207, 330
maxillofacial, 357–8, 358, 
361, 362
spinal, 343, 350
ulcerative colitis, 1268–9
urachal cyst, 1439
urinary tract, 1389–90, 1391
virtual colonoscopy, 1263
whole body scan, 317, 324
concussion, 330
condylar hyperplasia, 701
condylomata acuminata, 1368, 
1486, 1496
confidence intervals, 167
confidentiality, 174
conflict surgery
contrasts with civilian surgery, 
424
damage control, 426–7
decision making, 427
ethical and legal issues, 424–5
medical evacuation, 425
medical support roles, 425
patterns of injury, 425–6
principles, 426
weapon effects, 427–8
congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH), 844
congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 
133
congenital heart disease, 902–8
acyanotic, 906–8
aetiology, 903
aortic stenosis, 899
cyanotic, 904–6
diagnosis, 903
incidence, 903
congenital hypertrophy of the 
retinal pigment epithelium, 
1259
congenital malformations, 132–8
congenital vertical talus, 579
congestive heart failure, ascites, 
1058
Congo red stain, 244
‘coning’, 329, 654
conjunctivitis, 680–1
connective tissue disorders, 967, 
1251–3
Conn’s adenoma, 839, 840–1
conscious level, shock, 14
Consolidated Standards 
of Reporting Trials 
(CONSORT), 167–8
constipation, 1278–9
children, 131
drugs causing, 1278
and haemorrhoids, 1354–5
illnesses associated with, 1278
intestinal obstruction, 1286, 
1296
investigation, 1278–9
treatment, 1279
contraceptive pill, 260, 1516
contractures
spinal cord injury, 354
wounds, 32, 628, 629, 635
contralateral stretch test, 442
contrast enhanced ultrasound 
scanning (CEUS), 1158
contrast media, hazards, 191
contrast radiology, upper GI 
tract, 1111
conus medullaris, 340
Cooley’s anaemia, 1183–4
Coombs’ test, 1183
coracoacromial ligament, 490
cordotomy, percutaneous 
anterolateral, 277
cornea, 672
abrasions and ulceration, 677, 
681
burns, 679–80
grafting, 677
inflammation (keratitis), 681
corona phlebectatica, 972
coronary angiography
ischaemic heart disease, 888–9
valvular heart disease, 898, 900
coronary arteries
anatomy, 886–7
calcification (calcium score), 
888
stenoses, 888–9
coronary artery bypass grafting 
(CABG), 886–93
conduit selection, 890
indications for, 889
minimal access, 893
mortality rates, 892
off-pump, 893
operation, 890–1
postoperative complications, 
891–2
postoperative recovery, 891
preoperative assessment, 890
surgical outcomes, 893
coronary stents, 886, 889
thrombosis risk, 257
coronary vein, 1106
corpora amylaceae, 1468
Corrigan’s sign, 901
corticospinal tracts, 340
corticosteroids
adverse effects, bone 
infarction, 198
Crohn’s disease, 1245
delayed healing, 46
facet joint injections, 474
foraminal epidural injections, 
474
immunosuppressive regimens, 
1539
intra-articular injections, 
shoulder, 490, 491, 492, 
493, 495
pruritus ani, 1361
spinal cord injury, 345
sports injuries, 470
ulcerative colitis, 1269
corticotrophin-releasing factor 
(CRF), 3
corticotrophin-releasing hormone 
(CRH), 839
cortisol, 3, 4, 13, 839
deficiency, 844
excess, 841–2, 843
Corynebacterium minutissimum, 
1361
cost-effectiveness, targeted 
cancer therapies, 154, 158
cough impulse, 1025, 1031
coughing, 915
Couinaud’s segments, 1154, 1545
Courvoisier’s sign, 1199–200, 
1205, 1208, 1234–5
Cowden syndrome, 144, 663, 
1418
Craig’s test, 562
cranial nerves
facial, 363, 715, 789, 790–2, 
792, 793
oculomotor, 672
optic, 672, 673
submandibular gland excision, 
783
supplying ear, 705
trigeminal, 672, 705
vagus, 727, 810, 814, 1107
craniofacial anomalies, 686–8
diagnosis, 687
epidemiology, 687
management, 687–8
types, 686
craniofacial fractures, 323, 362
craniopharyngioma, 683
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1576 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1577
craniosynostosis, 668, 669, 687–8
types of, 668, 669
craniotomy
risks of, 671
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
659–60
trigeminal neuralgia, 670
cranium bifidum, 667
C-reactive protein, 551
creatine kinase, 419, 888
credentialing, 181
cremasteric reflex, 1498
crepitus, 383, 952
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD), 
215, 671, 1544
Crew Resource Management 
(CRM) training, 177
cricoid cartilage, 725, 726, 727
injury, 755–6
cricothyroidotomy, 749
critical care, 263, 266–7
critical limb ischaemia, 943, 949
Crohn’s disease, 46, 225, 227, 
616, 1241–8
aetiology, 1241–2
appendicitis in, 1312
clinical features, 1243
colitis, 1242, 1271–2
epidemiology, 1241
extraintestinal manifestations, 
1243, 1244
fistulas, 1045, 1243, 1440
indications for surgery, 1246
investigations, 193, 196, 212, 
1243–5
Montreal classification, 1243
nutrition, 1242, 1246
oesophagitis, 1104–5
pathogenesis, 1242
pathology, 1242–3
perianal, 1243, 1247–8, 1363, 
1370
proctitis, 1325
small bowel stricture, 1242, 
1246, 1282
terminal ileitis, 1305
treatment
medical, 1245–6
surgical, 1246–8
vs ulcerative colitis, 1243, 1268
cross-matching, 22
cross-sectional study, 164
croup, 743
Crouzon syndrome, 687, 701
cruciate ligaments, knee, 454, 
455–6, 518, 519
injuries, 520–1
reconstruction, 521
crush injuries, 28, 420–2
liver, 1162
crush syndrome, 421–2
cryoprecipitate, 21
‘cryptitis’, 1353
crypts of Lieberkühn, 1250, 1267
crypts of Luschka, 1188
crystalloid fluids, burn patient, 
624
crystalloid solutions, 
composition, 281
CTLA-4Ig, 1540
cubital tunnel, ulnar nerve 
compression, 500–1
cubitus valgus, 447
cubitus varus, 447
Cullen’s sign, 1019–20, 1223
Cushing’s adenoma, 839
Cushing’s disease, 841
Cushing’s syndrome, 841–2, 843
ACTH-dependent, 841
ACTH-independent, 841
Cushing’s triad, 328–9
cutaneous (keratin) horn, 606
cutis aplasia congenita, 615
cyanogenic glycosides, 76
cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2), 4
inhibitors, 1115
cyclophosphamide, 155
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate 
and 5-fluorouracil (CMF), 
878
cylindroma (turban tumour), 603
cyproterone acetate, 156, 1474
cystadenoma 
(hydrocystadenoma), 603
cystectomy, bladder cancer, 
1451–2
cysterna chyli, 995
cystgastrostomy, 1229
cystic duct, 1188
absence, 1196
low insertion, 1196
cystic fibrosis, 1219, 1294
cystic hygroma, 754–5
cystic myxomatous degeneration, 
967
cystine stones, 1406, 1408, 1434
cystinuria, 1406
treatment, 1410
cystitis
acute abacterial (acute 
haemorrhagic), 1442
alkaline encrusting, 1443
definition, 1441
interstitial (Hunner’s ulcer), 
1443
tuberculous, 1442–3
cystitis cystica, 1443
cyst of Moll, 674
cystocoele, 1522, 1523
cystography
bladder rupture, 1425
tuberculous cystitis, 1443
cystoscopy, 1379–85
bladder cancer, 1449
bladder diverticulum, 1437
flexible, 1380
minor procedures, 1380
narrow band imaging, 1381
photodynamic diagnosis, 1381
rigid, 1380
schistosomiasis, 1444–5
ureterocoele, 1401, 1402
vesicointestinal fistula, 1440
cysts
branchial, 753–4
breast, 861, 868, 869
epididymal, 1374, 1376–7, 
1504–5
ganglion, 509, 528
hydatid, 64–7, 1169, 1169
intracranial in children, 667
liver, 1168
lung, 937
mediastinum, 936
minor salivary glands, 776
ovary, 1526, 1527
renal, 1386, 1389–90, 1391
sebaceous, 598–9, 1510, 1511
seminal vesicle, 1476
skin and soft tissue, 598–9
spleen, 1178–9, 1179
Stafne bone, 780
sublingual glands, 779
thyroglossal duct, 755
thyroid, 809–10
urachal, 1438
cyst of Zeis, 674
cytogenetics, 247–8
cytokeratins, 245–6
cytokines
endogenous antagonists, 4
proinflammatory, 3, 7–8, 47, 
1242
cytology
microscopy, 242, 243
sample adequacy, 243
samples, 238
specimen processing, 238
specimens, 235
vs histology, 243
cytomegalovirus (CMV), 246, 
247, 1104, 1541
cytopoiesis, 1178
cytoreductive surgery
ovarian cancer, 1529
pseudomyxoma peritonei, 1317
cytosine arabinoside, 155
Czerny retractor, 1561
dabigatran, 221
dabrafenib, 612
dacarbazine, 156
Dacron grafts, 949, 950, 951
dacryocystitis, 674
daily water balance, 280
DAIR strategy, 556
damage control resuscitation 
(DCR), 20, 379, 427
damage control surgery (DCS), 
318–19, 326, 327, 378–80
conflict zones, 426–7
disaster zones, 413–15
indications for, 379
principles, 414
danazol, 869, 1452
Dandy Walker malformations, 
668
dapsone, 70
data, statistical, 167
databases, research, 163
data collection, 165
da Vinci robotic surgical system, 
1334, 1335
daVinci system, 109
day case surgery
advantages, 301
discharge, 304, 306, 307
elective, 305
emergency, 306
models of care, 301–2
patient pathway, 301, 306
perioperative management, 
304–5
preoperative assessment, 304
selection criteria, 302–4
DDH, see developmental 
dysplasia of the hip
deaths
head injuries, 328
preventable, 178
RTAs, 310, 311
traumatic causes, 364
Deaver retractor, 1560
DeBakey classification (aortic 
dissection), 910
DeBakey forceps, 1562
debridement, 26, 27, 415–16
deceleration injuries, 1161
decellularised scaffolds, 38–9
decongestive lymphoedema 
therapy, 1008
decortication, 923
deep brain stimulation, 670, 671
deep fascial space infection, 
hand, 504
deep vein thrombosis (DVT), 
986–91
after hip replacement, 517–18
differential diagnosis, 989
lymphoedema, 1000, 1005
postoperative, 296
risk of, 260
treatment, 990
defaecating proctography, 1278, 
1344
defaecation
difficulty, 1324, 1370
obstructed, 1278
see also constipation
degarelix, 1474
degloving injuries, 27–8, 325
dehiscence of Killian, 1101
dehydration
children, 120
gastric outlet obstruction, 1130
intestinal obstruction, 1286
dehydroepiandrosterone 
(DHEA), 839
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate 
(DHEAS), 839
Delaire technique and sequence, 
692
delayed ischaemic neurological 
deficit, 660–1
delirium, postoperative, 295
Delorme’s operation, 1323
Delphinian nodes, 800–1
dementia patients, 1430, 1433, 
1459, 1462, 1463
de Musset’s sign, 901
Denonvilliers’ fascia, 1318, 1451
dental anomalies, cleft lip/palate, 
695, 696
dental injuries, 357, 363
dental occlusion, jaw deformities, 
701, 702
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1577 25/10/2017   10:44Index1578
dentate line, 1340–1
de Quervain’s tenosynovitis, 443, 
469, 507–8
de Quervain’s thyroiditis, 822
dermatomes, abdominal wall, 
1018
dermatome (skin harvesting), 
639–40
dermis, 592, 634
artificial, 628, 630
dermo-epidermal junction, 592, 
599
dermoid cysts, 667, 673
intracranial, 667
orbit, 673
ovary, 1526
postanal, 1347
Descamets stripping endothelial 
keratoplasty (DSEK), 677
desmoid tumour
abdomen, 1259
abdominal wall, 1045
detrusor instability, 1431
detrusor overactivity, 1429–30, 
1432, 1460
treatment, 1433
detrusor–sphincter dyssynergia, 
1396, 1424, 1428
developing countries, see low-
income countries
developmental dysplasia of the 
hip (DDH), 567–71
dexamethasone suppression, 842
dextrose infusions, 10, 281
dextrose–saline, 624
diabetes insipidus, 666
diabetes mellitus
cystic fibrosis, 1219
day case surgery, 302–3
endoscopy, 219
fibrocalculous pancreatic, 77
foot disease, 532–3, 559, 953
gangrene, 953
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1173
pancreatic islet 
transplantation, 1553
peripheral arterial disease, 947
preoperative assessment, 256, 
260
sialadenosis, 796
type 2, bariatric surgery, 1145
diamorphine, 277
diaphragm, 914–15, 938
congenital hernia, 133, 938, 
939
injuries, 365, 938
blunt, 370
children, 123
penetrating, 370
weakness, 1022
diaphyseal aclasis, 539, 565
diarrhoea, post-vagotomy, 1124
diastematomyelia, 484
diathermy, 101–4
bipolar, 102
complications, 102–3, 258
effects, 102
laparoscopic surgery, 103, 114
monopolar, 102
principle, 102
diazoxide, 849–50
diclofenac, suppository, 115
diet
and appendicitis, 1301
and breast cancer risk, 871
coeliac disease, 1255
and colon cancer, 1261
and colonic diverticular 
disease, 1273, 1275
and constipation, 1279
and Crohn’s disease, 1242
fat, 282
and gastric cancer, 1131
and haemorrhoids, 1354–5
liver shrinkage, 1146
oxalate excess, 1408
diethylcarbamazine, 64, 1005
Dietl’s crisis, 1411
Dieulafoy’s disease, 1128
diffuse axonalinjury, 336
diffusion capacity (DLCO), 917, 
918
digastric muscle, 790
diGeorge syndrome, 903
digestion, small intestine, 1241
digestive enzymes
gastric, 1108–9
pancreas, 1214
digital rectal examination, 1320
digital subtraction percutaneous 
angiography (DSA), 946–7
2,8-dihydroadeninuria, 1406
1,5-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 
1457
dilatation
anal, 1356, 1370
biliary stricture, 228, 1157–8
iliac artery stenosis, 948, 950
oesophageal strictures, 1071
urethral stricture (male), 1483
diloxanide furoate, 59, 1273
dinaciclib, 158
diphthermia, 737
diplopia, vertical, 677
dipstick, urine, 1379
disability, assessment in trauma, 
325
disasters
common features, 409
damage assessment, 410–11
damage control surgery, 413–16
definitive management, 416
factors influencing relief effort, 
409–10
field hospitals, 413, 414
handing over, 422
hospital organisation, 416
organisation of relief efforts, 
410–13
planning for, 422–3
specific injuries and conditions, 
416–22
triage, 412, 413
discharge
day surgery, 304, 306, 307
following head injury, 329–30
laparoscopic surgery, 116
requirements, 300
disc herniation
cervical spine, 474, 475
lumbar spine, 198, 476
thoracic spine, 475
discitis, 589
discography, provocative, 474, 475
disc replacement, total, 475, 476, 
477
distal interphalangeal (DIP) 
joints, arthritis, 443, 506
distraction osteogenesis, 
craniofacial deformity, 688, 
691, 702
distributive shock, 13
diuretics, ascites, 1166
divarification of the recti, 1022, 
1023
diverticulae
bladder, 1384, 1436–8
colonic, 1273–6
gallbladder, 1201
Meckel’s, 131–2, 1044, 1252, 
1253
oesophagus, 1101–2
seminal vesicle, 1476
small intestine, 1251–3
urethra
female, 1377, 1485
male, 1479
diverticulectomy, 1438
diverticulitis
clinical presentation, 1274
differentiation from 
appendicitis, 1306
fistula formation, 1274, 1275–
6, 1440
imaging, 211–12
management, 1275
Meckel’s, 1252
DMAIC, 187–8
DNA
drugs directly damaging, 155–6
drugs interfering with synthesis 
(antimetabolites), 155
epigenetic modification, 142, 
249
first described, 139
‘dog ear’, 86
dopamine, 839
Doppler ultrasound, 17, 194, 203
peripheral arterial disease, 
945–6
priapism, 1491
venous disease, 975–6
Doppman, John L, 826
Dormia stone-catching basket, 
1409
dorsalis pedis pulse, 458, 459
dorsal root entry zone (DREZ) 
operation, 671
dorsiflexors, testing, 461
dose–response relationships, 150, 
151
dot-in-circle sign, 73
double-balloon endoscopy, 226, 
227
double effect, 173
Down syndrome, 132, 133, 136, 
689, 708, 903, 907, 1219
doxazosin, 1468
doxorubicin, 155
doxycycline, 1505
drains/drainage, 99–101, 299
ascites, 1058, 1059
basic principles, 100
chest, see chest drains
image-guided, 100–1
intraperitoneal abscesses, 
1056–7
laparoscopic patient, 115–16
pancreatic necrosis, 1227
pancreatic pseudocyst, 1229
removal, 101
T-tube, 100, 101
value and use of, 100
drapes, surgical, 1564
draw tests
ankle, 461
knee, 455, 456
dressings, see wound dressings
drooling, 797
child, 743
drug history, 1017
drugs
causing constipation, 1278
causing urinary retention, 1428
causing urine discolouration, 
1376
damaging DNA, 155–6
increasing risk of urinary 
stones, 1407
influencing PSA levels, 1378
safe prescribing, 182
see also named drugs and drug 
classes
dual X-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA) scan, 205, 825, 833
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 
482, 583
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 
872, 875
ductoscopy, 865
ductus arteriosus, 903, 904
patent, 906
ductus venosus, 903, 904
Dukes’ staging, 149
colorectal cancer, 1262
rectal carcinoma, 1330–1
duloxetine, 1433, 1434
dumping, after peptic ulcer 
surgery, 1123–4
Dunhill procedure, 807
duodenal atresia, 133–4, 1293–4
duodenaljejunal flexure, 1240
duodenal switch (DS), 1147, 
1150
duodenal ulcers, 1117
aetiology, 1116
bleeding, 1127–8
incidence, 1117
pathology, 1117
surgery, 1120–3
duodenoileal bypass, single 
anastomosis with sleeve 
gastrectomy, 1150
duodenum
adenocarcinoma, 1141
adenoma, 233
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1578 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1579
anatomy, 1240–1
gastrinoma (Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome), 850–2, 1116, 
1120, 1141–2
injuries, 375
microscopic anatomy, 1108
neuroendocrine tumours, 1141
obstruction, 1142
peptic ulcer bleeding, 1127–8
physiology, 1108–10
villous adenoma, 1141
Duoderm®, 626, 630
duplex renal pelvis/ureters, 1400, 
1401
duplex scanning
peripheral arterial disease, 946
varicose veins, 975–6
duplications
alimentary tract, 136
hand/digits, 510, 580
Dupuytren’s contracture, 442–3, 
506–7, 1065
dural arteriovenous fistulae 
(DA VFs), 661–2
dural tears, 717
Durkin’s compression test, 508
dutasteride, 1378
Dyball retractor, 1560
dyschondrosis, 686
dysmenorrhoea, 1516–17
dysostosis, 686
dyspepsia
H. pylori eradication, 1115, 
1117
investigation, 1131
management guidelines, 221
dysphagia, 1069, 1077
in absence of stricture, 1095
oropharyngeal, 1099
sideropenic, 740, 763, 1105
dysplasia
colorectal, 239, 240, 1267
oral epithelium, 767
dysplasia associated lesions or 
mass (DALMs), 1267
dyspnoea, risk of postoperative, 
916
dysuria, 1374
ear
anatomy, 703–5
congenital anomalies, 706
examination, 705–6
inflammation and infection, 
707–8
neoplasms, 708, 711–12
trauma, 706–7, 708
early dumping, 1123–4
early-morning urine (EMU), 
1379
early total care (ETC), 318–19
vs damage control surgery, 327
early warning system, national, 
290, 291
Eaton–Lambert syndrome, 926
eccrine glands, 593
eccrine poroma (papillary 
syringoma), 603
Echinococcus granulosus, 64, 1169
Echinococcus multilocularis, 64
echocardiography
aortic stenosis, 900
ischaemic heart disease, 888
mitral regurgitation, 896
mitral stenosis, 898
ectopia vesicae (bladder 
exstrophy), 1424–5, 1453
ectopic kidney, 1399
ectopic pancreas, 1219
ectopic pregnancy, 1306, 
1517–18
ectopic salivary glands, 780
ectopic testis, 1498
ectopic thyroid gland, 936
ectopic ureters, 1401
ectropion, 674, 680, 681
eczema
lower limb, 973
in lymphoedema, 1008
nipples, 864
education
continuing professional, 174–5
quality improvement, 188
Edwards syndrome, 903
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, 908, 
1416
Eisenmenger syndrome, 905–6
ejaculation, retrograde, 1466
elastic stable intramedullary 
nailing (ESIN), 405–6
elbow
anatomy, 498–9
clinical examination, 447–8
distal lateral condylar mass 
fracture, 382, 404, 405
loose bodies, 500, 501
olecranon bursitis, 500–1
olecranon fracture, 399
osteoarthritis, 499–500
replacement, 500
rheumatoid arthritis, 499
ulnar nerve compression, 
501–2
elderly patients
anal stenosis, 1369
appendicitis, 1303, 1304
diverticulitis, 1306
falls, 322
fractures, 311, 320
hip fractures, 318
shock, 15
subdural haematoma, 335
elective surgery
day case, 305
patient journey, 186
electrical injuries, 631, 632
electrical stimulation, 671
electrocardiography (ECG)
aortic stenosis, 900
hypercalcaemia, 826
hypocalcaemia, 831
ischaemic heart disease, 888
mitral regurgitation, 896
mitral stenosis, 897
myocardial ischaemia, 294
peripheral arterial disease, 945
preoperative, 256, 257, 258
electrocution, diathermy, 102
electroencephalography (EEG), 
epilepsy, 669
electrolytes
adult daily requirements, 281
in GI secretions, 281
paediatric requirements, 120
electromyography (EMG), anal 
sphincters, 1344, 1345
electronic information sites, 163
electronic patient records, 180–1
electron microscopy, 245
electrospinning technology, 39
electrosurgery, 101–4
advanced energy devices, 
103–4
during laparoscopy, 103, 114
see also diathermy
elephantiasis
endemic (podoconiosis), 1005
filarial, 63, 64, 1510
non-filarial, 1510
Ellik, Milo, 1436
EMBASE, 163
Emberger syndrome, 1002
embolectomy, 955
embolisation (therapeutic), 956
angiographic, 209, 319, 365, 
378
cerebral aneurysms, 659, 660
pelvic vein, 986
renal metastases, 547
uterine artery, 1525–6
embolism
acute arterial occlusion, 953–6
air, 956
fat, 956
parasitic, 956
pulmonary, see pulmonary 
embolism
embryology
adrenal glands, 839
anal canal, 1344–5
craniofacial malformations, 
686
female reproductive organs, 
1513
gallbladder and bile ducts, 
1195
kidneys, 1398–9
liver, 1155
lungs, 914
lymphatics, 995
musculoskeletal system, 561
pancreas, 1213
parathyroid glands, 800, 823
peritoneal cavity, 1047
prostate, 1456
rectum, 1319
testes, 1497
thyroid, 800
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), 
35–6
emergency surgery
laparoscopic, 116
patient journey, 186
preoperative assessment, 261–2
EMLA (eutectic mixture of local 
anaesthetics), 274
emollients, 1008
emphysema, surgical, 919
emphysematous pyelonephritis, 
1404
empyema
gallbladder, 1200
pleural, 922, 923
subdural, 657–8
encephelocoele, 667, 668
encephalopathy
hepatic, 1156
hyponatraemic, 120
enchondromatosis, 537, 540, 
565–6
enclosed blast, 432
endoanal ultrasound, 1344
endobronchial ultrasound 
(EBUS), 928, 929
endocarditis
endoscopy patient, 219
prosthetic valves, 895–6
EndoClose, 114
endocrine shock, 13
end-of-life care, 159, 173
endoleaks, 966
endolymph, 703–4
endometrial cancer, 146, 250, 
1516
endometrioma, 1327, 1521
endometriosis, 1520–2
anorectal, 1327, 1370
bladder wall, 1452
histology, 243
endometrium, 1514
endoprosthesis, bone tumours, 
547
endoscopes
decontamination, 218
standard, 217
endoscopic mucosal resection 
(EMR), 224, 230, 231, 1327, 
1328
endoscopic pancreatic 
sphincterotomy, 1231, 1233
endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP), 227–9, 1158, 1159, 
1192–3, 1217–18
in acute pancreatitis, 1224, 
1225
in chronic pancreatitis, 1232–3
complications, 228–9
pancreatic carcinoma, 1217, 
1218, 1235
pancreatitis after, 1222
sclerosing cholangitis, 1206, 
1207
therapeutic, 228
endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), 
232
advantages of, 232
biliary tract, 1191
indications, 232
liver, 1159
oesophageal disease, 232, 1070, 
1090–1
pancreas, 1218–19, 1235
stomach, 1111–12
endoscopy
bladder and urethra, 1379–85
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1579 25/10/2017   10:44Index1580
colon, see colonoscopy
gastrointestinal
antibiotic prophylaxis, 
219–20
anticoagulation, 220–1
capsule, 226–7
consent, 218
double/single balloon, 226, 
227
equipment, 217, 218
history of, 216–17
improved imaging, 233
perforations, 225, 1073–4, 
1111
risks of, 218
sedation, 219
small bowel, 225–7
upper tract, 221–5, 1070, 
1110–11
oesophageal carcinoma, 1087, 
1088
ureters, 1385
endoscopy unit, organisation, 
217–18
endothermal ablation, 977
endotoxins, 46–7, 1049
endotracheal intubation, 271–2, 
748
endovascular aneurysm repair 
(EVAR), 962–4
complications, 966
endovascular techniques, 209
endovenous glue, 980
endovenous laser ablation 
(EVLA), 977–8
comparison with RFA, 978–9
enema
air, 129
antegrade colonic, 137
barium, see barium enema
contrast, 59, 136
herbal causing proctitis, 1326
small bowel, 80, 1244
energy requirements, 282
burns patient, 626–7
enhanced recovery after surgery 
(ERAS), 11, 299–300
colonic surgery, 1265
Enneking staging system, 543
enophthalmos, 361
Entamoeba histolytica, 57, 1169, 
1272
enteral nutrition, 284
after laparoscopic surgery, 115
complications, 286
sip feeds, 285
tube-feeding techniques, 284–6
enteritis, infective, 1248–9
Enterobacter spp., 433
enterochromaffin-like (ECL) 
cells, 1107, 1108, 1115
enterochromaffin-like (ECL)
omas, 853, 854
enteroclysis, 226, 1244–5
enterococci, 44
antimicrobials, 56
glycopeptide-resistant (GRE), 
43
Enterococcus faecalis, 56
enterocoele, 1522, 1523
enterocolitis, necrotising, 138
enterocutaneous fistula, 1256
enterocystoplasty, clam, 1434
enterogastric reflux, 1115
enterogenous cysts, 1063–4
entropion, 680, 681
enucleation, eye, 684
enuresis, nocturnal, 1375, 1432
enzalutamide, 1474
eosinophilic gastritis, 1116
eosinophilic granuloma, 541, 
542, 543
eosinophilic oesophagitis, 1100–1
eosinophils, 241, 242
epicondylitis
lateral (tennis elbow), 448
medial (golfer’s elbow), 448, 
464–5
epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR)
inhibitors, 158
mutations, 250
epidermal (sebaceous) cysts, 
598–9, 1510, 1511
epidermis, 592, 593, 634
epidermoid carcinoma, 1371
epidermoid cysts, 667
spleen, 1179
epidermophytosis, 1361
epididymal appendage, torsion, 
126
epididymis, 1376–7, 1497
cysts, 1374, 1376–7, 1504–5
tumours, 1509
epididymo-orchitis, 126, 1503, 
1505–6
chronic, 1505
pathophysiology, 1505
treatment, 1505
tuberculous, 1505
epidural abscess, 481
epidural anaesthesia, 275
epidural opiates, 277
epigastric hernia, 127, 1039
epigastric vessels, inferior, 1029
epigenetics
cancer, 142, 249
colorectal cancers, 1329
epiglottis, 726, 727
epiglottitis, acute, 743
epilepsy, 668–70
and day surgery, 303
investigation, 668–9
surgical management, 670
epiphrenic diverticula, 1102, 
1103
epirubacin, 1139
episcleritis, 682
epispadias, 1377, 1424, 1478, 
1479
epistaxis, 719–20
epithelial–mesenchymal 
transition (EMT), 141
epithelial tumours, appendix, 
1315, 1316–17
epithelioma, 616
calcifying of Malherbe 
(pilomatrixoma), 602
Epley manoeuvre, 714
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), 246, 
247, 734, 738
erectile dysfunction, 1489–90
after pelvic fracture, 1481
erlotinib, 156, 158
ertapenem, 1308
erysipelas, 596–7
erythrasma, 1361
erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR), 544–5, 551
erythroplakia, 762, 767
erythroplasia of Queyrat, 606, 
607, 1377, 1492
escharotomy, 621, 624–5
ESCHAR trial, 165
Escherichia coli, 45, 51, 56, 550, 
1053, 1186, 1248
urinary tract infections, 1403, 
1404, 1441–2, 1474
ESPAC-1 study, 1237
ethics, 170–5
conflict surgery, 424–5
informed consent, 171–3
patient autonomy, 170–1
research, 166, 174
stem cell therapy, 35–6
transplantation surgery, 174
ethmoid sinus, 716
infection, 721–2
ethnic variation
acral lentiginous melanoma, 
610
breast cancer, 880–1
Crohn’s disease, 1241
DDH, 567
gallbladder cancer, 1209–10
sickle cell disease, 1184
see also geographical factors
etomidate, 269
etoposide, 155
etrolizumab, 1245
eumycetoma, 71, 72
European Clinical Trials 
Database, 166
EuroSCORE II, 890
Eustachian tubes, 704, 725
dysfunction in cleft lip/palate, 
694–5
evacuation
conflict zones, 425
major disasters, 413, 423
evening primrose oil, 869
everolimus, 157, 1420–1, 1540
evidence-based surgery, 168
Ewing’s sarcoma, 250, 478, 535, 
537, 542
treatment, 546
excimer laser, 683
exemestane, 156, 878
exercise, in lymphoedema, 1011
exercise tolerance testing, 257, 
264–5, 888
exomphalos, 135
exophthalmos, 675–6
exorbitism, 687
exostoses
ear canal, 708
hereditary multiple, 539, 565
experimental study, 164
explosions/explosives, 426, 429
explosive formed projectiles 
(EFPs), 430
extended focused assessment 
with sonography for trauma 
(eFAST), 366, 367, 372, 373
extensor digitorum brevis, 524
extensor pollicis brevis, 
tenosynovitis, 507–8
extensor pollicis longus, 446
external ear
anatomy, 703
exostoses, 708
otitis externa, 707–8
squamous cell carcinoma, 708
external fixation, 392
advantages, 392
disadvantages, 392
indications, 392
external ventricular drain (EVD), 
655
extoeing gait, 563
extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation (ECMO), 892
extracorporeal shockwave 
lithotripsy, 1408
extradural haematoma, 312, 313, 
333–4
extremity trauma
compartment syndrome, 408
examination, 381–3
fractures, growth plate, 387
history, 381
injuries easily missed, 382, 408
investigations, 384–5
major disasters, 416–17
neurological injury, 385
in skeletally immature, 403–6
soft tissue, 385
eye
acute red eye, 680–2
anatomy, 672–3
in craniofacial anomalies, 687, 
688
injuries, 677–80
thyroid eye disease, 675–6, 811
tumours, 676–7
eyelids
anatomy, 672
basal cell carcinoma, 674
burns, 628, 629
ectropion/entropion, 680, 681
meibomian cysts, 673–4
swellings, 673–4
eye surgery, 683–5
enucleation, 684
eyeball evisceration, 685
laser, 682, 683, 684
face
developmental anomalies, 
686–8
cleft lip/palate, 688–700
jaw disproportion, 701, 702
muscles, 689
skeletal buttresses, 360
squamous cell carcinoma, 607, 
608
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1580 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1581
facet joints, 338
injections, 474
facet subluxation, 339, 348, 349
facial injuries, 678–9
airway management, 323
burns, 628, 629, 679–80
major disasters, 417, 418, 421
facial nerve
dissection in parotid surgery, 
790–2, 793
injuries, 363, 789, 792
palsies, 715
facies
Cushing’s syndrome, 841
hippocratic, 1050
‘leonine’, 69, 70
factitious lymphoedema, 1006
faecal incontinence, see anal 
incontinence
faeces, fluid losses, 280, 281
faecolith, 1301–2
Fairbank’s test, 456–7
falciform ligament, 1153, 1170
Fallopian tubes
anatomy, 1514
ectopic pregnancy, 1517–18
removal at hysterectomy, 1517
Fallot’s tetralogy, 904–5
falls
elderly, 318, 322
from a height, 314
false aneurysms, 966
familial adenomatous polyposis 
(FAP), 144, 595, 1061
clinical features and diagnosis, 
236, 1259–60
duodenal polyps, 1234
rectal, 1326–7
surgical treatment, 1260
familial atypical multiple 
mole-melanoma (FAMM) 
syndrome, 604
familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia, 832
familial retinoblastoma 
syndrome, 537
family history
abdominal symptoms, 1017
breast cancer, 871
ovarian cancer, 1528
rectal cancer, 1328–9
farnesyl transferase inhibitors, 
157
fasciitis, necrotising, 30–1, 50, 
419–20, 597–8
fasciocutaneous flaps, 644–5, 646
fasciotomy, 28, 956
delayed wound closure, 54
FAST, see focused assessment 
with sonography for trauma
fasting
children, 122
metabolic response to, 10, 
278–9
fat
absorption, 1256
dietary, 282
digestion, 1241
as reconstructive tissue, 639
fat burns, 622
fat embolism, 956
fat mass, 8
fat mobilisation, 10
fat necrosis, breast, 866
fatty acids, 282
feeding, cleft lip/palate, 691
feeding formulae, burns patient, 
627
feeding tubes, 284–5
felon, 503–4
Felty’s syndrome, 1184–5
female reproductive system, 
1513–15
femoral artery
aneurysm, 966
false aneurysm, 966
superficial, 943
femoral head, 511
avascular necrosis, 512–13
blood supply, 511
femoral hernia, 1025, 1034–6
femoral nerve, blockade, 1034
femoral nerve stretch test, 473
femoral osteotomy, varus, 515
femoroacetabular impingement 
(FAI), 453, 513, 515
associated with SUFE, 574, 
575
femorodistal bypass, 951
femorofemoral crossover graft, 
951
femoropopliteal bypass, 949, 950, 
951
femoropopliteal obstruction, 944
femur
anteversion, 562
endoprosthetic replacement, 
547
fractures
distal, 401
paediatric, 405–6
proximal, 400, 401
shaft, 400–1
osteomyelitis, 551
slipped upper (capital) 
epiphysis, 382, 404–5, 
573–5
fentanyl, 276, 277
Ferguson-Smith syndrome, 595
fertilisation, 1514
fertility (male), 1511–12
after orchidopexy, 125
testicular maldescent, 1498
fetal circulation, 903, 904
fetal stem cells, 36
fibre
dietary, 1261, 1279, 1301, 1354
fermentation, 1259
fibrin glue, 1367
fibrinolysis, 1060
fibroadenoma, breast, 870
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), 
561, 833
fibroblasts, 24–5
fibroids, 1514, 1524–6
fibroma, plantar, 506, 531
fibromatosis, diffuse, 1061
fibrosarcoma, 1045
fibrosis
bladder neck, 1467–8
intraperitoneal, 1060–1
nephrogenic systemic, 191
oral submucous, 763
retroperitoneal, 1064–5, 1413
fibrous dysplasia, 541–2, 543, 566
fibular collateral ligament, 518
fibular flap, osseocutaneous, 771, 
772, 774
fibular hemimelia, 576
field change (‘cancerisation’), 
762–3
field hospitals, 413, 414
Filaria sanguinis hominis, 956
filariasis, 63–4, 1003–5, 1013
elephantiasis, 63, 64, 1510
hydrocoele, 1504
finasteride, 1378
fine-needle aspiration cytology 
(FNAC), 235
breast lesions, 862–3
CT-guided, lung cancer, 928–9
mycetoma, 74
neck swellings, 731
oral cancer, 766
thyroid, 804–5
thyroid swellings, 808, 809
finger clubbing, 926
fingers
congenital defects, 510
contractures, 32, 507
deformities in arthritis, 443, 
505–6
flexor muscles, 445
mallet, 469
pulleys, 507
trigger, 507
firearm injuries, see gunshot 
wounds
firearms, 427–8
first aid, major disasters, 413
First World War, 633
fish bones, 743
‘fish tail’ deformity, 404
fissure-in-ano, 1351–3
fistula-in-ano, 1363–7
fistulas
abdominal wall, 1045
aerodigestive, 1073
aortic enteric, 966, 1129
arteriovenous, 966–7
branchial, 754
bronchopleural, 933
colonic diverticular disease, 
1274, 1275–6, 1440
Crohn’s disease, 1045, 1243
definition, 616
enterocutaneous, 1256
faecal post-appendicectomy, 
1314
in imperforate anus, 136–7, 
1345–6
malignant tracheo-
oesophageal, 1095
mammary, 867, 868
neoplastic, 1440
pancreatic, 1221
umbilical, 1045
urinary tract, 1438–40
male urethra, 1484
fistulectomy, 1365
fistulotomy, 1365, 1366
Fitz, Reginald Heber, 1301
Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome, 
1049, 1519
fixed flexion deformity
hip, 451, 452
knee, 454
flail chest, 368
flame burns, 622
flaps, 27, 637, 641–9
advancement, 641, 642
anal advancement, 1353, 1370
anal fissure treatment, 1367
anal sphincter augmentation, 
1350, 1351
axial, 636, 637
bilobed, 641, 643
bipedicle, 641
breast reconstruction, 879, 880
combined, 646, 647
combined local, 644
composite, 637
distant, 644–5
free, 636, 637, 638, 645–6
limb amputation, 959, 960
lip reconstruction, 769
pedicled/islanded, 636, 637, 
644–5
perforator, 637, 645–6
postoperative care, 646–8
random, 637
rhomboid, 641
rotation, 641
tongue reconstruction, 771
transposition, 641, 643
V to Y, 641, 642
Y to V , 642, 644
flat foot (pes planus)
acquired adult, 530
causes, 458
children, 563
flexibility tests, 460, 461
rigid, 563
flavonoids, 1011
flexible access bio-inspired (FAB) 
systems, 118
flexible bronchoscopy, 923, 924
flexible endoscopy, upper GI 
tract, 1110–11
flexible sigmoidoscopy, 1320
flexor digitorum profundus, 445
flexor digitorum superficialis, 445
flexor pollicis longus, 446
flexor tendon sheath infection, 
hand, 504
flow cytometry, 248
flucloxacillin, 56, 1009
fluid
free intraperitoneal, 207, 208
intestinal absorption, 283
obstructed intestines, 1281, 
1288, 1289
fluid administration
burns patient, 622–3
children, 120–1
crush syndrome, 421
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1581 25/10/2017   10:44Index1582
gastric outlet obstruction, 1130
hypercalaemia/
hyperparathyroidism, 826
hyperparathyroidism, 826
peritonitis, 1051
postoperative, 10
shock, 15–16
trauma, 317–18
fluid displacement test, 454
fluid losses, routes of, 280–1
fluid overload, 288
fluids
after laparoscopy, 115
calculation of requirements, 
281
intake, 280
osmolarity, 121
tonicity, 121
fluorescein, 28
fluorescein angiography, 683
fluorescent in situ hybridisation 
(FISH), 247
fluoroscopy, 194
5-fluorouracil (5-FU), 155, 1139, 
1173, 1237, 1238, 1371
flutamide, 156, 1474
foam sclerotherapy, 979–80
focal neurological deficit, brain 
tumour, 663, 664
focal nodular hyperplasia, 1172
focused assessment with 
sonography for trauma 
(FAST), 123, 206–7, 324, 
372, 1160
extended (eFAST), 366, 367, 
372, 373
Fogarty balloon catheter, 955
folate deficiency, 1243–4
Foley catheter, retained, 1436
folic acid supplementation, 1151
follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH), 1514
follicular carcinoma, thyroid, 
809, 816
follicular cyst, rupture, 1306
follicular occlusion tetrad, 1367
follow-up clinic, 300
fondaparinux, 990
fontanelle, raised ICP , 652
foods
bolus impacted in oesophagus, 
1072
causing urinary oxalate, 1406
discolouring urine, 1376
intestinal obstruction, 1282
see also diet; nutrition; 
nutritional support
foot
anatomy, 524, 525
biomechanics, 525
chondrosarcoma, 536
clinical examination, 457–62
cutaneous nerve supply, 525
deformities
congenital, 577–80
leprosy, 69, 70
diabetic, 532–3, 559, 953
entrapment neuropathies, 533
flat, 457, 458, 460, 461, 530
forefoot disorders, 525–8
frostbite, 953, 954
heel pain, 533
hindfoot disorders, 528–9
infection, 531–2
longitudinal arch, 457
lymphoedema, 998
midfoot disorders, 528
movements, 458–9
neurological disease, 531, 533
progression angle, 562
reconstructive surgery, 647
shape, 457, 458
sports injuries, 468
stress fractures, 468, 528
tendon disorders, 529–30
tumours, 531
venous drainage, 969
venous pressure, 971
foot abduction orthosis (FAO), 
578
football injuries, 465
foot drop, 69, 70
footwear, 458, 525, 527
foramen of Bochdalek, 938, 939
foramen of Luschka, 653
foramen of Magendie, 653
foramen of Monro, 653, 656
foramen of Morgagni, 938
foramen ovale, closure at birth, 
903, 904
foramen of Winslow, 1056, 1161
forced expiratory volume in 1 
second (FEV1), 916–17, 918
forced vital capacity (FVC), 917
forceps, 1562
atraumatic, 99
forearm
fractures, 398–9
testing rotation, 447
foreign bodies
bladder, 1434, 1435, 1436
ear canal, 707
eye, 677, 679
inhaled, 132, 743–4, 924–5
oesophagus, 132, 1071–2
rectum, 1321
foreskin (prepuce)
disorders, 126–7, 1377, 1486–9
genital warts, 1496
forkhead box subgroup O 
(FOXO), 5
forward bending test, 441, 472, 
581
Foster-Kennedy syndrome, 664
Fournier’s gangrene, 50, 419, 597, 
1440, 1509–10
fovea coccygea, 1347
Fowler’s syndrome, 1485
fractional coronary flow reserve, 
257
fractures
ankle, 401–2
AO classification, 386–7
calcaneus, 402
clavicle, 400
description, 385–6
diaphyseal, 394
femur, 400–1
forearm, 398–9
healing, 388, 394, 548
humerus, 399–400
imaging, 200–1, 206, 207, 208
intra-articular fractures, 394–5
malunion, 394, 404, 494
metaphyseal, 394
nasal bones, 362, 717
neurovascular injury, 404
olecranon, 399
open, 385, 407–8
orbit, 356, 360–1, 677–8
in osteogenesis imperfecta, 567
osteoporotic, 349, 395, 406, 
407, 485
pathological, 406–7
radius, distal, 398
scaphoid, 396–7
skull, 207, 323, 332–3, 356, 
362
spinal
cervical spine, 206, 345–9, 
485, 486
imaging, 206, 209
lumbar spine, 209, 351
thoracic, 349
thoracolumbar, 350–1
sports, 464
stress, 464, 468, 528
talus, 402
fracture treatment
holding fragments, 389–94
infection, 556, 557
reduction, 388–9
risks and benefits, 388
in skeletally immature, 403–6
fragility fractures, 311, 320
fragility test, 1183
Francis report (2013), 178, 181
freckle (ephelis), 599
free tissue transfer, 637, 638, 
645–6
Freiberg’s disease 
(osteochondrosis), 527, 573, 
579
frenulum breve, 1488–9
frequency, 1375
frequency–dysuria (urethral) 
syndrome, 1376, 1442
fresh-frozen plasma (FFP), 21, 23
Freyer’s operation, 1466
Frey procedure, 1232
Frey’s syndrome, 792, 794–5
Friedlander curve, 429
Froment’s sign, 444, 446, 502
frostbite, 422, 632, 953, 954
frozen section specimens, 238
frozen shoulder (adhesive 
capsulitis), 492, 493
Fuhrman grading, 1419
fulguration, diathermy, 102
functional endoscopic sinus 
surgery (FESS), 723
fundoplication
laparoscopic, 1080
Nissen, 1079, 1080
fungal infections
ear, 707
military wounds, 433
transplant recipient, 1541–2
fungal toxins, 146
furosemide, 1166
future liver remnant, 1172
gabapentin, 276
Gabriel’s syringe, 1357
gadolinium-containing contrast 
agents, 191
gait, 437
extoeing, 563
foot and ankle disorders, 458
in hip disease, 437, 453
intoeing, 562–3
limping child, 589
toe-walking, 563
types of limp, 437
gait analysis, cerebral palsy, 
584–5
gait cycle, 525
galactocoele, 869
galactorrhoea, 666
Galen, 42
gallbladder
anatomy, 1188–9
cholecystitis glandularis 
proliferans, 1201
cholesterol polyposis, 1201
cholesterosis (strawberry 
gallbladder), 1201
congenital abnormalities, 
1195–6
distension, 212–13
diverticulosis, 1201
embryology, 1195
empyema, 1200
functions, 1189–90
gas, 1190, 1191
imaging, 1190–5
intraoperative, 1194–5
palpable, non-tender, 1199–200
physiology, 1189
polyps, 1210
porcelain, 1190, 1190, 1210
torsion, 1198
gallows traction, 405
gallstones (cholelithiasis), 212, 
213, 1157, 1198–200
after peptic ulcer surgery, 1125
bile ducts, 228, 1204–5, 1206, 
1216
causes, 1198–9
clinical features, 1018–19, 
1199
CT scan, 1192
diagnosis, 1199–200
ERCP , 228, 1158, 1159
intestinal obstruction, 1282
pancreatitis, 1222, 1224, 1225
pigment stones, 1183, 1199
treatment, 1200
ultrasound, 1191
gamekeepers’ thumb, 398, 469, 
503
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 
(GGT), 1155
ganglion
midfoot, 528
wrist, 509
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1582 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1583
ganglion cells
congenital absence, 136
loss, 1095–6
ganglioneuroma, 847
gangrene, 952–3
arterial insufficiency, 943
diabetic, 953
dry, 943, 952
Fournier’s, 50, 419, 597, 
1509–10
gas, 45, 49–50, 420, 960
Meleney’s, 50, 419
separation, 952
synergistic, 50, 419, 597, 1045
synergistic spreading 
(necrotising fasciitis), 
30–1, 50, 419–20, 597–8
treatment, 952–3
venous, 988
wet, 952
Gardner syndrome, 144, 236, 
595, 1259
Garrod’s knuckle pads, 506, 507
gas
free intraperitoneal, 210–11
intestinal obstruction, 1280–1, 
1288
in urine (pneumaturia), 1376
gas bloat syndrome, 1080
gas gangrene, 45, 49–50, 420, 960
Gasserian rhizolysis, 670
gastrectomy
Billroth I, 1120, 1123
Billroth II, 1118, 1120–1
palliative, 1138
postoperative complications, 
1138–9
sequelae, 1123–5
sleeve, 1147, 1148–9
subtotal, 1138
gastric acid
hypersecretion, 1114
normal secretion, 1108–9
gastric antral vascular ectasia 
(GA VE), 223
gastric arteries, 1106
gastric banding, 1147–8
complications, 1150
gastric bypass, 1147, 1148
banded Roux-en-Y, 1149
complications, 1150
one anastomosis (mini-gastric 
bypass), 1149–50
gastric cancer, 146, 1130–9
aetiology and risk factors, 1131
after gastric ulcer surgery, 1124
bleeding, 1128
chemotherapy, 155, 1139
clinical features, 1131–2
endoscopic procedures, 224, 
225
in gastric ulceration, 1118
GISTs, 1139–40
imaging, 214
incidence, 1130–1
investigations, 1110–13
lymphoma, 1140–1
molecular pathology, 1133–4
operability, 1136
pathology, 1132–3
radiotherapy, 1139
site, 1132
surgery
complications, 1138–9
outlook following, 1139
palliative, 1138
relapse following, 1139
subtotal gastrectomy, 1138
total radical gastrectomy, 
1136–8
gastric emptying studies, 1112–13
gastric lymphoma, 1140–1
gastric metaplasia, 1114
gastric mucosal barrier, 1109, 
1114
gastric outlet obstruction, 
1129–30
gastric stasis, 1021
gastric ulcers, 222–3, 1117–18
bleeding, 1127–8
clinical features, 1118–19
incidence, 1117
malignancy in, 1118
pathology, 1117–18
surgery, 1123
gastrin, 851, 1107, 1108, 1110, 
1114, 1115
gastrinomas, 849, 850–2, 1116, 
1120, 1141–2
gastritis, 1115–16
autoimmune, 1115
eosinophilic, 1116
erosive, 1115, 1128
H. pylori, 1114, 1115
lymphocytic, 1116
phlegmonous, 1116
reflux, 1115
stress, 1115
gastroduodenal artery, 1106
gastroduodenoscopy
peptic ulcers, 1117, 1119
video, 1070
see also oesophagogastroduo-
denoscopy
gastroenteritis, 131, 1248, 
1272–3
gastroenterostomy, 1121, 1123
gastroepiploic arteries, 1106
gastrointestinal (GI) tract
bacteria, 46–7, 1048–9
endoscopy, see endoscopy
haemorrhage, 211, 222–3, 
1126–9
injuries, 375
motility, 1109–10
perforation, 225, 232, 1019
gastrointestinal secretions, 
composition, 281
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 
(GIST), 154, 156, 1139–40
immunohistochemistry, 246
molecular testing, 250
oesophagus, 1084, 1085
rectum, 1327–8
small bowel, 1251
stomach, 1139–40
gastro-oesophageal junction
adenocarcinoma, 1132
endoscopy, 222
gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
(GORD), 1069, 1076–83
aetiology, 1076
after oesophagogastric 
resection, 1094
children, 128
clinical features, 1077
complications, 1078, 1080–3
diagnosis, 1077–8
endoscopic procedures, 221, 
223, 1079
investigations, 1071
management guidelines, 221
medical management, 1078–9
surgical treatment, 1079–80
gastroplasty, Collis, 1081
gastroschisis, 135
gastroscopy, 1110–11
gastric ulcers, 1118
normal stomach, 1111
gastrostomy, 223–4, 285–6
Gaucher’s disease, 1184
G cells, 1107, 1108, 1114, 1115
gefitinib, 156
gemcitabine, 155, 1237, 1238
gene expression
major injury, 4–5
and radiation, 153
see also epigenetics
General Medical Council, 175
general practitioner (GP), 300
genetic mutations, detection, 
249–50
genetics
bladder carcinoma, 1446–7
breast cancer, 144, 871, 880–1
cancer, 142, 249
colorectal cancer, 1261
Crohn’s disease, 1242
cystic fibrosis, 1219
familial adenomatous 
polyposis, 144, 1259
Lynch syndrome, 1260
ovarian cancer, 1528
primary lymphoedema, 1001–2
rectal cancer, 1329
renal cell carcinoma, 1417
genetic testing
cystic fibrosis, 1219
MEN 1, 857
genitalia, ambiguous, 844
genital warts, 1486, 1496
genitourinary tuberculosis, 1405
genomic instability, 142
gentamicin, 56
geographical factors
chronic pancreatitis, 1230
colonic diverticula, 1273
Crohn’s disease, 1241
gallbladder cancer, 1209–10
gastric cancer, 1130–1
oesophageal cancer, 1086–7
ulcerative colitis, 1267
germ cell tumours
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155
mediastinum, 935
ovary, 1526
testes, 1506–9
Gerota’s fascia, 838, 848
Gerstmann syndrome, 664
gestational age, calculation, 1515
Giacomini vein, 976
giant cell tumour, 541, 542, 546
giant condylomata, 1368
giant congenital pigmented 
naevus (giant hairy naevus), 
603–4
gigantism, 1000
Gillies forceps, 1562
Gilmore’s groin, 1034
gladiators, 89
glandular fever (infectious 
mononucleosis), 738
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 
312, 325, 331
calculation, 325
head injury classification, 329
Glasgow outcome score, 337
Glasgow scoring system 
(pancreatitis), 1224
glaucoma
acute angle closure, 682
secondary, 678
surgical treatment, 683–4
glenohumeral joint, 488
instability, 496–8
osteoarthritis, 493–5
posterior dislocation, 384
rheumatoid arthritis, 493
glenoid labrum, 497
glioblastoma multiforme, 156, 
664, 665
glioma, 664–5
gliptins, 1222
Glisson’s capsule, 1049, 1153
global health, 1564–6
Global Surgical Outcomes 
Collaboration, 165
globus syndrome, 738
glomus tumours, 614, 711, 712
glossopharyngeal nerve, 705
glossoptosis, 689, 691
glucagon, 3, 848, 1212
glucagon-like-peptide 1 (GLP-1), 
1145
glucagonoma, 849
gluconeogenesis, 279
glucose
blood levels, 8, 256, 260
obligatory requirements, 282
glue ear, 709–10
gluten, dietary, 1255
glycaemic control, endoscopy, 
219
glyceryl trinitrate, 1352
glycolysis, aerobic (Warburg 
effect), 142
GnRH agonists, 1525
goblet cell carcinoid tumours, 
1315
goitre, 805–7
aetiology, 805–6
diagnosis, 807
diffuse hyperplastic, 806, 807
nodular, 806, 811, 812
prevention and treatment, 807
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1583 25/10/2017   10:44Index1584
retrosternal, 803, 804, 807, 
810–11, 936
toxic, 811, 812
goitrogens, 806
golfer’s elbow, 448, 464–5
golf injuries, 464–5
Goligher retractor, 1561
Gompertzian growth, 142–3
gonorrhoea
pelvic inflammatory disease, 
1518–19
proctitis, 1325
testing, 1520
urethritis, 1494
Goodsall’s rule, 1364
Gorlin (basal naevus) syndrome, 
145, 595
goserelin, 156
gout, 506
gracilis muscle, anal canal 
transposition flap, 1350, 1351
graft rejection, 1533–7
acute, 1536
chronic, 1536–7
hyperacute, 1535–6
mechanisms, 1534–5
graft-versus-host disease, 1537
gram-negative bacilli, aerobic, 45
granny knot, 95, 96
granulomas
bladder (bilharzial), 1444
eosinophilic, 541, 542, 543
lung, 934
pyogenic, 614
granulomatosis with polyangiitis 
(Wegener’s syndrome), 795
Graves’ disease, 810, 811
great saphenous vein (GSV), 
969–70
incompetence, 975
stripping, 981
great vessels, transposition, 905
Grey Turner’s sign, 1019, 1020, 
1223
GRFoma, 849
gridiron incision, 1309
groin pain, 467
grommets, 710
Gross Motor Function 
Classification, 584
growth hormone (GH), 3
tumours secreting, 666
growth plate injuries, 403
classification, 387
guarding, abdominal, 1020, 1050
Guillain–Barré syndrome, 75–6
Guinea Pig Club, 628
gunshot wounds
assessment of extent, 428, 429
management, 428–9
mechanisms of injury, 315, 
427–8
military, 426, 426, 428–9
radiography, 372
thorax, 370, 372
Gustilo and Anderson 
classification (open fracture), 
385, 407
gut failure, 46–7
gut mucosal permeability, 1242
Guyon’s tunnel syndrome, 508
gynaecomastia, 69–70, 882, 1507
Hadfield’s operation, 865, 868
haemangiomas, 612–13
capillary, 613
liver, 1171–2
orbit, 676
rectum, 1327
spleen, 1185
haemangiosarcoma, 1185
haematemesis, 1075, 1126–9
haematocoele, 1499
haematocrit, 281
haematoma, 27
breast, 866
ear, 706–7
extradural, 312, 313, 333–4
pelvic, 376
prevertebral, 342
rectus sheath, 1023
retroperitoneal, 964, 965
subdural, 334–5
thigh (thigh bruise), 27, 467
urethral disruption injury, 1481
haematopoiesis, 1178
haematopoietic tumours, 538
haematospermia, 1376
haematuria, 1375–6
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
1460
bladder cancer, 1448
causes, 1375
classification, 1375
polycystic kidney disease, 1402
renal stones, 1407
haemoglobin, glycated (HbA1c), 
256, 260, 302
haemoglobin levels
in haemorrhage, 19
indication for transfusion, 21
haemoglobin S (HbS), 1184
haemoglobinuria, 1376
haemolytic anaemias, 1183–4
Haemophilus ducreyi, 1496
Haemophilus influenzae, 56, 587, 
709, 743, 922, 1186, 1187
haemoptysis, 923–4
haemorrhage, 18–20
acute pancreatitis, 1228
after thyroidectomy, 815
day case surgery, 305
degree and classification, 19
exsanguinating external, 323
gastrointestinal, 211
colonic diverticula, 1274
colonic polypectomy, 232
peptic ulcers, 222–3
upper tract, 1126–9
haemorrhoids, 1355–6
intracerebral, 661
laparoscopic surgery, 113–14
liver surgery, 1171
management, 19–20
maxillofacial trauma, 355
pathophysiology, 9–10, 18
pelvic injuries, 209, 324, 365, 
376–8
postoperative, 295–6
primary, 19
reactionary, 19, 305
retrobulbar, 361
revealed and concealed, 18–19
secondary, 19
shock, 13, 18
subarachnoid, 335, 658–61
subconjunctival, 359, 680
surgical, 19
tonsillectomy, 736–7
trauma, 323–4
torso, 365
variceal, 1163–6
haemorrhoidal veins, superior, 
1319
haemorrhoid artery ligation 
operation (HALO), 1359
haemorrhoidectomy, 1357–9
complications, 1359–60, 1369, 
1370
haemorrhoidopexy, stapled, 1359, 
1360, 1369
haemorrhoids, 1354–61
causes, 1354–5
clinical features, 1355
complications, 1355–6
external, 1360, 1361
four degrees, 1355
management, 1356–9
postoperative care, 1359
postoperative complications, 
1359–60, 1369, 1370
primary internal, 1354–60
rectal prolapse, 1322
strangulation, 1356
haemosiderosis, 973, 974, 984
haemostasis
liver transplant, 1555
liver trauma, 1161–2
thyroidectomy, 814, 815
haemothorax, 366
management, 368
massive, 368
Hageman factor, 618–19
Haglund’s prominence, 460
hair cells, 704–5
hair follicles, 593
lesions, 602–3
Hallpike test, 714
hallux rigidus, 526–7
hallux valgus, 458, 525–6
halo brace, 345
halo naevus, 600
hamartomas
lung, 934
spleen, 1178
hammer toe, 458, 527
hamstring injury, 467
hand
bony deformities, 443
clinical examination, 442–6, 
502
congenital anomalies/
malformations, 509, 510, 
580
deformity in leprosy, 69, 70
function, 502
imaging, 503
infections, 503–4
innervation, 443
joint replacements, 506
movements, 444–5
muscle wasting, 443, 502, 508
osteoarthritis, 504, 506
rheumatoid arthritis, 443, 
504–5
sports injuries, 469, 470
swelling and stiffness, 503
transplantation, 649
trauma, 28
Hand–Schuller–Christian 
disease, 541
hand washing, 43, 52
hangman’s fracture, 347, 348
Hansen’s disease, see leprosy
hard palate
anatomy, 690, 691
cleft, 690, 691
squamous cell carcinoma, 774
harmonic scalpel, 104
Hartmann’s procedure, 1265, 
1275, 1295, 1321, 1336
Hartmann’s solution, 281, 624, 
1290
Hashimoto’s disease 
(autoimmune thyroiditis), 
821–2
Hasselbach’s triangle, 1030, 1033
Hasson port, 112
Hawkin’s impingement test, 489
Hayflick hypothesis, 140
HDAC inhibitors, 157
headache
brain tumours, 663
‘thunderclap’, 659
head injury
annual mortality, 328
associated cervical spine 
fracture, 332
cerebral contusions, 336
classification, 329
concussion, 330
CT scanning, 197, 207, 357–8
diffuse axonal injury, 336
discharge criteria, 329–30
extradural haematoma, 312, 
313, 333–4
hearing loss, 713
intracranial pressure, 328–9, 
336
medical management, 336–7
meningitis following, 656
minor and mild, 329–30
non-accidental, 330
outcomes and sequelae, 337
pituitary dysfunction, 337
primary survey, 331–2
secondary survey, 332
seizures, 337
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
335
head and neck cancers
causes, 145, 146
cervical lymph node disease, 
758–9
chemotherapy agents, 155, 157
larynx, 751–2
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1584 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1585
lymphomas, 741
nasopharynx, 733–5
non-surgical treatment, 152
oral, see oral cavity cancer
oropharynx, 740–1
staging, 764
healing, see bone healing; wound 
healing
healthcare workers
communication, 182
and patient safety, 178, 180
Health Research Authority 
(HRA), 161
hearing aid, bone conduction, 
711
hearing loss
brain tumour, 664
cleft lip/palate, 694–5
congenital sensorineural, 712
noise exposure, 713, 714
presbycusis, 712–13
sudden sensorineural, 713
hearing tests, 705–6
heart
coronary artery anatomy, 
886–7
development, 903, 904
masses, 911–12
surgical approaches, 884, 931
thrombus, 911
transplantation, 1556–8
valve anatomy, 894
heart block, 258
heartburn, 1077
heart disease, see congenital 
heart disease; ischaemic 
heart disease; valvular heart 
disease
heart–lung transplantation, 1557
heated intraperitoneal 
chemotherapy (HIPEC), 
1317
Heberden’s nodes, 443, 506
heel pain, 533
Heerfordt’s syndrome, 795
Heimlich manoeuvre, 132, 744
Heineke–Mikulicz pyloroplasty, 
1122
Heineke–Mikulicz strictureplasty, 
1247, 1248
Heinrick’s safety pyramid, 179
Heinz bodies, 1178, 1183
Helicobacter pylori, 146, 246, 
1076, 1113–15, 1140
eradication regimes, 1114–15, 
1119–20
and gastric cancer, 1131
gastritis, 1114, 1115
peptic ulcers, 1116, 1117
helicopters, 411
Heller–Dor operation, 1099
Heller’s myotomy, 1098–9
hemianopia
bitemporal, 664
homonymous, 664
hemiarthroplasty, shoulder, 400, 
493, 494
hemicolectomy
left, 1264–5
right, 1264
hemifacial microsomia, 686, 687, 
702
hemihepatectomy, 1170
hemiplegia, epilepsy, 670
hemispherectomy, anatomical, 
670
hemivertebrae, 581
Henoch–Schönlein purpura, 131, 
1283, 1288, 1305
heparin, 221, 258, 989, 990
hepatectomy, 1169–71
hepatic artery, 1153
aneurysm, 1163, 1163
common, 1154
tortuous, 1188–9
thrombosis, 1555
hepatic duct, common, 1154, 1188
hepatic encephalopathy, 1156
hepatic veins
inferior, 1154
right, 1154
thrombosis, 1166–7
hepatitis, amoebic, 58
hepatitis, viral, 51–2, 1173
hepatitis B, 51, 1173
hepatitis C, 51, 1173
and hepatocellular carcinoma, 
1173
organ donation, 1544
universal precautions, 52
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
1173–5
hepatoma, 145, 146
Her2 gene, 249, 250
breast cancer, 250, 872, 878
gastric cancer, 1139
herbal enemas, causing proctitis, 
1326
Herceptin®, 873, 878, 1139
hereditary haemorrhagic 
telangiectasia (Osler’s 
disease), 719, 720
hereditary leiomyomatosis and 
renal cell cancer, 1418
hereditary multiple exostoses 
(diaphyseal aclasis), 539, 565
hereditary non-polyposis 
colorectal cancer (HNPCC), 
144, 663, 1260–1, 1329
endometrial cancer, 1516
hereditary papillary kidney 
cancer, 1418
hereditary spherocytosis, 1183
hernias
abdominal
anatomical causes, 1023
common principles, 1024
examination, 1025
history and diagnosis, 1025
investigations, 1025–6
management, 1026
mesh repairs, 1027–9
pathophysiology, 1023–4
sites, 1029
surgical approaches, 1026–7
diaphragmatic, 133, 938, 939
epigastric, 1039
femoral, 1025, 1034–6
gluteal, 1044
hiatus, 1076, 1078, 1081, 
1083–4
incisional, 1026, 1039–41, 
1287
inguinal, 124, 1029–34
internal (small intestines), 
1282
irreducible, 1024, 1026
laparoscopy port site, 115, 
1023, 1291
lumbar, 1042–3
management, 1026
mesh repairs, 1027–9
midline, 127
obstructed, 1024
obturator, 1043–4
omentum, 1061
parastomal, 1043, 1255, 1278
perineal, 1043
reducible, 1024
sciatic, 1044
scrotal, 1030, 1031
spigelian, 1024, 1041–2
sportsman’s, 1034
strangulated, 1024, 1038
traumatic, 1043
umbilical, 1036–8
ventral, 1028, 1036
herniation syndromes, 328–9
herniogram, 1026, 1032
herniorrhaphy, 1032
herniotomy, 1032
herpes simplex virus
corneal ulcers, 677, 681
genital infections, 1495
oesophagitis, 1104
transplant recipient, 1541
herpes zoster virus, 681, 715, 
1541
Herring classification, 572
heterografts (xenografts), heart 
valves, 895
Heuter–Volkmann principle, 561
hiatus hernia
Allison repair, 1079
paraoesophageal (rolling), 
1083–4
sliding, 1076, 1078, 1081
Hickman lines, 287
HIDA scanning, 1192, 1204, 
1232
hidradenitis suppurativa, 595–6, 
1367–8
pathology, 1367
presentation, 1367–8
hidradenoma, 603
highly active antiretroviral 
therapy (HAART), 52
high-pressure injection injuries, 
28–9
high-risk patient
critical care, 266–7
factors contributing to risk, 
262–3
identification, 263–5
minimising impact of surgery, 
266
optimisation, 265–6
risk management, 263
high-tension electrical injuries, 
631, 632
Hilgenreiner’s line, 569
Hill procedure, 1079
Hill–Sach’s lesion, 496
Hilton’s law, 573
Hinchey classification, 
diverticulitis, 1274
hindgut, embryology, 1319, 
1344–5
hip
anatomy, 511
arthrodesis, 515
arthroscopy, 515
biomechanics, 511–12
clinical examination, 451–3
developmental dysplasia, 
567–71
dislocation, cerebral palsy, 585
fixed flexion deformity, 451, 452
fractures, 400, 401
movements, 451–2
septic arthritis, 553, 586, 587
hip disease
avascular necrosis, 512–13
children, 589
femoroacetabular impingement 
(FAI), 453, 513, 515
gait disturbance, 437, 453
inflammatory arthritis, 515
osteoarthritis, 437, 513–14
Hippocrates, 42
hippocratic facies, 1050
hip replacement
bearing surfaces, 516
complications, 517–18
femoral component materials, 
516
implant fixation, 516–17
infection, 554–6
osteoarthritis, 514, 515
outcomes, 515–16
principles and design, 516
revision, 518
surgical approaches, 517
total, 515–18
hip screw, dynamic, 400, 401
hip spica, 405
Hirschsprung’s disease, 136, 1096
histamine, 1107, 1108, 1109, 1110
histamine receptor (H2-receptor) 
antagonists, 1108, 1119, 
1127
histology
deeper levels, 244
electron microscopy, 245
frozen section, 238
light microscopy, 242, 243
sample adequacy, 243
special stains, 244–5
specimen processing, 236–8
specimens, 235
vs cytology, 243
histopathology
bone infections, 552
intestinal tuberculosis, 79
mycetoma, 74
typhoid, 82
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1585 25/10/2017   10:44Index1586
histopathologist, 237
history taking
abdominal symptoms, 1016–17
extremity trauma, 381
musculoskeletal disease, 436
preoperative, 254–5
shoulder disorders, 489
spinal injuries, 341
sports injuries, 463
trauma, 315–16
traumatic brain injury, 330–1
HIV infection, 51–2
associated cancers, 146
circumcision in, 1487
ENT system, 738
intestinal complications, 1249, 
1273
and organ donation, 1544
sialadenitis, 787
transmission
and circumcision, 127
needle-stick injuries, 52
universal precautions, 52
hoarseness, causes, 749, 750
Hodgkin’s disease, 147, 596, 741, 
872, 882, 1182, 1185, 1251
Hoffmann’s sign, 473
Holman–Miller (antral) sign, 719
Holmes–Adie pupil, 331
holmium laser enucleation of the 
prostate (HOLEP), 1463, 
1465, 1467
Holt–Oram syndrome, 903
Homans’ procedure, 1011–12
Homans’ sign, 296
homeostasis, 2–3
home parenteral nutrition 
(HPN), 1257
homovanillic acid (HVA), 847
Hopkin’s rod, 731
hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT), 260
and breast cancer, 871, 881
hyperparathyroidism, 831
hormone therapy
breast cancer, 156, 878
prostate cancer, 156, 1474
Horner’s syndrome, 672, 1087
horseshoe kidney, 1399, 1400
hospital acquired infection 
(HAI), 45, 47
Houston’s valves, 1319
Howell–Jolly bodies, 1178
HRPT2 gene, 835
human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(hCG), 256, 1507, 1508, 
1514, 1518
human factors, 176–7
human herpes virus 8 (HHV8), 
246
human kallikrein-2 (HK2), 1379
human leucocyte antigens 
(HLAs), 1534
matching in organ 
transplantation, 1537–8
human papillomavirus (HPV), 
146, 760, 1368
anal intraepithelial neoplasia, 
1368–9
anal SCC, 1371
anal warts, 1368
cervical cancer, 1516
genital warts, 1496
oral SCC, 760
oropharyngeal carcinoma, 
740–1
penile cancer, 1492
Human Tissue Authority (HTA), 
1547
humerus
chondrosarcoma, 536
distal lateral condylar mass 
fracture, 382, 404, 405
distal (supracondylar) fracture 
in children, 403–4
proximal fractures, 400
proximal malunion, 494
shaft fractures, 383, 399–400
thyroid carcinoma metastases, 
817
Hunner’s ulcer (interstitial 
cystitis), 1443
Hürthle cell tumours, 818, 827
Hutchinson’s melanotic freckle, 
609, 610
Hutchinson’s sign, 610
hydatid disease, 64–8
biliary, 1207
liver, 65–7, 1169, 1169
pulmonary, 67–8
hydatid of Morgagni, 126, 1376, 
1500
hydrocephalus, 586, 653–6
aetiology, 653–4
normal pressure, 654
spina bifida, 484
treatment, 655–6
hydrocoele, 63, 64, 124, 125, 
1376
aetiology, 1502–3
clinical features, 1374, 1503
congenital, 124, 125, 1503
secondary, 1503
treatment, 1503–4
hydrocolloid dressings, 625–6, 630
hydrocortisone
intravenous, 844
oral, 844
pruritus ani, 1361
hydrocystadenoma 
(cystadenoma), 603
hydrofluoric acid, 632
hydrogel scaffolds, 39, 40
hydrogen cyanide, 618
hydronephrosis, 137, 213
bilateral, 1411
bladder outflow obstruction, 
1460, 1461
causes of lower tract, 1411
causes of upper tract, 1411
imaging, 1411–12
treatment, 1412–13
ultrasound scan, 1386
unilateral, 1410–11
hydroureter, 213
21-hydroxylase deficiency, 844
1,25-hydroxyvitamin D, 825, 833
hygiene, and pruritus ani, 1361
hyperbaric oxygen (HBO), 420
hypercalcaemia, 825–6
causes, 826
familial hypocalciuric, 832
in hyperparathyroidism, 825–6
renal calculi, 1406
hypercalciuria, 1405–6
hyperchloraemic acidosis, 1454–5
hypercortisolism, 841–2, 843
hypergastrinaemia, 1114, 1115
hyperglycaemia
parenteral nutrition, 288
postoperative, 4, 8
hyperhidrosis, 72, 595, 968
hyperlaxity syndrome, 458
hypermetabolism, 3, 4, 5, 6, 279
hyperoxaluria, 1406
hyperparathyroidism
familial syndromes, 831–2
lithium-induced, 831
persistent, 836
primary (pHPT), 825–32, 857, 
858, 1406
recurrent, 836–7
secondary, 833–5
tertiary, 835
hyperparathyroid-jaw tumour 
syndrome (HPT-JT), 832, 
1418
hyperplasia, 241
hypersplenism, 1180, 1184, 1184
hypertension
hyperaldosteronism, 840
phaeochromocytoma, 845
polycystic kidney disease, 1402
postoperative, 294
preoperative assessment, 257
hyperthermia, malignant, 272, 
273
hyperthyroidism, 13, 811–16
eye disease, 675–6, 811
hyphaema, 678
hypocalcaemia
after parathyroid surgery, 831
after thyroid surgery, 815, 816
hypochloraemic alkalosis, 128, 
1130
hypochlorhydria, 1114, 1115
hypoglossal nerve, 782, 785
hypokalaemia
intestinal obstruction, 1286
primary hyperaldosteronism, 
840
hyponatraemia
children, 121
encephalopathy, 120
subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
660–1
hypoparathyroidism
after thyroid surgery, 815
permanent, 830–1
hypoperfusion, occult, 18
hypopharynx
anatomy, 726
tumours, 741–2
hypospadias, 126, 1377, 1478, 
1479
hypotension
permissive, 964
postoperative, 293–4
trauma/haemorrhage, 323–4
hypothalamus, 3, 4
hypothenar wasting, 443
hypothermia, 10
in CPB, 885
postoperative, 299
in trauma, 317
hypothesis, 162
hypothyroidism, 13, 802, 812, 
822
hypovolaemia, trauma, 324
hypovolaemic shock, 13, 352, 
368
hypoxaemia, postoperative, 
292–3
hysterectomy
bladder dysfunction after,  
1429
endometriosis, 1522
excessive vaginal bleeding, 
1517
vesicovaginal fistula, 1439
iatrogenic injuries
bile ducts, 184, 1203–4
bladder, 1425–6, 1466
colon perforation, 232
male urethra, 1479, 1482
pancreas, 1221
upper GI endoscopy, 225
ureters, 1415
idelalisib, 157
idiopathic intracranial 
hypertension (IIH), 655
idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura (ITP), 1182–3
ifosfamide, 155
i-Gel airway, 271
i-Knife, 118
ileal conduit, 1452–3
ileal transposition, 1150
ileitis, Crohn’s, 1242, 1305
ileoanal anastomosis, 1270–1
ileoanal pouch, 1270–1
ileocaecal valve, 1256
ileocolic artery, 1264
ileocystoplasty, 1443
ileorectal anastomosis, 1260, 
1271
ileosigmoid knotting (compound 
volvulus), 1285
ileostomy, 1254–5, 1270
end, 1254
loop, 1254
ileum
anatomy, 1240
atresia, 1293–4
neuroendocrine tumours, 
854–5
resection, 283–4
terminal, 1240, 1241
Crohn’s disease, 1242, 1305
ileus
after appendicectomy, 1313–14
gallstone, 1282
meconium, 134, 1219, 1294
paralytic, 297, 1296–7
see also intestinal obstruction
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1586 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1587
iliac artery
anatomy, 1034–5
aneurysm, 966
stenosis, 944, 948, 950
iliac crest graft, 771, 773, 774, 
778
iliac vein, 1034–5
iliopsoas, 511
Ilizarov fixator, 557
imaging
abdominal aortic aneurysm, 
213
bowel ischaemia/infarction, 
211
bowel obstruction, 210
hazards, 191
head injury, 330
image interpretation, 190, 191
inflammatory processes, 
211–13
in major trauma, 205–8
oncology, 213–15
orthopaedic surgery, 200–5
renal colic, 213
requesting, 190
soft-tissue mass lesions, 203
spinal injuries, 342–4
see also individual imaging 
modalities
imatinib, 154, 156, 1140, 1251
imetelstat, 158
imidaquod, 1496
immersion injuries, 422
immobility, 11, 1006, 1406
immune system
in major burns, 619
response to injury, 3, 4
role in cancer, 141
immunoglobulins, 1176–7
immunohistochemistry, 243, 
245–7
infections, 246
tumour pathology, 245–6
immunosuppression, surgical 
infections, 46
immunosuppressive therapy
complications, 1539, 1541–2
modes of action, 1538
principles, 1540
regimens, 1540
transplantation, 649–50, 
1538–41
immunotherapy agents, 157, 
1421
imperforate anus, 136–7, 1345–7
impetigo, 596
impingement
femoroacetabular, 453, 513, 
515
shoulder, 449, 489
impotence, after prostatectomy, 
1466
improvised explosive devices 
(IEDs), 426, 430, 432
IMRAD format, 168
incidentaloma, 839–40
incisional hernia, 1026, 1039–41, 
1287
inclusion cysts, peritoneal, 1060
incontinence, see anal 
incontinence; urinary 
incontinence
indocyanine green (ICG), 1007
indoramin, 1468
induced pluripotent stem cells 
(iPSCs), 36–7
infants
appendicitis, 1304
definitions, 119
hip dysplasia, 567–71
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis 
(IHPS), 127–8
intussusception, 1283–4, 1293
mastitis, 865
postural abnormalities, 564
preoperative care, 259
rectal prolapse, 1321
infection control
burns, 627, 630–1
theatre, 52, 1563–4
infections
after splenectomy, 1186–7
foot, 531–2, 559
hand, 503–4
intracranial, 656–8
joints, see joint infections
liver, 1168–9, 1173
military wounds, 432–3
oesophagus, 1103–4
skin, 596–8
spinal, 481
surgical, see surgical infections
transplant recipients, 1541–2
wounds, see wound infections
see also specific infections
infectious mononucleosis 
(glandular fever), 738
inferior vena cava filter, 990
inferior vena cava (IVC), 1153, 
1154, 1398
injuries, 1162
in liver resection, 1170
retrocaval ureter, 1402
infertility, male factor, 1511–12
inflammation
imaging, 211–13
major burns, 618–19
microscopic features, 241, 242
systemic response syndrome, 3, 
47, 51, 1223
tumour-related, 142
inflammatory bowel disease, 212, 
1017, 1241, 1266–72
anal stricture, 1370
Crohn’s disease, 46, 225, 227, 
616, 1241–8, 1271–2
risk of malignancy, 1268
symptoms, 1017, 1267
ulcerative colitis, 1206, 1207, 
1267–71
infliximab, 1269
information technology, patient 
records, 180–1
informed consent, 171–3, 181, 
267
capacity, 173, 267
endoscopy, 218
surgeon’s notes, 172
transplantation surgery, 174
infrared radiation, 594
inguinal canal, anatomy, 1023, 
1029–30
inguinal hernias, 1029–34
causes, 1023, 1029
children, 124
classification, 1031
congenital, 1029
contralateral, 1031
diagnosis, 1031
direct, 1039
indirect, 1030
investigations, 1032
management, 158, 1032–4
sliding, 1030
inguinal (Poupart’s) ligament, 
1029
inhalation injury, 618
inhaled particles, causing cancers, 
146
injection injuries, high-pressure, 
28–9
injection sclerotherapy, 1356, 
1357
injury prevention, 320
Injury Severity Score (ISS), 310
inner ear, 703–5
inotropic drugs, 16, 892
in situ hybridisation, 247
Institute of Medicine (IOM), 
Crossing the Quality Chasm, 
176
instruments
forceps, 1562
Kocher dissector, 1562
McIndoe scissors, 1561
retractors, 1560–1
sterilisation, 1564
insulin, 848
insulin infusion, 8, 10
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-
1), 3
inhibitors, 158
insulinoma, 848–50, 857, 1216
insulin resistance, 6, 8, 288
Integra®, 628, 630
Integrated Research 
Administration System 
(IRAS), 166
integrins, 141
intensive care outreach services 
(ICORS), 267
intensive care unit (ICU)
acute pancreatitis, 1225
role, 263, 266–7
interdigital pilonidal sinus, 1347
interferon alpha-2b, 157
interleukin-2 (IL-2), 1534
intermaxillary fixation, 358
intermittent claudication, 943, 
947
intermittent cross-clamp 
fibrillation, 885
internal carotid artery
giant aneurysm, 660
occlusive disease, 662
internal iliac artery, embolisation, 
956
International Humanitarian Law, 
424–5
international normalised ratio 
(INR), 220, 221, 258
International Prostate Symptom 
Score (IPSS), 1461
internet, research databases, 163
interscalene block, 274
interspinous ligament, 338
interstitial cell tumours, testes, 
1507
interstitial cystitis, 1443
interstitial fluid (ISF), 995, 997
intervertebral disc, 338
herniation
cervical, 474, 475
lumbar, 198, 476, 477
thoracic, 475
total replacement, 475, 476, 
477
intervertebral foramen, 471
intestinal atresias, 133–4
intestinal failure, 46–7, 1555
intestinal hormones, 1241
intestinal obstruction
acute in newborn, 1293–4
adynamic, 1280, 1296–8
causes, 60–2, 1280, 1282–5
classification, 1280
clinical features, 1285–8
colonic diverticula, 1274
congenital causes, 137
dynamic, 1280, 1285
imaging, 1288–90
Meckel’s diverticulum, 1252
parasites, 60–1, 1282–3
pathophysiology, 1018–19, 
1280–1
postoperative, 1292
pseudo-obstruction, 1297–8
radiography, 193
recurrent caused by adhesions, 
1292
strangulation, 1281, 1286–7
symptoms, 1017
treatment
large intestines, 1294–6
small intestines, 1290–4
vs appendicitis, 1306
intestinal perforation
colonic diverticula, 1274
colonic polypectomy, 232
imaging, 210–11
typhoid, 82–3, 1248
intestinal permeability, 1242
intestinal resection, fluid and 
nutritional consequences, 
283–4
intestines
atresia, 1293–4
blast injury, 431
intussusception, 129–30, 
1283–4
ischemia, reperfusion injury, 
1291
in major burn injuries, 619
malrotation, 134, 135, 1284–5, 
1300
tuberculosis, 78–81
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1587 25/10/2017   10:44Index1588
vascular anomalies, 1276–7
viability assessment, 1291
volvulus, 1284–5
intoeing gait, 562–3
intra-abdominal pressure, raised, 
380
intra-aortic balloon pump, 892
intracranial pressure (ICP)
normal values, 328
raised, 328–9, 652–3
brain tumours, 663
clinical features, 652
control, 336
in craniofacial 
malformations, 688
head injury, 328–9, 336
idiopathic, 655
investigation, 653
intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
(ICSI), 1512
intraductal papillary mucinous 
neoplasms (IPMNs), 1234
intradural tumours, 480–1
intramedullary nails, 390, 392–3
elastic stable (ESIN), 405–6
intraosseous infusion, 122
intrathecal baclofen pumps 
(ITB), 584
intrauterine contraceptive device 
(IUCD), 1515, 1519
intravenous cannulae, children, 
122
intravenous drug use, 553
intravenous urogram, 192, 193, 
194, 1389
bladder cancer, 1449
intubation
burns patient, 620, 629
fibreoptic, 748
severe trauma, 323
intussusception
children, 129–30, 1283–4
clinical features, 1287
differential diagnosis, 1287–8
imaging, 1289
pathology, 1284
rectal, 1324
treatment, 1293
inverted papillomas, 723–4
investment, surgical services, 
1565
iodine, 805, 813
ionising radiation, 594
associated cancers, 145
biological effects, 191
and breast cancer, 871–2
doses from CT scanning, 191, 
192, 196, 317
doses from radiographs, 192, 
861
injuries, 632
legislation, 191–3
proctitis, 1325
risks of, 191, 317
thyroid tumours, 816
Ionising Radiation (Medical 
Exposure) Regulations 
(IRMER), 191–2
ipilumumab, 157, 158
Iraq war, 426
iridotomy, laser, 682, 684
irinotecan, 155
iritis, 678
iron deficiency
after gastrectomy, 1124
dysphagia, 740, 763, 1105
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 
1017, 1279
Isaacson, Peter Gersohn, 1140
ischaemia
chronic small intestinal, 1254
mesenteric, 956, 1061, 1253–4
myocardial, 265, 294
ischaemia–reperfusion syndrome, 
13
ischaemic colitis, 1276–7
ischaemic heart disease (IHD), 
887–9
clinical manifestations, 887
indications for surgery, 889
investigations, 888–9
pathophysiology, 887
preoperative care/assessment, 
257, 890
risk factors, 887
surgical risk management, 265
ischaemic limb
acute, 955–6
chronic, 943–52
critical, 943, 949
ischiorectal abscess, 1362, 1363
islets of Langerhans, 848, 1212, 
1219
transplantation, 1553
isotope renogram, 1392–4, 1395, 
1404, 1412
itching, burn wounds, 631
Ivor Lewis operation, 1092,  
1093
Jaboulay’s operation, 1503–4
jackhammer (nutcracker) 
oesophagus, 1099–100
Jack’s test, 460, 461
Japan, gastric cancer, 1130–1, 
1136–7, 1139
jaundice
after cholecystectomy, 1203
bile peritonitis, 1052
imaging, 213
neonatal, 135, 1196
pancreatic carcinoma, 1234
javelin throwers, 465
jaw, developmental 
abnormalities, 701, 702
jaw tumour syndrome, 
hyperparathyroid, 832
Jehovah’s Witness, 173, 259
jejunostomy, 283, 286
jejunum, 1241
atresia, 134, 1293–4
diverticulae, 1251–2
neuroendocrine tumours, 
854–5
Jenkins’ rule, 1041
Jobe’s test, 449, 450
Johansen step technique, 768–9
Johne’s disease of cattle, 1242
Joint Advisory Group (JAG), 
UK, 217
joint contractures, release, 584
joint disease, imaging, 201–2
joint effusions, 204
joint fractures, 394–5
joint infections
children, 586–7
complications, 588–9
imaging, 204, 205
implant-related, 554–6
native joint, 553–4
joint laxity, generalised, 498
joints, assessment of movement, 
438–9
Joll retractor, 1560
journals, peer-reviewed, 167–8
J pouch, 1271
jugular venous pressure (JVP), 
255
junctional naevus, 599
junctional zones, torso, 364–5
juvenile polyp, rectum, 1327
Kanavel’s cardinal signs, 504
Kaposi’s sarcoma, 52, 146, 615, 
738
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155
conjunctiva, 680
lymphoedema, 1005
Karydakis procedure, 1348
Kasai procedure, 135, 1197
kayaking, 467
KCNJ5 gene, 840
Keinböck’s disease, 508–9
Keller’s excision arthroplasty, 526
keloid scars, 31, 815
keratin horn, 606
keratinocytes, 592, 634
keratitis, 677, 681
keratoacanthoma, 606
Kerlix®, 630
ketamine, 269
ketone production, 279
Ki67, 245, 246
kidneys
anatomy, 1398
benign tumours, 1416
calculi, 213, 825, 1386, 1405–7
congenital abnormalities
agenesis, 1399
duplex renal pelvis/ureter, 
1400
ectopic/crossed renal 
ectopia, 1399
horseshoe kidney, 1399, 
1400
multicystic disease, 1399
embryology, 1398–9
enlargement, 1402
infarction, 1416
injury
acute postoperative, 294–5
preoperative management 
259,
medullary sponge, 1386, 1406
parathyroid hormone actions, 
825
polycystic disease, 1402–3, 
1549, 1550
renal cell carcinoma, 547, 548, 
1416–21
scarring, 1404
transitional cell carcinoma, 
1421
trauma, 1413–14
Wilms’ tumour 
(nephroblastoma), 138, 
152, 156, 832, 1421–2
kidneys, ureters and bladder 
(KUB) X-ray, 1388
kidney transplantation
first successful, 1532
graft dysfunction, 1551–2
graft rejection, 1535–7
hyperparathyroidism after, 835
living donor, 1547–8
organ donation, 1542–8
organ recovery (deceased 
donor), 1544–7
outcomes, 1552
with pancreas transplant, 1552
patient selection, 1549
technical complications, 
1550–1
technique, 1549–50
Kienbock’s disease, 573
Kiesselbach’s plexus, 717, 719
Killian’s dehiscence, 738
Kingella kingae, 587
Kirschner wires (K-wires), 389, 
392, 398, 399
indications for, 392
Kit gene, 154, 249
Klebsiella spp., 45, 56, 937, 1442
Klebsiella granulomatis, 1496
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 1404
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 882, 
1376, 1506, 1511
Klippel–Feil syndrome, 489
Klippel–Trenaunay syndrome, 
972, 991, 1000
knee
anatomy, 518–19
arthrodesis, 521
arthroscopy, 521
biomechanics, 519
clinical examination, 453–7
dislocation, 382, 383
giving way, 467, 468
instability, 468
joint replacement, 521–3
locking, 467
meniscal injuries, 456, 467
movement, 454, 519
osteoarthritis, 519–20
osteotomy, 521
paediatric metaphyseal corner 
injury, 590
soft tissue disorders, 520–1
sports injuries, 465, 466, 467–8
through-knee amputation, 959
varus deformity, 454, 521
see also patella
knee angle, 563
knee–ankle–foot orthosis 
(KAFO), 564
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1588 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1589
knee–elbow position, 1342
knee pain
children and adolescents, 
575–6
patellofemoral, 467–8
knock-knees, 563
knot tying, 94–5, 96
Kocher dissector, 1562
Kocher manoeuvre, 850
Koch’s postulates, 42–3
Kock pouch, 1454
Köhler’s disease, 573, 580
Kras mutations, 248, 249, 250, 
1261
Krukenberg’s tumours, 1135
Kshara sutra, 1367
KTP (green light) laser, 1467
Kulchitsky cells, 1250, 1300, 
1315
Kupffer cells, 1155, 1172
Kussmaul’s sign, 911
kyphoplasty, 485
kyphosis
in ankylosing spondylitis, 481, 
482
normal thoracic, 471
Scheuermann’s, 483, 582
Lachmann test, 455
lacrimal canaliculi, injuries, 678
lacrimal gland
anatomy, 672
tumours, 675
lacrimal sac, mucocoele, 674–5
lactate, 17, 326, 327
lactic acidosis, 12, 14, 17
lactiferous ducts, 860
Ladd’s procedure, 134
lag screw, 393
lag test, 454
Lancet Commission, 1565–6
Lane’s forceps, 1310
Langenbeck retractor, 1560
Langerhans’ cells, 592
Langer’s lines, 85–6, 636
laparoscopic surgery, 86–9
abdominal trauma, 373
adrenalectomy, 847–8
anastomoses, 99
anterior mesh rectopexy, 1324
appendicectomy, 1309, 
1311–12
bariatric surgery, 1147
benefits, 87
cholecystectomy, 1202
colorectal cancer, 1265
diathermy, 103, 114
discharge, 116
emergency situations, 116
fundoplication, 1080
hernia repair, 1026, 1033
epigastric hernia, 1039
femoral hernia, 1036
incisional hernia, 1040–1
inguinal hernia, 1033
umbilical hernia, 1038
liver resection, 1170–1
natural orifice (NOTES), 117, 
118
operative problems, 113–14
patient positioning, 85, 266
pneumoperitoneum creation, 
112
port-site hernias, 115, 1023, 
1291
postoperative care, 114–16
preoperative problems, 112–13
principles of safe, 87
risks of complications, 266
single incision, 117
splenectomy, 1186, 1186
stapling devices, 97
training, 117–18
trocar insertion, 87–9, 112
trocar site haemorrhage, 114
laparoscopy
gallbladder carcinoma, 1211
gastric cancer, 1110, 1112
liver disease, 1160
oesophageal cancer, 1089–90
uterine fibroids, 1525
lapatinib, 156
lap-belt injuries, 351
large intestine
amoebiasis, 57–60, 1272–3
anatomy, 1258–9
bacteria, 46–7, 1048–9
benign tumours, 1259–61
malignant tumours, see 
colorectal cancer
obstruction, see intestinal 
obstruction
physiology, 1259
volvulus, 1284–5
laryngeal mask airway, 271, 748
laryngeal nerves
recurrent, 727, 801–2
identification in 
thyroidectomy, 813–14
intraoperative monitoring, 814
paralysis after thyroidectomy, 
815
superior, 727, 815
laryngectomy, 752–3
laryngitis
acute, 750
chronic, 750
laryngoscope, paediatric, 120
laryngoscopy, 728, 731
thyroid assessment, 809
laryngotracheobronchitis 
(croup), 743
larynx
anatomy, 727, 728
examination, 729, 731
functions, 727, 728
imaging, 730
injuries, 755–6
papillomata, 750
tumours, 751–2
venous oedema, 815
Lasègue’s straight leg raise test, 
441–2, 473
Laser Assisted Bile duct 
Exploration by 
Laparo-endoscopy for 
choledocholithiasis 
(LABEL), 118
laser treatments
eye surgery, 682, 683, 684
oesophageal cancer, 1094
prostate, 1463, 1465, 1467
varicose veins, 977–9
last menstrual period (LMP), 
1515
late dumping, 1124
latissimus dorsi flaps, 645, 647
breast reconstruction, 879, 880
lavage
peritoneal, 373
pulsed jet, 27
laxatives, 1279
leadership, healthcare, 188
lead time bias, 146–7
lean body mass, 8
lean manufacturing principles, 
187
ledderhosen disease, 506, 531
Le Fort fractures, 360
left anterior descending artery 
(LAD), 886, 887
left internal mammary artery 
(LIMA) graft, 890, 891
left ventricular failure, 265
Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease, 
571–3
leg length discrepancy, 452–3, 
514
leg ulcers, see venous leg ulcers
Leibovich score, 1419
leiomyoma
uterine (fibroids), 1514, 
1524–6
vein wall, 994
leiomyosarcoma
oesophagus, 1085
uterine, 1524
vein wall, 994
lens, subluxation, 678
lentigo, 599
lentigo maligna melanoma, 609, 
610
lenvatinib, 156
leprosy, 68–71, 882
Leriche’s syndrome, 943
letrozole, 156, 158, 878
Letterer–Siwe disease, 541
leukaemia
acute promyelocytic, 156
causes, 145, 146
chronic myeloid, 156
hairy-cell, 157
splenomegaly, 1182
treatment, 152, 155, 156, 157
leukoplakia, 761–2
bladder, 1452
hairy, 738
management, 767
proliferative verrucous, 763
speckled, 762, 767
leuprolide, 156
levator ani muscles, 1319, 1320
‘levator syndrome’, 1354
levobupivacaine, 273
Leydig cells, 1457, 1498
Leydig cell tumours, 1507
Lich–Gregoir technique, 1550
Lichtenstein’s repair, 1032, 1033
lifestyle factors, associated with 
cancers, 146
Li–Fraumeni syndrome, 144, 663, 
880
ligament injuries
grading, 464
sports, 464
ligaments of Cooper, 860, 1035
ligament of Treitz, 221
ligamentum teres, 511
ligament of Wrisberg, 518
Ligasure system™, 104
ligation of intersphincteric fistula 
tract (LIFT), 1366
lighting, operating theatre, 1563
lignocaine, 273, 274
limb ischaemia
acute, 955–6
chronic, 943–52
critical, 943, 949
limb malformations, congenital, 
564–6
limb reduction procedures, 
1011–12
limb revascularisation, 326
limbs
development, 561
normal variants of growth/
development, 562–4
limb salvage
bone tumours, 546–7
extremity trauma, 416–17
limb swelling
differential diagnosis, 1000
see also lymphoedema
limb transplantation, 649
limb volume measurement, 1007
limp, childhood, 589
linea alba, 1022
hernia through, 1039
stretching, 1022, 1023, 1037–8
lingual nerve, 782, 785
linsitinib, 158
Linxian, China, 1086
lipase, serum, 1223
lipid storage disease, 1184
lipodermatosclerosis, 973, 984, 
986
lipodystrophy, 595
lipoedema, 1006
lipofilling, 639
lipoma, 544, 936
retroperitoneal, 1065
lipomyelomeningocoele, 667, 668
lipoproteins, plasma, 1241
liposuction, 1011
lips
mucous retention cyst, 776
reconstruction surgery, 769
tumours, 765, 767–9, 777
Lisch nodules, 595
Lisfranc fracture–dislocation, 
197, 402–3, 524
Lisfranc’s ligament, 403
lithium, 261
hyperparathyroidism, 831
litholapaxy, 1435–6
lithotomy position, 1342
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1589 25/10/2017   10:44Index1590
lithotripsy, 1409, 1436
lithotrite, blind, 1435, 1436
liver
abscess
after trauma, 1162
amoebic, 57–60, 1169
pyogenic, 1168, 1168
acute failure, 1155–6
anatomy, 215, 1153–5
bile production, 1189
blood supply, 1153
chronic disease, 882, 1156–7, 
1166–8
embryology, 1155
fatty, 1157
functions, 1155
hydatid cyst, 65–7, 1169, 1169
imaging, 1157–60
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
1174
infections, 1168–9, 1173
treatment, 1173
metastases, 195, 214, 215, 
1112, 1158, 1160
colorectal cancer, 1173, 
1173, 1262, 1266
oesophageal cancer, 1089
packing, 1161
palpation, 1021
response to injury, 4, 7–8
simple cysts, 1168
trauma, 208, 373–4, 1160–3, 
1162
in children, 123
tumours, 1169–75
ablation, 1171
benign, 1171–2
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
1173–5
metastases, 1172–3
surgical approach, 1169–71
venous drainage, 1154
liver disease
polycystic, 1403
preoperative management, 259
liver flukes, 1207, 1208
liver function tests (LFTs), 256, 
1155
oesophageal cancer, 1089
prostate cancer, 1471
TPN, 288
liver transplantation, 1554–5
in acute liver failure, 1156
after variceal haemorrhage, 
1166
for ascites, 1166
cholangiocarcinoma, 1209
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1175
indications and patient 
selection, 1554
living donor, 1548
organ donation, 1542–8
outcomes, 1555
recovery from deceased donor, 
1545
technical complications, 1555
technique, 1554
living donor transplantation, 
1547–8
Lloyd-Davies position, 1336
lobectomy, 932
local anaesthesia, 273–5
locking screws, 392
lockjaw (tetanus), 417–18, 419
Loeffler’s syndrome, 60
log-rolling, 325–6, 341
lonafarnib, 157
London Blitz, 421
long head of biceps, rupture, 469, 
495–6
longitudinal muscle, anal canal, 
1340
longitudinal study, 164
long saphenous vein (LSV), 
grafts, 890, 891, 949
loose bodies
elbow, 500, 501
peritoneal, 1060
lordosis
cervical spine, 439, 440, 471
lumbar spine, 440, 441, 471
Lord’s operation, 1503
low back pain
discogenic, 476
epidemiology, 471
patient history, 472
physical examination, 472–3
see also back pain
lower limb
axes, 519
compartments, 524
compartment syndrome, 382, 
408, 955–6
length discrepancy, 452–3, 514
neurological examination, 473
oedema, 972–3
paediatric orthopaedics, 575–7
venous anatomy, 969–70
lower motor neurone (LMN) 
lesions, 473
lower oesophageal sphincter 
(LOS), 1067–8, 1076, 1077
botulinum toxin injection, 
223, 1099
incompetence, 1100
non-relaxing, 1097, 1098
postprandial transient 
relaxations, 1076
lower urinary tract symptoms 
(LUTS), 1375
BPH, indications for 
treatment, 1463–4
investigation
blood tests, 1377–9
endoscopy, 1379–85
urine-based tests, 1379
male, 1459
assessment, 1461–2
post-micturitional, 1375
storage, 1375
voiding, 1375
low-income countries
patient safety, 180
spinal care, 485–7
low molecular weight heparin 
(LMWH), 221, 258, 989, 
990
Ludwig’s angina, 756
Luer connection, 748
Lugol’s iodine, 815
lumbar hernia, 1042–3
lumbar puncture, subarachoid 
haemorrhage, 659
lumbar spine
clinical examination, 441–2
disc herniation, 476
fractures, 345, 351
lordosis, 440, 441, 471
lumbar sympathectomy, 276, 968
lumps
breast, 861–3, 869, 871
history and examination, 438
neck, 753–5
lunate, avascular necrosis, 508–9
lunate dislocation, 397
Lund and Browder chart, 621
Lundh test, 1214
lung cancer, 925–34
causes, 143, 145, 146
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155, 156
clinical features, 925–6
histological classification, 925
investigations, 926–30
molecular testing, 250
pathological types, 925
pleural effusion, 921, 922
risk factors, 925
screening, 158
surgical management, 931–4
survival rates, 926, 928
lung disease
obstructive, 917
restrictive, 917
lung resection, 932–4
broncoplastic, 933
complications, 933–4
metastases, 934
lungs
abscess, 937
anatomy, 914
benign tumours, 934
biopsy, 928–9, 930
blast injury, 430
fetal development, 914
fluid losses, 280
functional assessment, 916–18
hydatid disease, 67–8
inhalation injury, 618
metastases, 214, 934
sequestration, 937
transplantation, 1557
tuberculosis, 937
luteinising hormone (LH), 1457, 
1514
luteinising hormone-releasing 
hormone (LHRH), 1457
agonists, 869, 878, 1452, 1474
lymph
transport, 996
volume, 997
lymphadenitis
acute, 996–7
cervical, 77–8, 756, 757
lymphoedema, 1005
mesenteric, 1062
tuberculosis, 77–8, 757
lymphadenopathy, paratracheal, 
928
lymphangiography
direct, 1006, 1007
filariasis, 1004
primary lymphoedema, 1003, 
1004
lymphangiomas, 999
lymphangions, 996
lymphangiosarcoma, 879, 
999–1000
lymphangitis, 49, 597, 1005
acute, 996–7
lymphatic bypass, 1011
lymphatic drainage, manual, 
1009
lymphaticovenular anastomosis, 
1011
lymphatic system
anal canal, 1341
anatomy and physiology, 995–6
bladder, 1423
development, 995
gallbladder, 1189
imaging, 1006–7
rectum, 1319
stomach, 1107, 1135–6
thyroid, 800–1
lymph nodes
axillary, 860–1
cervical
adenitis, 77–8, 756–7
anatomy, 728–9, 800–1
dissection, 758–9, 784, 785, 
819
metastases, 729, 764
groin, 1031
mediastinal, 922, 929–30, 936
mesenteric, 855, 1062
resection
gastric cancer, 1137–8
neck, 758–9, 767, 784, 785, 
819
oesophageal cancer, 1092
retropharyngeal, 727
thorax, 914, 915
tumour infiltration, 213–14
lymphocoele, 1013
peri-transplant, 1551
lymphocytic gastritis, 1116
lymphoedema, 997–1000
acute inflammatory episodes, 
1008–9
after breast cancer treatment, 
879, 1005
and chronic venous 
insufficiency, 1005–6
conditions mimicking, 1006
definition, 997
investigation, 1006–7
malignancies associated with, 
999
management, 997, 1007–12
pathophysiology, 997–8
primary, 998, 1001–3
risk factors, 998, 999
scope of clinical problem, 997
secondary (acquired), 998, 
1003–6
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1590 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1591
severity classification, 997
symptoms and signs, 997, 998–9
lympho-fluoroscopies, 1007
lymphogranuloma inguinale, 
1325, 1369, 1496
lymphogranuloma venereum, 
1325, 1495–6
lymphomas
causes, 145, 146
classification, 147
cutaneous T cell, 157
gastric, 1140–1
head and neck, 741, 761
mediastinum, 935–6
molecular testing, 250
pancreas, 1238
salivary glands, 789
in Sjögren’s syndrome, 796
small bowel, 1251
spleen, 1185
thyroid, 816–17, 821
treatment, 152
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155, 157
lymphorrhoea, 1008
lymphoscintigraphy, 1006
lymph trunks, 996
Lynch syndrome, 251, 1260–1, 
1329, 1516
Maastricht classification, 1544
McBurney’s point, 1303, 1309
McCune Albright’s syndrome, 
566, 600
McFarlane staging, 843
McIndoe scissors, 1561
McKeown operation, 1092, 1093
McMurray’s test, 456
macrophages, 24, 1178
macula, 673
macular disorders, 683
mafenide acetate cream, 625
Maffucci syndrome, 537, 540, 565
Magenstrasses and Mill 
operation, 1148
magnesium, requirements, 281
magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA), 197, 199, 213, 947
magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP), 197, 198, 1215, 
1216
ascariasis, 60–1
cholangiocarcinoma, 1208, 
1209
chronic pancreatitis, 1231
gallstone, 1192, 1193
hydatid disease, 66
magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), 197–8
advantages, 197, 199
anal fistula, 1365
anatomical hemispherectomy, 
670
arthrography, 201–2, 496, 497, 
503
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 
1461
bone infections, 204
bone tumours, 536
brain abscess, 656, 657
brain tumours, 664, 665, 683, 
684
breast, 862
cardiac, 888
contraindications, 474
Crohn’s disease, 1244–5
cross-sectional, bladder cancer, 
1449, 1450
diffusion weighted, 197–8
disadvantages, 198, 199
ear, 706
enterography, 212, 1244–5
femoral head osteonecrosis, 
512, 513
HIV-associated parotitis, 787
knee, 520
liver, 191
liver disease, 1158
lymphoedema, 1006–7
multiparametic (mpMRI), 
1390, 1392
mycetoma, 73
myelofibrosis, 1185
oesophageal cancer, 1090
oral cancer, 766
osteomyelitis, 551
pancreas, 1215, 1216
paranasal sinus carcinoma, 724
parathyroid glands, 828
parotid gland tumours, 788, 
790
phaeochromocytoma, 845–6
pharynx, larynx, neck, 730, 
731
pituitary gland, 842
principles, 197
proctography, 1344
rectal cancer, 1332
shoulder, 489, 490
skier’s thumb, 503
spinal, 338–9, 343, 474
stomach, 1112
synovitis, 201
thyroid lymphoma, 821
trauma, 209
extremities, 385
urethral diverticulum, 1485
urinary tract, 1390
uterine fibroids, 1525
venous angioma, 993, 994
major adverse cardiovascular 
events (MACE), 257
major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC), 1537
malabsorption, 1255–6
bacterial overgrowth, 1255–6
bowel resection, 283
coeliac disease, 1255
cystic fibrosis, 1219
maladie de Roger, 908
malaria, 1180, 1181, 1187
malignant melanoma, 608–12
anus, 1371–2
choroidal, 676–7
cytology, 240
epidemiology, 608–9
familial cutaneous, 145
management, 156, 157, 611–12
molecular testing, 250
pathophysiology, 609
penis, 1493
premaligant lesions, 603, 604
staging, 611
malignant transformation, 141, 
142
malleolar flare, 972
mallet finger, 469
mallet toe, 458, 527
Mallory-Weiss syndrome, 1075, 
1128
malnutrition, 46, 260, 796
malnutrition universal screening 
tool (MUST), 280
malrotation with volvulus, 134, 
135, 1284–5
mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) inhibitors, 157, 
1420–1, 1540
mammography, 861, 880
mandible
advancement surgery, 688
fractures, 358–9
prognathism, 700, 701
reconstruction, 771, 772, 773
underdevelopment, 688, 701
Mangled Extremity Severity 
Score (MESS), 416
mannitol, 421
manometry
anorectal, 1278, 1343–4
oesophagus, 1068, 1069, 1070–
1, 1078, 1098
Mantoux test, 78
MANTRELS score, 1307
marathon runners, 467
Marfan syndrome, 458, 901, 903, 
908, 909, 1416
Marion’s disease, 1467
Marjolin’s ulcer, 29, 605, 984
martial arts, 466
Masaoka staging (thymoma), 935
Massive Transfusion Protocols, 
427
mastalgia, 869
mast cells, degranulation, 619
mastectomy
breast reconstruction, 879–80
lymphoedema after, 999
procedures, 876
mastitis
bacterial, 866–7
of infants, 865
periductal (duct ectasia), 
867–8
mastoiditis, 709
maxilla
advancement surgery, 696, 699, 
700, 701, 702
fractures, 360
reconstruction, 774, 778
underdevelopment, 701, 702
maxillary alveolus, cancer, 774
maxillectomy, 774, 775, 778
maxillofacial trauma
airway management, 323, 355, 
356
assessment, 356–8
bone, 356
craniofacial, 323, 362
emergency assessment/
treatment, 355–6
imaging, 357–8
major disasters, 417, 418, 421
mandible, 358–9
maxillary fractures, 360
naso-orbito ethmoidal 
fractures, 362
orbital fractures, 360–1
panfacial, 362–3
soft tissue, 356, 363
teeth, 363
zygomatico-orbito complex 
fractures, 359
May–Thurner syndrome, 991
mean arterial pressure (MAP), 
328, 337
Meckel’s diverticulum, 131–2, 
1044, 1116, 1282, 1304
excision, 132, 1253
features, 1252, 1253
meconium ileus, 134, 1219,  
1294
meconium peritonitis, 134
MED16383, 157, 158
media, in major disasters, 412
medial canthal ligament, injury, 
362
medial sural artery perforator 
(MSAP) flap, 769
median nerve
compressive neuropathy, 443, 
508
hand, 443
mediastinal lymph nodes
assessment, 929–30
metastases, 922, 936
mediastinitis, oesophageal 
perforation, 1074
mediastinoscopy, 929, 930
mediastinotomy, 929–30
mediastinum, 935–6
displacement, 367
injuries, 365
parathyroid adenoma, 830
primary tumours, 935–6
surgical approaches, 935
widened, 369
medical errors
common causes, 178
operative, 184
prevalence, 178
Medicines and Health Care 
products Regulatory Agency 
(MHRA), 166
Mediterranean fever, periodic, 
1055
MEDLINE, 163
medullary sponge kidney, 1386, 
1406
medullary thyroid carcinoma, 
816, 820–1
in MEN, 856, 858
MEFV gene, 1055
‘megaoesophagus’, 1096, 1097
megaureter, congenital, 1402
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1591 25/10/2017   10:44Index1592
meibomian cyst (chalazion), 
673–4
curettage, 685
meibomian glands, 672
Meige syndrome, 1002
Meigs’ syndrome, 1058
Meissner’s corpuscles, 592
Meissner’s plexus, 1067, 1107, 
1297
MEK inhibitors, 157
melaena, 1126–9
melanin, 592, 594
melanin spots, 1250
melanocytes, 592
melanoma
acral lentiginous, 610
amelanotic, 610
desmoplastic, 610
nodular, 609
superficial spreading, 609
see also malignant melanoma
MELD score, 1157
Meleney’s synergistic gangrene, 
50, 419, 597
Ménétrier’s disease, 1116
Menière’s disease, 714
meningiomas, 197, 480–1, 665, 
684
meningitis, 656
tuberculous, 658
meningococcal septicaemia, 588, 
589, 598
meningocoele, 484, 667
menisci, 518
discoid, 575
examination, 456
tears, 456, 467, 518–19, 520
meniscus (crescent) sign, 67
menstrual cycle, 1514–15
menstruation, 1514
dysfunctional bleeding, 
1516–17
Mental Capacity Act (2005), 
173, 267
6-mercaptopurine, 155, 1245, 
1532, 1539
Mercedes–Benz sign, 1190
Merkel cells, 592
Merkel cell tumour, 612
mesenchymal stem and stromal 
cells (MSCs), 35
mesenteric artery
inferior, 1258, 1319
superior, 1153, 1241, 1258
occlusion, 1253
mesenteric artery occlusion, 952, 
956, 1253
mesenteric ischaemia, 956, 1061, 
1253–4
mesenteric lymph nodes
metastases, 855
tuberculous adenitis, 1062
mesenteric vein, superior, 1241
mesentery
cysts, 1062–4
injury, 1061
misty, 1062
tumours, 1064
mesh hernia repairs, 1027–9
mesh rectopexy, 1324
mesoappendix, 1300, 1310
mesothelioma, 146, 922
metabolic bone disease, 205, 485
metabolic equivalent tasks 
(METs), 263–4
metabolic response to starvation, 
10, 278–9
metabolic stress response, 3–7, 
279
ebb and flow model, 5–6
mediators, 3–5
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) 
joints
contractures, 507
ulnar drift, 505
meta-iodobenzylguanidine 
(MIBG) SPECT, 846
metaphyseal fractures
distal radius, 403, 404
treatment, 394
metaplasia, 241–2
bladder, 1446, 1448, 1452
gastric, 1114
oesophagus, 241–2, 1081–3
metastases
adrenal glands, 842
bone, see bone metastases
‘cannon ball’ in testicular 
carcinoma, 1508
cerebral, 663, 664, 665
colorectal cancer, 195, 1158, 
1172–3, 1262
formation of, 141
imaging, 195, 199, 214, 215
liver, 195, 214, 215, 1089, 
1112, 1160, 1172–3
lung, 934
lymph nodes
melanoma, 612
mesenteric, 855
neck, 729, 758–9
ocular, 676
ovary, 1526
peritoneal, 1211
prostate cancer, 1471–2, 1474
spinal, 478
surgical resection, 150
metatarsalgia, 527–8
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) 
joints, 460
dislocation, 382
first
deformities, 458, 525–7
fusion, 526, 527
rheumatological disease, 529
metatarsus adductus, 562, 563
metformin, 158
methotrexate, 155, 1518
metopic synostosis, 687
metronidazole, 56, 59, 559, 
1272–3, 1475
Meyerding classification 
(spondylolisthesis), 478, 479
‘Mickey Mouse’ sign, 976
microbiology, surgical infections, 
44–7
microcephaly, 668
microdiscectomy, 476
microdochectomy, 865
microscopy, light, 237, 242–3
microsurgery, 645–6
microtome, 236, 237
microvascular free flaps, oral 
reconstruction, 774–5
micturition, control, 1424
middle ear
anatomy, 703, 704
disorders of, 708–12
midface fractures, 355, 356
midface retrusion, correction, 
696, 699, 700
mid-stream specimen of urine 
(MSSU), 1379
migraine, vestibular, 715
migrating motor complex, 1109
Milan criteria, 1175
milia, 598
‘milieu intérieur’, 2
military wounds, 49
blast injuries, 430–2
gunshot, 426, 426, 428–9
infection, 432–3
milk-alkali syndrome, 1406
Milligan–Morgan operation, 1357
Milroy’s disease, 1001
Milwaukee classification, 1232, 
1233
minimal access surgery
coronary artery bypass, 893
future directions, 117–18
oesophagectomy, 1092–3
parathyroidectomy, 829–30
thyroid, 814
see also laparoscopic surgery; 
robotic surgery
Mirels score, 548
Mirizzi syndrome, 1203
miscarriage, 1515
miserable malalignment 
syndrome, 562
mismatch repair (MMR) gene 
mutations, 249–51
mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK), 612
inhibitors, 154, 157
mitomycin C, 155, 1421, 1450
mitosis, drugs interfering with, 
155
mitotane, 843, 846
MitraClip®, 899
mitral valve
anatomy, 894
disease, 896–9
ischaemic, 889
prolapse, 1403
regurgitation, 896–7
stenosis, 897–9
repair, 898, 899
replacement, 899
Mittelschmerz, 1306
mixed venous oxygen saturation, 
17–18
Mohs’ micrographic surgery, 605, 
674
Molders’ click, 462
molecular diagnosis, 247–51
GISTs, 250
lymphoma, 250
and prognosis, 251
soft-tissue tumours, 250
and tumour staging, 251
moles (naevi), 599–602
Mondor’s disease, 867
Mongolian spot, 601
monoclonal antibodies
Crohn’s disease, 1245–6
renal cell carcinoma, 1420–1
transplantation, 1539–40
ulcerative colitis, 1269
Monro Kellie doctrine, 328–9
Montgomery’s glands, retention 
cyst, 864
Montgomery’s tubercles, 860
Morgagni hernia, 938, 939
morphine, oral, 276, 277
Morris retractor, 1560
Morton’s neuroma, 462, 527–8
mosquito, filariasis transmission, 
63
mouth opening, assessment, 261, 
262
movement
assessment, 438–9
descriptive terms, 438
movement disorders, 670
moya moya disease, 662
mucinous tumours
appendix, 1315, 1316
pancreas, 1234
mucocoele, lacrimal sac, 674–5
mucohaemorrhoidal prolapse, 
1322
mucosa-associated lymphoid 
tissues (MALT), 725, 1140
mucous cysts, 509
mucous retention cysts, 776, 779
Muir and Barclay formula, 624
Müllerian ducts, 1399, 1513
Müller’s muscle, 672
Müller’s sign, 901
multidisciplinary teams
bariatric surgery, 1146
breast cancer treatment, 875
cancer management, 148, 149
pain management, 276, 277
multilayer lymphoedema 
bandaging (MLLB), 1009–10
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 
1 (MEN 1), 144, 856–7
adrenals, 856, 857
anterior pituitary, 856, 857
epidemiology, 856
genetic screening, 857
operative therapy, 857
pancreas/duodenum, 848, 849, 
851, 1141–2
parathyroids, 826, 830, 832, 
856, 857
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 
2 (MEN 2), 856, 857–8
familial medullary thyroid 
carcinoma, 856, 858
type 2a, 144, 820, 832
type 2b, 144, 856, 857
multiple myeloma, 538, 544
treatment, 156, 547
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1592 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1593
multiple organ dysfunction 
syndrome (MODS), 15, 
47, 51
multiple sclerosis, 1430
mumps, 786
orchitis, 1501, 1506
murmurs
aortic regurgitation, 901
aortic stenosis, 900
mitral regurgitation, 897
mitral stenosis, 897
Murphy’s sign, 213, 1018, 1199, 
1303
muscle, ultrasound scanning, 195
muscle injuries, sports, 464
muscle power, grading, 438
muscle relaxants, 272, 273
muscle wasting
hands, 443, 502, 508
stress response, 6–7
muscular dystrophy, 482, 583, 
586
musculoskeletal disease, history 
taking, 436
musculoskeletal examination
ankle and foot, 457–62
elbow, 447–8
hand and wrist, 442–6
hip joint, 451–3
knee, 453–7
look, feel, move, 437–9
shoulder, 448–50, 451
spine, 439–42
musculoskeletal system
development, 561
normal variants, 562–4
mutation analysis, 247, 248
mutation detection, 249–50
myasthenia gravis (MG), 935
mycetoma, 71–5, 937
mycobacterial infections
hand, 504
musculoskeletal, 559–60
salivary glands, 795
see also leprosy; tuberculosis
Mycobacterium leprae, 43, 68
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis, 
1242
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
drug resistance, 560
drug therapy, 560
see also tuberculosis
mycophenolate, 1539
mydriasis, 331
myelodysplastic syndrome, 157
myelofibrosis, spleen, 1185, 1185
myeloma, 157, 538, 544
myelomeningocoele, 484, 667
myelopathy, cervical, 475
mylohyoid muscle, 782, 783
myocardial infarction (MI)
CABG following, 889
perioperative risk assessment, 
265, 915
surgery following, 257, 265, 915
myocardial injury, blunt, 370
myocardial ischaemia
minimising in surgery, 265
postoperative, 294
myocardial perfusion scanning, 
888
myocardial protection, 885
myocutaneous flaps, 594, 644–5
free transfer, 645–6
postoperative care, 646–8
myoglobinuria, 421, 631, 1376
myomectomy, 1526
myometrium, 1514
myopathy, critical illness, 7
myositis ossificans, 470
myotomy
endoscopic, 1099
Heller’s, 1098–9
myxoedema, 802
pretibial, 1006
myxoma, atrial, 911–12
nadolol, 813
naevi
atypical (dysplastic), 604
blue, 601, 602
compound, 599
giant congenital pigmented, 
603–4
halo, 600
intradermal, 599
junctional, 599
of Ota and Ito, 601–2
spider, 614
spindle cell, 600
Spitz, 599–600
strawberry (capillary 
haemangioma), 613
naevus sebaceous of Jadassohn 
(tricholemmoma), 602
naevus spilus, 600–1
nails
infections, 503–4
melanoma, 610
narrow band imaging, 233
nasal bones
anatomy, 716
fractures, 362, 717
nasal deformity, cleft lip/palate, 
699, 700
nasal microdebrider, 723
nasal polyps, 722–3
nasal septum
anatomy, 716
deformity, 718
perforation, 718–19
nasogastric tubes, 285
nasojejunal tubes, 286
nasolacrimal duct, 672
nasopharynx
anatomy, 725, 726
tumours, 733–5
National Confidential Enquiry 
into Surgical Deaths 
(NCEPOD), 266–7
National Institute for Health 
Care Excellence (NICE), 
174, 256
bariatric surgery guidance, 
1146
dyspepsia/GORD guidance, 
221
head injury guidelines, 330
lung cancer referral guidance, 
928
lung cancer treatment 
guidance, 932
peripheral arterial disease 
guidance, 948
trauma guidance, 313
National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR), 164
National Research Ethics 
Service, 162
National Spinal Injuries Centre 
(UK), 352
natural orifice transluminal 
endoscopic surgery 
(NOTES), 117, 118
nausea
postoperative, 298–9, 304, 305
laparoscopic surgery, 115
navitoclax, 158
neck
anatomy, 728–9
examination, 729
lumps, 753–5
root (base) injuries, 364
secondary carcinoma, 729,  
758
trauma, 755–6
neck dissection, 758–9
classical radical (Crile), 758, 
785
modified radical, 759
oral cavity cancer, 767
selective, 759
submandibular gland tumours, 
784, 785
suprahyoid, 784
thyroid cancer, 819
necrosectomy, pancreatic, 1227
necrosis, microscopy, 239
necrotising enterocolitis, 138
necrotising fasciitis, 30–1, 50
causes, 30, 419, 597
clinical signs, 30, 419, 597
management, 419–20, 597–8
necrotising otitis externa, 707–8
necrotising sialometaplasia, 778
needles, suture, 94, 95
needle-stick injuries, 52
Neisseria gonorrhoea, 1442, 1494, 
1518–19
Neisseria meningitidis, 598, 1186, 
1306
Nelson’s syndrome, 842
neoadjuvant therapy
oesophageal cancer, 1093–4
rectal carcinoma, 1332
neonates
acute intestinal obstruction, 
1293
bone and joint infections, 
587–8
brachial plexopathy, 586
cystic hygroma, 754–5
definition, 119
hip dysplasia, 568, 569, 570
intravenous fluids, 121
nephrectomy
calculus, 1409–10
live kidney donor, 1547–8
partial, 1420
radical, 1420
renal cell carcinoma, 1420
nephroblastoma (Wilms’ 
tumour), 138, 152, 156, 832, 
1421–2
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, 
191
nephrolithiasis, see renal calculi, 
1402
nephrolithotomy, percutaneous, 
1409
nephrometry scoring systems, 
1420
nerve blocks, 274–5
nerve grafts, 637
nerve healing, 25
nerve injury
extremity trauma, 383, 385, 
400
inguinal hernia repair, 1034
surgery, 85
thyroidectomy, 815
varicose vein surgery, 982
nerve monitoring, thyroidectomy, 
814
nerve regeneration, 25
nerve roots, 439, 471
compression, 476
nerve sheath tumours, 666–7
nerve stimulation procedures, 
276
Nesbitt procedure, 1490
netball injuries, 466
neural tube defects, 483–4, 667–8
neurinomas, 856
neuroblastoma, 138, 847
neuroendocrine cell system, 
852–3
neuroendocrine response to 
injury, 3–4
neuroendocrine tumours
cytology, 240
duodenum, 1141
immunohistochemistry, 246, 
247
lung, 925
rectum, 1328
relative organ distribution, 853
small bowel, 854–5
stomach, 853–4
neurofibromas
orbit, 673
spinal, 481
neurofibromatosis, 594–5
incidence, 687
type 1 (NF1), 145, 481, 595, 
600, 663, 845
type 2 (NF2), 145, 481, 663
neurogenic shock, 352
neurogenic tumours, 
mediastinum, 936
neurological deficit, head injury, 
331–2
neurological disease
foot, 531
mimicking prostatic 
obstruction, 146, 1462
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1593 25/10/2017   10:44Index1594
neurological examination
lower limb, 473
sensory testing, 438
spinal disorders, 472–3
upper limb, 473
neurolysis, cancer pain, 277
neuromuscular disorders, 583–6
brachial plexopathy, 586
cerebral palsy, 584–5
management principles, 583
muscular dystrophy, 482, 586
polio, 75–6, 583, 586
spina bifida, 586
surgical procedures, 584
neuropathic bladder, 1428–9
in children, 131
neuropathic foot, 532–3
neuropathic (neurogenic) pain, 
275, 276, 354
neurosurgery
functional, 668–71
paediatric, 667–8
vascular, 658–62
neurosurgical centres, 336, 337
neurotmesis, 385
neutrophils, 241, 242
Never events, 184
newborn and infant physical 
examination (NIPE) 
guidelines, 568
next-generation sequencing 
(NGS), 248, 249
nifedipine, 967, 1099
nil by mouth (NBM), 259
nilutamide, 156
nimodipine, 660
nipple, 860
cracked, 863
discharges, 864–5
Paget’s disease, 864, 873
reconstruction, 879–80
retraction, 863, 864
supernumerary, 863
niraparib, 158
Nissen fundoplication, 1079, 1080
nitric oxide (NO), 3–4
nitrogen, urinary losses, 7, 8–9
nitrous oxide anaesthesia, 271, 
919
nivolumab, 157
nociceptive pain, 275, 276
nocturia, 1375
nocturnal enuresis, 1375, 1432
NOD2/CARD15 gene, 1242
node of Cloquet, 1035
noise exposure, 713, 714
non-accidental injury (NAI), 
311, 589–90
factors raising suspicion, 138, 
316, 590
fractures, 590
head, 330
non-governmental organisations 
(NGOs), disaster relief, 411
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma 
(NHL), 147, 741, 789, 1251, 
1522
Nonne–Milroy disease, 1002
non-seminomatous germ cell 
tumours (NSGCT), 1506–9
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), 221, 276, 
1115, 1116, 1120
Noonan syndrome, 903, 1001
noradrenaline (norepinephrine), 
839
nose
anatomy, 716–17
packing, 719–20
reconstructive surgery, 643, 
648
trauma, 717–18
tumours, 723–4
nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB), 5
nuclear medicine, 199–200
bone scans, see bone scans
head and neck cancers, 766
hepatobiliary, 192, 1204, 1232
lymphoscintigraphy, 1006
octreotide scan, 855
parathyroid, 827
radiation exposure, 192
renograms, 1392–4, 1395, 1412
strengths, 200
thyroid, 804
trauma, 385
weaknesses, 200
nucleic acid amplification testing 
(NAAT), 1505
nursing care, burns patient, 627
Nuss procedure, 939
nutrition
following bariatric surgery, 
1151
and goitre, 805
and hypercalcaemia, 826
and intestinal resection, 283–4
requirements, 281–3
nutritional assessment, 279–80
nutritional deficiencies
after peptic ulcer surgery, 1124
after total gastrectomy, 1139
and oesophageal cancer, 1086
nutritional support, 284–8
burns patient, 626–7
chronic pancreatitis, 1231
Crohn’s disease, 1246
gastrostomy, 285–6
head injury, 337
multidisciplinary teams, 288
oesophagectomy, 1093
parenteral, 286–8
perioperative, 260
short bowel syndrome, 1256–7
tube feeding, 284–6
obesity
acute appendicitis in, 1304
associated cancers, 146
breast cancer risk, 871
central, 841
and day surgery, 303–4
definition, 1144
epidemic, 1144
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1173
laparoscopic surgery, 112–13
and oesophageal cancer, 1087
preoperative care, 260
surgery, see bariatric surgery
Obesity Surgery Mortality Risk 
Score (OS-MRS), 1146
observational study, 164
obstructive shock, 13
obstructive sleep apnoea, 732
and bariatric surgery, 1146
children, 732
craniofacial anomalies, 688
obesity, 260
obturator hernia, 1043–4
obturator test, 1303
occipital condyle fracture, 345
occipitoatlantal dislocation, 
345–6
occult hypoperfusion, 18
Ochsner–Sherren regime, 1312
Octopus® stabiliser, 893
octreotide, 284, 1124, 1129, 
1237, 1251
octreotide scan, 855
ocular coherence tomography 
(OCT), 683
oculomotor nerve, 672
odontoid (dens), 338
fractures, 346–7
odynophagia, 370, 1069, 1077
oedema
lower limb, 972–3
visceral, 9–10
oesophageal cancer, 1083, 
1085–95
adenocarcinoma, 1083, 1086, 
1087
in Barrett’s oesophagus, 1082–
3, 1087
causes, 145, 146
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155
clinical features, 1087
geographical variation, 1086 
–7
investigation, 1088–91
involving gastric cardia, 1087, 
1089, 1091
neoadjuvant therapy, 1093–4
non-surgical treatments, 1094
palliative treatment, 1094–5
pancreatic cancer, 1238–9
pathology and aetiology, 1083, 
1085–6
spread of, 1088, 1089
squamous cell carcinoma, 
1085–7, 1092
staging, 1088–9
stent placement, 224, 225, 
1094
surgery, 1092–3
tissue specimen, 236
tracheo-oesophageal fistula, 
1095
treatment principles, 1091–2
oesophageal motility disorders, 
1095
achalasia, 1095–9
in autoimmune disease, 1100–1
classification, 1095, 1096
functional pain, 1095
oesophageal body, 1099–101
pharyngeal/oesophageal 
diverticula, 1101–2
pharyngo-oesophageal 
junction, 1099
oesophageal speech, 753
oesophagectomy, 1092–3
oesophagitis
Candida albicans, 1103–4
Crohn’s, 1104–5
eosinophilic, 1100–1
reflux, 1076, 1078
oesophagogastric junction
adenocarcinoma, 1132
endoscopy, 222
oesophagogastroduodenoscopy 
(OGD), 221–5
complications, 224–5
indications, 221
peptic ulcer disease, 222–3, 
1117, 1119
therapeutic procedures, 221–4
oesophagojejunostomy, 1136, 
1137
oesophagoscopy, 1087, 1088
oesophagus
anatomy, 1067
Barrett’s, 221, 224, 233, 241–2, 
1077, 1081–3, 1087
benign tumours, 1084, 1085
cancer, see oesophageal cancer
congenital abnormalities, 133
congenital atresia, 133
corrosive injury, 1075–6
diverticula, 1101–2
drug-induced injury, 1076
foreign bodies, 132, 1071–2
infections, 1103–4
injuries, 370
investigations, 1069, 1070–1
jackhammer (nutcracker), 
1099–100
Mallory-Weiss tear, 1075, 1128
normal squamous mucosa, 1077
pain, 1095
perforation, 1072–4
in endoscopy, 225, 1073–4
pathological, 1073
spontaneous, 1072–3
treatment, 1074
pH recording, 1071, 1078
physiology, 1067–9
replacement, 1076
Schatzki’s ring, 1102–3
shortening, 1081
sideropenic dysphagia, 740, 
763, 1105
strictures
Barrett’s oesophagus, 1082
corrosive injury, 1075, 1076
dilatation, 1071
reflux-induced, 1078, 1080
surgical approaches, 1092
symptoms of disease, 1069
thermal recanalisation, 1071
varices, 222, 1126, 1127
haemorrhage, 1163–6
webs, 1105
oestrogen, 1514
office-based care, 301–2
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1594 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1595
off-pump coronary artery bypass 
grafting (OPCAB), 893
ofloxacin, 1520
olaparib, 158
olecranon bursitis, 500–1
olecranon fracture, 399
Olgilvie’s syndrome (colonic 
pseudo-obstruction), 1297–8
oligodendroglioma, 198
oligohydramnios, 567
Ollier disease, 537, 540, 565, 566
omentum
fat necrosis, 1225
functions, 1061
torsion, 1061
oncogenes, 140, 249
open disclosure, 181
open reduction and internal 
fixation (ORIF)
mandibular fractures, 358
maxillary fractures, 360
operating list, 267
operating table
patient positioning, 84
transfer to and from, 84
operating theatre
air and ventilation, 1563–4
etiquette, 1564
infection control, 52, 1564
location and spaces, 1563
sterile surgical field, 1563
surgical safety, 182–4
operation planning, trauma, 
319–20
opiates, 219, 276, 277
Opisthorchis viverrini, 1208
opportunistic infections, 47
postsplenectomy (OPSI), 1187
Opsite® sandwich, 379
optic nerve, 672, 673
meningioma, 684
oral cavity
anatomy, 760–1
minor salivary glands, 776–8
trauma, 357, 363
oral cavity cancer
anatomical sites, 761
buccal mucosa, 772
clinical features, 764–5
epidemiology, 760
field change, 762–3
floor of mouth, 771
hard palate/maxillary alveolus, 
774
investigations, 765–7
lips, 765, 767–9
mandibular alveolus, 772–3
pathology, 761
premalignant conditions, 763, 
767
retromolar pad, 774
second primary tumours, 762
staging, 764
tongue, 765, 766, 769–71
treatment, 767
oral contraceptive pill, 260, 1516
oral hypotonic solutions, 283
oral submucous fibrosis, 763
Oram, Samuel, 903
orbicularis oculi, paralysis, 69
orbit
anatomy, 673
bruising, 332, 359, 362
complications of rhinosinusitis, 
721–2
dermoid cysts, 673
fractures, 356, 360–1, 677–8
neurofibroma, 673
swellings, 673, 675–6
cellulitis, 675, 722
orchidectomy
prostate cancer, 1474
testicular maldescent, 1499
testicular tumours, 1508
orchidopexy, 125, 1499
orchitis, 1506
mumps, 1501
organ of Corti, 704
organ donation, 1542–8
after brain death, 1543
after circulatory death, 1543–4
evaluation of deceased donor, 
1544
living donors, 1543, 1547–8
organ recovery, 1544–7
organ perfusion, monitors, 17
organ preservation solutions, 
1546
orogastric tube, laparoscopic 
surgery, 115
oropharynx
anatomy, 726
disorders, 735–41
examination, 729
tumours, 740–1
orotracheal tube, 271, 272
orthodontic treatment, 695
orthognathic surgery, 696, 699, 
700, 701–2
orthopaedic wool, 984
Ortolani test, 568
os calcis, fractures, 402
Osgood–Schlatter disease, 575
Osler’s disease, 719, 720
osseous flaps, 646
ossicles, 703, 704
osteitis fibrosa cystica, 825
osteoarthritis (OA)
elbow, 499–500
foot and ankle, 528
gait abnormalities, 437
hand, 504, 506
hand deformity, 443
hip, 437, 513–14
knee, 519–20
shoulder, 493–5
osteoblastoma, 480, 539
osteochondritis dissecans (OCD)
elbow, 500
knee, 575
osteochondromas, 539–40, 565
osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle 
bone disease), 566–7
osteoid osteoma, 538–9, 542
treatment, 546
osteomas
nasal skeleton, 723
orbit, 675
osteomyelitis
acute, 556, 557
antibiotic therapy, 552
children, 587–9
chronic, 556–9
complications, 588–9
diagnosis, 551–2
epidemiology, 549
frontal bone (Pott’s puffy 
tumour), 657, 658, 722
imaging, 204, 205
management, 552
microbiology, 550
pathology, 550, 587–8
pyogenic vertebral, 481
osteophytes, 494, 495
osteoporosis
after spinal cord injury, 354
fractures
intra-articular, 395
limb, 406, 407
spinal compression, 349
imaging, 205
spine, 349, 485
osteoradionecrosis, 775
osteosarcoma, 535, 539
distal femur, 203, 535
parosteal, 539
treatment, 546
osteotomies
in ankylosing spondylitis, 481, 
482
around the hip, 515
hallux valgus treatment, 525–6
knee, 521
pelvic in DDH, 570, 571
osteotomy, bimaxillary, 701, 702
otalgia, referred, 705
otitis externa, 707–8
otitis media
acute, 708–9
chronic, 710–11
cleft lip/palate, 694–5
with effusion (glue ear), 
709–10
otosclerosis, 711
otoscope, 705
ototoxicity, 714
Otovent® device, 710
Ottawa ankle rules, 468
outcome indicators, 185
outcomes, spinal cord injuries, 
353
outpatient parenteral antibiotic 
therapy (OPAT), 552
ovarian cancer, 155, 1526–9, 
1529
ovarian cysts, 1526
management, 1526, 1527
torsion, 1306
ovarian tissue cryopreservation, 
1529
ovarian vein, incompetence, 985, 
986
ovaries
anatomy, 1514
benign tumours, 1526
endometriosis, 1521
ovulation, 1514
oxalate, urinary, 1406
oxaliplatin, 155
oxycodone, 276
oxygenation, children, 122
oxygen saturation, 918
mixed venous, 17–18
oxygen therapy, burns patient, 
620, 621
Oxyuris vermicularis, 1302
P13K inhibitors, 157
p53 gene, 140, 144, 249, 880, 
1261, 1329
pacemakers, diathermy, 103, 258
Pacinian corpuscles, 592
packed red blood cells, 21
packing
liver injury, 1161–2
nasal, 719–20
pancreas, 1227
Paget–Schrötter disease, 992
Paget’s disease, 407, 535, 537
extramammary, 603
nipple, 864, 873
pain
abdominal, see abdominal pain
after laparoscopic surgery, 115
amputations, 960
back, see back pain
breakthrough, 277
breast (mastalgia), 869
chest, 1069, 1077
knee, 467–8, 575–6
lymphoedema, 1008
neuropathic, 275, 276, 354
oesophagus, 1095
sympathetic nervous system 
activity, 276
syndromes, 670–1
types of, 275, 276
urological, 1017, 1305, 1374–5
painful arc test, 449, 450
pain management
benign disease, 276
chronic pain, 275–6
double effect, 173
malignant disease, 276–7
neurosurgical, 670–1
WHO ladder, 276
palate
anatomy, 690, 691
benign tumours, 777, 778
cleft, see cleft lip and palate
squamous cell carcinoma, 774
palbociclib, 158
palliative care, 150, 158–9
domains and interventions, 
159
gastric surgery, 1138
life and death issues, 173
oesophageal cancer, 1094–5
pancreatic carcinoma, 1237–8
palpation
abdomen, 1020–1
liver, 1021
spleen, 1021
pampiniform plexus, 1501
‘pan’, 760
Pancoast’s syndrome, 926
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1595 25/10/2017   10:44Index1596
pancreas
abscess, 1227–8
anatomy, 1212–14
calcifications, 1218, 1231
congenital anomalies, 1213, 
1219–20
development, 1213
effusion, 1228
endocrine tumours, 848–52, 
857
exocrine function tests, 1214
fistula, 1221
hydatid cyst, 65
imaging, 1215–19
injuries, 375, 1220–1
necrosis, 1226–7
non-functional endocrine 
tumours, 852
physiology, 1214
pseudocysts, 1216, 1221, 
1228–9
sphincterotomy, 228
transplantation, 1552–4
isolated islets, 1553–4
organ recovery from deceased 
donor, 1545, 1546
results, 1553
surgical technique, 1552–3
pancreas divisum, 1213, 1219
pancreatic ascites, 1228
pancreatic carcinoma, 1233–9
adjuvant therapies, 1237
ampullary, 1234, 1235, 1236, 
1237
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155, 156
clinical features, 1234–5
endoscopic ultrasound, 1218
ERCP , 1217
incidence, 1233
investigation, 1235
neoadjuvant therapy, 1238–9
palliation, 1237–9
pancreatic fluid histology, 1218
pathology, 1234
risk factors, 1233
surgical decisions, 1235–6
surgical resection, 1236–7
pancreatic duct, 1213, 1214
accessory (Santorini), 1213, 
1221
stones, 1216, 1217, 1231–2
stricture, 1230, 1231
pancreatic necrosectomy, 1227
pancreatitis, 1221–33
acute, 212, 1017, 1051, 1221–
30, 1306
aetiology, 1222
categories, 1221–2
clinical presentation, 1222–3
complications, 1226–9
incidence, 1222
investigation, 1223–5
management, 1225
mechanism of injury, 1221
outcomes and follow-up, 
1229–30
severity assessment, 1223–4
after ERCP , 228–9
autoimmune, 1230
chronic, 1215, 1217, 1218, 
1230–2
ERCP , 1217, 1218, 1232–3
hereditary, 1222, 1230
tropical chronic, 76–7, 1230
pancreatoduodenectomy, 1236–7
pylorus-preserving (PPPD), 
1236–7
Whipple’s procedure, 375, 
1141, 1209, 1236
panfacial fractures, 362–3
Panner’s disease, 500, 573
pannus, 504, 505
panobinostat, 157
pantalar fusion, 528
pantaloon hernia, 1030
paper-based records, 180–1
papillary carcinoma, thyroid, 809, 
816, 817, 818
papillary muscle, 894
papillary syringoma (eccrine 
poroma), 603
papillary tumours, bladder, 1384, 
1445, 1446
papillary warts (verruca vulgaris), 
599
papilloedema, 652, 659
papillomas
bile ducts, 1207–8
bladder (bilharzial), 1444, 
1445
laryngeal, 750
nasal, 723–4
nipple, 863
papillomata acuminata, female 
urethra, 1486
Papillon technique, 1337
Pap stain, 238
paracentesis
ascites, 1059, 1166
peritonitis, 1053
paracetamol, 115, 276, 1156
paradoxical respiration, 368
parafibromin 
immunohistochemistry, 836
paraganglioma
familial syndrome, 845
vagal, 758
paralytic ileus, 297, 1296–7
clinical features, 1297
management, 1297
post-appendicectomy, 1313–14
varieties, 1297
paranasal sinuses
anatomy, 716–17
endoscopic surgery, 723
imaging, 717
tumours, 146, 724
parapharyngeal abscess, 737
parapharyngeal space, 726–7
paraphimosis, 1377, 1489
parastomal hernias, 1043, 1255, 
1278
parathyroidectomy
hypoparathyroidism after, 
830–1
persistent hyperparathyroidism, 
836
primary hyperparathyroidism, 
829–30
recurrent hyperparathyroidism, 
836–7
secondary 
hyperparathyroidism, 
834–5
subtotal, 834
parathyroid glands
adenoma, 826–30
anatomy, 823–4
autotransplantation, 834
carcinoma, 832, 835–6
embryology, 800, 823–4
hyperplasia in MEN 1 
syndrome, 857
imaging, 826–8
insufficiency following thyroid 
surgery, 815
reimplantation in 
thyroidectomy, 814
role in calcium regulation, 824–5
see also hyperparathyroidism; 
hypoparathyroidism
parathyroid hormone (PTH)
functions of, 824–5
in parathyroid carcinoma, 836
venous sampling, 828
parathyroid hormone-related 
protein (PTHrP), 845
parathyromatosis, 836–7
paratyphoid, 1248, 1273
paraumbilical hernia, 1037, 1038
parenteral nutrition, 286
complications, 287–8
home (HPN), 1257
short bowel syndrome, 1256–7
venous access, 286–7
parietal cells, 1107, 1108, 1109, 
1115
Parinaud’s syndrome, 652
parity, and breast cancer risk, 871
Parkes–Weber syndrome, 991
Parkinson’s disease, 670, 1430, 
1459
Parkland formula, 624
Parks procedure, 1270–1
paronychia, 503
parotid duct, injuries, 363
parotidectomy, 789–92
complications, 792–7
extracapsular dissection, 792, 
793
radical, 792, 794
superficial, 789–92
parotid gland
anatomy, 785
inflammatory disorders, 786–7
tumours, 787–9
parotitis, 786, 787
Parry–Romberg disease, 615
patella
biomechanical role, 519
dislocation, 468
fractures, 401
tracking, 456, 576
patella alta, 457
patellar apprehension, 456–7
patellar tap test, 454
patellar tendon, 457
rupture, 457
tendinosis, 465
traction apophysitis (Osgood–
Schlatter disease), 575–6
patellofemoral joint, 
examination, 456–7
patellofemoral pain, 467–8
patent ductus arteriosus, 906
Paterson–Kelly syndrome, 740, 
763, 1105
Patey mastectomy, 876
pathological fractures, 406–7
healing, 548
metastatic bone disease, 548
simple bone cyst, 541, 542
pathology department, 234
patient advocacy, 182
patient-centred approach, 181
patient journey, 186–7
day-case surgery, 301, 306
elective surgery, 186
urgent surgery, 186
patient positioning
anal examination, 1342
laparoscopic surgery, 85, 266
safety, 84–5
thoracotomy, 930, 931
patient records, 180–1
Patient Reported Outcome 
Measures (PROMs), 164
patient safety, 177–84
concept underlying, 179, 180
diathermy use, 102–3
incident causes, 178
incident definitions, 178
incident prevalence, 178
Never events, 184
patient positioning, 84–5
Safety II approach, 184
strategies, 180–1
and surgeon, 182–4, 185
Paul–Bunnell test, 735, 738
Paul–Mikulicz procedure, 1295, 
1296
Pavlik harness, 569, 570
peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), 
916
peau d’orange, 63, 873, 874, 879
pectus carinatum (pigeon chest), 
940
pectus excavatum, 939
peer review, research, 165–6
peer-reviewed journals, 167–8
pelvic abscess, 1055, 1312
pelvic binder, 323, 324
pelvic congestion syndrome, 
985–6
pelvic exenteration, rectal 
cancer, 1337
pelvic fractures, 376–8
angiography protocol, 319
assessment, 325, 326, 377–8
classification, 377
haemorrhage, 324, 365, 376–7, 
378
imaging, 206, 378
management, 209, 378
‘open-book’, 378
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1596 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1597
urethral injury (male), 1480–1
pelvic inflammatory disease 
(PID), 1306, 1518–20
causes, 1518
diagnosis, 1518–19
treatment, 1519–20
pelvic inlet, 376
pelvis
anatomy, 376–7
spastic cerebral palsy, 585
pelvi-ureteric junction (PUJ), 
obstruction, 1410–13
pembrolizumab, 157, 158
penetrating injuries
abdomen, 372, 373–4
liver, 373, 1160, 1161
mechanisms of injury, 314–15
neck, 756
oesophagus, 073
radiographic markers, 372
renal, 1413–14
thorax, 368, 372, 938
penicillins, 43, 55–6, 419, 420
penile intraepithelial neoplasia 
(PeIN), 1492
penis
anatomy, 1486
chordee, 1491
congenital curvature, 1491
disorders in children, 126–7
inflammatory disorders, 1494–6
Peyronie’s disease, 506, 1377, 
1490
priapism, 1491
trauma, 1377, 1489
tumours, 1491–3
causes, 146
Penrose drains, 1227
pen sliding test, 443
pentoxifylline, 985
pepsin, 1108
pepsinogen, 1107
peptic stricture, 1077, 1078
peptic ulcers, 1116–26
aetiology, 1116
bleeding, 222–3, 1127–8
clinical features, 1118–19
duodenal, 1116, 1117
failure to heal, 1120
gastric, 1117–18
investigation, 1119
medical treatment, 1119–20
perforation, 1019, 1048, 1125–
6, 1305
pre-pyloric, 1118
pyloric, 1118
recurrent after surgery, 1123
sequelae of surgery, 1123–5
sites, 1116
stress, 1128
surgical treatment, 1120–3
peptide hormones, 1109, 1110
percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI), 886, 889
percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG), 223–4, 
285–6
percutaneous nephrolithotomy 
(PCNL), 1409
percutaneous posterior tibial 
nerve stimulation (PTNS), 
1351
percutaneous suprapubic 
litholapaxy, 1436
percutaneous transgastric 
cystgastrostomy, 1229
percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography (PTC), 
1159, 1193–4
percutaneous transluminal 
angioplasty (PTA), 948–9
perforation
hollow organ, 210–11, 1019
intestinal
colonic diverticula, 1274
imaging, 210–11
in polypectomy, 232
typhoid, 82–3, 1248
oesophagus, 225, 1072–4
peptic ulcers, 1125–6
upper GI tract in endoscopy, 
225, 1073–4, 1111
perforator ligation, 982
perianal abscess, 48
perianal Crohn’s disease, 1243, 
1247–8, 1363, 1370
pericardial effusion, 911
pericardial tamponade, 123, 
367–8, 911
pericardiocentesis, 368, 911
pericarditis, 911
constrictive, 1058
pericardium, malignant 
infiltration, 911
perihepatitis, 1049
perilunate dislocation, 382, 397
perilymph, 703, 704
perineal dissection, rectal cancer 
surgery, 1336
perineal hernia, 1043
perineal pain, 1374–5
periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain, 
244
periodic familial Mediterranean 
fever, 1055
perioperative mortality, 262, 
266–7
risk assessment, 915
periorbital bruising, 332, 359, 362
peripheral arterial disease
acute, 953–6
amputation, 957–60
chronic, 942–52
clinical features, 943–4
co-morbidity, 945
investigations, 945–7
non-surgical management, 
947–9
risk of cardiovascular event, 
947
risk factors, 945, 947
surgical management, 
949–52
diabetes, 947, 953
renal artery stenosis, 942
peripherally-inserted central 
venous catheter (PICC) 
line, 287
peripheral nerves
compression, 443, 501–2, 508, 
533
injuries, 383, 400
leprosy, 68–9
spinal roots, 439
tumours, 758
peripheral sensorimotor 
neuropathy (PSN), 953
peristalsis, visible, 1286
peritalar release, 578
peritendonitis, 463
peritoneal lavage, 373
peritoneum
embryology, 1047
functions, 1047–8
gallbladder metastases, 1211
inclusion cysts, 1060
innervation, 1018
loose bodies (mice), 1060
tumours, 1059–60
peritonitis, 1048–52
in appendicitis, 1302, 1308
bile, 1052, 1053
causes, 1048
clinical features, 1050
diagnosis, 1050–1
diffuse (generalised), 1049–50
localised, 1049, 1050
management, 1051–2
microbiology, 1048–9
periodic (familial 
Mediterranean fever), 1055
primary pneumococcal, 1053
prognosis, 1052
sclerosing encapsulating, 1061
spontaneous bacterial, 1053
tuberculous, 1053–4
periurethral abscess, 1495
perivenous tumescent 
anaesthesia, 978
periventricular leucomalacia 
(PVL), 584
Perkins line, 569, 585
peroneal tendons, 458, 461–2
subluxation, 529–30
tendinosis, 529
peroneus longus, 461–2
personalised (precision) 
medicine, 150
Perthes (Legg–Calvé–Perthes) 
disease, 571–3
pes cavus, 457, 458, 531
pes planus, 457, 458, 460
Peutz–Jeghers syndrome, 144, 
221, 599, 1233, 1250, 1284
Peyer’s patches, 82, 129, 1062, 
1241, 1282
Peyronie’s disease, 506, 1065, 
1377, 1490
Pfannenstiel incision, 1431
Pfeiffer syndrome, 687
phaeochromocytoma, 839, 936
aetiology, 844–5
clinical features, 845
diagnosis, 845–6
malignant, 846
MEN 1 syndrome, 856, 858
pathology, 845
in pregnancy, 846–7
treatment, 846
Phalen’s test, 444, 445, 508
phantom limb, 960
pharyneal pouch (Zenker’s 
diverticulum), 738–40, 
1101–2
pharyngo-oesophageal junction 
disorders, 1099
pharyngoscopy, 731
pharynx
anatomy, 725–7
examination, 729, 731
oedema, 744
phenoxybenzamine, 846
phenytoin, brain tumour seizures, 
663
phimosis, 1377, 1486
children, 127, 1486
‘physiological’, 1486
treatments, 1486–8
phlebectomy, 982
phleboliths, 1388
phlegmasia alba dolens, 988
phlegmasia cerulea dolens, 988
phlegmonous gastritis, 1116
phosphate, serum, 826, 833
phosphate binders, 834
phosphate calculi, 1434
‘phrenic’ pain, 1050
Phrygian cap, 1195
phyllodes tumour, 870
physiotherapy, burns patient, 627
phytobezoars, 1282
Pick’s disease, 1058
Pierre Robin sequence, 689, 691, 
701
pigeon chest, 940
pigmented villonodular synovitis 
(PVNS), 531
pigment gallstones, 1183, 1199
pilomatrixoma, 602
pilonidal sinus, 1347–9
pilosebaceous cysts, 599
pinna
cellulitis, 707
haematoma, 706–7
piperacillin, 56
pituitary, 3, 4
pituitary apoplexy, 666
pituitary function, traumatic 
brain injury, 337
pituitary–thyroid axis, 802
pituitary tumours, 664, 665–7
adenoma, 841, 842
chemotherapy agents, 156
in MEN 1 syndrome, 856, 857
prolactinoma, 156, 665–6
plagiocephaly, 668
plantar fascia, 524
plantar fasciitis, 533
plantar fibroma, 506, 531
plant toxins, 76, 146
plasma proteins, 624
plaster casts, 390–1
Plaster of Paris, 390
Plastibel (Hollister) device, 1488
plastic and reconstructive surgery
breast and nipple, 879–80
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1597 25/10/2017   10:44Index1598
burns, 627–8, 629–30
complex areas, 648–9
flaps, 637, 641–9
history, 633
implants and prosthetics, 
638–9
lip cancer, 768–9
oral tumours, 770–1, 772, 773, 
774, 774–5, 778
scope, 635–6
skin grafts, 634–5, 636–7, 
639–41
skin substitutes, 637
tissue expansion, 637–8
tongue, 770–1
toolbox, 635
vacuum-assisted closure, 638
vascularised composite 
allografting, 649–50
platelets, wound healing, 24
platelet transfusions, 21
plate and screw fixation, 392, 
393, 399
pleomorphic adenoma
minor salivary glands, 777–8
parotid gland, 787, 788, 790, 
793
submandibular gland, 784
plethysmography, 1007
pleura, 918–19
infection and empyema, 922, 
923
pleural effusion, 921–3
cytology, 243
exudates/transudates, 921
malignant, 921, 922, 926
pancreatitis, 1223
surgical management, 922–3
pleural fluid, physiology, 918, 921
pleural space, gases, 919
pleurectomy, 921
pleurisy, 1305
pleurodesis, 921, 922
Plummer–Vinson syndrome, 740, 
763, 1105
pneumaturia, 1376
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 1541–2
pneumonectomy, 932–4
pneumonia
lobar, 1305
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 1541–2
postoperative, 293
pneumoperitoneum, 210–11
laparoscopy, 112
pneumothorax, 205, 919–21
imaging, 205, 207
management, 920–1
open (sucking chest wound), 
368
recurrence, 919
spontaneous, 919
tension, 292, 366, 367, 919
in children, 122–3
podoconiosis, 1005
podophyllin, 1496
pointing sign, 1303
poliomyelitis, 75–6, 583, 586
pollutants, associated with 
cancers, 146
polyarteritis nodosa, 1416
polyclonal antibody, 1540
polycystic kidney disease, 1402–
3, 1549, 1550
polycystic liver disease, 1168
polymazia, 865
polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR), 247, 248
polyps
antrochoanal, 733
colonic, 230–1, 232
children, 131
gallbladder, 1210
gastric, 1130
intestinal, 1259
nasal, 722–3
rectal, 1326–7
endoscopic mucosal 
resection, 1327, 1328
juvenile, 1327
urethra, male, 1484
vocal folds, 749–50
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
arterial graft, 949, 951
Ponseti method, 578, 579
popliteal artery
aneurysm, 944, 966
thrombolysis, 956
popliteal pulse, 944
popliteal vein, 969, 970
entrapment, 991–2
porcine small intestinal mucosa, 
1367
porencephalic cysts, 667
porphyria, 1184
porta hepatis, 1153
portal gastropathy, 1129
portal hypertension, 1106, 1129, 
1163–6
and haemorrhoids, 1354
splenomegaly, 1184, 1184
portal pyaemia, 1314
portal vein, 1153, 1154, 1241
thrombosis, 1165–6, 1228
porto-enterostomy, Kasai, 135–6, 
1197
port site herniation, 115, 1023, 
1291
port-wine stain (capillary 
vascular malformation), 613
positive end expiratory pressure 
(PEEP), 273
positron emission tomography 
(PET), 200, 214, 215
with CT (PET/CT), 1091, 
1112, 1113, 1391–2, 1393
FDG, 214, 215, 551, 766, 
926–7, 929, 1159–60
ischaemic heart disease, 888
liver, 1159–60
lung cancer, 926–7
oesophageal cancer, 1091
oral cancer, 766
stomach, 1112, 1113
thyroid, 803
POSSUM score, 264
post-anal dermoid, 1347
post-anal dimple (fovea 
coccygea), 1347
post-cholecystectomy syndrome, 
1204
post-concussive syndrome, 330
postcricoid tumours, 741–2
posterior cruciate ligament 
(PCL), 454, 455–6, 518
posterior fossa malformations, 
668
posterior sagittal anorectoplasty, 
1346
posterior urethral valves, 137–8, 
1410, 1477–8
post-micturition dribble, 1375
postoperative care
amputee, 959–60
colorectal cancer, 1265
discharge and follow-up, 300
drainage, 99–101, 299
enhanced recovery, 299–300
follow-up, 300
hip replacement, 517–18
immediate, 290
laparoscopic surgery, 114–16
lung resection, 933–4
observations, 290, 291
plastic and reconstructive 
surgery, 646–8
standards, 290
tracheostomy, 747
wounds, 299
postoperative complications
abdominal surgery, 297–8
intestinal obstruction,  
1292
amputation, 960
appendicectomy, 1313–14
bleeding, 295
central nervous system, 295
cholecystectomy, 1203–5
classification, 292
day case surgery, 304–5
diathermy, 102–3, 258
ERCP , 228–9
gastrectomy, 1138–9
haemorrhoids, 1359–60
hip replacement, 517–18
laparoscopic surgery, 266
lung resection, 933–4
nausea and vomiting, 298–9, 
304, 305
neck surgery, 298
neurosurgery, 298
orthopaedic surgery, 298
plastic surgery, 298
pressure sores, 297
renal and urinary system, 
294–5
respiratory system, 292–3
splenectomy, 1186–7
thoracic surgery, 298
thyroid surgery, 815–16
total knee replacement, 522
tracheostomy, 747, 748
urinary retention, 295, 1429
vascular surgery, 298
wound dehiscence, 297
post-thrombotic syndrome 
(PTS), 984, 986, 990, 1000, 
1005
post-transplant 
lymphoproliferative disease 
(PTLD), 1542
post-traumatic reactions, 627
post-traumatic syringomyelia, 354
potassium, 281, 281, 840
Pott’s puffy tumour, 657, 722
pouch–anus anastomosis, 1271
pouch of Douglas, 1513, 1518, 
1522
pouchitis, 1271
Power’s ratio, 346
prasugrel, 220
praziquantel, 63, 66, 1169, 1445
prazosin, 1468
‘precision medicine’, 251
pregabalin, 276
pregnancy
appendicitis, 1304
breast carcinoma, 881
duration, 1515
early loss, 1515
ectopic, 1306, 1517–18
phaeochromocytoma in, 846–7
pyelonephritis, 1403
ureters/renal pelves dilatation, 
1411
urinary tract infection, 1441
preherpetic pain, 1306
Preiser’s disease, 508–9
premalignant lesions
oesophagus, 241–2, 1081–3
oral, 763, 767
skin, 603, 604
preoperative assessment, 254–6
airway, 261, 262
anaemia, 258–9
cardiovascular disease, 256–8
cholecystectomy, 1203
coagulation disorders, 260
day case surgery, 304
emergency surgery, 261–2
endocrine and metabolic 
disorders, 260
gastrointestinal disease, 259
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1175
high-risk patient, 262–8
history taking, 254–5
investigations, 256
lung cancer treatment, 931–2
medical examination, 255–6
neurological and psychiatric 
disorders, 260–1
rectal carcinoma surgery, 
1331–2
renal disease, 259
respiratory disease, 259
splenectomy, 1185
UTI, 260
preoperative preparation
bowel, 98, 1263, 1334
fasting, 10
skin, 52, 1564
prepuce, see foreskin
preputioplasty, 1487
presbycusis, 712–13
prescribing, safety, 182
pressure sores, 29–30, 297, 
615–16, 953
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1598 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1599
prevention in surgery, 84
spinal cord injuries, 340, 354
staging system, 29
preterm infant
definition, 119
fluids, 121
pretibial myxoedema, 1006
priapism, 332, 1491
PRICE protocol, 468, 470
prilocaine, 273
primary biliary cirrhosis, 1167–8
primary hyperaldosteronism 
(PHA/Conn’s syndrome), 
840–1
primary hyperparathyroidism 
(pHPT), 825–32
diagnosis, 826–8
hypercalcaemia, 825–6
management, 829–31
in MEN 1, 830, 857
in MEN-2, 858
pathology, 826
presentation, 825
renal stones, 1406
primary sclerosing cholangitis 
(PCS), 1159, 1167, 1167, 
1206–7, 1208
primary survey
head injury, 331–2
severe trauma, 323–6
primum non nocere, 177
Pringle’s manoeuvre, 374, 374, 
1161, 1171
probability (P-values), 167
process measures, 185
processus vaginalis, 124, 125, 
1497
patent, 125, 1023, 1032, 1376, 
1503
procidentia (complete rectal 
prolapse), 1322–4
proctalgia, 1320
proctalgia fugax, 1353–4
proctitis, 1267, 1324–6
proctocolectomy
and ileostomy, ulcerative 
colitis, 1270–1
restorative with ileal pouch–
anal anastomosis (RPC), 
1260, 1270–1
proctography, 1278, 1344, 1345
proctoscopy, 1320, 1343
professionalism, 181
professional performance
monitoring, 174–5
quality improvement, 186–8
progesterone, 1514
prognathism, 700, 701
prolactin, 3
prolactin inhibitors, 869
prolactinomas, 156, 665–6
prolapse
rectal, 1288, 1320, 1321–4
urethra, 1485, 1522, 1523
uterovaginal, 1522–3
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), 
844
propofol (di-isopropyl phenol), 
269
propranolol, 813, 815
proptosis, 361, 673, 675–6
propylthiouracil, 812
prostanoids, 4
prostate
abscess, 1475
anatomy, 1456–7
benign hyperplasia, see benign 
prostatic hyperplasia
biopsy, 1385, 1387, 1470–1
transperineal template 
(TPTBP), 1387–8
TRUS, 1385, 1387
calculi, 1468
embryology, 1456
physiology, 1457–8
ultrasound imaging, 1385–7
prostate cancer, 1468–74
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155–6
clinical features, 1470
early diagnosis, 1462
epidemiology, 1468–9
histological classification, 1469
investigation, 1470–2
bone scans, 1392, 1393–4, 
1472
MRI scanning, 1390, 1392
pathology, 1469
risk prediction models, 1378
screening, 1469
spread of, 1469
staging, 1469–70
treatment
advanced disease, 1473–4
early disease, 1472–3
prostatectomy, 1473
tumour markers, 1378–9
prostatectomy
in BPH, 1463
reoperation, 1466–7
complications, 1431, 1466–7
counselling, 1464
indications for in LUTS/BOO, 
1464
radical, 1473
retropubic, 1465
transperineal, 1465
transurethral (TURP), 1464–5
transvesical, 1466
prostate health index, 1379
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 
1378–9, 1457–8, 1462
age-specific reference ranges, 
1378
derivatives, 1378–9
drugs influencing, 1378
kinetics, 1379
levels in prostate cancer, 1378, 
1457, 1471
measurement in LUTS/BPH, 
1462
use in screening, 1378, 1469
prostatic plexus, 1423
prostatitis, 1474–5
acute, 1474–5
chronic, 1475
prosthetic valves
biological, 895
dysfunction and complications, 
895–6
endocarditis (PVE), 895–6
mechanical, 258, 895
protease inhibitors, 156
protein
daily requirements, 282
metabolism in stress response, 
6–7
total body mass, 8–9
protein turnover, 8
Proteus spp., 56, 481, 1403,  
1442
Proteus mirabilis, 1404
prothrombin complex 
concentrates, 21
proton pump, 1107, 1108
proton pump inhibitors, 284, 
1077–9, 1114, 1119
proto-oncogenes, 249
provocative discography, 474, 
475
proximal femoral focal deficiency 
(PFFD), 564
proximal interphalangeal (PIP) 
joints
arthritis, 443, 506
contractures, 507
prucalopride, 1279
pruritus ani, 1361, 1362
pseudarthrosis, congenital of 
tibia, 576, 577
pseudoachalasia, 1097
pseudocysts
pancreas, 1216, 1221, 1228–9
spleen, 1179, 1179
Pseudomonas spp., 45, 56, 433, 
559, 1442
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 56, 708
pseudomyxoma peritonei, 1059–
60, 1316
classification, 1316
treatment, 1317
pseudo-obstruction, intestinal, 
1297–8
pseudopolyps, inflammatory, 1327
pseudotumour cerebri (idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension), 
655
psoas abscess, 1065
psoas sign, 1303
psoriatic arthritis, 506
psychiatric medications, 261
psychoneurosis, pruritus ani, 1361
psychosocial interventions, 159
ptosis, 672
bilateral, 675–6
pubic bones, separation, 1424
publication, research, 168
Pubmed, 163
Pubmed Central, 163
puborectalis muscle, 1318, 1339, 
1343
puerperal sepsis, 43
pulmonary contusion, 370–1
pulmonary embolism, 292, 296, 
986–91
investigations, 988–9
prophylaxis, 989, 990
treatment, 990
Wells criteria, 989
pulmonary function tests, 916–18
pulmonary hypertension, VSD, 
908
pulmonary sequestration, 937
pulmonary stenosis, 904
pulmonary venous drainage, total 
anomalous, 905
pulse rate, shock, 14
pulses
aortic, 1020
arterial disease, 944
extremity trauma, 383, 404
lower limb, 458, 459
waterhammer, 901
PUMA 560, 108
puncture wounds, 27
pupil examination, head injury, 
331
purpura fulminans, 598
pus
joint, 586–7
staphylococcal, 44
pyelonephritis
acute, 1305, 1403
chronic, 1404
emphysematous, 1404
in pregnancy, 1403
xanthogranulomatous, 1404–5
pyeloplasty, 137, 1412–13
pylephlebitis, 1314
pyloric mucosal diaphragm, 1130
pyloric stenosis
adult, 1129, 1130
infantile hypertrophic, 127–8
pyloric stricture, dilation, 223, 
224
pyloromyotomy, Ramstedt’s, 128
pyloroplasty, Heineke–Mikulicz, 
1122
pylorus-preserving 
pancreatoduodenectomy 
(PPPD), 1236–7
pyoderma gangrenosum, 596
pyogenic granuloma, 614
pyogenic infections, spine, 481
pyogenic liver abscess, 1168
pyonephrosis, 1403, 1440
pyrexia
appendicitis, 1303
intestinal obstruction, 1286
postoperative, 296–7
surgical infection, 54
pyuria, 1403
quadriceps
lipoma, 544
rupture, 383, 467
tears, 467
quality improvement, 185–8
investment and education, 188
pathway, 187–8
pioneers of, 186
tools used, 187
quality measures, 185
Quincke’s sign, 901
quinolones, 1505
quinsy, 735–6
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1599 25/10/2017   10:44Index1600
radial artery, coronary artery 
bypass graft, 890
radial club hand, 580
radial forearm free flap, 774–5
radial head, congenital 
dislocation, 580, 581
radial nerve
hand, 443
injuries, 383, 400
radiation, see ionising radiation; 
ultraviolet radiation
radiation proctitis, 1325
radicular artery of Adamkiewicz, 
471
radiculopathy, cervical, 473, 474
radiofrequency ablation (RFA)
Barrett’s oesophagus, 1083
liver tumours, 1171
renal carcinoma, 1420
varicose veins, 978–9
radiography
abdominal wall hernia, 1025
cervical spine, 342–4
dynamic imaging, 343
checking radiographs, 191
chest, see chest radiography
current legislation, 191–3
extremity trauma, 384
gallbladder, 1190, 1191
hazards of, 191
hip, avascular necrosis, 512, 
513
intestinal obstruction, 1288–90
KUB, 1388
major trauma, 205–6
mammography, 861, 880
oesophagus, 1070
peritonitis, 1051
pharynx, larynx, neck, 730
principles, 193–4
prostate cancer, 1471–2
responsibilities, 192
shoulder, 489
spine, 474
typical radiation doses, 192
wasteful use, 192
radioiodine, 812, 819–20
radiologist, 190
radiology, intervention, 380
radionuclide imaging
see nuclear medicine
biliary tract, 1192
gallbladder, 1192, 1204
ischaemic heart disease, 888
spleen, 1178
thyroid, 804, 808
radiotherapy, 153–4
bladder cancer, 1451
breast carcinoma, 877
combined with chemotherapy, 
157–8
five ‘Rs’, 154
gastric cancer, 1139
oesophageal cancer, 1094
oral cancer, 767, 775
processes involved in, 153
prostate cancer
advanced disease, 1474
early disease, 1473
rectal carcinoma, 1337
radioulnar synostosis, 580
radius
distal fractures, 398
paediatric, 403, 404
shaft fractures, 398–9
RAF inhibitors, 157
Ramirez’s component separation 
technique, 1041
Ramsay Hunt syndrome, 715
ramucirumab, 158
randomised controlled trials 
(RCTs)
bariatric surgery, 1145, 1147
definition, 164
randomised studies, 164–5
Ranson score, acute pancreatitis, 
1224
ranula, 779
rapid sequence induction (RSI), 
270
Ravitch procedure, 939
Raynaud’s disease, 967
Raynaud’s syndrome, 967
reactionary haemorrhage, 19, 305
rebound tenderness, 1020
rectal arteries, 1319, 1341
rectal biopsy, amoebiasis, 1272
rectal bleeding, 1319, 1329
children, 131–2
rectal carcinoma, 1329
rectal carcinomas, 1328–38
chemotherapy, 1337–8
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155
clinical features, 1329
differential diagnosis, 1330
epidemiology, 1328
investigation, 1329–30
local recurrence, 1338
neoadjuvant therapy, 1332
pathogenesis, 1328–9
radiotherapy, 1337
stages of progression, 1330–1
surgery
abdominoperineal excision, 
1336
anterior resection, 1332–3, 
1334–6
bladder dysfunction, 1429
extensive, 1337
liver resection, 1337
local, 1334
patient assessment, 1331–2
preoperative preparation, 
1334
principles of, 1332–4
results of, 1338
types of spread, 1330
rectal evacuation disorder, 1324
rectal irrigation, 1279
rectal prolapse, 1320, 1321–4
children, 131, 1321–2
full-thickness, 1322–3
mucosal, 1321–2
surgical treatment, 1323–4
vs intussusception, 1288
rectal veins, 1319, 1341
rectobulbar fistula, 1346
rectocoele, 1522, 1523
rectoperineal fistula, 1345–6
rectopexy
abdominal, 1323–4
perineal, 1323
rectourethral fistula, 137
rectovestibular fistula, 1345, 1346
rectum
adenoma, 1259
benign lesions, 1327–8
blood supply, 1319
discharge, 1319
diversion of urine into, 1453
embryology, 1319
examination, 1320
anal stricture, 1370
digital, 1320
prostate disease, 1461, 1470, 
1471
rectal cancer, 1329–30
sigmoidoscopy, 1320, 1330
in spinal injury, 332
foreign bodies, 1321
injuries, 375, 1321
lymphatic drainage, 1319
pain (proctalgia fugax), 1353–4
polyps, 1326–7
surgical anatomy, 1318
symptoms and signs of disease, 
1319–20
varices, 1354
venous drainage, 1319
rectus abdominis muscle, 1022, 
1023
rectus abdominus free flap, 771, 
774
rectus sheath, haematoma, 1023, 
1306
recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN), 
727, 801–2
identification in 
thyroidectomy, 813–14
intraoperative monitoring, 814
paralysis after thyroidectomy, 
815
5a-reductase, 1457
5a-reductase inhibitors, 1378, 
1464
refeeding syndrome, 288
reflux gastritis, 1115
reflux oesophagitis, 1076, 1078
refusal of treatment, 170–1, 173, 
259
regional anaesthesia, 274–5
regorafenib, 156
regurgitation, 1069, 1077
risk in surgery, 259
rehabilitation
limb fractures, 394
spinal injuries, 353
sports injuries, 470
Reissner’s membrane, 703, 704
Reiter’s disease, 681, 1494–5
relief efforts, major disasters, 
409–13
remote presence systems, 118
renal artery
occlusion, 1416
organ donor, 1550
stenosis, 942, 952
balloon dilatation, 949
renal calculi, 213, 825, 1386, 
1402
aetiology, 1405–7
clinical features, 1407
management, 1407–10
renal cell carcinoma, 1416–21
ablative therapies, 1420
clear cell, 1416, 1419
diagnosis, 1417, 1419
hereditary syndromes 
associated with, 1416, 
1418
incidence, 1416
medical management, 156, 
157, 1420–1
metastases, 547, 548
non-clear-cell, 1416, 1416
pathology, 1419
risk factors, 1417
staging, 1419
surgery, 1419–20
renal colic, 213, 1017, 1305, 
1374, 1407
renal cysts, 1386, 1389–90, 1391
renal failure
after AAA repair, 966
end-stage, 1403, 1549
polycystic kidney disease, 1403
renal function
contrast media, 191
raised intra-abdominal 
pressure, 380
response to injury, 9
shock, 12
renal injuries, 375–6, 1413–14
renal scarring, 1404
renal secondary 
hyperparathyroidism, 833–5
renal tubular acidosis, 1406
renal vein
anatomy, 1398
thrombosis, 1416
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
axis, 9, 12, 839, 840
renography, isotope, 1392, 1394, 
1404, 1412
reperfusion injury, 13, 421
crush syndrome, 421
intestinal obstruction, 1291
reproductive physiology, female, 
1514–15
Rescue and Preparedness in 
Disasters (RAPID), 411
Research Ethics Committee 
(NHS), 166
resection margins
bone tumours, 546
malignant melanoma, 611
soft tissue tumours, 545, 548
respiratory disease, preoperative 
care, 259
respiratory failure, high-risk 
patients, 265–6
respiratory rate, shock, 14
resternotomy, emergency, 912
resting energy expenditure, 279
rest pain, 943
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1600 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1601
resuscitation, 15–18
assessment of response to, 326, 
327
cardiac arrest after cardiac 
surgery, 912–13
damage control (DCR), 20, 
379, 427
resveratrol, 158
reticular vein, 972, 973
retina
anatomy, 673
detachment, 683, 683
dialysis, 678, 679
retinal artery, occlusion, 682, 
954–5
retinal haemorrhages, 678, 679
retinal vein, occlusion, 682
retinoblastoma, 144, 676
RET proto-oncogene, 136, 144, 
856, 857, 858
retractors, 1560–1
retrobulbar haemorrhage, 361
retrognathia, 688, 701
retrograde ureterogram, 1385
retrograde ureteropyelogram, 
1411, 1412
retrograde urethrogram, 206
retroperitoneum
abscess, 1065
fibrosis, 1064–5, 1413
haematoma, 964, 965
injuries, 376
tumours, 1065–6, 1414, 1509
zones, 376
retropharyngeal abscess, 737
retropharyngeal space, 727
retroviruses, in stem cell therapy, 
36–7
rhabdomyoma, 912
rhabdomyosarcoma, 156
rhesus system, 21, 22
rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
arteritis, 967
atlantoaxial subluxation, 481
elbow, 499
foot, 529
hand, 443, 504–5
preoperative care, 261
shoulder, 493
wrist synovitis, 201
rhinophyma, 603
rhinoplasty, cleft lip/palate, 699, 
700
rhinosinusitis
acute, 720–2
chronic, 722–3
rib hump, 581
rib notching, 906
ribs
children, 119
fractures, 366, 368
Richter’s hernia, 115, 1024, 1281, 
1286, 1291, 1314
rickets, 566, 567
biliary, 1196
rifampicin, 560
rifles, 428
right coronary artery (RCA), 
886–7
right ventricular hypertrophy, 
904
rigidity, abdomen, 1020
Rigler’s triad, 1282
Ringer’s lactate solution, 373, 
624
ring fixator, 390, 392, 393
risk assessment
bariatric surgery, 1146
major thoracic surgery, 915–16
patient safety, 179
Risk of Malignancy Index, 1527
risk management
clinical, 181
high-risk patient, 263
tissue analysis, 235–6
rituximab, 157, 1540
rivaroxaban, 990
road traffic accidents (RTAs), 
310–11
fatalities, 310, 311
head injuries, 328
mechanisms of injury, 313, 314
seatbelt injuries, 123, 351, 
1061
severe injuries, 325
survivors, 310–11
total casualties, 310
robotic surgery, 108–10
benefits, 108–9
disadvantages, 116
future development, 118
image-guided, 108
rectal cancer, 1334, 1335
systematic overview, 110
teleoperated, 108
thyroid, 814
rocuronium, 272, 273
rodent ulcer, see basal cell 
carcinoma
ronaciclib, 158
ropivacaine, 273
rotator cuff
anatomy, 488
calcific tendinitis, 493
tears, 202, 491–2, 494
tendonitis, 469, 490, 491
round ligament, 1029
roundworm, see ascariasis
Roux-en-Y 
choledochojejunostomy, 63, 
1204
Roux-en-Y gastrectomy, 1121, 
1124, 1126
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 1148
Roux-en-Y oesophagojejunotomy, 
1136, 1137
Roux-en-Y 
pancreatojejunostomy, 1221
Rovsing, Neils Thorkild, 1303
Rovsing’s sign, 1303
rowing injuries, 465
Royal College of Radiologists 
(RCR), 191
rucaparib, 158
rugby injuries, 465
rule of 2’s, 384
runners, injuries, 467
running, 525
Rutherford Morison’s incision, 
1309
Rutherford Morison’s pouch, 
1056
sacral nerve blockade, 1434
sacral nerve stimulation, 1279, 
1350–1, 1434
sacroiliac joint, 377
sacroiliitis, 1267
safeguarding, 138
sagittal synostosis, 687
St Mark’s perineal retractor, 1561
saline
hypertonic, 624
normal, 281
saliva, composition, 281
salivary glands
ectopic tissue, 780
minor, 776–8
sublingual, 778–9
submandibular, 780–5
tumours, 789, 793
Salmonella enteritidis, 1248, 1273
Salmonella typhi, 82–3, 1201–2, 
1248, 1273
Salmonella typhimurium, 1201–2
salmonellosis, 1248, 1273
salmon patch, 613
salpingectomy, 1517, 1518
salt, dietary, 1131
Salter–Harris fractures, 387, 403
sample size, clinical studies, 164
saphena varix, 972, 973, 975, 
1031
saphenofemoral junction (SFJ), 
969, 975
competence assessment, 976
ligation, 981
saphenopopliteal junction (SPJ), 
970
ligation, 981–2
saphenous nerve, injury, 982
saphenous veins, 969–70
incompetence, 975
long vein grafts, 890, 891, 949
stripping, 981–2
sarcoidosis, 795, 1406
sarcomas
breast, 882
chemotherapy and biological 
agents, 155–6
Ewing’s, 542
retroperitoneal, 1065–6
soft-tissue, 537, 548
Savage’s decompressor, 1291
Savary–Guillard bougie dilators, 
223
scaffolds, tissue engineering, 
38–40
scala vestibuli, 703, 704
scald burns, 619, 622, 628
scalpel blades, sizes/shapes, 85
scaphocephaly, 668, 669
scaphoid
avascular necrosis, 508–9
fracture, 382, 396–7
scapula, 488
Scarf osteotomy, 525–6
Scarpa’s triangle, 1043
scars
avoidance, 31–2
burns patient, 628, 629
keloid, 31, 815
limbs, 382
prior abdominal surgery, 112, 
1023
thyroid surgery, 815
Schatzki’s ring, 1102–3
Scheuermann’s kyphosis, 483, 
582
Schistosoma haematobium, 1182, 
1443–4
Schistosoma mansoni, 1182, 1326, 
1444
schistosomiasis, 146
bladder, 1443–5
geographical distribution, 1443
mode of infection, 1443–4
rectal, 1326
splenomegaly, 1182
treatment, 1445
Schlemm’s canal, 673
Schober’s test, 472
Schwann cells, 594, 758
schwannomas, 481, 758, 936
vestibular, 666–7, 706
sciatica, 476
sciatic nerve, tests, 441–2
sclera, 672
scleritis, 682
scleroderma, oesophagus, 1100
sclerosing encapsulating 
peritonitis, 1061
sclerotherapy
haemorrhoids, 1356, 1357
oesophageal/gastric varices, 
1164
varicose veins, 979–80
scoliosis, 581–2
classification, 581
congenital, 482
functional, 441
idiopathic, 482, 483, 581–2
neuromuscular, 482, 484
structural, 441
Scottish Improvement Hub, 187
screening
breast carcinoma, 880
cancer, 146–7
colorectal cancer, 230, 1262
lung cancer, 158
prostate cancer, 1378, 1469
using histology/cytology, 243
screw fixation, 390, 392, 393
scrotal hernia, 1030, 1031
scrotum
acute, 125–6
carcinoma, 1511
elephantiasis, 1510
Fournier’s gangrene, 50, 
1509–10
idiopathic oedema, 1501
sebaceous cysts, 1510–11
trauma, 1499
scrubs, 1564
SDH-associated kidney cancer, 
1418
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1601 25/10/2017   10:44Index1602
seatbelt injuries, 351, 1061
children, 123
sebaceous (epidermal) cysts, 
598–9
scrotal skin, 1510, 1511
sebaceous glands, 593
seborrhoeic keratosis (basal cell 
papilloma), 599
secondary survey, 326
sedation, gastrointestinal 
endoscopy, 219, 1111
Seddon classification, 385
seed ganglion, 509
segmentectomy, lung, 932
seizures
after head injury, 337
brain tumours, 662–3
Seldinger technique, 1480
selective dorsal rhizotomy (SDR), 
584
selective oestrogen receptor 
antagonists (SERMs), 485, 
831
selective progesterone receptor 
modulator (SPRM), 1525
seliciclib, 158
selumetinib, 157
seminal vesicles
cyst, 1476
diverticulum, 1476
normal ultrasound, 1471
prostate cancer spread, 1469
tuberculosis, 1475, 1506
seminal vesiculitis, 1476
seminiferous tubules, 1497
seminomas, 1498, 1506, 1508–9
Sengstaken–Blakemore tube, 
374, 1127, 1129, 1164, 1164
sensory testing, 438, 443
sentinel node biopsy
breast carcinoma, 877
malignant melanoma, 612
sepsis, 51
acute pancreatitis, 1226–7
after prostatectomy, 1466
catheter-related, 288
definitions, 51
intraperitoneal, 1055–7
management, 266
metabolic response, 279
septicaemia
meningococcal, 588, 589, 598
post-splenectomy, 1186
septic arthritis
children, 586–7
clinical predictors, 587
complications, 588–9
epidemiology, 549
foot/ankle, 531–2
implant-related, 554–6
native joint, 553–4
septic shock, 13, 18
septorhinoplasty, cleft lip/palate, 
699, 700
sequestration, bone infections, 
550, 551
seroma, 1026, 1034
serous cystadenomas, 1234
serrated adenomas, 1326
Serratia spp., 433
Sertoli cells, 1498
Sertoli cell tumours, 1507
service delivery
bariatric surgery, 1146–7
paediatrics, 138
service evaluation, 162
service investment, 1565
sesamoid injuries, 527
sestamibi scan, parathyroid 
glands, 827
setons, anal fistula, 1366–7
Sever’s disease, 580
sex cord-stromal tumours, ovary, 
1526
sexually-transmitted infections
genital herpes, 1495
gonorrhoea, 1325, 1494, 
1518–19
tropical, 1495–6
see also AIDS; HIV infection
shared-care model of chronic 
disease, 1151
SHELL model, 177
Shigella, 433, 1248, 1273
shock
classification, 13–15
clinical features, 14
definition, 12
haemorrhagic, 18–20
hypovolaemic, 13, 352, 368
multiple organ failure, 15
neurogenic, 352
pathophysiology, 12–13
resuscitation, 15–18
resuscitation end points, 18
severity, 14–15
spinal trauma, 352
unresuscitatable, 15
short bowel syndrome, 283, 
1256–7
short-stay surgery, 302
shotguns, 428
shoulder
anatomy, 488
arc of motion, 490
arthrodesis, 495
clinical examination, 448–50, 
448–51, 451, 489
congenital abnormalities, 
488–9
dislocation, 469, 496–8
habitual, 498
posterior, 382, 384, 497, 498
recurrent traumatic, 496
frozen (adhesive capsulitis), 
492, 493
hemiarthroplasty, 400, 493, 
494
history taking, 489
imaging, 489
impingement syndrome, 449
instability, 449–50
atraumatic, 497–8
osteoarthritis, 493–5
pain, 489, 490
after laparoscopic surgery, 
115
replacement, 493, 494
reverse geometry, 492
rheumatoid arthritis, 493
rotator cuff disorders, 202, 469, 
490–2, 494
sports injuries, 469
Shouldice repair, 1032
shrapnel, 431
shunts
surgical, variceal haemorrhage, 
1165
transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic (TIPSS), 
1058–9, 1129, 1164, 1165
ventriculoperitoneal, 586, 
655–6
sialadenitis
acute ascending bacterial, 786
granulomatous, 795
submandibular, 780, 781
sialadenosis (sialosis), 795–6
sialolithiasis, 780–1, 787
sialometaplasia, necrotising, 778
sialorrhoea, 797
sickle cell disease, 1184
sideropenic dysphagia, 740, 763, 
1105
sigmoid colon
carcinoma, 1262, 1263, 1264–5
volvulus, 1284–5, 1288, 
1295–6
sigmoidoscopy
amoebiasis, 58
anal lesions, 1343
colorectal cancer, 1262–3
flexible, 1320, 1321
rectal examination, 1320,  
1330
rigid, 1320, 1330
sigmoid volvulus, 1295
ulcerative colitis, 1268
Silastic prosthesis (nasal septum), 
718–19
silicone sheet, fenestrated, 625
silver nitrate solution, 625
silver sulphadiazine cream, 625, 
630
Simmond’s test, 460, 468
Sims position, 1342
simulation, laparoscopy, 117
simultaneous pancreas and 
kidney (SPK) transplant, 
1552–3
Singapore Statement on 
Research Integrity, 166
single anastomosis duodenoileal 
bypass with sleeve 
gastrectomy (SADI-S), 1150
single incision laparoscopic 
appendicectomy (SILA), 
1311
single incision laparoscopic 
surgery (SILS), 117
single-photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT), 846, 
1391
sinus
abscesses, 48
definition, 616
pilonidal, 1347–9
sinusitis, see rhinosinusitis
sinus tarsi syndrome, 458
sip feeding, 284
Sipple’s syndrome, 856
sirolimus, 1540
Sister Mary Joseph’s nodule, 
1044, 1045, 1135
Sistrunk procedure, 755, 1011
Six Sigma methodology, 187
Sjögren’s syndrome, 787, 796, 
1100
skeletal muscle, protein 
degradation, 4
Skene’s tubules, 1456
skew foot, 457
skiers, injuries, 466
skier’s thumb, 398, 469, 503
skin
adnexa, 592–3
benign lesions/tumours, 
599–604
blood supply, 593, 594, 634
congenital/genetic disorders, 
594–5
congenital wounds, 615
cysts, 598–9
functions, 594
hair follicle lesions, 602–3
infections, 596–8
malignant lesions/tumours, 
604–12
manifestations of generalised 
disease, 595–6
radiation damage, 594
structure, 592–4, 634
tension lines, 85–6, 636
thickness, 593
vascular lesions, 612–15
skin adhesive strips, 96
skin cancer
basal cell carcinoma, 604–5
causes, 145
malignant melanoma, 608–12
premalignant lesions, 603–4
squamous cell carcinoma, 
605–8
transplant recipient, 1542
skin care, lymphoedema, 1008–9
skin examination
foot, 458
musculoskeletal disorders, 437, 
438
skin flaps, 27
see also flaps
skin grafts, 27, 634–5, 636
composite, 636
failure, 640
full-thickness, 635, 636, 640
harvesting, 639–40
infections, 54
split-thickness, 28, 634–5, 636, 
639–40
survival, 635
skin incisions, 85–9
abdominal, 86
factors in planning, 85–6
laparoscopic surgery, 86–7, 88
skin preparation, 52, 1564
skin substitutes, 637
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1602 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1603
skull deformities, 
craniosynostosis, 668, 669, 
687–8
skull fractures, 207
depressed, 333
with facial fractures, 323, 356, 
362
reconstructive surgery, 645
skull base, 332, 333
skull vault, 332–3
skull tongs, 344
sleep apnoea, 732
and bariatric surgery, 1146
children, 732
in craniofacial anomalies, 688
obese patient, 260
sleeve gastrectomy, 1147, 1148–9
complications, 1150
and ileal transposition, 1150
slipped upper femoral epiphysis 
(SUFE), 382, 404–5, 573–5
slit ventricle syndrome, 655
small bowel enema, 80, 1244
small cell lung cancers, 925, 926
small intestines
anatomy, 1240–1
atresia, 133–4, 1293–4
endoscopy, 225–7
enterocutaneous fistula, 1256
infective enteritis, 1248–9
injuries, 375
internal herniation, 1282
malabsorption, 1255–6
motility, 283
neuroendocrine tumours, 
854–5
obstruction, 193, 210, 1018, 
1060
adhesions, 1060, 1283
bands, 1283
internal hernia, 1282
strictures, 1282
physiology, 1241
pseudo-obstruction, 1297
resection, effects of, 283–4, 
1256–7
strictures, 79, 80, 1242, 1282
transplantation, 1555–6
tuberculosis, 78–81
tumours, 1249–51
vascular anomalies, 1253–4
volvulus, 1288
small saphenous vein (SSV), 970
incompetence, 975
stripping, 981–2
small stomach syndrome, 1123
Smith’s fracture, 398
smoking
associated cancers, 145, 751
and bladder cancer, 1446
and Crohn’s disease, 1242
lung cancer risk, 925
and oesophageal cancer, 1086
and oral cancer, 760
and peptic ulcers, 1116
and ulcerative colitis, 1267
SNAP mnemonic, 1256
snow blindness, 679
snowboarding injuries, 466
snuff box, anatomical, 397, 444, 
445
social functioning, urinary 
continence, 1430, 1433
social history, 1017
sodium
dietary requirements, 281
dietary restriction, 1059
in GI secretions, 281
hyponatraemia, 120, 121, 
660–1
sodium iodide, 815
soft palate
cleft, 689–90
erythroplakia, 762
soft-tissue infections, necrotising, 
30–1, 419–20, 597–8
soft-tissue tumours, 544
evaluation and investigation, 
544–6
treatment, 545, 548
soil-borne disease, 50, 71
soleal sinusoids, 971
solitary rectal ulcer syndrome, 
1324
solute resorption, urinary 
diversion, 1454–5
somatic cells, 34–5
somatostatin, 848, 855, 1107–8, 
1109
somatostatin analogues, 284, 
1124, 1129, 1225, 1237, 1251
somatostatinoma, 849
somatostatin receptor 
scintigraphy, 855
Sonde endoscopy, 225–6
sorafenib, 156
Southampton wound grading 
system, 48
Southwick slip angle, 574
Souttar tube, 1094
spaces of Disse, 995–6
spastic diplegia, 584–5
spastic gait, 437
spasticity, spinal cord injury, 354
specialised pro-resolving mediators 
(SPM), 4
specialist centres
neurosurgical, 336
spinal cord injuries, 352
speech, 727
cleft lip/palate, 695
oesophageal, 753
rehabilitation after 
laryngectomy, 752–3
speech therapy, 749
spermatic cord, 1377
spermatocoele, 1504–5
sperm counts, 1512
spherocytosis, hereditary, 1183
sphincter of Lütkens, 1188
sphincter of Oddi, 228, 1188, 
1189, 1207, 1214, 1232
dysfunction (SOD), 1222, 
1232–3
spider naevi, 614
spigelian hernia, 1024, 1041–2
spina bifida, 483–4, 583, 586, 
615, 667
meningocoele, 484, 667
myelomeningocoele, 484, 667
spina bifida occulta, 667
spinal anaesthesia, 275
spinal canal, 471
spinal claudication, 476
spinal cord, neuroanatomy, 
339–40
spinal cord injury (SCI)
assessment, 332
associated complications, 354
contusion, 348
epidemiology, 352
incomplete, 353
outcomes and prognosis, 353
pathophysiology, 352–3
specialist centres, 352
spinal disorders
degenerative, 474–6
infections, 481
inflammatory 
spondyloarthropathies, 
261, 348, 481, 482
investigation, 474, 475
neurological examination, 
472–3
physical examination, 472–3
spondylolisthesis, 478
spondylolysis, 476–7
spinal dysraphism, 484
spinal fusion, 476, 477
spinal immobilisation, 340
spinal injuries
in ankylosing spondylitis, 348
cervical spine, 345–9
children, 122
decompression, 345
diagnostic imaging, 342–4
history, 341
imaging, 200
MRI, 209
radiographs, 206
lumbar spine, 350, 351
management, 344–5
neuropathic bladder, 1428–9
patient assessment, 340–1
physical examination, 341, 342
spinal realignment, 344–5
stabilisation, 345
thoracic, 349, 350
thoracolumbar, 344, 350–1
spinal nerve roots, 439, 471
compression, 440, 476
spinal shock, 352, 1428
spinal stability, 339
spinal stenosis, 476
spinal surgery
costs of, 485
global issues, 485–7
lumbar disc disease, 476, 477
spindle cell naevus, 600
spindle cells, 246
spine
anatomy, 338–9, 471
clinical examination, 439–42, 
472–3
deformities, 472, 482–3, 581–3
developmental abnormalities, 
483–5
imaging, 474, 475
in low-income countries, 
485, 486
mobility testing, 472
osteoporosis, 349, 485
tumours, 478, 480–1
SPINK1, 1230
spinothalamic tracts, 340
Spirochaeta vincenti, 1325
spirometry, 916, 917
spironolactone, 841, 1166
Spitz naevus, 599–600
splanchnic nerves, 1241, 1258
spleen
abscess, 1180, 1180
anatomy, 1176, 1177
congenital abnormalities, 
1178–9
functions, 1177–8
infarction, 1179, 1180
investigation, 1178
neoplasms, 1185
palpation, 1021
physiology, 1176–7
rupture, 1180
trauma, 208, 374
in children, 123
splenectomy, 374, 1185–7
haemolytic anaemias, 1183, 
1184
idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, 1182–3
indications, 1185
laparoscopic, 1186, 1186
open, 1185–6
pancreatic cancer surgery, 1236
postoperative complications, 
374, 1186–7
trauma, 374
splenic artery, 1176, 1177
aneurysm, 1179, 1180
splenic flexure, carcinoma, 1264
splenic vein, 1176, 1177
thrombosis, 1165–6, 1228
splenomegaly, 1180–5
splenunculi, 1178
splints
burn injuries, 628
limb fracture, 390–1
spondyloarthropathy, 
inflammatory, 261, 481, 482
spondylolisthesis, 478, 479, 582
spondylolysis, 476–7, 582
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis 
(SBP), 1053
sports injuries
bursae, 464
by individual sport, 464–7
by regions of symptoms, 467–9
diagnosis, 463
fractures, 464
ligaments, 464
muscles, 464
rehabilitation, 470
tendons, 463–4
treatment, 470
sportsman’s hernia, 1034
Sprengel’s shoulder, 488–9
spring ligament, 530
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1603 25/10/2017   10:44Index1604
Spurling’s test, 440
sputum cytology, 927
SpyGlass™, 1158–9
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
anal canal, 1371
arising in venous ulcer, 605, 
984
bladder, 1448
cervical lymph nodes, 758,  
759
in chronic osteomyelitis, 558
cutaneous, 605–8
external ear, 708
histology, 240, 241
hypopharynx, 741–2
in situ (Bowen’s disease), 606, 
607, 1492
middle ear, 711
nose/sinuses, 724
oesophagus, 1085–7, 1092
oral
anatomical sites, 761
buccal mucosa, 772
clinical features, 761–2, 
764–5
epidemiology, 760
field change and second 
primary tumours, 762–3
floor of mouth, 771, 772
investigations, 765–7
lips, 767–9
mandibular alveolus, 772–3
palate, 774
pathology, 761
post-treatment management, 
775
premalignant lesions, 763, 
767
staging, 764
tongue, 769–70
oropharynx, 740–1
penile, 1492–3
squeeze test, 461
Stafne bone cyst, 780
staghorn calculus, 1388, 1406
staging
adrenocortical carcinoma, 843
breast cancer, 874, 875
cancers, 148, 149, 213
gastric cancer, 1134–5
hepatocellular carcinoma, 1174
lung cancer, 926, 927
malignant melanoma, 611
molecular testing, 251
oesophageal cancer, 1088–9
oral cancers, 764
ovarian cancer, 1528
pressure sores, 29
rectal carcinoma, 1330–1
renal cell carcinoma, 1419
testicular tumours, 1508
thymoma, 935
thyroid carcinomas, 819
standards of excellence, 174–5
Stanford classification (aortic 
dissection), 910
stapedotomy, 711
stapes, 704, 711
otosclerosis, 711
Staphylococcus aureus, 44, 532, 
559, 587, 1442
bone and joint infections, 554
methicillin-resistant (MRSA), 
43, 44, 56, 532, 588
antimicrobials, 56
parotitis, 786
pneumonia, 293
renal carbuncle, 1404
spinal infection, 481
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 44, 
518, 896, 1442
stapled haemorrhoidopexy, 1359, 
1360, 1369
stapling, pharyngeal pouch, 
739–40
stapling devices, 96–7
Starling’s forces, 971, 996
starvation, 8, 10, 278–98
statins, 948, 1222
statistics, 166–7
steatorrhoea, 283, 1219, 1234, 
1256
Steinberg classification, 512, 513
steinstrasse, 1408
stem cells, 34, 35–8, 1558
adult/somatic, 35
embryonic, 35–6
fetal, 36
induced pluripotent (iPSCs), 
36–7
in vitro differentiation, 37–8
Stemmer’s sign, 998
Stener lesion, 398, 469
stented valves, 895, 902
stent-graft, aorta, 963, 964
stents
aorta, 370, 963, 964
biliary, 228, 1237
biliary/duodenal in pancreatic 
cancer, 1237, 1238
colon, 231, 1295
coronary, 257, 886
oesophageal, 224, 225, 1074, 
1094
peripheral arterial disease, 
948–9
rectal cancer, 1337
thoracic aorta, 370, 910–11
urethral, 1467
stercoliths, 1282
sterile surgical field, 1563
sterilisation, male, 1512
sternoclavicular joint, 488
sternocleidomastoid muscle, 790, 
791
sternotomy, median, 371
Stewart–Treves’ syndrome, 999
stilboestrol, 146
stitch granuloma, 815–16
stomach
blood supply, 1106–7
cancer, see gastric cancer
GISTs, 1139–40
injuries, 375
investigations, 1110–13
lymphatics, 1107, 1135–6
microscopic anatomy, 1107–8
nerves, 1107
neuroendocrine tumours, 
853–4
outlet obstruction, 1129–30
physiology, 1108–10
polyps, 1130
variceal haemorrhage, 1163–6
stomal stenosis, 1296, 1297
stomas, 1254–5, 1277–8
bags and appliances, 1254–5, 
1277–8
children, 119, 122
complications, 1043, 1255, 
1278
large intestines, 1277–8
small intestines, 1254–5
tracheal, 752–3
urinary diversion, 1452–3
stone-catching basket, 1409
stones, see calculi; gallstones
stools
consistency, 1354–5
fluid losses, 280, 281
‘redcurrant jelly’, 129
Stoppa’s operation, 1034
straight leg raise test, 441–2, 473
strangulation
haemorrhoids, 1356
hernias, 1024, 1038, 1287
intestinal obstruction, 1281, 
1286–7
penis, 1489
strangury, 1375
Strasberg classification, 1204
strawberry gallbladder, 1201
‘strawberry’ lesion, rectosigmoid, 
1325
strawberry naevus, 613
Streptococcus, 44
b-haemolytic, 44, 559
Streptococcus faecalis, 44, 56, 1442
Streptococcus milleri, 922
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 709, 
896, 1186
Streptococcus pyogenes, 30, 44
Streptococcus viridans, 786
stress fractures, 464, 468, 528
stress-free perioperative care, 2
stress gastritis, 1115
stress ulceration, 1128
strictures
anal, 1243, 1360, 1370
biliary, 228, 1163
colonic, 231
Crohn’s disease, 1242
treatment, 1246, 1247, 1248
oesophageal/pyloric, 223, 225
oesophagus, 1071, 1075, 1076, 
1078, 1080
small bowel, 79, 80, 1242, 
1246, 1282
urethra
female, 1485
male, 1466, 1482–4
stridor, 742–3
‘string sign’ (Kantor), 1244
stroke
care costs, 158
following CABG, 892
haemorrhagic, 661
minor/TIAs, 951, 954–5
postoperative, 294
preoperative care, 260–1
stroke test, 454
strontium-89 radiotherapy, 1474
Struma valley, 805
struvite calculi, 1406, 1409
stye (hordeolum), 674
stylomastoid artery, 791
subacromial impingement, 490, 
491
subarachnoid haemorrhage 
(SAH), 335, 658–61
grading, 659
management, 659–61
perimesencephalic, 658
traumatic, 335
subclavian artery, stenosis, 952
subclavian line, infraclavicular, 
287
subclavian steal syndrome, 952
subconjunctival haemorrhage, 
359, 680
subdural empyema, 657–8
subdural haematoma, 334–5, 335
subhepatic abscesses, 1056–7
sublingual glands, 778–9
submandibular glands, 780–5
excision, 781–3
inflammatory disorders, 780, 
781
stone formation, 780–1
stricture, 780
tumours, 783–5
submucosal plexus of Meissner, 
1107
submucous resection, 718
subphrenic abscess, 1055–7
subtalar joint, 459, 460, 524
succussion splash, 1021
sucking chest wound, 366, 368
Sucquet–Hoyer canals, 614
sugammadex, 272
Sugarbaker technique, 1059–60
sulcus sign, 498
sunitinib, 156
sunsetting, 652
supermicrosurgery, 646
supracondylar humeral fractures, 
403–4
suprapubic catheter, 1480, 1481
suprapubic pain, 1374
supraspinatus
tendon calcification, 493
trauma, 202, 491
supraspinous ligament, 338
sural nerve neurapraxia, 982
‘surfer’s ear’, 708
surgeons, global distribution, 
485, 486
surgeon’s knot, 95, 96
surgical emphysema, 919
surgical infections
antimicrobial treatment, 55–6
colonic surgery, 1265
‘decisive period’, 46
history, 42–4
microbiology, 44–7
prevention, 52–5
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1604 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1605
reduced resistance, 46–7
sources, 45–6
surgical site (major and minor), 
47–50
systemic, 50–1, 53, 54
viral, 51–2
surgical proficiency, 184
Sushruta, 633
suture materials, 89–91
absorbable, 90, 93
characteristics, 90–1
non-absorbable, 92
sutures
alternatives, 96–7
barbed, 91
bowel anastomoses, 98
continuous, 91
interrupted, 91
knot tying, 94–5, 96
mattress, 91, 94
minimising marks, 32
needles, 94
postoperative removal, 299
reducing incisional hernia risk, 
1041
siting, 91
subcuticular, 94
vascular anastomoses, 99
suxamethonium, 272, 273
swab, retained, 183
swallowing, 726
assessment, 726, 1068, 1069
difficult/painful, 1069
physiology, 1067–9
restoration in oesophageal 
cancer, 1091
swan neck deformity, 443, 504
sweat glands, 593
lesions, 603–4
sweating, gustatory (Frey’s 
syndrome), 792, 794–5
sweat test, 1219
Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) 
study, 1145
‘Swelling’ acronym, 438
swimmer’s itch, 1444
swimming injuries, 466
Swiss cheese model, 179
sympathectomy, 968
symptom relief, cancer, 159
synacthen test, 842
syndactyly, 580
syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone 
(SIADH), 337
synergistic effect, 158
synergistic gangrene, 30–1, 50, 
1045
synovectomy, rheumatoid hand, 
505
synovial chondromatosis, 500
synovitis
ankle, 531
imaging, 201
wrist, 195, 201
syphilis, 616, 1495
orchitis, 1506
syringomyelia, 484–5
post-traumatic, 354
systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS), 51
acute pancreatitis, 1223
definitions, 51, 1223
pathogenesis, 47, 51
systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE), 967
systemic sclerosis, 1100
systems thinking, 188
tachycardia, 14, 294
tacrolimus, 1538–9
taenia coli, 1258, 1300
Taenia echinococcus, 956
Takayasu’s arteritis, 967, 1416
talipes equinovarus, congenital, 
577–9
talus
congenital vertical, 579
fractures, 382, 402
tamoxifen
breast cancer, 156, 158, 878, 
881
endometrial cancer risk, 146, 
1516
mastalgia, 869
tapentadol, 276
tapeworm, dog, 64, 1169
targeted therapies, 154, 157–8
cost-effectiveness, 154, 158
renal cell carcinoma, 1420–1
tarsal coalition, 563, 579
tarsal tunnel syndrome, 533
tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint
anatomy, 524
examination, 458–9, 460, 461
injuries, 197, 402–3, 524
taxanes, 155, 1474
Taylor spatial frame, 392, 393
tazobactam, 56
T-cell activation, allograft 
rejection, 1534, 1535
T-cell co-stimulatory blockers, 
1540
T-cell-immune checkpoint 
inhibitors, 1421
T-cell lymphomas, 1251
team working, 180, 182
tears, 672
technetium 99 (Tc99m) scanning
gallbladder, 1192, 1204, 1232
thyroid, 804
trauma, 385
urinary tract, 1392, 1394, 
1404, 1412
teeth, injuries, 357, 363
teicoplanin, 56
telangiectasia
hereditary haemorrhagic 
(Osler’s disease), 719,  
720
lower limb, 972, 973, 975
telecanthus, traumatic, 362
telesurgery, 108
telomeric shortening, 140
temozolomide, 156
temporal arteritis, 683, 967
temporal bone, fractures, 713–14
temsirolimus, 157, 1420–1
tendinosis
Achilles, 529
peroneal tendons, 529–30
tendon disorders
hand, 504, 505, 507–8
lower limb, 529–30
rheumatoid arthritis, 504–5, 
529
rotator cuff, 469, 490, 491,  
493
tendon grafts, 637
tendon injuries
Achilles, 382, 383, 403, 468, 
529
healing, 25, 27
sports, 463–4
tendonitis, calcific, 493
tendon transfers, 531, 584
tenesmus, 1319–20, 1329
tennis elbow, 448
tennis injuries, 465
Tenon’s capsule, 684
tenosynovitis, extensor (wrist), 
195
tension pneumothorax, 292, 366, 
367, 919
children, 122–3
management, 367, 919
teratoma, testes, 1507
terazosin, 1468
terminal ileitis, 1242, 1305
Terson’s syndrome, 659
testes
absence, 1500
anatomy, 1497
descent, 124, 1023, 1029–30, 
1497
ectopic, 1498
embryology, 1497
incomplete descent, 125, 
1497–9
injuries, 1499
lymphatic drainage, 1506, 1507
pain, 1374, 1376
torsion, 1498, 1500–1
children, 125–6
vs appendicitis, 1306
tumours, 1498, 1506–9
children, 1509
testicular artery, 1497
injury, 1034
testicular veins, 1497, 1501
testosterone, 1457
tetanus, 50, 417–18, 419
tethered cord syndrome, 667
tetralogy of Fallot, 904–5
thalassaemia, 1183–4
thalidomide, 157
theatre etiquette, 1564
thenar muscles, 446
wasting, 443, 508
Thessaly’s test, 467
thiazide diuretics, 1407
Thiersch operation, 1323
thigh, bruise, 467
thigh–foot angle, 562, 563
thiocyanates, 806
6-thioguanine, 155
thiopentone, 269
thiopurine methyltransferase 
(TPMT), 1245
Thomas splint, 391
Thomas’s test, modified, 451, 
452, 514
Thompson procedure, 1012
Thompson’s test, 460, 468
thoracic aorta
aneurysms, 908–9
disruption, 366, 369–70
thoracic duct, 995
injuries, 756
thoracic outlet syndrome, 939, 
991–2
thoracic spine
clinical examination, 440–1
disc herniation, 475
fractures, 349, 350
thoracic surgery
emergency, 371
postoperative care, 298
thoracic trauma, 365–71, 372, 
938
thoracolumbar junction injury, 
338–9
thoracolumbar spine, fractures, 
344, 350–1
thoracoscopy, video-assisted 
(VATS), 370, 922–3, 931, 
934
Thoracoscore, 915
thoracotomy, 930–1
anterior, 931
emergency, 371, 931
lung cancer, 930–1
survival rates, 371
threadworms, 1361
three-glass urine test, 1475
three-swab test, 1439
thromboangiitis obliterans 
(Buerger’s disease), 967, 990
thrombocytopenic purpura, 
idiopathic (ITP), 1182–3
thrombocytosis, post-
splenectomy, 1186
thromboelastography (TEG), 
1161
thromboembolism
after hip replacement, 517–18
after SCI, 354
postoperative, 296
preoperative care, 260
prosthetic valves, 895
risk in endoscopy, 220
risk factors, 260
thrombolysis, 955, 956, 990
thrombophilia, 260, 987
thrombophlebitis, 287, 990–1, 
1005
thrombophlebitis migrans, 990
thrombosis
axillary vein, 992
cavernous sinus, 721
coronary stent, 257
deep vein, see deep vein 
thrombosis (DVT)
haemorrhoids, 1360, 1361
hepatic venous, 1167–8
portal vein, 1165–6
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1605 25/10/2017   10:44Index1606
superior mesenteric artery, 1253
thrombus
abdominal aortic aneurysm, 
961, 962
acute arterial occlusion, 953–6
aortic bifurcation, 954
cardiac, 911
through-the-scope (TTS) 
balloons, 223, 231
thumb
examination, 446
trigger, 507, 580
ulnar collateral ligament injury 
(gamekeepers’/skier’s 
thumb), 398, 469, 503
Thunderbeat S™, 104
thymectomy, primary 
hyperparathyroidism, 830
thymoma, 935
thyroglobulin, 800, 802
measurement after thyroid 
cancer surgery, 820
thyroglossal duct cysts, 755
thyroid
anatomy, 800–2
core biopsy, 809
cysts, 809–10
discrete swellings (nodules), 
807–8
toxic, 811, 812
ectopic tissue, 936
embryology, 800
enlargement, 805–11
goitre, 805–7
retrosternal, 803, 804, 807, 
810–11, 936
toxic, 811, 812
histology
autoimmune thyroiditis, 821
follicular carcinoma, 818
medullary carcinoma, 820
normal, 800, 801, 811
thyrotoxicosis, 811, 812
imaging, 803–4
neoplasms, 145, 816–21
aetiology, 816
benign, 816
clinical features, 817
diagnosis, 817
follicular carcinoma, 809, 816
malignant lymphoma, 
816–17, 821
medullary carcinoma, 816, 
820–1, 856
papillary carcinoma, 809, 
816, 817, 818
prognosis, 818–19
relative incidence, 816
surgical treatment, 819
undifferentiated (anaplastic) 
carcinoma, 816, 817, 
820
physiology, 802–3
surgery, 298, 810, 813–14
indications for, 810
thyroid cartilage, trauma, 755–6
thyroidectomy
alternative surgical techniques, 
814
Graves’ disease, 810
hyperthyroidism, 812, 813
indications for, 810
Kocher dissector, 1562
new technology, 814
postoperative complications, 
815–16
retrosternal goitre, 811
in simple goitre, 807
subtotal, 807, 812, 815
surgical technique, 813–14
thyroid neoplasms, 810, 819
in thyrotoxicosis, 812, 813
thyroid eye disease, 675–6, 811
thyroid function tests, 802, 808
thyroiditis
autoimmune (chronic 
lymphocytic), 821–2
granulomatous (de Quervain’s), 
822
Riedel’s, 822
thyroid-stimulating antibodies, 
802
thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH), 802
thyrotoxic crisis (storm), 815
thyrotoxicosis, 13, 811–16
drug and radioiodine 
treatment, 812, 813
eye disease, 675–6, 811
surgical treatment, 810, 812, 
813–16
thyroid histology, 811, 812
thyroxine, 802
after thyroid surgery, 819
in hyperplastic goitre, 807
replacement after 
thyroidectomy, 815
thyroxine-binding globulin 
(TBG), 802
thyroxine-binding prealbumin 
(TBPA), 802
tibia
axis, 519
congenital pseudarthrosis, 576, 
577
high osteotomy, 521
torsion
external, 562
internal, 563
tibial fractures
articular, 396
closed, 382
diaphyseal, 394, 395
infections, 556, 557
plateau, 401
shaft, 401
shaft in children, 406
tibialis anterior, 461
tendinosis, 528
tibialis posterior, 461
tibialis posterior tendon
failure, 530
transfer, 531
tibial nerve, posterior, 69
tibia vara, 576
tibiofemoral angle, 563
tibiofemoral dislocation, 383
tibiofibular stability, distal, 461
ticagrelor, 220
ticarcillin, 56
Tietze Syndrome, 869
Tillaux’s sign, 1063
tilt test, 461
timeline principle, 312–13
Tinel’s sign, 502, 508
Tinel’s test, 444, 445
tinidazole, 59
tinnitus, 713
tipifarnib, 157
tissue analysis
autopsy, 251
malignancy diagnosis, 238–41
microscopy, 242, 243
non-neoplastic/inflammatory 
conditions, 241, 242
reasons for, 234–5
specimen adequacy, 243
specimen processing, 236–8
tissue specimens, 235–6
tissue blocks, 236, 237, 244
tissue engineering, 650
challenges, 40
future directions, 41
potential applications, 33–4, 
650
safety concerns, 40
scaffolds, 38–40
science underpinning, 34
sources of cells, 34–8
tissue implantation, 40
tissue expansion, 628, 637–8
tissue glue, 96
tissue oedema, 10
tissue perfusion, 10
lactate levels, 326, 327
monitoring, 17
reduced, 18
tissue plasminogen activator 
(tPA), 422, 990
tissue typing, 1537–8
tissue-typing laboratory, 1538
tobacco use
associated cancers, 145, 751
and oral malignancy, 760
see also smoking
tobramycin, 56
toes
congenital curly, 579
first
hallux rigidus, 526–7
hallux valgus, 525–6
lesser toe deformities, 458, 527
‘too many toes’ sign, 457, 461
Tokyo Consensus Guidelines, 
acute cholecystitis, 1200
tongue
hairy leukoplakia, 738
leukoplakia, 761–2, 767
neurinomas, 856
reconstruction, 770–1
squamous cell carcinoma, 765, 
766, 769–71
tonsillectomy, 736–7
tonsillitis
acute, 735
chronic, 736
tonsils, 726
‘too many toes’ sign, 457, 461
topical anaesthetics, 274
torsion
omentum, 1061
ovarian cyst, 1306
testicular, 125–6, 1306, 1376, 
1498
tibial, 562, 563
torso, junctional zones, 364–5
torso trauma
abdominal, 372–6
antibiotics, 380
damage control surgery, 378–80
deaths, 364
interventional radiology, 380
mechanisms of injury, 364–5
non-operative management, 
380
pelvis, 376–8
thoracic, 365–71, 372, 938
torsion, testes, 1500–1
torticollis, congenital, 582
total anomalous pulmonary 
venous drainage (TAPVD), 
905
total circulatory arrest, 885
total contact cast, 533
total hip replacement, 515–18
total intravenous anaesthesia 
(TIVA), 270, 304
total knee replacement, 521–3
totally extraperitoneal (TEP) 
hernia repair, 1033
total mesorectal excision (TME), 
1334–5
total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 
286–8
toxic shock syndrome, 30
Toyota Production System, 187
trabecular artery, 1177
trabeculectomy, 683–4
trace elements, 282–3
trachea
deviation, 366, 367
obstruction, 924–5
oesophageal cancer invasion, 
1089
wounds, 756
tracheal dilator, 745
tracheal stoma, 752–3
tracheobronchial injuries, 370
tracheo-oesophageal fistula
malignant, 1095
oesophageal atresia, 133
tracheostomy
complications, 747, 748
elective, 745–6
emergency, 744–5
indications for, 744
percutaneous, 747
tracheostomy tubes, 747
trachoma, 677
traction
cervical spine, 344
limb fractures, 391–2, 405
training
endoscopy, 217
ethics and, 174–5
laparoscopic surgery, 117–18
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1606 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1607
trametinib, 157, 612
tranexamic acid, 324
transabdominal preperitoneal 
(TAPP) hernia repair, 1033, 
1042
transanal endoluminal 
microscopic surgery 
(TEMS), 1332, 1333
transanal stapled resection of 
intussusception (STARR), 
1324
transanal total mesorectal 
excision (taTME), 1335–6
transbronchial needle aspiration 
(TBNA), 928
transcapillary escape rate (TER), 
7
transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation (TA VI), 902
transcervical resection of fibroid 
(TCRF), 1526
transdifferentiation, 40
transforming growth factor-alpha 
(TGF-a), 1116
transforming growth factor-beta 
(TGF-b), 4
transfusion, see blood transfusion
transient ischaemic attacks 
(TIAs), 951, 954–5
transitional cell carcinoma
bladder, 1446
upper urinary tract, 1421
transitional cell papilloma, nasal, 
723–4
transjugular intrahepatic 
portosystemic stent shunts 
(TIPSS), 1058–9, 1129
ascites, 1166
variceal haemorrhage, 1164, 
1165
transluminal angioplasty, 948–9
transperineal template biopsies 
of the prostate (TPTBP), 
1387–8
transplantation
clinical guidelines, 1558
combined liver and small 
bowel, 1556
composite tissues, 649–50
ethics, 174
future prospects, 1558
graft rejection, 1533–7
history of, 1532–3
HLA matching, 1537–8
immunosuppressive therapy, 
1538–41
informed consent, 174
international databases, 1558
kidney, 835, 1549–52
liver, 1156, 1166
living donor, 1547–8, 1553–4
milestones, 1533
organ donation, 1542–8
organ function after, 1548, 
1549
pancreas, 1545, 1552–4
simultaneous pancreas and 
kidney, 1552
small bowel, 1555–6
thoracic organs, 1556–8
tissue-typing laboratory, 1538
transposition of the great vessels, 
905
transrectal ultrasound (TRUS), 
1385–7, 1462, 1470, 1471
transtracheal ventilation, 748–9
transurethral resection of prostate 
(TURP), 298
complications, 1466–7
indications in LUTS, 1464
reoperation, 1466–7
surgical technique, 1464–5
transverse abdominis muscle 
(TRAM) flap, 879, 880
transversus abdominis plane 
block (TAP), 274
trapezius myocutaneous flap,  
644
trastuzumab (Herceptin), 157, 
158, 873, 878, 1139
Traube’s sign, 901
trauma
bladder, 1425–6
causing lymphoedema, 1005
children, 122–4
ear, 706–7, 708
early total care (ETC), 318–19, 
327
extremity, see extremity trauma
gallbladder/biliary tree, 1198
history, 315–16
imaging, 200–1, 205–8
liver, 123, 208, 373–4, 1160–3, 
1162
major
identification, 322
imaging, 205–8
primary survey, 323–6
pancreas, 1220–1
penis, 1377, 1489
physiological response to, 3–7, 
317–18
rectum/anal canal, 1321
renal, 1413–14
splenic injury, 1180
surgical, see iatrogenic injuries
testes, 1499
ureters, 376, 1414–15
venous, 992–3
trauma assessment, 313–17
hidden factors, 315–17
initial, 318
mechanisms of injury, 313–15
response to, 320
obvious injuries, 315
patient factors, 315, 316, 317, 
320
primary survey, 323–6
secondary survey, 326
trauma-induced coagulopathy 
(TIC), 18
trauma management
local protocols and guidelines, 
319
operation planning, 319–20
timeline, 312–13
trauma team, 318, 322, 323
Travers retractor, 1561
Treacher Collins syndrome, 687, 
689, 701, 708
tremor, flapping, 1156
trench foot, 422
Trendelenburg gait, 437
Trendelenburg positioning, 266, 
792
Trendelenburg test, 452, 453, 514
Treponema pallidum, 1495
triage
categories, 412
major disasters, 412
triage tags, 412, 413
triangular fibrocartilage complex 
(TFCC), 202, 503
trichobezoars, 1282
trichoepithelioma, 602
tricholemmal (pilosebaceous) 
cysts, 599
tricholemmoma, 602
trick movements, 383
tricyclic antidepressants, 276, 277
trigeminal nerve, 672, 705
trigeminal neuraligia, 670
trigger digit, 507, 580
trigger thumb, 507, 580
triglycerides, long-chain (LCTs), 
282
trigonocephaly, 668, 669
tri-iodothyronine (T3), 802
tripartite risk assessment, 915–16
trocar insertion
previous abdominal surgery, 
112
technique, 87–9
trocar site haemorrhage, 114
Troisier’s sign, 1135
Trojani system, 544
trophic ulceration, 69–70
tropical pancreatitis, 76–7, 1230
tropical sexually transmitted 
infections, 1495–6
tropical splenomegaly, 1182
troponin testing, 265, 888
Trousseau’s sign, 831, 1132
truncal vagotomy, 1121–2, 1125
and antrectomy, 1223
trunk asymmetry, 472
Trypanosoma cruzi, 1095
T-tube drains, 100, 101
tube-feeding techniques, 284–5
tubercles, bladder (bilharzial), 
1444
tubercle of Zuckerkandl, 802
tuberculoma, 658
tuberculosis, 77–81, 559–60, 588
breast, 867
central nervous system, 658
cervical lymphadenitis, 77–8, 
757
diagnosis, 78
drug-resistant, 560
epididymo-orchitis, 1505–6
foot, 532
hand, 504
hyperplastic, 1248–9
intestinal, 1248–9
mesenteric lymphadenitis, 
1062
miliary, 658
peritonitis, 1053–4
proctitis, 1325
prostate, 1475–6
pulmonary, 937
renal, 1440
salivary glands, 795
seminal vesicles, 1476, 1506
small intestines, 78–81
splenomegaly, 1182
transplant recipient, 1541
treatment, 560
ulcerative, 616, 1248
urinary tract, 1405, 1442–3
tuberous sclerosis, 602–3, 912, 
1001, 1418
tubo-ovarian abscess, 1519–20
tubular adenomas, rectum, 1326
tumourigenesis, 249
tissue engineering, 40
tumour markers, 1378
Ca 19-9, 22, 1167, 1208, 1211, 
1235
CA-125, 1527, 1528, 1529
human kallikrein-2 (HK2), 
1379
prostate-specific antigen 
(PSA), 1378–9
testis, 1379
tumour necrosis factor alpha 
(TNF-a), 619
tumour, nodes, metastases 
(TNM) staging, 148, 149, 
213, 240
colorectal cancer, 1262
gastric cancer, 1134–5
laryngeal cancer, 752
lung cancer, 926, 927
oesophageal cancer, 1088–9
oral cavity cancer, 764
rectal carcinoma, 1331
tumour predisposition disease, 
1418
tumours
adrenal glands, 841, 842, 843, 
857
angiogenic competence, 140
bile ducts, 1207–9
bone, see bone tumours
cardiac, 911–12
chest wall, 938
eye, 676–7
gallbladder, 1209–11
growth of, 142–3
hypercalcaemia, 826
larynx, 751–2
liver, 1169–75
mesentery, 1064
metastatic, see metastases
neck (primary), 757–8
ovary, 1526–9
paediatric, 138
pancreas, 848–52
parathyroid glands, 835–6
penis, 1491–3
retroperitoneum, 1065–6, 
1414, 1509
salivary glands
minor, 777–8
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1607 25/10/2017   10:44Index1608
parotid, 787–9
sublingual, 779
submandibular, 783–5
small intestines, 1249–51
spinal, 478–81
testes, 1506–8
thyroid, 145, 816–21
venous, 993–4
tunica vaginalis, 1029
turban tumour, 603
turbinates, 716
turf toe, 468, 527
Turner syndrome, 903, 906, 1001
tympanic membrane, 703, 704
blast rupture, 430, 432
perforation, 708, 709
ventilation tube (grommet), 
710
typhilitis, 1307
typhoid, 82–3
gallbladder, 1201–2
intestinal, 1248, 1273
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, 154, 
156, 1420
ubiquitin–proteasome pathway, 7
ulcerative colitis, 1267–71
acute colitis in, 1267–8, 1269
aetiology, 1267
cancer risk, 1268
distinguishing from Crohn’s 
disease, 1243, 1268
epidemiology, 1267
extraintestinal manifestations, 
1267
indications for surgery, 1269
investigations, 1268–9
medical treatment, 1269
pathology, 1267
primary sclerosing cholangitis 
in, 1206, 1207
proctitis, 1325
severity classification, 1267
surgical treatment, 1270–1
ulcers
amoebic, 57, 58, 1272
arterial insufficiency, 943
bladder (bilharzial), 1444, 1445
characteristic edge shapes, 616
definition, 616
diabetic foot, 532
genital, 616, 1495
peptic, 222–3, 1019, 1048
trophic, 69–70
venous, see venous leg ulcers
ulna, shaft fractures, 398–9
ulnar collateral ligament injury, 
thumb, 398, 469, 503
ulnar drift, 443, 505
ulnar nerve
compression in cubital tunnel, 
501–2
compression in Guyon’s canal, 
508
hand, 443
ultrasonic dissector, 1170
ultrasound, 194–5
abdominal aortic aneurysm, 
961
abdominal wall hernias, 
1025–6
advantages, 194–5, 196
amoebiasis, 58–9
appendicitis, 1307
biliary tract, 1191
bililary system, 213
bladder diverticula, 1438
breast, 861–2
cholecystitis, 212–13
contrast enhanced (CEUS), 
1158
DDH assessment, 568, 569
disadvantages, 195, 196
duodenal atresia, 133, 134
endoanal, 1344, 1365
endobronchial (EBUS), 928, 
929
endorectal, 1332
endoscopic, see endoscopic 
ultrasound
epididymal cyst, 1504
extremity trauma, 384
eye
choroidal melanoma, 677
retinal detachment, 683
FAST, 123, 206–7, 324, 372, 
1160
hip effusion, 586
hydronephrosis, 1411, 1412
intraoperative, insulinoma, 850
joint disease, 201, 202
laparoscopic, biliary tract, 1195
lithotripsy, 1436
liver, 1157–8
major trauma, 206–7
miscarriage diagnosis, 1515
mycetoma/actinomycetoma, 73
oesophageal cancer, 1089
oral cancer, 766
ovarian cancer, 1527
pancreas, 1215
panoramic, 195
parathyroid glands, 827–9
regional anaesthesia guidance, 
274
roundworm infestation, 60, 61
soft-tissue mass lesions, 203
stomach, 1111–12
testicular tumours, 1507, 1508
thyroid, 803, 808, 817
transrectal (TRUS), 1385–7, 
1462, 1470, 1471
transvaginal, 1515, 1527, 1527
urinary tract (USS), 1385
varicocoele, 1502
ultraviolet (UV) radiation
corneal injury, 679
skin cancers, 145, 594, 604, 
608
umbilical hernia, 127, 1023, 
1036–8
umbilicus
chronic infection, 1044
fistula, 1044
malignancy, 1044, 1045
patent urachus, 1044
skin discolouration around, 
1019–20
trocar insertion, 87–9
uncal herniation, 329, 331
underbody blast, 432
unicoronal synostosis, 687
United Nations (UN), relief 
agencies, 411
University of Wisconsin solution, 
1546
upper limb
congenital anomalies, 580–1
neurological examination, 473
sports injuries, 469, 470
see also parts of upper limb
upper motor neurone (UMN) 
lesions, 473
upper oesophageal sphincter 
(UOS), 1067, 1069
upper tract transitional cell 
carcinoma, 1421
urachal cyst, 1438
urachus, patent, 1044, 1438
urea and electrolytes, 256
urease-producing organisms, 1406
ureteric bud, 1399, 1400
ureterocoele, 1401, 1402
ureterogram, retrograde, 1385
ureteroileostomy, 1452, 1453
ureteropyelogram, retrograde, 
1411, 1412
ureteroscopy, 1385
calculi management, 1408–9
ureterosigmoidostomy, 1453
complications, 1454–5
ureterovaginal fistula, 1439
ureters
congenital megaureter, 1402
dilation in pregnancy, 1411
duplex, 1400, 1401
ectopic, 1401, 1432
injury, 376, 1414–15
repair, 1415
retrocaval, 1402
urethra
bladder cancer recurrence, 
1452
caruncle, 1377, 1485–6
diverticulum, 1479, 1485
female
abnormalities, 1485–6
anatomy, 1485
carcinoma, 1486
male
anatomy, 1477
calculi, 1484
congenital anomalies, 126, 
137–8, 1477–8, 1479
dilatation, 1483
fistula, 1440, 1484
injuries, 1479–82
neoplasms, 1484
stricture, 1466, 1482–4
urethral sphincters
artificial, 1431
distal striated, 1423, 1456, 1477
urethral syndrome, 1376, 1442
urethritis
gonococcal, 1494
non-specific (non-gonococcal), 
1494
Reiter’s disease, 1494–5
urethrocoele, 1485, 1522, 1523
urethrogram
retrograde, 206
urethral injury, 1481
urethral stricture, 1483
urethroplasty, urethral stricture, 
1484
urethroscopy, urethral stricture, 
1483
urethrotomy, endoscopic 
(internal), 1484
urgency, 1375
uric acid stones, 1406, 1434, 1435
urinalysis
dipstick test, 1379
early-morning urine, 1379
male lower urinary tract 
symptoms, 1462
mid-stream specimen, 1379
preoperative, 256
voided urine cytology, 1379
urinary catheterisation
laparoscopic surgery, 115
neuropathic bladder, 1428
peritonitis, 1052
suprapubic, 1480, 1481
urinary diversion, 1433, 1452
bladder cancer, 1452–4
bladder exstrophy, 1425, 1453
complications, 1425, 1454–5
continent, 1454
external, 1452–3
internal, 1453–4
risk of malignancy, 1455
urinary flow rates, 1395, 1396
bladder outflow obstruction, 
1395, 1396, 1459, 1460, 
1462
men, 1459, 1460, 1462
normal, 1396
urethral stricture, 1482
urinary incontinence, 1429–34
female, 1431–2, 1524
male, 1431
after prostatectomy, 1431, 
1466
overflow, 1421, 1430, 1433, 
1460
urethral rupture, 1481
stress, 1375, 1430, 1431, 1433
treatment, 1432–4
urge, 1375
urinary retention, 1426–9, 1463
acute, 1426–7
in BPH, 1460, 1461
management, 1463
chronic, 1421, 1427, 1430, 
1433, 1463
drugs inducing, 1428
postoperative, 295, 1429
urinary ribonucleic acid (RNA) 
biomarkers, 1379
urinary stream, reduced, 1375
urinary tract
calculi
bladder, 1383, 1434–6
causes, 1405
imaging, 1388
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1608 25/10/2017   10:44Index 1609
kidneys, 213, 825, 1386, 
1388–9, 1405–7
renal, 1405–10
endoscopy, 1379–85
fistulae, 1438–40
malformations, 137–8, 1424–5, 
1432, 1477–9
obstruction, 1410–13
pain, 1017, 1305, 1374–5
radiology, 1385–95
trauma, 375–6, 1413–14
tuberculosis, 1405, 1442–3
urinary tract infection (UTI), 
1441–2
acute abacterial cystitis, 1442
alkaline encrusting cystitis, 
1443
avenues of infection, 1441
bacteriology, 1441–2
in children, 127, 131, 1404
cystitis cystica, 1443
frequency–dysuria (urethral) 
syndrome, 1376, 1442
interstitial cystitis (Hunner’s 
ulcer), 1443
in men, 1441
polycystic kidney disease, 1402
postoperative, 295
predisposing factors, 1441
in pregnancy, 1441
preoperative care, 260
recurrent, 1441
treatment, 1442
tuberculous, 1442–3
upper tract, 1403–5
urinary incontinence in, 1432
urine
blood (haematuria), 1375–6, 
1460, 1524
discolouration, 1376
dribbling, 1401
postvoid residual, 1395, 1430, 
1460
urine examination, 
schistosomiasis, 1444
urine output
fluid resuscitation, 624
healthy adult, 280
postoperative, 294–5
shock, 14
urodynamic studies, 429, 430
bladder outflow obstruction, 
1396, 1397, 1430, 1431, 
1460, 1462
bladder overactivity, 1396, 
1397
indications in men, 1462
urogenital remnant, 1063
urography
intravenous, 192, 193, 194
ureterocoele, 1401
urology stack, 1380
urticaria, schistosomiasis, 1444
uterine artery embolisation, 
1525–6
uterine bleeding, 1515–17
uterovaginal prolapse, 1522–3
uterus
anatomy, 1513–14
fibroids, 1514, 1524–6
utriculus masculinus, 1477
uvea, 672–3
uveitis, 681
V600E BRAF mutation, 154
vaccination
human papillomavirus, 1516
splenectomy, 1187, 1236
tetanus, 50, 417–18
VACTERL syndrome, 580
vacuum-assisted closure, 30, 416, 
638, 639
vagal body tumour, 758
vagal nerve stimulation, 670
vagina, anatomy, 1513
vaginal bleeding
early pregnancy, 1515
non-pregnant state, 1515–17
vaginal vault prolapse, 1522, 
1523
vagotomy
highly selective, 1122, 1123
sequelae, 1123–5
truncal, 1121–2, 1123, 1125
vagus nerve, 727, 810, 1107
monitoring in thyroid surgery, 
814
valgus cut angle, 519
valgus stress test, 455, 456
Valsalva manoeuvre, 1020
value, concept of, 185
valves of Heister, 1188
valvulae conniventes, 1241, 1258
valvular heart disease, 893–902
antibiotic prophylaxis, 53, 896
aortic valve, 899–902
polycystic kidney disease, 1403
preoperative management, 258
surgical options, 894–5
vancomycin, 56
vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), 
847
varices
anorectal, 1354
gastric, 1129
management of bleeding, 
1163–6
oesophageal, 222, 1126, 1127
varicocoele, 1377, 1501–2
varicography, 976
varicose veins, 972, 974–82
complications of surgery, 982
epidemiology, 974
investigation, 975–6
management, 976–7
adjunctive surgical 
techniques, 982
compression, 977
endothermal ablation, 977
endovenous glue, 980
laser ablation, 977–8
open surgery, 981–2
radiofrequency ablation, 
978–9
sclerotherapy, 979–80
recurrence, 982, 983
symptoms and signs, 974–5
varicosities, pelvic, 985–6
varus deformity
elbow, 447
knee, 454, 521
varus femoral osteotomy, 515
vasa brevia, 1106
vascular access
children, 122
parenteral nutrition, 286–7
trauma, 323
vascular endothelial growth factor 
C (VEGF-C), 1001, 1002
vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF)
antibodies targeting, 1420–1
inhibitors, 158
vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) receptor-3 
(VEGFR-3), 1001
vascular injuries
extremity trauma, 383
liver trauma, 1162
veins, 992–3
vascular interventional radiology, 
209
vascular invasion, tumour cells, 
239
vascularised composite 
allografting (VCA), 649–50
vascular malformations
cerebral, 661–2
omtestome, 1276–7
skin, 613
vascular resistance, shock, 14
Vascular Society Quality 
Improvement Programme 
(VSQIP), 162
vas deferens, 1497
vasectomy, 1374, 1512
Vaseline gauze, 625, 630
vasoactive intestinal polypeptide 
(VIP), 845
vasodilation, 10
vasopressin, see antidiuretic 
hormone (ADH)
vasopressor therapy, 16
vasospastic disorders, 967–8
Vaughan Jackson syndrome, 505
vecuronium, 273
vedolizumab, 1245, 1269
vein of Galen malformations, 661
vein patch, 99
veins
congenital anomalies, 991
cystic degeneration, 994
entrapment syndromes, 991–2
injuries, 992–3
lower limb, 969–70
neck, 367, 368
repair and replacement, 993
total blood volume, 970
veliparib, 158
velopharyngeal incompetence, 
695
vemurafenib, 154, 157, 612
vena cava, injuries, 1162
venae commitantes, 969
venetoclax, 158
venoarteriolar reflex (VAR), 
1001
venography, ascending, 989
venous disease
classification, 974
prevalence, 969
venous hypertension, 983
causes, 971
clinical features, 972–4
management, 984–5
pathology, 971–2
venous leg ulcers, 29, 973, 974, 
982–5
causes, 29, 983
clinical features, 984
investigation, 984
mixed, 983, 985
pathophysiology, 983
prevention of recurrence, 985
prognosis, 985
venous malformations, 993, 994
venous reflux, 975–6
and lymphoedema, 1005–6
venous thromboembolism, 
986–91
aetiology, 986–7
diagnosis, 987–8
investigations, 988–9
pathology, 987
prophylaxis, 989, 990, 1263
risk factors, 986, 987
venovenous bypass, 1162
ventilation
anaesthesia, 272–3, 1563
transtracheal, 748–9
ventricular aneurysm, 889
ventricular assist device (VAD), 
892
ventricular fibrillation (VF), 912
ventricular septal defect (VSD), 
904, 907–8
ventricular septal rupture, 889
ventricular tachycardia, 912
ventriculomegaly, 654
ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunts, 
586, 655–6
complications, 655–6
shunt valves, 655
ventriculostomy, endoscopic 
third ventricle, 656
vermiculation, 1019
vernal conjunctivitis, 680
Verres needle, 112
vertigo, benign paroxysmal 
positional, 714
verumontanum, 1477
vesical arteries, 1423
vesical plexus, 1423
vesico-intestinal fistula, 1440
vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR), 
131, 1404
grading, 1404
vesico-urethral fistulae, 1431
vesicovaginal fistula, 1439
vestibular labyrinth, 705
vestibular neuronitis, 714
vestibular schwannoma, 666–7, 
706, 715–16
vibration white finger, 967
Vibrio spp., 433
Victoria, Queen, 269
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1609 25/10/2017   10:44Index1610
video-assisted thoracoscopic 
surgery (VATS), 922–3
empyema debridement, 923
lung/lymph node biopsy, 930
lung resection, 931, 934
mediastinal tumour, 936
pleural effusion drainage, 922
pneumothorax, 921
videofluoroscopy, 726
video gastroduodenoscopy, 1070
video-gastroscope, 1110
villous adenomas, rectum, 1326
vinblastine, 155
vincristine, 155
VIPoma, 849
viral infections, 51–2
associated cancers, 146
hepatitis, 51–2, 1173
parotid gland, 786
transplant recipient, 1541
viral oncogenes (v-onc), 140
Virchow’s triad, 986
virilisation, 844
visceral oedema, 9–10
visceral pain, 1018, 1258
visual loss
arterial occlusion, 954–5
painless, 682–3
Vitallograph, 917
vital signs
children, 120
postoperative, 290, 291
vitamin B12
absorption, 283, 1241
deficiency, 1124, 1243, 1256
vitamin D, 158, 825, 831
vitamin K, 1163
vitamins, 282
supplementation after bariatric 
surgery, 1151
vocal folds, 727, 728
nodules, 749, 750
palsy, 751
polyps, 749–50
vocal rehabilitation, 752–3
voice change, after 
thyroidectomy, 815
voided urine cytology, 1379
voiding pressures, bladder outflow 
obstruction, 1430, 1431, 
1460
Volkmann’s ischaemic 
contracture, 404, 422
volleyball, 466
volume loading, crush syndrome, 
421
volume loss, 9–10, 13
volume procedures, as day 
surgery, 305
volvulus, 134–5, 1284–5
caecal, 1288, 1289–90, 1295
causes, 1284–5
clinical features, 1288
compound, 1285
imaging, 1289–90
sigmoid colon, 1284–5, 1288, 
1290
small intestine, 1288
volvulus neonatorum, 1284, 
1288, 1290
vomiting
after peptic ulcer surgery, 1123
bilious in children, 128, 134
cyclic in children, 1307
gastric outlet obstruction, 1130
intestinal obstruction, 1286
Mallory-Weiss syndrome, 1075
postoperative, 298–9, 304, 305
spontaneous oesophageal 
perforation, 1072–3
von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) 
syndrome, 145, 845, 1220, 
1418, 1420
von Recklinghausen disease, see 
neurofibromatosis type 1 
(NF1)
vorinostat, 157
V to Y flap, 641, 642
vulval intraepithelial neoplasia 
(VIN), 1368
Wada test, 669
Waldeyer’s fascia, 1318, 1336
Waldeyer’s ring, 725, 726, 761
walking cycle, 525
Wallerian degeneration, 25, 385
Warburg effect, 142
warfarin
endoscopy patient, 221
venous thromboembolism,  
990
warm ischaemic time, 1545
Warthin’s tumour, 789
warts
anal, 1368
genital, 1486, 1496
papillary (verruca vulgaris), 
599
water balance, daily, 280
Waterhouse–Friderichsen 
syndrome, 844
water intoxication, in 
transurethral prostatectomy, 
1467
‘water-lily’ sign, 68
water plethysmography, 1007
Weber–Christian disease, 1062
Weber–Fergusson incision, 774, 
775
wedge compression fractures, 349
wedge resection, lung, 932
weight loss
after bariatric surgery, 1145
lifestyle change, 1144
weight training, 467
Wells criteria, 988, 989
West retractor, 1561
Wharton’s duct, 780
Whipple’s procedure, 375, 1141, 
1209, 1236
Whipple’s triad, 848
Whitaker test, 1412
white cell counts (WBC)
bone/joint infections, 551, 553
primary pneumococcal 
peritonitis, 1053
whole blood, 20
whole body CT scanning, 317, 
324
whole-gut transit time, 1278, 
1279
Williams syndrome, 903
Wilms’ tumour 
(nephroblastoma), 138, 152, 
156, 832, 1421–2
Wiltse classification 
(spondylolisthesis), 478
windlass mechanism, 524
Windlass test, 460, 461
wingless-type (Wnt) pathway, 
mutations, 561, 831, 1329
withdrawal of treatment, 173
Wolfe grafts, 635, 636, 640
Wolffian duct, 1063, 1399
Wolff’s law, 561
World Anti-Doping Agency 
(WADA), 470
World Cancer Research Fund, 
143, 146
World Federation of Neurological 
Surgeons (WFNS), SAH 
grading, 659
World Health Organization/
Revised European–American 
Lymphoma (WHO/REAL) 
system, 147
World Health Organization 
(WHO)
analgesic ladder, 276
surgical safety checklist, 182–3
worms
appendix, 1302
biliary, 1205, 1207
intestinal obstruction, 60–1, 
1282–3
roundworm (ascariasis), 60–2, 
1282–3
threadworm, 1361
wound closure, 89–97
negative pressure (vacuum-
assisted), 30, 416, 638, 
639
temporary in DCS, 379
wound dehiscence, 297
risk factors, 297
wound dressings
biological, 985
burns, 625–6, 630
venous ulcers, 985
wound healing, 634
abnormal, 25–6
burns, 630–1
contractures, 32, 635
delayed, 46, 54, 89
factors influencing, 24
infected wounds, 53–5
normal phases of, 24–5
primary intention, 89
scarring, 31–2
secondary intention, 89
specific tissues, 25
tertiary intention, 89
wound infections
after appendicectomy, 1313
following CABG, 892
following colonic surgery, 1265
postoperative, 53–5, 299
prevention, 52–3
scoring systems, 47, 48
thyroid surgery, 815
wound management
acute wounds, 26–7
debridement, 26, 27, 415–16
necrotising fasciitis, 419
postoperative, 299
wounds
acute, 26–9
bites, 27
blast, 431, 433
chronic, 29–30
congenital, 615
contamination, 416
degloving, 27–8
gunshot, 315, 370, 372, 426, 
427–9
neck, 755–6
punctures, 27
‘sucking’ entry, 49
tidy vs untidy, 26
wrist
clinical examination, 442–6
congenital malformations, 509, 
510
fractures, 396–7
ganglion, 509
instability, 397–8
osteoarthritis, 506
synovitis, 195, 201
total replacement, 505
Wuchereria bancrofti, 63, 1003–4, 
1504, 1510
xanthinuria, 1406
xanthogranulomatous 
pyelonephritis, 1404–5, 1409
xenotransplantation, 1558
xeroderma pigmentosum, 145, 
595
xerostomia, 797–8
Yersinia enterocolitica, 1248, 1305
yersiniosis, 1248
yolk sac tumour, 1506
Y to V flaps, 642, 644, 1370
Z deformity, thumb, 443
Zenker’s diverticulum 
(pharyngeal pouch), 738–40, 
1101–2
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, 850–
2, 1116, 1120, 1141–2
zone of polarising activity (ZPA), 
561
Zoon’s balanitis, 1377
Z-plasty, 32, 628, 641
zygomatico-orbito complex 
fractures, 359
84_01-B&L27_Index-4col-smaller.indd   1610 25/10/2017   10:4410_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1014 25/10/2017   09:35
10_58-B&L27_Pt10_Ch58.indd   1014 25/10/2017   09:35
