Contributors
Sanchit Ahuja, MD
Department of Anesthesiology
Pain Management and Perioperative Medicine
Henry Ford Health System
Detroit, Michigan
Wael Ali Sakr Esa, MD, PhD, MBA
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology and Pain Management 
CCLCM, Case Western Reserve University
General Anesthesiology, Pain Management
Section Head Orthopedic Anesthesia
Staff Outcome Research Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
Kenneth C. Cummings III, MD, MS, FASA
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology
CCLCM, Case Western Reserve University
General Anesthesiology, Pain Management
Staff Outcome Research Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland, Ohio
Rajeev Krishnaney Davison, MD
Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland Clinic 
Cleveland, Ohio
Hesham Elsharkawy, MD, MBA, MSc
Associate Professor of Anesthesiology
Case Western Reserve University
Outcomes Research Consortium 
Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
Jacob Ezell, MD
Fellow 
Pain Management
University of California - San Diego
La Jolla, California
Ibrahim Farid, MD, FASA
Professor of Anesthesia, NEOMED
Director, Pediatric Pain Center
Pediatric Anesthesiologist
Akron Children’s Hospital
Akron, Ohio
Mauricio Forero, MD, FIPP
Associate Professor
Department of Anesthesia
McMaster University
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Rami Edward Karroum, MD
Staff, Department of Pediatric Anesthesiology
Akron Children’s Hospital
Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology, NEOMED
Akron, Ohio
Sree Kolli, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of General Anesthesiology & Regional 
Anesthesiology
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
Kamal Maheshwari, MD, MPH
Anesthesiologist
Department of General Anesthesiology and Outcomes 
Research 
Anesthesiology Institute 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation 
Cleveland, Ohio
Mohammed Faysal Malik, MD
Clinical Fellow
Regional Anesthesia & Acute Pain Management
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
Junaid Mukhdomi, MD, MS
Resident
Pain Management
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
Cleveland, Ohio
Vicente Roqués-Escolar, MD
Anesthesiologist 
Anesthesia and chronic pain treatment,
Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca
Murcia, Spain
Ana Isabel Sànchez-Amador, MD
Anesthesiologist 
Anesthesia and chronic pain treatment
Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca
Murcia, Spain
John Seif, MD
Department of General Anesthesiology
Department of Pediatric Anesthesiology
Anesthesiology Institute
Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, Ohio
Contributors
viii
Samantha Stamper, MD
Associated Professor
Anesthesiology and Acute Pain Management
Cleveland Clinic Foundation
Cleveland, Ohio
Chihiro Toda, MD
Clinical Fellow
Regional Anesthesia & Acute Pain Management,
Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio
Cynthia A. Wong, MD
Professor and Chair
Department of Anesthesia
University of Iowa
Iowa City, Iowa
Maria Yared, MD
Assistant Professor
Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine
Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC)
Charleston, South Carolina
Foreword
Richard W. Rosenquist, MD
It is a special privilege to be asked to write this foreword by the editors of Brown’s Atlas of Regional Anesthesia, Drs. Ehab 
Farag and Loran Mounir-Soliman, with whom I have been working for the past 8.5 years. I met Dr. David L. Brown in 1988 
when I attended my first ASRA meeting. Little did I know at that time that he would become a colleague, mentor, and friend 
in the years to come and have a tremendous impact on my academic and medical career choices and personal development. 
I have endeavored over the years to collect autographs from the primary authors of influential textbooks and one of the 
most treasured of these is the first edition of the Atlas of Regional Anesthesia signed with a note by David Brown. It has been 
an extremely useful textbook, and in the years following the publication of the first edition, I have watched the various 
iterations with interest, both as a consumer and author. 
The first edition of the Atlas of Regional Anesthesia was written entirely by David L. Brown, MD while he was an Associate 
Professor of Anesthesiology at Mayo Medical School in Rochester, MN, and published in 1992. At a time when regional 
anesthesia was a blend of art and science and practitioners across the country were divided into various camps depending 
on where they had trained or who they believed, there were significant variations in practice and many lively discussions 
at ASRA meetings. Those who were heavily influenced by Dr. Daniel Moore frequently advocated for the use of multiple 
injections and paresthesias to confirm correct needle placement and did not ascribe to the fascial sheath approaches being 
promoted by Dr. Alon Winnie. Dr. Brown’s goal in creating this Atlas of Regional Anesthesia was to “utilize a heavy propor­
tion of art (i.e., illustrations) in the ‘mix’”, with the thought that “these images will provide physicians with an improved 
understanding of the anatomy and the technical details necessary for the successful use of regional anesthesia”. 
The first edition had 40 chapters, of which one was about local anesthetics and equipment, 6 were about anatomy, and 
33 were about blocks. It was widely used and recognized as successful in its mission to improve understanding of the relevant 
anatomy and its application to regional anesthesia and care for patients with chronic and cancer pain at a time when visual­
izing the relevant anatomy by memory when performing blocks was critical.
The second edition in 1999 was also a single author publication that included one chapter about local anesthetics 
and equipment, six chapters of anatomy, and ten new chapters that included a chapter on Chronic and Cancer Pain Care: 
An Introduction and Perspective and nine new block chapters and modifications including continuous peripheral nerve 
blocks, infraclavicular block, the addition of saphenous block to the popliteal block chapter, paravertebral blocks, facet block, 
sacroiliac block, superior hypogastric plexus block cervical, and lumbar transforaminal injection, implantation of spinal 
drug delivery systems, and spinal cord stimulation.
The third edition in 2006 was the first multi-author publication with the addition of Drs. André P. Boezaart, James P. 
Rathmell, and Richard W. Rosenquist as authors as well as a new artist, Joanna Wild. The text had the same number of 
chapters as the second edition with modifications to the existing chapters to introduce new chapters including cervical and 
lumbar transforaminal injections.
The fourth edition in 2010 brought additional changes including three more contributors—Ursula A. Galway, Brian D. 
Sites, and Brian C. Spence. This edition was the first to address the rapidly growing use of ultrasound guidance for the 
performance of regional blocks. It increased the total number of chapters to 51 with a new chapter on transversus abdominis 
plane block and provided access to an online version with educational videos to demonstrate the role and use of ultrasound 
in the performance of regional anesthesia.
The fifth edition in 2016 brought extensive changes to the text and focus and a change in title to Brown’s Atlas of Regional 
Anesthesia. The primary authors Ehab Farag and Loran Mounir-Soliman collaborated with David L. Brown as well as seven 
new contributors. The total number of chapters was expanded to 56 to incorporate new chapters on the pharmacology of 
local anesthetics in pediatrics, adductor canal block, trigeminal (Gasserian) ganglion block, subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, quadratus lumborum block, and four chapters on pediatric regional anesthesia using ultrasound: caudal block, 
ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric block, superficial cervical plexus block and rectus sheath block in pediatrics. Existing chap­
ters on anatomy were supplemented with additional images from commonly used cross-sectional techniques such as com­
puted tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), all of the chapters related to chronic and cancer pain were 
removed, and a second illustrator Joe Kanasz was added. Finally, the videos were updated to include blocks on real patients 
to provide additional insights to the reader.
This quote from Leonardo da Vinci was included in the first four editions of the book:
“And you who think to reveal the figure of a man in words, with his limbs arranged in all their different attitudes, banish the 
idea from you, for the more minute your description the more you will confuse the mind of the reader and the more you will 
lead him away from the knowledge of the thing described. It is necessary therefore for you to represent and describe.”
Leonardo da Vinci
(1452-1519)
The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, Vol. I, Ch. III
Foreword
x
Despite the centuries that have passed since this quote was first penned, the truth of its admonition is just as relevant 
today as it was then. The primary goal of this book to “utilize a heavy proportion of art (i.e., illustrations) in the ‘mix’”, with 
the thought that “these images will provide physicians with an improved understanding of the anatomy and the technical 
details necessary for the successful use of regional anesthesia” has been maintained with focused improvements incorporated 
into each successive edition. The sixth edition scheduled for publication in 2020 has 10 new contributors and a reduction 
in the total number of chapters to 48 maintaining its focus on regional anesthesia and analgesia. This includes expansion 
of the types of blocks incorporating ultrasound guidance and the introduction of a section on obstetric regional anesthesia. 
As I review the list of new contributors and see those who have had the opportunity to work with Dr. Brown and those 
whose careers have been fostered and impacted by the new editors as well, I am confident that the tradition begun by 
Dr. Brown remains on sound footing. I am certain that this text will continue to be a valuable resource that incorporates 
the “art and science” of regional anesthesia into a single source that improves the successful use of regional anesthesia for 
generations to come. I look forward to adding this new edition to my library and collecting the autographs from the primary 
authors.
Preface to the Sixth Edition
What nobler employment or more advantageous to mankind than that of the man who correctly instructs the rising 
generation?
Cicero
In this new edition of Brown’s Atlas of Regional Anesthesia we have tried our best to make those words of Cicero our motto. 
Since the last edition, several new blocks, specifically interfascial plane blocks, have been added to our clinical practice, 
including serratus anterior, PECS, erector spinae blocks, and many more. Therefore, in this edition we tried our best to delve 
deeper and to add all the nuances in the field of regional anesthesia. Furthermore, we added a new chapter for regional 
anesthesia written by a world-renowned obstetric anesthesiologist, Dr. Cynthia Wong. We have recruited well-versed authors 
in the field of regional anesthesia from both the United States and Europe to enrich the content of the text. In this edition, 
we tried to maintain the theme that characterizes Brown’s Atlas from its first edition, which is the simplicity and easily 
performed techniques that can be routinely adopted in everyday clinical practice. All the videos in this edition, as in the 
previous one, have been performed on real patients in order to transform the atlas into a virtual workshop that can be used 
by physicians in their clinical practices. Moreover, we not only included the largest library of videos covering virtually every 
block in the atlas, but we also added an introductory video by Dr. Seif that discusses in detail commonly performed blocks. 
We hope this new edition will be useful to everyone interested in regional anesthesia from the novice to the master in the 
field.
We would like to express our gratitude to Drs. John Seif and Vicente Roqués-Escolar for their invaluable help in making 
the videos of the new edition. We would like to thank Mr. Joe Kanasz and Brandon Stelter for their extraordinary medical 
illustrations and video production, as well as Mrs. Tanya Smith, our editorial assistant, and Laura Klein and Sarah Barth 
from Elsevier for their generous help and support during the production process of this new edition.
Editors
Ehab Farag, MD, FRCA, FASA
Loran Mounir-Soliman, MD
This page intentionally left blank
Preface to the Fifth Edition
Regional anesthesia is one of the fundamental pillars of modern anesthesia. The Atlas of Regional Anesthesia by Dr. David 
Brown has become a classic textbook for regional anesthesia since its first edition in 1991. Since the last edition published 
in 2010, the use of ultrasound has changed the map of the practice of regional anesthesia. In this new edition, now Brown’s 
Atlas of Regional Anesthesia, we combined the classical techniques from the original atlas with updated techniques and blocks 
using ultrasound. We believe the eyes do not see what the brain does not recognize. Therefore we felt it was important to 
include a number of ultrasound images and figures that identify the optimal position of the needle, as well as the best posi­
tion of the patient and the anesthesiologist during the procedure. We have tried to retain the simplicity of the original atlas 
through self-explanatory figures and a few purposeful pearls to demonstrate the block performance. We tried to limit the 
techniques to the most commonly used and routinely adopted in our practice. Moreover, we have added videos of real 
patients for better clarification, showing real-time blocks performance in addition to advanced techniques using peripheral 
nerve catheters. Our aim is to transform the atlas into a virtual workshop that enables the reader to feel comfortable with 
the procedures after reading the text and watching the video. In this new edition we did rewrite all the blocks using ultra­
sound and added new blocks like subcostal, quadratus lumborum, paravertebral, adductor canal, and many more. We have 
added new chapters on regional anesthesia pharmacology and on regional anesthesia using ultrasound in pediatric patients. 
We hope this new edition will be useful to anyone interested in learning regional anesthesia or in mastering regional 
anesthesia.
We would like to thank Mr. Joe Kanasz for his extraordinary medical illustrations; Mrs. Mariela Madrilejos, our editorial 
assistant; Ms. Carole McMurray and Mr. William Schmitt from Elsevier for their help and incessant support during the 
production process of this edition.
Editors
Ehab Farag, MD, FRCA
Loran Mounir-Soliman, MD
This page intentionally left blank
Introduction to the Fourth Edition
The necessary, but somewhat artificial, separation of anesthetic care into regional or general anesthetic techniques often 
gives rise to the concept that these two techniques should not or cannot be mixed. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
To provide comprehensive regional anesthesia care, it is absolutely essential that the anesthesiologist be skilled in all aspects 
of anesthesia. This concept is not original: John Lundy promoted this idea in the 1920s when he outlined his concept of 
“balanced anesthesia.” Even before Lundy promoted this concept, however, George Crile had written extensively on the 
concept of anociassociation.
It is often tempting, and quite human, to trace the evolution of a discipline back through the discipline’s developmental 
family tree. When such an investigation is carried out for regional anesthesia, Louis Gaston Labat, MD, often receives credit 
for being central in its development. Nevertheless, Labat’s interest and expertise in regional anesthesia were nurtured by 
Dr. Victor Pauchet of Paris, France, to whom Dr. Labat was an assistant. The real trunk of the developmental tree of regional 
anesthesia consists of the physicians willing to incorporate regional techniques into their early surgical practices. In Labat’s 
original 1922 text, Regional Anesthesia: Its Technique and Clinical Application, Dr. William Mayo in the foreword stated:
The young surgeon should perfect himself in the use of regional anesthesia, which increases in value with the increase in the 
skill with which it is administered. The well-equipped surgeon must be prepared to use the proper anesthesia, or the proper 
combination of anesthesias, in the individual case. I do not look forward to the day when regional anesthesia will wholly displace 
general anesthesia; but undoubtedly it will reach and hold a very high position in surgical practice.
Perhaps if the current generation of both surgeons and anesthesiologists keeps Mayo’s concept in mind, our patients will 
be the beneficiaries.
It appears that these early surgeons were better able to incorporate regional techniques into their practices because they 
did not see the regional block as the “end all.” Rather, they saw it as part of a comprehensive package that had benefit for 
their patients. Surgeons and anesthesiologists in that era were able to avoid the flawed logic that often seems to pervade 
application of regional anesthesia today. These individuals did not hesitate to supplement their blocks with sedatives or light 
general anesthetics; they did not expect each and every block to be “100%.” The concept that a block has failed unless it 
provides complete anesthesia without supplementation seems to have occurred when anesthesiology developed as an inde­
pendent specialty. To be successful in carrying out regional anesthesia, we must be willing to get back to our roots and 
embrace the concepts of these early workers who did not hesitate to supplement their regional blocks. Ironically, today some 
consider a regional block a failure if the initial dose does not produce complete anesthesia; yet these same individuals 
complement our “general anesthetists” who utilize the concept of anesthetic titration as a goal. Somehow, we need to meld 
these two views into one that allows comprehensive, titrated care to be provided for all our patients.
As Dr. Mayo emphasized in Labat’s text, it is doubtful that regional anesthesia will “ever wholly displace general anesthe­
sia.” Likewise, it is equally clear that general anesthesia will probably never be able to replace the appropriate use of regional 
anesthesia. One of the principal rationales for avoiding the use of regional anesthesia through the years has been that it was 
“expensive” in terms of operating room and physician time. As is often the case, when examined in detail, some accepted 
truisms need rethinking. Thus it is surprising that much of the renewed interest in regional anesthesia results from focusing 
on health care costs and the need to decrease the length and cost of hospitalization.
If regional anesthesia is to be incorporated successfully into a practice, there must be time for anesthesiologist and patient 
to discuss the upcoming operation and anesthetic prescription. Likewise, if regional anesthesia is to be effectively used, some 
area of an operating suite must be used to place the blocks before moving patients to the main operating room. Immediately 
at hand in this area must be both anesthetic and resuscitative equipment (such as regional trays), as well as a variety of local 
anesthetic drugs that span the timeline of anesthetic duration. Even after successful completion of the technical aspect of 
regional anesthesia, an anesthesiologist’s work is really just beginning: it is as important to use appropriate sedation intra­
operatively as it was preoperatively while the block was being administered.
This page intentionally left blank
Contents
Section I: Introduction
Chapter 1:	
Pharmacology3
Kamal Maheshwari and David L. Brown with 
contributions from Brian D. Sites and Brian 
C. Spence
Chapter 2:	
Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics in 
Pediatrics...............................................................7
Ibrahim Farid and Rami Edward Karroum
Chapter 3:	
Equipment and Ultrasound.................................13
Kamal Maheshwari and Loran Mounir-Soliman
Section II: Upper Extremity Blocks
Chapter 4:	
Upper Extremity Block Anatomy......................25
David L. Brown
Chapter 5:	
Interscalene Block..............................................33
Ehab Farag with David L. Brown
Chapter 6:	
Supraclavicular Block........................................45
Ehab Farag and David L. Brown
Chapter 7:	
Suprascapular Block...........................................55
Wael Ali Sakr Esa
Chapter 8:	
Infraclavicular Block..........................................59
Kenneth C. Cummings III and Ehab Farag
Chapter 9:	
Axillary Block.....................................................69
Wael Ali Sakr Esa and David L. Brown
Chapter 10:	
Distal Upper Extremity Blocks..........................77
Sree Kolli and Sanchit Ahuja
Chapter 11:	
Intravenous Regional Block...............................85
David L. Brown
Section III: Lower Extremity Blocks
Chapter 12:	
Lower Extremity Block Anatomy......................91
David L. Brown
Chapter 13:	
Lumbar Plexus Block.........................................99
Loran Mounir-Soliman and David L. Brown
Chapter 14:	
Sciatic Block......................................................107
Ehab Farag and David L. Brown
Chapter 15:	
Femoral Block...................................................115
Ehab Farag and David L. Brown
Chapter 16:	
Ultrasound for Fascia Iliaca and Inguinal 
Region Blocks....................................................127
Mohammed Faysal Malik and Chihiro Toda
Chapter 17:	
Lateral Femoral Cutaneous Nerve Block........131
Sanchit Ahuja and Sree Kolli
Chapter 18:	
Obturator Block...............................................135
Loran Mounir-Soliman and David L. Brown
Chapter 19:	
Popliteal and Saphenous Block.......................141
Maria Yared and David L. Brown
Chapter 20:	
Adductor Canal Block......................................151
Ehab Farag
Chapter 21:	
Ankle Block.......................................................157
Maria Yared and David L. Brown
Section IV: Head and Neck Blocks
Chapter 22:	
Retrobulbar (Peribulbar) Block......................167
David L. Brown
Chapter 23:	
Cervical Plexus Block.......................................171
Jacob Ezell and Samantha Stamper
Chapter 24:	
Stellate Ganglion Block....................................177
Vicente Roqués-Escolar and Ana Isabel 
Sánchez-Amador
Section V: Airway Blocks
Chapter 25:	
Airway Block Anatomy....................................183
David L. Brown
Chapter 26:	
Glossopharyngeal Block..................................189
David L. Brown
Chapter 27:	
Superior Laryngeal Block................................193
David L. Brown
Chapter 28:	
Translaryngeal Block........................................195
David L. Brown
Section VI: Truncal Blocks
Chapter 29:	
Truncal Block Anatomy...................................199
David L. Brown
Chapter 30:	
PECS and Pecto-Intercostal Blocks.................203
Loran Mounir-Soliman
Chapter 31:	
Serratus Anterior Block...................................207
Loran Mounir-Soliman
Chapter 32:	
Ultrasound for Intercostal Block....................211
Ehab Farag and Rajeev Krishnaney Davison
Chapter 33:	
Paravertebral Block..........................................215
Ehab Farag
Chapter 34:	
Erector Spinae Plane Block..............................221
Vicente Roqués-Escolar and Mauricio Forero
Chapter 35:	
Rectus Sheath Block and Catheter 
in Adults............................................................227
Jacob Ezell, Junaid Mukhdomi, 
Samantha Stamper, and John Seif
Chapter 36:	
Transversus Abdominis Plane Block 
(Classic Approach)...........................................231
Loran Mounir-Soliman
Chapter 37:	
Subcostal Transversus Abdominal 
Plane Block.........................................................233
Ehab Farag
Chapter 38:	
Quadratus Lumborum Block..........................237
Hesham Elsharkawy and Ehab Farag
Section VII: Neuraxial Blocks
Chapter 39:	
Ultrasound-Assisted Neuraxial Blocks...........243
Loran Mounir-Soliman
Contents
xviii
Chapter 47:	
Paravertebral Catheters in Pediatrics.............293
John Seif
Section IX: Obstetrics Regional 
Anesthesia
Chapter 48:	
Regional Techniques During Pregnancy 
and Delivery.......................................................297
Cynthia A. Wong
Index303
The videos accompanying this text can be accessed at
www.expertconsult.com and includes over 40 ultrasound 
scans of procedures discussed in the book. The videos should 
be used in conjunction with the text and not as a standalone 
product.
Chapter 40:	
Spinal Block......................................................249
David L. Brown
Chapter 41:	
Epidural Block..................................................261
David L. Brown
Chapter 42:	
Caudal Block.....................................................273
David L. Brown
Section VIII: Pediatric Regional 
Using Ultrasound
Chapter 43:	
Caudal Block in Pediatrics...............................281
John Seif
Chapter 44:	
Ilioinguinal and Iliohypogastric Block...........283
John Seif
Chapter 45:	
Superficial Cervical Plexus Block....................287
John Seif
Chapter 46:	
Pudendal Nerve Block......................................291
John Seif
Introduction
Section 1
This page intentionally left blank
Pharmacology
Kamal Maheshwari and David L. Brown 
with contributions from Brian D. Sites and Brian C. Spence1
Regional anesthesia is a fast-growing field with application 
in a wide range of surgical procedures. Better technique 
with the help of ultrasound, better and safer local anesthet­
ics, and better drug delivery systems for continuous anes­
thesia all helped in gaining the current status. Far too often, 
those unfamiliar with regional anesthesia regard it as 
complex because of the long list of local anesthetics avail­
able and the varied techniques described. The goal through­
out this book is to simplify regional anesthesia by providing 
specific information about various elements involved in 
decision making.
One of the first steps in simplifying regional anesthesia 
is to understand the two principal decisions necessary in 
prescribing a regional technique. First, the appropriate tech­
nique needs to be chosen for the patient, the surgical pro­
cedure, and the physicians involved. Second, the appropriate 
local anesthetic and potential additives must be matched to 
patient, procedure, regional technique, and physician. This 
book will detail how to integrate these concepts into your 
practice.
DRUGS
Numerous local anesthetic drugs are used in varied con­
centrations and with different additives. The decision to 
choose one particular local anesthetic is influenced by 
patient factors, surgical factors, and the available resources 
(cost factors). Not all procedures are created equal in terms 
of the amount of time needed to complete an operation, 
and the severity or nature of pain will be different. If anes­
thesiologists are to use regional techniques effectively, they 
must be able to choose a local anesthetic that lasts the right 
amount of time and provides effective anesthesia and anal­
gesia. To do this, they need to understand the local anes­
thetic timeline from the shorter-acting to the longer-acting 
agents (Fig. 1.1) and the effect of additives. Also, they 
need to understand the factors associated with successful 
continuous nerve block management.
All local anesthetics share the basic structure of aromatic 
end, intermediate chain, and amine end (Fig. 1.2). This 
basic structure is subdivided clinically into two classes of 
drugs: the amino esters and the amino amides. The amino 
esters possess an ester linkage between the aromatic end 
and the intermediate chain. These drugs include cocaine, 
procaine, 2-chloroprocaine, and tetracaine (Figs. 1.3 and 
1.4). The amino amides contain an amide link between the 
aromatic end and the intermediate chain. These drugs 
include lidocaine, prilocaine, etidocaine, mepivacaine, 
bupivacaine, and ropivacaine (see Figs. 1.3 and 1.4).
AMINO ESTERS
CH3
H3CO
N
O
O
CO
H
C
Cocaine was the first local anesthetic used clinically, and it 
is used today primarily for topical airway anesthesia. It is 
unique among the local anesthetics in that it is a vasocon­
strictor rather than a vasodilator. Some anesthesia depart­
ments have limited the availability of cocaine because of 
fears of its abuse potential. In those institutions, mixtures 
of lidocaine and phenylephrine rather than cocaine are 
used to anesthetize the airway mucosa and shrink the 
mucous membranes.
COOCH2CH2
H2N
C2H5
C2H5
N
Procaine was synthesized in 1904 by Einhorn, who was 
looking for a drug that was superior to cocaine and other 
solutions in use. Currently, procaine is seldom used for 
peripheral nerve or epidural blocks because of its low 
potency, slow onset, short duration of action, and limited 
power of tissue penetration. It is an excellent local anes­
thetic for skin infiltration, and its 10% form can be used as 
a short-acting (i.e., lasting ,1 hour) spinal anesthetic.
COOCH2CH2
Cl
H2N
C2H5
C2H5
N
Chloroprocaine has a rapid onset and a short duration of 
action. Its principal use is in producing epidural anesthesia 
for short procedures (i.e., lasting ,1 hour). Its use declined 
during the early 1980s after reports of prolonged sensory 
and motor deficits resulting from unintentional subarach­
noid administration of an intended epidural dose. The 
adverse effects were related to low pH and the use of 
sodium metabisulfite as a preservative. However, newer 
drug formulation has used EDTA as the preservative. Still, 
short-lived yet annoying back pain may develop after large 
(.30 mL) epidural doses of 3% chloroprocaine, presum­
ably due to calcium binding by the EDTA. For spinal anes­
thesia, a dose of 30 and 60 mg 1%–2% 2-chloroprocinae 
can last up to 60 minutes, however its use is still limited.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
4
Infiltration
    epi
Peripheral
    epi
Epidural
    epi
*Subarachnoid block.
†For lower extremity surgery.
45–60
60–90
SAB*
    epi
   phenylephrine†
75–90
90–180
90–120
120–180
80–120
120–180
90–140
140–200
100–150
120–220
360–480
480–600
140–200
160–220
120–200
150–225
60
75–100
180–360
200–400
480–780
600–900
165–225
180–240
90–110
100–150
70–90
100–150
200–300
45–60
60–90
Procaine
Chloroprocaine
Lidocaine
Mepivacaine
Tetracaine
Ropivacaine
Etidocaine
Bupivacaine
60–75
75–90
90–120
Fig. 1.1  ​Local anesthetic 
timeline (length in minutes of 
surgical anesthesia). Epi, 
epinephrine.
Aromatic end
Amine end
Intermediate chain
R1
R2
N
Fig. 1.2  ​Basic local anesthetic structure.
A
B
Fig. 1.3  ​Local anesthetics commonly used in the United States. 
(A) Amides. (B) Esters.
COOCH2CH2
H9C4
Cl
N
H
CH3
CH3
N
Tetracaine, first synthesized in 1931, has become widely 
used in the United States for spinal anesthesia. It may be 
used as an isobaric, hypobaric, or hyperbaric solution 
for spinal anesthesia. Without epinephrine, it typically lasts 
1.5 to 2.5 hours, and with the addition of epinephrine, it 
may last up to 4 hours for lower extremity procedures. 
Tetracaine is also an effective topical airway anesthetic, 
although caution must be used because of the potential for 
systemic side effects. Tetracaine is available as a 1% solution 
for intrathecal use or as anhydrous crystals that are recon­
stituted as tetracaine solution by adding sterile water 
immediately before use. Tetracaine is not as stable as pro­
caine or lidocaine in solution, and the crystals undergo 
deterioration over time. Nevertheless, when a tetracaine 
spinal anesthetic is ineffective, one should question tech­
nique before “blaming” the drug.
AMINO AMIDES
NHCOCH2
C2H5
C2H5
N
CH3
CH3
Lidocaine was the first clinically used amide local anes­
thetic, having been introduced by Lofgren in 1948. 
Lidocaine has become the most widely used local anes­
thetic in the world because of its inherent potency; rapid 
onset; tissue penetration; and effectiveness during infiltra­
tion, peripheral nerve block, and both epidural and spinal 
blocks. During peripheral nerve block, a 1% to 1.5% solu­
tion is often effective in producing an acceptable motor 
blockade, whereas during epidural block, a 2% solution 
seems most effective. In spinal anesthesia, a 5% solution in 
dextrose is most commonly used, although it may also be 
used as a 0.5% hypobaric solution in a volume of 6 to 
8 mL. Others use lidocaine as a short-acting 2% solution 
in a volume of 2 to 3 mL. The suggestion that lidocaine 
causes an unacceptable frequency of neurotoxicity with 
spinal use needs to be balanced against its long history of 
use. We believe that the basic science research may not 
5
Pharmacology
anesthesia. Prilocaine is not more widely used because, 
when metabolized, it can produce both orthotoluidine and 
nitrotoluidine, agents in methemoglobin formation.
NHCOCH
C2H5
C3H7
N
C2H5
CH3
CH3
Etidocaine is chemically related to lidocaine and is a 
long-acting amide local anesthetic. Etidocaine is associated 
with profound motor blockade and is best used when this 
attribute can be of clinical advantage. It has a more rapid 
onset of action than bupivacaine, but is used less frequently. 
Those clinicians using etidocaine often use it for the initial 
epidural dose and then use bupivacaine for subsequent 
epidural injections.
CH3
NHCO
CH3
CH3
N
Mepivacaine is structurally related to lidocaine, and the 
two drugs have similar actions. Overall, mepivacaine is 
slightly longer acting than lidocaine, and this difference in 
duration is accentuated when epinephrine is added to the 
solutions.
NHCO
CH3
CH3
C4H9
N
Bupivacaine is a long-acting local anesthetic that can be 
used for infiltration, peripheral nerve block, and epidural 
and spinal anesthesia. Useful concentrations of the drug 
range from 0.125% to 0.75%. By altering the concentration 
of bupivacaine, sensory and motor blockade can be sepa­
rated. Lower concentrations provide sensory blockade 
principally, and as the concentration is increased, the effec­
tiveness of motor blockade increases with it. If an anesthe­
siologist had to select a single drug and a single drug 
concentration, 0.5% bupivacaine would be a logical choice 
because at that concentration it is useful for peripheral 
nerve block, subarachnoid block, and epidural block. 
Cardiotoxicity during systemic toxic reactions with bupi­
vacaine became a concern in the 1980s. Although it is clear 
that bupivacaine alters myocardial conduction more dra­
matically than lidocaine, the need for appropriate and 
rapid resuscitation during any systemic toxic reaction 
cannot be overemphasized. Levobupivacaine is the single 
enantiomer (l-isomer) of bupivacaine and appears to have 
a systemic toxicity profile similar to that of ropivacaine, 
and clinically it has effects similar to those of racemic 
bupivacaine.
NHCO
CH3
CH3
C3H7
N
Ropivacaine is another long-acting local anesthetic, 
similar to bupivacaine; it was introduced in the United 
States in 1996. It may offer an advantage over bupivacaine 
because experimentally it appears to be less cardiotoxic. 
Procaine
Cocaine
2-Chloroprocaine
Lidocaine
Prilocaine
Mepivacaine
Tetracaine
Ropivacaine
Etidocaine
Bupivacaine
AMINO ESTERS
AMINO AMIDES
COOCH2CH2
H2N
C2H5
C2H5
CH3
H3CO
N
O
O
CO
N
COOCH2CH2
Cl
H2N
C2H5
C2H5
N
COOCH2CH2
H9C4
Cl
N
H
CH3
CH3
N
NHCOCH2
CH3
CH3
C2H5
C2H5
N
NHCOCH
CH3
CH3
H
C3H7
N
NHCOCH
CH3
CH3
C2H5
C3H7
N
NHCO
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
NHCO
CH3
CH3
C4H9
NHCO
CH3
CH3
C3H7
N
N
CH3
C2H5
H
C
Fig. 1.4  ​Chemical structure of commonly used amino ester and 
amino amide local anesthetics.
completely reflect the typical clinical situation. In any 
event, we have reduced the total dose of subarachnoid lido­
caine we administer to less than 75 mg per spinal proce­
dure, inject it more rapidly than in the past, and no longer 
use it for continuous subarachnoid techniques. Patients 
often report that lidocaine causes the most common local 
anesthetic allergies. However, many of these reported aller­
gies are simply epinephrine reactions resulting from intra­
vascular injection of the local anesthetic epinephrine 
mixture, often during dental injection.
NHCOCH
CH3
CH3
H
C3H7
N
CH3
Prilocaine is structurally related to lidocaine, although it 
causes significantly less vasodilation than lidocaine and thus 
can be used without epinephrine. Prilocaine is formulated 
for infiltration, peripheral nerve block, and epidural anes­
thesia. Its anesthetic profile is similar to that of lidocaine, 
although in addition to producing less vasodilation, it has 
less potential for systemic toxicity in equal doses. This attri­
bute makes it particularly useful for intravenous regional 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
6
Initial studies also suggest that ropivacaine may produce 
less motor block than that produced by bupivacaine, with 
similar analgesia. Ropivacaine may also be slightly shorter 
acting than bupivacaine, with useful drug concentrations 
ranging from 0.25% to 1%. Many practitioners believe that 
ropivacaine may offer particular advantages for postopera­
tive analgesic infusions and obstetric analgesia.
Levobupivacaine is a pure S enantiomer of bupivacaine 
with lower cardiac toxicity profile but similar pharmacoki­
netic profile. Levobupivacaine potency is less than bupiva­
caine and more than ropivacaine. It can be used for all 
peripheral nerve blocks and neuraxial blocks.
Exparel (bupivacaine liposome injectable suspension) is 
a new drug that utilizes the DepoFoam technology devel­
oped by Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Parsippany, NJ, 
USA). The bupivacaine is encapsulated in multivesicular 
liposomes, from which sustained release of the drug 
happens in the infiltrated areas for up to 72 hours. Exparel 
is indicated for single-dose infiltration in adults to produce 
postsurgical local analgesia and as an interscalene brachial 
plexus nerve block to produce postsurgical regional anal­
gesia. The 20 ml Exparel can be mixed with saline or plain 
bupivacaine, if larger infiltration volume is required.
VASOCONSTRICTORS
Vasoconstrictors are often added to local anesthetics to 
prolong the duration of action and improve the quality of 
the local anesthetic block. Although it is still unclear 
whether vasoconstrictors actually allow local anesthetics to 
have a longer duration of block or are effective because they 
produce additional antinociception through a-adrenergic 
action, their clinical effect is not in question.
CH
NH
CH2
CH3
OH
HO
HO
Epinephrine is the most common vasoconstrictor used; 
overall, the most effective concentration, excluding spinal 
anesthesia, is a 1:200,000 concentration. When epinephrine 
is added to local anesthetic in the commercial production 
process, it is necessary to add stabilizing agents because 
epinephrine rapidly loses its potency on exposure to air and 
light. The added stabilizing agents lower the pH of the local 
anesthetic solution into the 3 to 4 range and, because of 
the higher pKa values of local anesthetics, slow the onset 
of effective regional block. Thus if epinephrine is to be used 
with local anesthetics, it should be added at the time the 
block is performed, at least for the initial block. In subse­
quent injections made during continuous epidural block, 
commercial preparations of local anesthetic–epinephrine 
solutions can be used effectively.
CH
NH
CH2
CH3
OH
OH
Phenylephrine also has been used as a vasoconstrictor, 
principally with spinal anesthesia; effective prolongation of 
block can be achieved by adding 2 to 5 mg of phenylephrine 
to the spinal anesthetic drug. Norepinephrine also has been 
used as a vasoconstrictor for spinal anesthesia, although it 
does not appear to be as long lasting as epinephrine or to 
have any advantages over it. Because most local anesthetics 
are vasodilators, the addition of epinephrine often does not 
decrease blood flow as many fear it will; rather, the combi­
nation of local anesthetic and epinephrine results in tissue 
blood flow similar to that before injection.
LOCAL ANESTHETIC TOXICITY
Local anesthetic can cause direct nerve injury and/or sys­
temic toxicity. If systemic toxicity is suspected, it should be 
treated swiftly with Intralipid. See Table 1.1 for the local 
anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) management protocol.
Table 1.1  
  
American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine
Checklist for Treatment of Local Anesthetic 
Systemic Toxicity
The pharmacologic treatment of Local Anesthetic Systemic 
Toxicity (LAST) is different from other cardiac arrest 
scenarios.
•	 Get Help
•	 Initial Focus
•	 Airway management: ventilate with 100% oxygen
•	 Seizure suppression: benzodiazepines are preferred; 
AVOID propofol in patients having signs of cardiovascular 
instability
•	 Alert the nearest facility having cardiopulmonary 
bypass capability
•	 Management of Cardiac Arrhythmias
•	 Basic and Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) will 
require adjustment of medications and perhaps 
prolonged effort
•	 AVOID vasopressin, calcium channel blockers, beta 
blockers, or local anesthetic
•	 REDUCE individual epinephrine doses to ,1 µg/kg
•	 Lipid Emulsion (20%) Therapy (values in parentheses are 
for 70 kg patient)
•	 Bolus 1.5 mL/kg (lean body mass) intravenously over 
1 minute (,100 mL)
•	 Continuous infusion 0.25 mL/kg/min (,18 mL/min; 
adjust by roller clamp)
•	 Repeat bolus once or twice for persistent cardiovascular 
collapse
•	 Double the infusion rate to 0.5 mL/kg/min if blood 
pressure remains low
•	 Continue infusion for at least 10 minutes after attaining 
circulatory stability
•	 Recommended upper limit: Approximately 10 mL/kg 
lipid emulsion over the first 30 minutes
•	 Post LAST events at www.lipidrescue.org and report use 
of lipid to www.lipidregistry.org
Data from: American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 
Checklist for Managing Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity: 2012 
Version. 
e1
Abstract: This chapter presents a brief review of pharmo­
kinetics and pharmacodynamics of local anesthestics, 
including the role of additives, for successful completion of 
regional anesthesia procedures. We also present treatment 
of local anesthestic systemic toxicity in this chapter.
Keywords: Local anesthestics; pharmacology; LAST, local 
anesthetic systemic toxicity
Pharmacology of Local 
Anesthetics in Pediatrics
Ibrahim Farid and Rami Edward Karroum2
activity level by 9 months to 1 year of age. Therefore neo­
nates and infants have a decreased clearance of amide LAs. 
Amide LAs bind to serum proteins. a1-acid glycoprotein is 
the major serum protein that binds amide LAs. Albumin 
has a very low affinity to bind amide LAs. However, being 
the most abundant protein in serum, albumin binding 
capacity to amide LAs is not insignificant.
Infants have a decreased level of a1-acid glycoprotein 
and albumin. Adult levels of protein binding are reached at 
about 1 year of age. Therefore neonates and infants are 
more prone to developing toxicity from amide LAs due to 
a higher serum-free fraction and lower clearance rate. The 
susceptibility to cardiac toxicity is amplified by increased 
heart rates. Due to their higher baseline heart rates neo­
nates and infants are more sensitive than adults to amide 
LA-induced cardiotoxicity.
Neonates and infants have a relatively larger volume of 
distribution (VD) of amide LAs compared with adults. 
Toxicity will be more likely to occur following repeated 
doses and/or continuous infusion. This can be explained 
by the fact that larger VD prevents high serum drug con­
centrations from occurring after a slow incremental injec­
tion of a single dose of amide LAs.
Commonly used amide LAs in children include lido­
caine, ropivacaine, bupivacaine, its L-enantiomer levobu­
pivacaine, and eutectic mixture of local anesthetics 
(EMLA) cream.
Ester LAs are degraded in plasma by cholinesterases. 
Although neonates and infants have a lower level of 
cholinesterases, this has not been shown to be of clinical 
significance. Commonly used ester LAs in children include 
tetracaine and 2% to 3% chloroprocaine. Chloroprocaine 
use for continuous epidural analgesia in neonates and 
infants has been on the rise due to its rare incidence of 
systemic toxicity.
AMIDE LOCAL ANESTHETICS
BUPIVACAINE
This is the most commonly used amide LA for regional 
blockade in pediatric anesthesia. Its long duration of action 
is related to its high binding to plasma proteins. Adding 
epinephrine will not result in further prolongation of the 
duration of action. However, epinephrine will reduce the 
rate of systemic absorption and the peak plasma concentra­
tion of bupivacaine. Its relatively slow onset of action is due 
Key Points
Neonates and infants are more prone to developing 
systemic toxicity to local anesthetics (LAs), particularly 
amide LAs, compared with older children and adults. 
This is due to reduced plasma concentration of a1-
acid glycoprotein with higher unbound fraction and 
decreased clearance of amide LAs.
Higher baseline heart rates in neonates and infants 
predispose them to increased sensitivity for bupivacaine-
induced cardiotoxicity compared with adults. This is 
due to the strong affinity of bupivacaine for the fast 
sodium channels, resulting in prolonged blockade of 
these channels in the cardiac conduction system and a 
profound decrease in ventricular conduction velocity.
Chloroprocaine is the LA of choice for epidural infusion 
in neonates and small infants due to its very low risk of 
systemic toxicity and accumulation compared with 
amide LAs in this age group as well as easier dosing and 
pump programming.
Regional anesthesia is usually performed under general 
anesthesia, which may mask the earliest signs of 
systemic toxicity, particularly central nervous system 
(CNS) signs. Therefore refractory cardiovascular collapse 
may be the first and only sign in pediatric patients.
It is recommended that an epinephrine-containing 
test dose be used in all regional blocks before giving 
the full bolus dose. Order of sensitivity for detection 
of unintentional intravascular injection in pediatric 
patients when a test dose of LAs mixed with epinephrine 
is given, from most to least sensitive, is:
Increase T wave amplitude and ST segment 
changes . increase in systolic blood pressure 
more than 10% . increase in heart rate 10% 
to 15% above baseline heart rate before 
administration of test dose.
Total doses of LAs should not exceed the maximum 
allowable dose under any circumstances. The dose 
should be based on the lean body weight rather than 
the actual body weight, particularly in obese patients.
INTRODUCTION
LAs are divided into two main chemical compounds: the 
amides and the esters.
Amide LAs are metabolized exclusively in the liver by 
cytochrome P450 enzymes. These enzymes reach adult 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
8
to its high pKa of 8.1. It is a racemic mixture of levorotatory 
(L) and dextrorotatory (D) enantiomers; the L-enantiomer 
is the bioactive form, and the D-enantiomer is responsible 
for its toxicity. Toxicity from bupivacaine can be serious, 
ranging from CNS excitation to cardiovascular collapse. 
Direct cardiac toxicity is due to prolonged blockade of 
the sodium channels in the cardiac conduction system, 
resulting in a profound decrease in ventricular conduction 
velocity. This phenomenon is markedly amplified by tachy­
cardia due to the strong affinity of bupivacaine for the fast 
sodium channels. Stereoselectivity of the sodium channel 
in the open state, however, has not been demonstrated.
The threshold for toxicity occurs at a bupivacaine level 
of 2 to 4 µg/mL. The maximum dose of bupivacaine is 
2.5 to 3 mg/kg. The most commonly used concentration 
for single-shot peripheral nerve block and caudal epidural 
is 0.25% (Table 2.1). After a single administration, analge­
sia usually lasts for 3 to 4 hours. For an epidural catheter 
the loading dose is 0.05 mL/kg/spinal segment or between 
0.5 and 1 mL/kg, not to exceed the maximum dose of 
2.5 mg/kg. For continuous epidural infusion a concentra­
tion ranging from 0.0625% to 0.125% is used and usually 
runs at a dose of 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg/h (Table 2.2).
LIPOSOMAL BUPIVACAINE
Recently, a liposome bupivacaine has been approved by 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in 
adults as a local anesthetic injected into the surgical site 
for postsurgical pain relief. The liposome bupivacaine 
formulation incorporates liposome-encapsulated bupiva­
caine (DepoFoam) and a small amount of extraliposo­
mal bupivacaine. The liposome-encapsulated component 
permits bupivacaine release over an extended period. 
The extraliposomal component allows for rapid release 
and relatively rapid onset of action. There are some recent 
studies evaluating its use in the epidural space in adults 
as an alternative to continuous bupivacaine infusion 
through an indwelling epidural catheter. Liposomal bupi­
vacaine is not currently approved for use in children. 
If approved, it may offer an attractive alternative for 
children in whom an indwelling catheter is not an option, 
but in whom prolonged regional blockade provided by 
liposome bupivacaine formulation may be beneficial.
LEVOBUPIVACAINE (L-ENANTIOMER 
OF BUPIVACAINE)
Levobupivacaine has almost the same blocking properties 
and pharmacokinetics as its racemic counterpart bupiva­
caine. The effect on the cardiac conduction system is stereo­
specific, with the L-enantiomer having much less of an 
effect than the D-enantiomer present in the racemic mixture 
of bupivacaine. As a result, levobupivacaine carries a reduced 
risk of cardiac toxicity compared with bupivacaine. It is 
currently unavailable in the United States.
ROPIVACAINE
This exists as an L-enantiomer. It is chemically similar to 
bupivacaine, but differs from it structurally having a propyl 
(three-carbon) side chain rather than a butyl (four-carbon) 
side chain. In an equipotent dose it carries a lower risk of 
cardiac and neurological toxicities compared with bupiva­
caine. This makes ropivacaine an attractive alternative to 
bupivacaine in pediatric patients. The data available from 
studies on infants and children do not report greater 
Table 2.1  Single-Shot Caudal Epidural Dose of Local Anesthetics
Local anesthetic
Concentration
Dose (mg/kg)
Dose (mL/kg)
Bupivacaine
0.25% (2.5 mg/mL)
2.5 
1
Ropivacaine
0.2% (2 mg/mL)
2
1
Table 2.2  Suggested Epidural Infusion Concentrations and Rates for Pediatric Patients
Local anesthetic
Maximum rate of infusion and suggested infusion concentration (conc.)
Neonates and infants up to 6 months
Infants (6 months to 1 year)
Children older than 
1 year
Chloroprocainea
Conc. of 2%. Rate of 5 to 15 mg/kg/h.
N/Ac
N/Ac
Bupivacaine
Conc. of 0.0625%. Rate of 0.2 mg/kg/h 
for no more than 48 hours.
Conc. of 0.0625% to 0.125%. Rate of 
0.3 to 0.4 mg/kg/h. Reduce the infusion 
rate 30% after 48 hours and discontinue 
after 72 hours.
Conc. of 0.0625% 
to 0.125%. Rate of 
0.4 mg/kg/h.
Ropivacaineb
Conc. of 0.1%. Rate of 0.2 mg/kg/h for 
no more than 72 hours. Reduce the 
infusion rate 30% after 48 hours.
Conc. of 0.1% to 0.2%. Rate of 0.3 to 
0.4 mg/kg/h. Reduce the infusion rate 
30% after 48 hours.
Conc. of 0.1% to 0.2%. 
Rate of 0.4 mg/kg/h.
aChloroprocaine is the first choice for epidural infusion in neonates due to reduced risk of systemic toxicity compared with amide LAs.
bRopivacaine is the second choice for epidural infusion in neonates due to its better toxicity profile compared with bupivacaine.
cN/A, nonapplicable. Chloroprocaine is not usually used in this age group and is replaced by amide LAs.
9
Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics in Pediatrics
to heat once the patch is removed from the pouch and is 
exposed to oxygen in the air. It increases skin temperature 
slightly to increase blood flow into the area and speeds 
up delivery of LAs to provide anesthesia to a depth of 
almost 7 mm. It is used to facilitate venipuncture, intrave­
nous cannulation, and some superficial dermatological 
procedures. It should be applied only to intact skin. 
Methemoglobinemia has been reported, and caution 
should be exercised in patients with congenital or idio­
pathic methemoglobinemia. Caution should be exercised 
in patients with pseudocholinesterase deficiency, as they 
are at greater risk of tetracaine toxicity.
If being used with other products containing an LA con­
sider the potential for additive effects. The heating compo­
nent contains iron powder and must be removed before 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Application of the 
patch for a longer duration than recommended, or simul­
taneous or sequential application of multiple patches, is 
not recommended because of the risk for increased drug 
absorption and possible adverse reactions. Cutting the 
patch or removing the top cover could cause the patch to 
heat to temperatures that could result in thermal injury. On 
the other hand, covering the holes on the top side of the 
patch could cause the patch not to heat. The most common 
side effects are local skin reactions such as redness of the 
skin and swelling; these reactions are generally mild and 
resolve spontaneously after discontinuation of the patch. 
Safety and effectiveness of the patch have been established 
in patients 3 years of age and older. Apply the patch for 
20 to 30 minutes prior to venipuncture or intravenous 
cannulation. For superficial dermatological procedures 
such as superficial excision or shave biopsy, apply the patch 
for 30 minutes prior to the procedure. A topical cream of 
lidocaine and tetracaine (Pliaglis) also exists, but is indi­
cated only for adult use.
ESTER LOCAL ANESTHETICS
TETRACAINE
Tetracaine is the most commonly used LA for spinal anes­
thesia in children. Some centers use spinal anesthesia with 
tetracaine as the sole anesthetic for inguinal hernia repair 
in premature or expremature neonates. This practice is 
most relevant for those premature neonates who are less 
than 60 weeks postconceptual age at the time of surgery. 
This population is at risk for developing postoperative 
apnea, and the use of spinal anesthesia may decrease the 
incidence of this complication.
Neonates have a larger total volume of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) compared with adults (4 mL/kg compared with 
2 mL/kg, respectively). In addition, 50% of the total CSF 
volume is in the spinal portion of the subarachnoid space 
compared with only 25% of the total CSF volume in adults. 
Neonates also have a more rapid turnover of CSF than 
adults. As a result, neonates require larger doses of LAs for 
spinal anesthesia, and the duration of the spinal block is 
shorter.
Tetracaine is used in a concentration of 1% (10 mg/mL), 
and the calculated dose is mixed in an equivalent volume of 
dextrose 10% to make the solution hyperbaric. The final 
concentration of tetracaine is 0.5% (5 mg/mL). For inguinal 
sparing of motor function following ropivacaine blockade 
compared with bupivacaine. Adult studies are conflicting 
in this regard.
The most commonly used concentration for single-shot 
caudal and single-shot peripheral nerve block is 0.2% (see 
Table 2.1). For an epidural catheter, the loading dose is 
0.05 mL/kg/spinal segment or between 0.5 and 1 mL/kg, 
not to exceed the maximum dose of 3 mg/kg. For continu­
ous infusion, the concentration range is from 0.1% to 
0.2% and usually runs at a dose of 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg/h (see 
Table 2.2).
LIDOCAINE
Lidocaine is not commonly used in pediatrics due to its 
short duration of analgesia. The amides ropivacaine and 
bupivacaine are more commonly used instead.
EMLA CREAM
This is a eutectic mixture of equal quantities of lidocaine 
2.5% and prilocaine 2.5%. It is commonly used to 
provide transdermal local anesthesia in pediatric patients. 
Methemoglobinemia has been reported with the use of 
EMLA cream. Therefore the maximum total surface area to 
which the cream is applied should be calculated in advance, 
and the maximum allowable dose should never be exceeded 
(Table 2.3). This is particularly important in neonates. 
However, close attention should also be paid to the dose 
used in infants and toddlers. EMLA cream should be 
applied only to intact skin, and the dose should be reduced 
in case it is applied to mucous membranes. Other reported 
side effects include blanching and rash at the site of appli­
cation. The duration of action is 1 to 2 hours.
LIDOCAINE AND TETRACAINE 
(SYNERA) TRANSDERMAL PATCH
This is a combination of lidocaine, an amide LA, and tet­
racaine, an ester LA. The drug formulation is an emulsion 
in which the oil phase is a 1:1 eutectic mixture of lidocaine 
7% and tetracaine 7%. Each patch contains 70 mg lidocaine 
and 70 mg tetracaine and has a total skin contact area of 
50 cm, and an active drug-containing area of 10 cm2. The 
eutectic mixture has a melting point below room tempera­
ture, and therefore both LAs exist as a liquid oil rather than 
as crystals. The patch has a heating component that begins 
Table 2.3  Maximum Recommended Doses 
and Application Areas for EMLA Cream
Body weight and age
Maximum 
total dose (g)
Maximum 
surface 
area (cm2)
0 to 3 months or ,5 kg
1 
10
3 to 12 months and 5 to 10 kg
2 
20
1 to 6 years and 10 to 20 kg
10 
100 1
7 to 12 years and .20 kg
20
200
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
10
Table 2.4  Tetracaine Dose for Spinal Anesthesia for Inguinal Hernia Repair
Local anesthetic
Age and weight
Dose (mg/kg)
Duration of action
Tetracaine 1% in 10% dextrose (1:1 dilution)
(hyperbaric)
Neonates and less than 5 kga
Infants and 5 to 15 kg
Children and greater than 15 kg
0.5 to 0.6
0.3 to 0.4
0.2 to 0.3 
90 to 120 minutesb
aMaximum dose of 1 mg/kg can be used to achieve mid to high thoracic level dermatomes.
bDuration can be extended by 30% with the addition of epinephrine.
hernia repair neonates less than 5 kg require the largest dose 
of 0.5 to 0.6 mg/kg. For infants 5 to 15 kg, the dose is 0.3 to 
0.4 mg/kg, and for children greater than 15 kg, the dose is 
0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg (Table 2.4).
The duration of the block is 90 to 120 minutes. This can 
be extended by 30% with the addition of epinephrine 
1:100,000. If a higher block level is desired in neonates the 
dose can be increased up to a maximum of 1 mg/kg. This 
dose can result in a block that extends to a dermatome 
height in the mid to upper thoracic region.
CHLOROPROCAINE
Chloroprocaine is increasingly used to provide continuous 
epidural infusion for postoperative pain control in neo­
nates. It is rapidly metabolized by cholinesterases, with an 
elimination half-life of a few minutes. Although neonates 
have a reduced level of plasma esterases compared with 
adults this is clinically insignificant. Therefore the inci­
dence of systemic toxicity is rare and the risk of accumula­
tion is minimal. This safety profile allows better analgesia 
in neonates as it allows the use of higher infusion rates 
and thus wider dermatomal coverage compared with 
amide LAs. Chloroprocaine has a rapid onset of action 
(5 to 10 minutes) because of its high tissue penetrance. It 
has a short duration of action (45 minutes) that can be 
prolonged to 70 to 90 minutes with the addition of epi­
nephrine. Its potency is 25% that of bupivacaine or tetra­
caine. Epidural anesthesia is achieved by administering 
up to 1 mL/kg of 2% to 3% chloroprocaine with epineph­
rine 1:200,000 (maximum dose of chloroprocaine: 20 to 
30 mg/kg). For continuous epidural analgesia rates refer 
to Table 2.2.
TOXICITY OF LOCAL ANESTHETICS
DIRECT NEUROTOXICITY
All LAs are potentially capable of producing direct neuro­
toxicity. This complication is rare and conclusive human 
studies are still lacking in this field. However, animal studies 
show that the risk is higher on the developing nervous 
system and is directly related to the concentration of the 
LA. Therefore neonates and infants are at higher risk since 
their nervous system is still developing. The recommenda­
tion is to avoid the use of a high concentration of LAs in 
this age group.
SYSTEMIC TOXICITY
Predisposing Factors
Neonates and infants are more prone to developing sys­
temic toxicity to LAs, particularly amide LAs, compared 
with older children and adults. This is due to:
•	 Reduced plasma concentration of a1-acid glycopro­
tein in this age group, resulting in higher unbound 
fraction of amide LAs, which is responsible for 
toxicity.
•	 Decreased clearance of amide LAs in neonates and 
infants due to decreased metabolism in the liver by 
cytochrome P450 enzymes.
•	 Regional anesthesia is usually performed under 
general anesthesia, which may mask the earliest 
signs of systemic toxicity, particularly CNS signs. 
Therefore refractory cardiovascular collapse may 
be the first and only sign.
•	 Higher baseline heart rates in neonates and infants 
predispose them to increased sensitivity for bupivacaine-
induced cardiotoxicity compared with adults.
Clinical Picture
•	 Systemic toxicity can result from accidental intravas­
cular injection of LAs or secondary to systemic 
absorption of LAs from the regional block site, 
particularly when maximum recommended doses 
are exceeded.
•	 Systemic toxicity is consistent with signs of CNS and 
cardiac toxicity.
•	 Regional anesthesia is usually performed under 
general anesthesia in pediatric patients. Although 
general anesthesia with inhalational agents raises the 
threshold for seizure, it will also lower the threshold 
for cardiac toxicity. Therefore, general anesthesia 
may confound the diagnosis of systemic toxicity, 
and the first sign may be cardiovascular collapse.
•	 The bupivacaine threshold for cardiac toxicity is 
lower than its CNS toxicity in pediatrics. Therefore 
in pediatrics signs of cardiac toxicity may precede 
signs of CNS toxicity, or may be the only sign of 
systemic toxicity. This is different from adults where 
signs of CNS toxicity usually precede cardiac 
toxicity.
•	 Signs of systemic toxicity under general anesthesia 
may be nonspecific and consist of muscle rigidity, 
11
Pharmacology of Local Anesthetics in Pediatrics
unexplained hypoxemia, unexplained tachycardia, 
dysrhythmias, and cardiovascular collapse.
•	 When bupivacaine is mixed with epinephrine 
(usually in a 1:200,000 dilution), the earliest and 
most reliable sign of unintentional intravascular 
injection is increase in the T wave amplitude of 
more than 50% compared with the baseline, with 
associated ST segment changes. These electrocardio­
gram (EKG) changes are very sensitive. They occur 
within 60 seconds of injection. If only a small test 
dose is given, these changes are transient and brief 
and do not progress into cardiovascular collapse.
•	 Following a test dose of bupivacaine and epineph­
rine, tachycardia is not a sensitive sign for uninten­
tional intravascular injection in pediatrics.
•	 Order of sensitivity for detection of unintentional 
intravascular injection in pediatrics, from most to 
least sensitive, is:
Increase T wave amplitude and ST segment changes 
. increase in systolic blood pressure more than 10% 
. increase in heart rate 10% to 15% above baseline 
heart rate before administration of test dose.
•	 After the age of 8 years, T wave changes are less 
sensitive for the detection of intravascular injection.
•	 If a bolus dose of bupivacaine is unintentionally 
injected intravascularly, cardiac arrhythmias and 
subsequent cardiovascular collapse develop rapidly.
Prevention/Reducing the Risk
•	 Careful calculation of total doses of LAs administered.
•	 Total doses of LAs should not exceed the maximum 
allowable dose under any circumstances (Table 2.5).
•	 The dose should be based on the lean body weight 
rather than the actual body weight, particularly in 
obese patients. Lean body weight can be extrapo­
lated by knowing actual body weight and ideal body 
weight.
•	 The dose should be reduced in pediatric patients 
with associated comorbidities such as patients with 
liver failure or congestive heart failure (CHF).
•	 Decrease bolus dose of amide LAs by 30% for all 
infants younger than 6 months of age.
•	 Limit the duration of amide LA infusion to no more 
than 48 hours for bupivacaine and 72 hours for 
ropivacaine for all infants and neonates less than 
6 months of age (see Table 2.2).
•	 Chloroprocaine is the LA of choice for epidural 
infusion in neonates and small infants due to its 
very low risk of systemic toxicity and accumulation 
compared with amide LAs in this age group.
•	 When mixing two different LAs, toxicity is additive. 
Thus when mixing equivalent amounts of two 
different LAs the maximum dose for each should be 
reduced by 50%.
•	 Using ropivacaine or levobupivacaine instead of 
bupivacaine may reduce the risk of cardiotoxicity.
•	 When performing an epidural block, aspiration of 
blood or CSF through the needle or catheter may 
indicate that the tip is within a vessel or subarach­
noid space, respectively. However, a false negative 
aspiration test tends to occur frequently in pediatric 
patients. This is related to the fact that even the 
smallest applied negative pressure can result in 
collapse of the thin-walled vessels.
•	 The recommendation is to use an epinephrine-
containing test dose in all regional blocks before giving 
the full bolus dose. This will help detect unintentional 
intravascular injections as mentioned earlier.
•	 The only exception for the use of an epinephrine-
containing test dose is the block that involves an end 
artery, such as penile and digital blocks.
•	 Slow and intermittent injection of all bolus doses 
should occur over several minutes. Rapid injection 
can result in systemic toxicity, even if the maximum 
allowable dose is not exceeded and the injection is 
not intravascular. This results from a rapid surge of 
LAs in the blood beyond the protein-carrying 
capacity of neonates and infants.
•	 Absorption of LAs from the site of regional block 
from higher to lower is:
Intercostal . caudal . lumbar epidural . thoracic 
epidural brachial . femoral . sciatic.
•	 Ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve blocks, particu­
larly in children less than 15 kg, are associated with 
alarming levels of bupivacaine in the blood, even 
when half the maximum recommended dose is 
used. Therefore this block should be performed 
under ultrasound guidance, as it can limit the 
required volume needed to perform the block. A 
volume of 0.2 mL/kg of ropivacaine 0.2% is used in 
an ultrasound-guided block compared with the 
anatomic landmark method that may require the 
use of up to 1 mL/kg.
•	 Whenever a regional block is performed in pediatric 
patients all resuscitation equipment should be 
immediately available.
Treatment
Effective CPR
•	 This is the first line of treatment in conjunction 
with Intralipid administration.
•	 This includes securing the airway and ensuring 
adequate breathing and circulation through the 
performance of quality chest compression.
Table 2.5  Maximum Recommended Doses 
of Commonly Used Local Anesthetics
Local anesthetic
Dose ( mg/kg)
Bupivacaine
2.5 to 3
Ropivacaine
3
Levobupivacaine
3
Lidocaine/lidocaine 1 epinephrine
4/7
2-Chloroprocaine
20
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
12
Intralipid 20%
•	 This is recommended as the next line of treatment 
for cardiotoxicity induced by bupivacaine and 
ropivacaine.
•	 Give immediately and without delay in conjunction 
with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
•	 Acts as a “lipid sink” by promoting dissociation of 
bupivacaine from the myocardium and therefore 
shortens the duration of bupivacaine-induced 
asystole.
•	 Pediatric dose is similar to adult doses and consists 
of a bolus of 1.5 mL/kg over 1 minute. Repeat bolus 
dose can be given in 3 to 5 minutes with a maximum 
of 3 mL/kg. This is followed by a maintenance 
infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min until the circulation is 
restored.
Prevention and Treatment of Seizure
•	 Should only occur after securing the airway and 
ensuring adequate breathing and oxygenation, 
because the majority of cases of morbidity that 
occurs with seizure are related to airway complica­
tions such as aspiration and hypoxia.
•	 Midazolam 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IV (intravenous) is 
the agent of choice.
•	 Propofol 1 to 2 mg/kg may be also used to control 
seizure; however, this should be used with caution 
and in the absence of hypotension or cardiovascular 
instability.
•	 Mild hyperventilation can help raise the seizure 
threshold by inducing respiratory alkalosis.
•	 Some case reports suggest the use of Intralipid 20% 
to treat CNS toxicity of LAs, even in the absence of 
cardiotoxicity, and suggest its use as a first line of 
treatment in this context.
Support the Circulation
•	 Intravenous fluid bolus with 10 to 20 mL/kg of 
isotonic fluids such as lactated Ringer’s.
•	 Phenylephrine infusion starting at a rate of 
0.1 µg/kg/min to support the vascular tone 
antagonizes the LA-induced vasodilatation.
•	 Successful use of cardiopulmonary bypass has been 
also reported.
Bardsley H, Gristwood R, Baker H, et al. A comparison of the 
cardiovascular effects of levobupivacaine and rac-bupivacaine 
following intravenous administration to healthy volunteers. 
Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1998;46:245–249.
Berde CB. Toxicity of local anesthetics in infants and children. 
J Pediatr. 1993;122:S14–S20.
Cook DR. Paediatric anaesthesia: pharmacological considerations. 
Drugs. 1976;12:212–221.
Coté CJ, Lerman J, Todres ID. Regional anesthesia. In: A Practice 
of Anesthesia for Infants and Children. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2013.
Gorfine SR, Onel E, Patou G, Krivokapic ZV. Bupivacaine 
extended-release liposome injection for prolonged postsurgi­
cal analgesia in patients undergoing hemorrhoidectomy: a 
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. Dis Colon Rectum. 2011;54:1552–1559.
Gourrier E, Karoubi P, el Hanache A, et al. Use of EMLA cream 
in a department of neonatology. Pain. 1996;68:431–434.
Hodgson PS, Neal JM, Pollock JE, Liu SS. The neurotoxicity of 
drugs given intrathecally (spinal). Anesth Analg. 1999;88:
797–809.
Krane EJ, Haberkern CM, Jacobson LE. Postoperative apnea, bra­
dycardia, and oxygen desaturation in formerly premature 
infants: prospective comparison of spinal and general anes­
thesia. Anesth Analg. 1995;80:7–13.
Litz RJ, Roessel T, Heller AR, Stehr SN. Reversal of central nervous 
system and cardiac toxicity after local anesthetic intoxication 
by lipid emulsion injection. Anesth Analg. 2008;106:
1575–1577.
Mauch JY, Spielmann N, Hartnack S, Weiss M. Electrocardiographic 
and haemodynamic alterations caused by three different test 
solutions of local anaesthetics to detect accidental intravas­
cular injection in children. Br J Anaesth. 2012;108:283–289.
McCloskey JJ, Haun SE, Deshpande JK. Bupivacaine toxicity sec­
ondary to continuous caudal epidural infusion in children. 
Anesth Analg. 1992;75:287–290.
Mirtallo J. State of the art review: intravenous fat emulsions: 
current applications, safety profile, and clinical implications. 
Ann Pharmacother. 2010;44:688–700.
Rice LJ, DeMars PD, Whalen TV, et al. Duration of spinal anes­
thesia in infants less than one year of age. Comparison of 
three hyperbaric techniques. Reg Anesth. 1994;19:325–329.
Ward RM, Mirkin BL. Perinatal/neonatal pharmacology. In: 
Brody TM, Larner J, Minneman KP, eds. Human Pharmacology: 
Molecular to Clinical. 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby-Year Book; 
1998:873–883.
Weinberg GL. Treatment of local anesthetic systemic toxicity 
(LAST). Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35:188–193.
Weinberg G, Lin B, Zheng S, et al. Partitioning effect in lipid 
resuscitation: further evidence for the lipid sink. Crit Care 
Med. 2010;38:2268–2269.
Willschke H, Marhofer P, Bosenberg A, et al. Ultrasonography for 
ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve blocks in children. Br J 
Anaesth. 2005;95:226–230.
Suggested Reading
Amory C, Mariscal A, Guyot E, et al. Is ilioinguinal/iliohypogas­
tric nerve block always totally safe in children? Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2003;13:164–166.
Equipment and Ultrasound
Kamal Maheshwari and Loran Mounir-Soliman3
appears to provide the highest level of certainty of catheter 
tip location at the time of injection, whereas a multiple–
side-hole catheter may be preferred for continuous analge­
sia techniques.
Continuous Infusion Dosage With the advent of ultra­
sound and better training, more and more continuous 
nerve block catheters are performed to help patients. 
Current practice is to limit continuous infusion at 
0.4/mg/kg/h (bupivacaine/ropivacaine). See Table 3.1 for 
specific block recommendations.
NERVE STIMULATORS
In recent years, use of nerve stimulators has increased from 
occasional use to common use and is often of critical 
importance. The growing emphasis on techniques that use 
either multiple injections near individual nerves or place­
ment of stimulating catheters has provided impetus for this 
change. The primary impediment to successful use of a 
nerve stimulator in a clinical practice is that it is at least a 
three-handed or two-individual technique (Fig. 3.5), 
although there are devices allowing control of the stimula­
tor current using a foot control, eliminating the need for a 
third hand or a second individual. In those situations, 
requiring a second set of hands, correct operation of con­
temporary peripheral nerve stimulators is straightforward 
and easily taught during the course of the block. There are 
a variety of circumstances in which a nerve stimulator is 
helpful, such as in children and adults who are already 
anesthetized, when a decision is made that regional block 
is an appropriate technique, in individuals who are unable 
to report paresthesias accurately, in performing local anes­
thetic administration on specific nerves, and in placement 
of stimulating catheters for anesthesia or postoperative 
analgesia. Another group that may benefit from the use of 
a nerve stimulator is patients with chronic pain, in whom 
accurate needle placement and reproduction of pain with 
electrical stimulation or elimination of pain with accurate 
administration of small volumes of local anesthetic may 
improve diagnosis and treatment.
When nerve stimulation is used during regional block, 
insulated needles are most appropriate because the current 
from such needles results in a current sphere around the 
needle tip, whereas uninsulated needles emit current at the 
tip as well as along the shaft, potentially resulting in less 
precise needle location. A peripheral nerve stimulator 
should allow between 0.1 and 10 milliamperes (mA) of 
EQUIPMENT
NEEDLES, CATHETERS, AND 
SYRINGES
Effective regional anesthesia requires comprehensive 
knowledge of equipment—that is, the needles, syringes, 
and catheters that allow the anesthetic to be injected into 
the desired area. In early years, regional anesthesia found 
many variations in the method of joining needle to syringe. 
Around the turn of the century, Schneider developed the 
first all-glass syringe for Hermann Wülfing-Luer. Luer is 
credited with the innovation of a simple conical tip for easy 
exchange of needle to syringe, but the “Luer-Lok” found in 
use on most syringes today is thought to have been designed 
by Dickenson in the mid-1920s. The Luer fitting became 
virtually universal, and both the Luer slip tip and the 
Luer-Lok were standardized in 1955.
In almost all disposable and reusable needles used in 
regional anesthesia, the bevel is cut on three planes. The 
design theoretically creates less tissue laceration and dis­
comfort than the earlier styles did, and it limits tissue 
coring. Many needles that are to be used for deep injection 
during regional block incorporate a security bead in the 
shaft so that the needle can be easily retrieved on the rare 
occasions when the needle hub separates from the needle 
shaft. Fig. 3.1 contrasts a blunt-beveled, 25-gauge needle 
with a 25-gauge “hypodermic” needle. Traditional teaching 
holds that the short-beveled needle is less traumatic to 
neural structures. There is little clinical evidence that this 
is so, and experimental data about whether sharp or blunt 
needle tips minimize nerve injury are equivocal.
Fig. 3.2 shows various spinal needles. The key to their 
successful use is to find the size and bevel tip that allow one 
to cannulate the subarachnoid space easily without causing 
repeated unrecognized puncture. For equivalent needle 
size, rounded needle tips that spread the dural fibers are 
associated with a lesser incidence of headache than are 
those that cut fibers. The past interest in very-small-gauge 
spinal catheters to reduce the incidence of spinal headache, 
with controllability of a continuous technique, faded 
during the controversy over lidocaine neurotoxicity.
Fig. 3.3 depicts epidural needles. Needle tip design is 
often mandated by the decision to use a catheter with the 
epidural technique. Fig. 3.4 shows two catheters available 
for either subarachnoid or epidural use. Although each has 
advantages and disadvantages, a single–end-hole catheter 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
14
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
Fig. 3.1  ​Frontal, oblique, and lateral views of regional block 
needles. (A) Blunt-beveled, 25-gauge axillary block needle. 
(B) Long-beveled, 25-gauge (“hypodermic”) block needle. 
(C) 22-gauge ultrasonography “imaging” needle. (D) Short-
beveled, 22-gauge regional block needle. (From Brown DL: 
Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 
1996. “Used with permission of Mayo Foundation for Medical 
Education and Research. All rights reserved.”)
Fig. 3.2  ​Frontal, oblique, and lateral views of common spinal 
needles. (A) Sprotte needle. (B) Whitacre needle. (C) Greene 
needle. (D) Quincke needle. (From Brown DL: Regional Anesthesia 
and Analgesia. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996. “Used with permission 
of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. All rights 
reserved.”)
current in pulses lasting approximately 200 ms at a fre­
quency of 1 or 2 pulses per second. The peripheral nerve 
stimulator should have a readily apparent readout of when 
a complete circuit is present, a consistent and accurate 
current output over its entire range, and a digital display 
of the current delivered with each pulse. This facilitates 
generalized location of the nerve while stimulating at 2 mA 
and allows refinement of needle positioning as the current 
pulse is reduced to 0.5–0.1 mA. The nerve stimulator 
should have the polarity of the terminals clearly identified 
because peripheral nerves are most effectively stimulated 
by using the needle as the cathode (negative terminal). 
Alternatively, if the circuit is established with the needle as 
anode (positive terminal), approximately four times as 
much current is necessary to produce equivalent stimula­
tion. The positive lead of the stimulator should be placed 
in a site remote from the site of stimulation by connecting 
the lead to a common electrocardiographic electrode (see 
Fig. 3.5).
The use of a nerve stimulator is not a substitute for a 
complete knowledge of anatomy and careful site selection 
for needle insertion; in fact, as much attention should be 
paid to the anatomy and technique when using a nerve 
stimulator as when not using it. Large myelinated motor 
fibers are stimulated by less current than are smaller unmy­
elinated fibers, and muscle contraction is most often 
produced before patient discomfort. The needle should be 
carefully positioned to a point where muscle contraction 
can be elicited with 0.5–0.1 mA. If a pure sensory nerve is 
to be blocked, a similar procedure is followed; however, 
correct needle localization will require the patient to report 
a sense of pulsed “tingling or burning” over the cutaneous 
distribution of the sensory nerve. Once the needle is in 
the final position and stimulation is achieved with 
0.5–0.1 mA, 1 mL of local anesthetic should be injected 
through the needle. If the needle is accurately positioned, 
this amount of solution should rapidly abolish the muscle 
contraction or the sensation with pulsed current.
ULTRASOUND
In the last decade, image-guided peripheral nerve blocks 
have become the norm for anesthesiologists at the forefront 
of regional anesthesia innovation. The dominant method 
of imaging is ultrasonography. Ultrasonographic imaging 
devices are noninvasive, portable, and moderately priced. 
Most work has been done using scanning probes with fre­
quencies in the range of 5–10 megahertz (MHz). These 
devices are capable of identifying vascular and bony struc­
tures but not nerves. Contemporary devices using high-
resolution probes (12–15 MHz) and compound imaging 
allow clear visualization of nerves, vessels, catheters, and 
local anesthetic injection and can potentially improve the 
techniques of ultrasonography-assisted peripheral nerve 
15
Equipment and Ultrasound
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 3.3  ​Frontal, oblique, and lateral views of common 
epidural needles. (A) Crawford needle. (B) Tuohy needle; 
the inset shows a winged hub assembly common to 
winged needles. (C) Hustead needle. (D) Curved, 18-gauge 
epidural needle. (E) Whitacre, 27-gauge spinal needle. 
(From Brown DL: Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia, 
WB Saunders, 1996. “Used with permission of Mayo Foundation 
for Medical Education and Research. All rights reserved.”)
A
B
Fig. 3.4  ​Epidural catheter designs. (A) Single distal orifice. 
(B) Closed tip with multiple side orifices. (From Brown DL: 
Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 
1996. “Used with permission of Mayo Foundation for Medical 
Education and Research. All rights reserved.”)
block. Use of these devices is limited by their cost, the need 
for training in their use and familiarity with ultrasono­
graphic image anatomy, and the extra set of hands required. 
They work best with superficial nerve plexuses and can be 
limited by excessive obesity or anatomically distant struc­
tures. One of the keys to using this technology effectively 
is a sound understanding of the physics behind ultrasonog­
raphy. A corollary to understanding the physics is the need 
for study and appreciation of the relevant human anatomy.
American Society of Regional Anesthesiologists 
Recommendations
The following are the American Society of Regional 
Anesthesiologists recommendations for performing an 
ultrasonography-guided block:
	 1.	 Visualize key landmark structures, including muscles, 
fascia, blood vessels, and bone.
	 2.	 Identify the nerves or plexus on short-axis imaging, 
with the depth set 1 cm deep to the target 
structures.
	 3.	 Confirm normal anatomy or recognize anatomic 
variation(s).
	 4.	 Plan for the safest and most effective needle 
approach.
	 5.	 Use the aseptic needle insertion technique.
	 6.	 Follow the needle under real-time visualization as it 
is advanced toward the target.
	 7.	 Consider a secondary confirmation technique, such as 
nerve stimulation.
	 8.	 When the needle tip is presumed to be in the correct 
position, inject a small volume of a test solution.
	 9.	 Make necessary needle adjustments to obtain 
optimal perineural spread of local anesthesia.
	10.	 Maintain traditional safety guidelines of frequent 
aspiration, monitoring, patient response, and 
assessment of resistance to injection.
Table 3.1  Commonly Used Dose and Pump Setting for Continuous Peripheral Nerve Block Infusion
Block type
Local anesthetic*
Continuous 
rate (mL/hr)
Bolus 
dose (mL)
Lock-out 
interval (min)
Number of bolus 
per hour
Interscalene
0.25 % Bupivacaine or 0.2 % ropivacaine
8-10
8-12
60
1
Supraclavicular
0.25 % Bupivacaine or 0.2 % ropivacaine
8-10
8-12
60
1
Popliteal
0.25 % Bupivacaine or 0.2 % ropivacaine
8-10
8-12
60
1
Femoral or 
Adductor canal^
0.12 % Bupivacaine or 0.1 % ropivacaine
6-8
0
—
—
*Overall cumulative dose of local anesthetic for any 4 hours period should be less than the toxic dose. Conservative dosage is recommended for 
elderly and frail patients.
^Lower dose is recommended to avoid quadriceps weakness
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
16
Anode
( lead)
Fig. 3.5  ​Nerve stimulator technique.
WAVELENGTH AND FREQUENCY
Ultrasound is a form of acoustic energy defined as the 
longitudinal progression of pressure changes (Fig. 3.6). 
These pressure changes consist of areas of compression 
and relaxation of particles in a given medium. For sim­
plicity, an ultrasound wave is often modeled as a sine 
wave. Each ultrasound wave is defined by a specific wave­
length (l) measured in units of distance, amplitude (h) 
measured in decibels (dB), and frequency (f) measured in 
hertz (Hz) or cycles per second. Ultrasound is defined as 
a frequency of more than 20,000 Hz. Current transducers 
used for ultrasonography-guided regional anesthesia 
generate waves in the 3- to 13-MHz range (or 30,000–
130,000 Hz).
ULTRASOUND GENERATION
Ultrasound is generated when multiple piezoelectric crys­
tals inside a transducer rapidly vibrate in response to an 
alternating electric current. Ultrasound then travels into 
the body where, on contact with various tissues, it can be 
reflected, refracted, and scattered (Fig. 3.7).
To generate a clinically useful image, ultrasound waves 
must reflect off tissues and return to the transducer. 
The transducer, after emitting the wave, switches to a 
receive mode. When ultrasound waves return to the trans­
ducer, the piezoelectric crystals will vibrate once again, this 
time transforming the sound energy back into electrical 
energy. This process of transmission and reception can be 
repeated over 7000 times per second, and when coupled 
with computer processing results in the generation of a 
real-time, two-dimensional image that appears seamless. 
By convention, whiter (hyperechoic) objects represent a 
larger degree of reflection and higher signal intensities, 
whereas darker (hypoechoic) images represent less reflec­
tion and weaker signal intensities.
CLINICAL ISSUES RELATED TO PHYSICS
Resolution. Resolution refers to the ability to clearly 
distin­guish two structures lying beside one another. 
17
Equipment and Ultrasound
h
0
h  height of the wave, or amplitude
  wavelength
f  
velocity of ultrasound


A
B
C
Transducer
Needle
Nerve
Vein
Artery
D
Fig. 3.7  ​Production of an ultrasonographic image. This figure demonstrates the many responses that an ultrasound wave produces 
when traveling through tissue. (A) Scatter reflection: the ultrasound wave is deflected in several random directions both toward and 
away from the probe. Scattering occurs with small or irregular objects. (B) Transmission: the ultrasound wave continues through the 
tissue away from the probe. (C) Refraction: when an ultrasound wave contacts the interface between two media with different 
propagation velocities, the wave is refracted (bent) to an extent depending on the difference in velocities. (D) Specular reflection: 
a large, smooth object (e.g., the needle) returns (reflects) the ultrasound wave toward the probe when it is perpendicular to the 
ultrasound beam.
Fig. 3.6  ​Ultrasound wave basics.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
18
Although there are several different types of resolution, 
anesthesiologists are mostly concerned with lateral reso­
lution (left–right distinction) and axial resolution (front–
back distinction). Ultrasonography systems with higher 
frequencies have better resolution and can effectively dis­
criminate closely spaced peripheral neural structures. 
However, because of a process known as attenuation, 
high-frequency ultrasound cannot penetrate into deep 
tissue (Fig. 3.8). Attenuation is the loss of ultrasound 
energy into the surrounding tissue, primarily as heat. For 
superficial blocks between 1 and 4 cm in depth, frequen­
cies greater than 10 MHz are preferred. For blocks at 
depths greater than 4 cm, frequencies less than 8 MHz 
should result in adequate tissue penetration, with a pre­
dictable degradation in resolution.
Focus. Although axial resolution is related simply to the 
frequency of ultrasound, lateral resolution also depends 
on beam thickness. Any maneuver that generates a narrow 
beam will increase the lateral resolution. Most ultrasonog­
raphy machines have an electronic focus that generates a 
focal point (narrowest part of the beam) that can be placed 
directly over the target of interest. However, this increases 
the divergence of the beam beyond the region of the 
focus point (far field), resulting in image degradation of 
structures beyond this focal point. Thus the beam focus 
should be placed at the level of the object that is being 
assessed to provide the clearest possible picture of the 
object (Fig. 3.9).
Gain. The overall gain controls allow the operator to 
increase or decrease the signal intensity for a darker or a 
brighter image. The time gain compensation (TGC) adjusts 
gain at specific depths of the image. The goal of TGC is to 
compensate for the attenuation in the signal as result of 
depth. Accordingly, appropriate TGC adjustment allows 
structures with similar reflecting characters to be seen 
with similar brightness regardless of depth. Inappropriately 
low gain settings may result in the apparent absence of 
an existing structure (i.e., “missing structure” artifact), 
whereas inappropriately high gain settings can easily 
obscure existing structures.
Reflection. The sound waves bounce back to the trans­
ducer at the interface of tissues with different acoustic 
impedance (reflection). The quantity of energy reflected 
determines the amplitude (brightness) of the image pro­
cessed and mainly depends on the nature of the tissue, with 
bone having the highest impedance and air having the 
lowest impedance. A smooth large surface can reflect the 
beam more effectively than the surrounding tissue, which is 
called specular reflection. When two specular reflectors are 
close to each other, reverberation of the beam between those 
surfaces can occur. Clinically it shows as parallel, equally 
spaced lines, deep to and parallel to the reflecting surfaces 
(reverberation artifact). The comet tail artifact is an example 
of this reverberation when scanning the two layers of pleura, 
when in proximity with no fluids or air in-between. 
Hyperechoic reverberation is another example of this arti­
fact caused by the two walls of the hollow block needles.
COLOR DOPPLER
Color-flow Doppler ultrasonography relies on the fact that 
if an ultrasound pulse is sent out and strikes moving red 
blood cells, the ultrasound that is reflected back to the 
12–13 MHz
8–10 MHz
3–8 MHz
Depth of penetration
Fig. 3.8  ​Probe frequency and depth of tissue penetration. Higher-frequency ultrasound attenuates to a larger degree at more superficial 
depths, although it provides more image detail.
19
Equipment and Ultrasound
Transducer
Corresponding
image on monitor
Focal zone
Near field
Depth of penetration
Far field
Fig. 3.9  ​Basics of ultrasonographic probe focusing.
transducer will have a frequency that is different from the 
original emitted frequency. This change in frequency is 
known as the Doppler shift. It is this frequency change that 
can be used in cardiac and vascular applications to calcu­
late both blood flow velocity and blood flow direction. The 
Doppler equation states that
Frequency shift 5 2 3 V 3 Ft 3 cosine F/c
where V is velocity of the moving object, Ft is the transmit­
ted frequency, F is the angle of incidence of the ultrasound 
beam and the direction of blood flow, and c is the speed of 
ultrasound in the medium. The direction of blood flow is not 
as crucial for regional anesthesia as it is for cardiovascular 
anesthesia. What is most important is being able to positively 
identify blood vessels by visualizing color flow. This is espe­
cially important when interrogating a projected trajectory of 
the needle when placing a block. By placing color-flow Doppler 
over the expected needle path, the clinician should be able to 
screen for and avoid any unanticipated vasculature.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF AN 
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED  
NERVE BLOCK
During ultrasonographic needle guidance, most nerves are 
imaged in cross section (short axis). Alternatively, if the 
transducer is moved 90 degrees from the short-axis view, 
the long-axis view is generated. The short-axis view is gen­
erally preferred because it allows the operator to assess the 
lateromedial perspective of the target nerve, which is lost 
in the long-axis view (Fig. 3.10).
Anterior
Anterior
Long-axis image
Short-axis image
Distal
Fig. 3.10  ​Short-axis (top) and long-axis (bottom) imaging of the 
median nerve.
Two techniques have emerged regarding the orienta­
tion of the needle with respect to the ultrasound beam 
(Fig. 3.11). The in-plane approach generates a long-axis 
view of the needle, allowing full visualization of the shaft 
and tip of the needle. The out-of-plane view generates a 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
20
Out-of-plane (OP)
approach
In-plane (IP)
approach
Long-axis
view of needle
Short-axis
view of needle
Fig. 3.11  ​The in-plane (right) and out-of-plane (left) needle approaches for needle insertion and ultrasonographic visualization.
short-axis view of the needle. One disadvantage of the 
in-plane approach is the challenge of maintaining needle 
imaging with a very thin ultrasound beam. A limitation 
of the out-of-plane view is that it generates a short-axis 
view of the block needle, which may be very hard to visu­
alize. With the out-of-plane view, the operator cannot 
confirm that the needle tip (rather than part of the shaft) 
is being imaged, and therefore the needle location is often 
inferred from tissue movement or small injections of 
solution.
Two main types of ultrasound probes are used for 
regional anesthesia:
	1.	Linear probe (usually higher frequency probe) that 
allows better resolution and more accurate identifi­
cation of the margins for the target structure, with 
narrower ultrasonographic window.
	2.	Curvilinear probe (generally with lower frequency), 
which makes it more suitable for deeper structures, 
providing a wider view to detect important struc­
tures adjacent to the target nerve. The caveat with 
the curvilinear probe is a lower degree of resolution 
(Figs. 3.12, 3.13A, and 3.13B).
Regardless of the machine or transducer selected, there 
are four basic transducer manipulation techniques, which 
can be described as the “PART” of scanning:
Pressure (P): Various degrees of pressure are applied to 
the transducer that are translated onto the skin.
Alignment (A): Sliding the transducer defines the length­
wise course of the nerve and reference structures.
Rotation (R): The transducer is turned in either a 
clockwise or counterclockwise direction to optimize 
the image (either long or short axis) of the nerve 
and needle.
Tilting (T): The transducer is tilted in both directions to 
maximize the angle of incidence of the ultrasound 
beam to the target nerve, thereby maximizing reflection 
and optimizing image quality.
The primary objective of PART maneuvers is to optimize 
the amount of ultrasound that reflects off an object and 
returns to the transducer (Fig. 3.14).
Constant and frequent manipulations of the probe, 
mainly rotation and tilting, allow better appreciation of the 
anatomical structures, particularly nerves and tendons, due 
to anisotropy.
This characteristic mainly indicates the change in 
amplitude of the reflected signal based on the angle of 
incidence of the beam. Small changes in the angle of the 
beam striking the object can result in significantly unequal 
amplitude of the reflected image (anisotropic), with the 
largest amplitude when this angle is perpendicular to the 
long axis of the structure in short axis view. Clear visual­
ization of the targeted structure versus no visualization at 
all can be a function of change in this angle of incidence, 
highlighting the importance of acquiring this hand skill.
21
Equipment and Ultrasound
Fig. 3.12  ​Our system for ultrasonographic needle guidance recommendations. For a block for which we would recommend a high-
frequency setting with the in-plane (IP) technique of needle visualization, a red scan plane with an “IP” inside the plane is shown. For 
a low-frequency setting with the out-of-plane (OP) technique for needle visualization, we show a green scan plane with an “OP” in the 
plane. The midfrequency setting is indicated by a blue scan plane. An example is shown in the upper right of the figure. In this case, 
we recommend starting with a high-frequency probe setting and an in-plane technique for needle visualization.
A
B
Fig. 3.13  ​(A) Linear probe; (B) Curvilinear probe.
High-frequency setting (12–13 MHz)
Mid-frequency setting (8–10 MHz)
IP  In-plane technique
OP  Out-of-plane technique
IP
Low-frequency setting (3–8 MHz)
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
22
Pressure
Alignment
Rotation
Tilting
Fig. 3.14  ​PART maneuvers: pressure, alignment, rotation, and tilting.
e1
Keywords: Needles, nerve stimulator, ultrasound, Physics.
Upper Extremity Blocks
Section 2
This page intentionally left blank
Upper Extremity Block 
Anatomy
David L. Brown4
If anesthesiologists are to deliver comprehensive anesthesia 
care, they should be familiar with brachial plexus blocks. 
Familiarity with these techniques demands an understand­
ing of brachial plexus anatomy. One problem with under­
standing this anatomy is that the traditional wiring diagram 
for the brachial plexus is unnecessarily complex and 
intimidating.
Fig. 4.1 illustrates that the plexus is formed by the ventral 
rami of the fifth to eighth cervical nerves and the greater 
part of the ramus of the first thoracic nerve. In addition, 
small contributions may be made by the fourth cervical 
and the second thoracic nerves. The intimidating part of 
this anatomy is what happens from the time these ventral 
rami emerge from between the middle and anterior scalene 
muscles until they end in the four terminal branches to the 
upper extremity: the musculocutaneous, median, ulnar, 
and radial nerves. Most of what happens to the roots on 
their way to becoming peripheral nerves is not clinically 
essential information for an anesthesiologist. There are 
some broad concepts that may help clinicians understand 
the brachial plexus anatomy; throughout this chapter, my 
goal is to simplify this anatomy.
After the roots pass between the scalene muscles, they 
reorganize into trunks—superior, middle, and inferior. The 
trunks continue toward the first rib. At the lateral edge of 
the first rib, these trunks undergo a primary anatomic divi­
sion into ventral and dorsal divisions. This is also the point 
at which understanding of brachial plexus anatomy gives 
way to frustration and often unnecessary complexity. This 
anatomic division is significant, because nerves destined to 
supply the originally ventral part of the upper extremity 
separate from those that supply the dorsal part. As these 
divisions enter the axilla, the divisions give way to cords. 
The posterior divisions of all three trunks unite to form the 
posterior cord; the anterior divisions of the superior and 
middle trunks form the lateral cord; the un-united anterior 
division of the inferior trunk forms the medial cord. These 
cords are named according to their relationship to the 
second part of the axillary artery.
At the lateral border of the pectoralis minor muscle 
(which inserts onto the coracoid process), the three cords 
reorganize to give rise to the peripheral nerves of the upper 
extremity. Simplified, the branches of the lateral and medial 
cords are all “ventral” nerves to the upper extremity. The 
posterior cord, in contrast, provides all “dorsal” innerva­
tion to the upper extremity. Thus the radial nerve supplies 
all the dorsal musculature in the upper extremity below the 
shoulder. The musculocutaneous nerve supplies muscular 
Key Points
•	 Along its course above the clavicle, the brachial 
plexus is bounded by the anterior and middle scalene 
muscles. The two muscles constitute the scalene 
triangle with its apex at the transverse processes 
of cervical vertebrae and its base formed by the 
first rib.
•	 The phrenic nerve runs anterior to the brachial 
plexus, separated by the anterior scalene muscle. 
The distance between the phrenic nerve and the bra­
chial plexus is a few millimeters at the apex of the 
scalene triangle and reaches a few centimeters 
towards the base of the triangle.
•	 The vertebral artery lies anterior to the roots of the 
brachial plexus as they leave the cervical vertebrae.
•	 Nerves supplying the ventral part of the upper 
extremity originate from the anterior divisions of the 
trunks of the brachial plexus forming the medial and 
lateral cords.
•	 Nerves supplying the dorsal part of the upper extrem­
ity originate from the posterior divisions of the 
trunks of the brachial plexus forming the posterior 
cord.
•	 The cords of the brachial plexus get their names 
according to their relationship to the second part 
of the axillary artery in the standard anatomical 
position (arm adducted, extended parallel to the 
trunk).
Man uses his arms and hands constantly … as a result 
he exposes his arms and hands to injury constantly. … 
Man also eats constantly. … Man’s stomach is never 
really empty. … The combination of man’s prehensibility 
and his unflagging appetite keeps a steady flow of 
patients with injured upper extremities and full stomachs 
streaming into hospital emergency rooms. This is why the 
brachial plexus is so frequently the anesthesiologist’s 
favorite group of nerves.
Classical Anesthesia Files, David Little, 1963.
The late David Little’s appropriate observations do not 
always lead anesthesiologists to choose a regional anes­
thetic for upper extremity surgery. However, those selecting 
regional anesthesia recognize that there are multiple 
sites at which the brachial plexus block can be induced. 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
26
Axillary
nerve
Musculocutaneous nerve
Median cutaneous nerve
of forearm
Median cutaneous nerve
of arm
TERMINAL
BRANCHES
3 CORDS
DIVISIONS
3 Ventral
3 Dorsal
3 TRUNKS
ROOTS
SUPERIOR
MIDDLE
INFERIOR
LATERAL
POSTERIOR
MEDIAL
Suprascapular
nerve
Subscapular nerve
Thoracodorsal
nerve
Long
thoracic nerve
T1
T1
1st Rib
C8
C7
C7
C6
C5
C4
Radial nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Radial nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
C6
C5
C4
Fig. 4.1  ​Brachial plexus anatomy.
innervation in the arm while providing cutaneous innerva­
tion to the forearm. In contrast, the median and ulnar 
nerves are nerves of passage in the arm, but in the forearm 
and hand they provide the ventral musculature with motor 
innervation. These nerves can be further categorized: the 
median nerve innervates more heavily in the forearm, 
whereas the ulnar nerve innervates more heavily in the 
hand.
Some writers have focused anesthesiologists’ attention 
on the fascial investment of the brachial plexus. As the 
brachial plexus nerve roots leave the transverse processes, 
they do so between the prevertebral fascia, which divides 
to invest both the anterior and the middle scalene muscles. 
Many suggest that this prevertebral fascia surrounding the 
brachial plexus is tubular throughout its course, thus 
allowing needle placement within the “sheath” to produce 
brachial plexus block easily. There is no question that the 
brachial plexus is invested with prevertebral fascia; however, 
the fascial covering is discontinuous, with septa subdivid­
ing portions of the sheath into compartments that clini­
cally may prevent adequate spread of local anesthetics. 
Ultrasonographic observation of injections near the bra­
chial plexus confirms our earlier clinical impressions of 
fascial discontinuity. My clinical impression is that the dis­
continuity of the “sheath” increases as one moves from 
transverse process to axilla.
Most upper extremity surgery is performed with the 
patient resting supine on an operating table with the arm 
extended on an arm board. Thus anesthesiologists must 
understand and clearly visualize the innervation of the upper 
extremity while the patient is in this position. Figs. 4.2 
through 4.7 illustrate these features with the arm in the 
supinated and pronated positions for the cutaneous nerves, 
and dermatomal and osteotomal patterns, respectively.
27
Upper Extremity Block Anatomy
C7
C6
C5
T1
C8
Median antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
Ulnar
nerve
Median
nerve
Radial nerve
Axillary nerve
Supraclavicular
nerve
(Cervical plexus)
Intercostobrachial
cutaneous nerve
(inferior lateral
brachial cutaneous n.)
(Posterior
antebrachial
cutaneous n.)
(Posterior
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve)
(Posterior
brachial
cutaneous n.)
Musculocutaneous nerve
(Lateral antebrachial
cutaneous nerve)
Radial nerve
Fig. 4.3  ​Upper extremity dermatome innervation with arm supinated on arm board.
Fig. 4.4  ​Upper extremity peripheral nerve innervation with arm pronated on arm board.
Musculocutaneous nerve
(Lateral antebrachial
cutaneous nerve)
Radial nerve
(Superficial
branch)
Median
nerve
Radial nerve
(Inferior lateral 
brachial cutaneous nerve)
Axillary nerve
Supraclavicular
nerve
(Cervical plexus)
Intercostobrachial and
medial brachial cutaneous nerve
Median antebrachial 
cutaneous nerve
Ulnar nerve
(Palmar digital branch)
(Palmar  branch)
Fig. 4.2  ​Upper extremity peripheral nerve innervation with arm supinated on arm board.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
28
C7
C8
C5
T1
C6
C8
Fig. 4.5  ​Upper extremity dermatome innervation with arm pronated on arm board.
C7
C7
C8
C5
C6
C8
C5
C7
C7
C7
C8
C5
C6
C6
C8
C5
C6
Fig. 4.6  ​Upper extremity osteotomes with arm supinated.
Fig. 4.7  ​Upper extremity osteotomes with arm pronated on arm board.
An additional clinical “pearl” that will help anesthesiolo­
gists check brachial plexus block before initiation of the 
surgical procedure is the “four Ps.” Fig. 4.8 shows how the 
mnemonic “push, pull, pinch, pinch” can help an anesthesi­
ologist remember how to check the four peripheral nerves 
of interest in the brachial plexus block. By having the patient 
resist the anesthesiologist’s pulling the forearm away from 
the upper arm, motor innervation to the biceps muscle is 
assessed. If this muscle has been weakened, one can be 
certain that local anesthetic has reached the musculocutane­
ous nerve. Likewise, by asking the patient to attempt to 
extend the forearm by contracting the triceps muscle, one 
assesses the radial nerve. Finally, pinching the fingers in the 
distribution of the ulnar or median nerve—that is, at the 
base of the fifth or second digit, respectively—helps the anes­
thesiologist develop a sense of the adequacy of block of both 
the ulnar and median nerves. Typically, if these maneuvers 
are performed shortly after brachial plexus block, motor 
weakness will be evident before sensory block. As a historical 
highlight, this technique for checking the upper extremity 
was developed during World War II to allow medics a 
method of quick analysis of injuries to the brachial plexus.
29
Upper Extremity Block Anatomy
A
B
C
Biceps muscle
PUSH
PULL
PINCH
PINCH
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Triceps
muscle
Radial
nerve
Fig. 4.8  ​Upper extremity peripheral nerve function mnemonic: “push (A), pull (B), pinch, pinch (C).”
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
30
Vertebral artery
Sternocleido-
mastoid
muscle
T1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1st rib
Clavicle
Phrenic nerve
Accessory
phrenic nerve
Scalene muscle
(middle)
(anterior)
Fig. 4.9  ​Supraclavicular regional block: functional 
anatomy.
Although some of the brachial plexus neural anatomy of 
interest to anesthesiologists has been outlined, there are 
some anatomic details that should be highlighted (Fig. 4.9). 
As the cervical roots leave the transverse processes on their 
way to the brachial plexus, they exit in the gutter of the 
transverse process immediately posterior to the vertebral 
artery. The vertebral arteries leave the brachiocephalic and 
subclavian arteries on the right and left, respectively, and 
travel cephalad, normally entering a bony canal in the 
transverse process at the level of C6 and above. Thus one 
must be constantly aware of needle tip location in relation­
ship to the vertebral artery. It should be remembered that 
the vertebral artery lies anterior to the roots of the brachial 
plexus as they leave the cervical vertebrae.
Another structure of interest in the brachial plexus 
anatomy is the phrenic nerve. It is formed from branches 
of the third, fourth, and fifth cervical nerves and passes 
through the neck on its way to the thorax on the ventral 
surface of the anterior scalene muscle. It is almost always 
blocked during interscalene block and less frequently with 
supraclavicular techniques or with cervical paravertebral 
block. Avoidance of phrenic blockade is important in only 
a small percentage of patients, although phrenic nerve 
location should be kept in mind for those with signifi­
cantly decreased pulmonary function—that is, those 
whose day-to-day activities are limited by their pulmonary 
impairment.
Another detail of the brachial plexus anatomy that needs 
amplification is the organization of the brachial plexus 
nerves (divisions) as they cross the first rib. Textbooks often 
depict the nerves in a stacked arrangement at this point. 
However, radiologic, clinical, ultrasonographic, and ana­
tomic investigations demonstrate that the nerves are not 
discretely “stacked” at this point, but rather assume a 
posterior and cranial relationship to the subclavian artery 
(Fig. 4.10). This is important when one is carrying out 
31
Upper Extremity Block Anatomy
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
1st rib
Clavicle
Anterior scalene
muscle
Brachial plexus
Subclavian artery
Clavicle
Coracoid process
Pectoralis minor
muscle
Pectoralis
major
muscle
Axillary
artery
Axillary
vein
Brachial
plexus
Fig. 4.10  ​Supraclavicular block anatomy: functional anatomy of brachial plexus, subclavian artery, and first rib.
Fig. 4.11  ​Parasagittal magnetic resonance image and line drawing of the important anatomy in the infraclavicular block. (From Brown 
DL: Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1996. “Used with permission of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and 
Research. All rights reserved.”)
supraclavicular nerve block and is using the rib as an ana­
tomic landmark. The relationship of the nerves to the 
artery means that if one simply walks the needle tip closely 
along the first rib, one may not elicit paresthesias as easily, 
because the nerves are more cranial in relationship to the 
first rib.
Another anatomic detail that needs highlighting is the 
proximal axillary anatomy at a parasagittal section through 
the coracoid process. At this transition site, the brachial 
plexus is changing from the brachial plexus cords to the 
peripheral nerves as it surrounds the subclavian and axil­
lary arteries (Fig. 4.11). At the site of this parasagittal 
section, the borders of the proximal axilla are formed by 
the following anatomic structures:
Anterior: posterior border of the pectoralis minor muscle 
and brachial head of the biceps
Posterior: scapula and subscapularis, latissimus dorsi, and 
teres major muscles
Medial: lateral aspect of chest wall, including the ribs and 
intercostal and serratus anterior muscles
Lateral: medial aspect of upper arm
These anatomic relationships are important during con­
tinuous techniques of infraclavicular block.
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Keywords: brachial plexus, scalene muscles, subclavian 
artery, cervical pleura.
Interscalene Block
Ehab Farag with David L. Brown5
PERSPECTIVE
Interscalene block (classic anterior approach) is especially 
effective for surgery of the shoulder or upper arm because 
the roots of the brachial plexus are most easily blocked with 
this technique. Frequently the ulnar nerve and its more 
peripheral distribution in the hand can be spared, unless 
one makes a special effort to inject local anesthetic caudad 
to the site of the initial paresthesia. This block is ideal for 
reduction of a dislocated shoulder and often can be 
achieved with as little as 10–15 mL of local anesthetic. This 
block also can be performed with the arm in almost any 
position and thus can be useful when brachial plexus block 
needs to be repeated during a prolonged upper extremity 
procedure.
Patient Selection. Interscalene block is applicable to 
nearly all patients because even obese patients usually 
have identifiable scalene and vertebral body anatomy. 
However, interscalene block should be avoided in patients 
with significantly impaired pulmonary function. This 
point may be moot if one is planning to use a combined 
regional and general anesthetic technique, which allows 
intraoperative control of ventilation. Even when a long-
acting local anesthetic is chosen for the interscalene tech­
nique, usually phrenic nerve, and thus pulmonary 
function will return to a level that patients can tolerate 
by the time the average-length surgical procedure is 
completed.
Pharmacologic Choice. Useful agents for interscalene 
block are primarily the amino amides. Lidocaine and 
mepivacaine provide surgical anesthesia for 2–3 hours 
without epinephrine and for 3–5 hours when epineph­
rine is added. These drugs can be useful for less complex 
or outpatient surgical procedures. For more extensive 
surgical procedures requiring hospital admission, longer-
acting agents such as bupivacaine or ropivacaine can be 
chosen. The more complex surgical procedures on the 
shoulder often require muscle relaxation; thus bupiva­
caine concentrations of at least 0.5% are needed. Plain 
bupivacaine produces surgical anesthesia lasting from 
4–6 hours; the addition of epinephrine may prolong this 
to 8–12 hours. Ropivacaine’s effects are slightly shorter 
in duration.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. Surface anatomy of importance to anesthesi­
ologists includes the larynx, sternocleidomastoid muscle, 
and external jugular vein. Interscalene block is most often 
performed at the level of the C6 vertebral body, which is 
at the level of the cricoid cartilage. Thus by projecting a 
line laterally from the cricoid cartilage, one can identify 
the level at which one should roll the fingers off the ster­
nocleidomastoid muscle onto the belly of the anterior 
scalene and then into the interscalene groove. When firm 
pressure is applied, in most individuals it is possible to 
feel the transverse process of C6, and in some people it 
is possible to elicit a paresthesia by deep palpation. 
The external jugular vein often overlies the interscalene 
groove at the level of C6, although this should not be 
relied on (Fig. 5.1).
It is important to visualize what lies under the palpating 
fingers; again, the key to carrying out successful intersca­
lene block is the identification of the interscalene groove. 
Fig. 5.2 allows us to look beneath surface anatomy and 
develop a sense of how closely the lateral border of the 
anterior scalene muscle deviates from the border of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. This feature should be con­
stantly kept in mind. The anterior scalene muscle and the 
interscalene groove are oriented at an oblique angle to the 
long axis of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Fig. 5.3 
removes the anterior scalene and highlights the fact that at 
the level of C6, the vertebral artery begins its route to the 
base of the brain by traveling through the root of the trans­
verse process in each of the more cephalad cervical 
vertebrae.
Position. The patient lies supine with the neck in the 
neutral position and the head turned slightly opposite the 
site to be blocked. The anesthesiologist then asks the patient 
to lift the head off the table to tense the sternocleidomas­
toid muscle and allow identification of its lateral border. 
The fingers then roll onto the belly of the anterior scalene 
and subsequently into the interscalene groove. This maneu­
ver should be carried out in the horizontal plane through 
the cricoid cartilage—thus at the level of C6. To roll the 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
34
External
jugular vein
Cricoid
cartilage
Middle
scalene
muscle
Anterior
scalene
muscle
Fig. 5.1  ​Interscalene block: surface anatomy.
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Clavicle
Clavicle
1st rib
1st rib
Phrenic nerve
Anterior scalene muscle
Middle scalene muscle
External jugular
vein
Subclavian
vein
Subclavian
artery
Brachial plexus
Anterior scalene
muscle
Middle scalene
muscle
Fig. 5.2  ​Interscalene block: functional anatomy of scalene muscles.
fingers effectively the operator should stand at the patient’s 
side (Fig. 5.4).
Needle Puncture. When the interscalene groove has been 
identified and the operator’s fingers are firmly pressing in 
it, the needle is inserted, as shown in Fig. 5.5, in a slightly 
caudal and slightly posterior direction. As a further direc­
tional help, if the needle for this block is imagined to be 
long and inserted deeply enough, it would exit the neck 
posteriorly in approximately the midline at the level of the 
C7 or T1 spinous process. If a paresthesia or motor response 
is not elicited on insertion, the needle is “walked” while 
maintaining the same needle angulation as shown in 
Fig. 5.4 in a plane joining the cricoid cartilage to the C6 
transverse process. Because the brachial plexus traverses the 
neck at virtually a right angle to this plane, a paresthesia or 
motor response is almost guaranteed if small enough steps 
of needle reinsertion are carried out. When undertaking the 
block for shoulder surgery, this is probably the one brachial 
plexus block in which a large volume of local anesthetic 
coupled with a single needle position allows effective anes­
thesia. For shoulder surgery 25–35 mL of lidocaine, mepi­
vacaine, bupivacaine, or ropivacaine can be used. If the 
interscalene block is being carried out for forearm or hand 
surgery, a second, more caudal needle position is desirable, 
in which 10–15 mL of additional local anesthetic is injected 
to allow spread along more caudal roots.
35
Interscalene Block
C6
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Vertebral
artery
1st rib
Brachial
plexus
Pleura
Clavicle
Anterior 
scalene
muscle
Middle scalene muscle
Fig. 5.3  ​Interscalene block: functional anatomy of vertebral artery.
Cricoid
cartilage
Fig. 5.4  ​Interscalene block technique: palpation.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
36
Cricoid
cartilage
Paresthesia-
seeking plane
Fig. 5.5  ​Interscalene block technique: “paresthesia-seeking” plane.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Problems that can arise from interscalene block include 
subarachnoid injection, epidural block, intravascular injec­
tion (especially in the vertebral artery), pneumothorax, and 
phrenic block.
PEARLS
This block is most applicable to shoulder procedures, as 
opposed to forearm and hand surgical procedures, although 
some practitioners combine interscalene and axillary 
blocks to produce an approximation of a supraclavicular 
block. For shoulder surgery block that requires muscle 
relaxation, a local anesthetic concentration that provides 
adequate motor block should be chosen (i.e., mepivacaine 
and lidocaine at 1.5%, bupivacaine at 0.5%, and ropiva­
caine at 0.75% concentrations). Because this block is most 
often carried out through a single injection site and the 
operator relies on the spread of local anesthetic solution, 
one must allow sufficient “soak time” after the injection. 
This often means from 20–35 minutes.
If there is difficulty in identifying the anterior scalene 
muscle, one maneuver is to have the patient maximally 
inhale while the anesthesiologist palpates the neck. During 
this maneuver the scalene muscles should contract before 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle contracts, and this may 
allow clarification of the anterior scalene muscle in the 
difficult-to-palpate neck. Further, if the operator is finding 
it difficult to elicit a paresthesia or produce a motor 
response during nerve stimulation with this block, it is 
almost always because the needle entry site has been placed 
too far posteriorly. For example, Fig. 5.6 shows that if the 
right side of the neck is divided into a 180-degree arc, the 
needle entry site should be approximately at 60 degrees 
from the sagittal plane to optimize production of the 
block.
Most of the injection difficulties that result in complica­
tions can be avoided if one remembers that this should be 
a very “superficial” block; if the palpating fingers apply 
sufficient pressure, no more than 1–1.5 cm of the needle 
should be necessary to reach the plexus. It is when the 
needle is inserted deeply that one must be cautious about 
subarachnoid, epidural, and intravascular injection. For an 
operation that requires ulnar nerve block, I would not 
choose the interscalene block. The ulnar nerve is difficult 
to block with the interscalene approach because it is derived 
from the eighth cervical nerve (this nerve is difficult to 
block after injection at a more cephalic injection site). 
Finally, one should be cautious about using this block in a 
patient with significant pulmonary impairment because 
phrenic block is almost guaranteed with the interscalene 
block.
ULTRASOUND FOR INTERSCALENE 
BLOCK
KEY POINTS
•	 A small linear (20- to 25-mm) footprint is preferred 
for this block.
•	 The most successful way to perform this block is to 
visualize the brachial plexus in the supraclavicular 
region and then scan cephalad to identify the roots 
that are sandwiched between the anterior scalene 
and middle scalene muscles.
•	 Insertion of the needle and the catheter between C5 
and C6 or C6 and C7 will help to properly anchor 
the catheter and ensure good analgesia after shoul­
der surgery.
37
Interscalene Block
Middle
scalene
muscle
60°
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Anterior
scalene
muscle
Posterior
scalene
muscle
Trapezius
muscle
C.6.
Dura mater
Myotome innervation of the upper limb
Axillary nerve
Lateral
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
Radial nerve
Median
nerve
Dorsal view
Anterior view
Ulnar
nerve
Ulnar nerve
Fig. 5.6  ​Interscalene block anatomy: an angle of approximately 60 degrees from the sagittal plane is the optimal needle angle for 
the block.
Fig. 5.7  ​Interscalene ultrasound.
SONOANATOMY
The interscalene block is performed in the posterior tri­
angle (Figs. 5.7 through 5.9), which lies between the pos­
terior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the 
trapezius muscle, next to the sixth and seventh cervical 
vertebra. In the interscalene block, the brachial plexus is 
made of nerve roots (C5, C6, C7) or trunks. The brachial 
plexus in the interscalene block appears as hypoechogenic 
nodules (due to the high ratio of neural/nonneural tissue 
in this region) located between the anterior and middle 
scalene muscles under the prevertebral fascia. The dorsal 
scapular and long thoracic nerves of the brachial plexus are 
frequently located in the middle scalene muscle at less than 
1 cm posterior to the plexus. The nerves appear as hyper­
echoic structures containing a hypoechoic center.
INDICATIONS
•	 The principal indication for interscalene block is 
surgery of the shoulder. Local anesthetic spread after 
the block includes the supraclavicular (nonbrachial 
Fig. 5.8  ​The myotome innervation of the upper limb.
plexus) nerve (C3 to C4), which supplies sensory 
innervation to the cape of the shoulder.
•	 The interscalene block can be used for surgery on 
the humerus neck; however, it is not sufficient for 
hand surgeries, as it misses the lower roots and the 
trunk of the plexus.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
38
Sclerotome innervation of the upper limb
Axillary nerve
Lateral
antebrachial
cutaneous nerve
Radial nerve
Radial nerve
Median nerve
Dorsal view
Anterior view
Ulnar
nerve
Ulnar
nerve
Ulnar
nerve
Fig. 5.9  ​Sclerotome innervation of the upper limb.
TECHNIQUE
The patient position is usually either supine with the head 
turned to the opposite side to be blocked or in the lateral 
decubitus position. We prefer to insert the block in the 
lateral decubitus position, especially during the catheter 
insertion. The supraclavicular region is usually scanned to 
identify the brachial plexus superficial and lateral to the 
subclavian artery. The brachial plexus is then followed 
cephalad to identify the roots of the brachial plexus in the 
interscalene region sandwiched between the anterior 
scalene and middle scalene muscles. In the transverse 
short-axis view of the plexus, the in-plane needle passes 
from the lateral into the medial direction in the supine 
position or from the posterior into the anterior direction 
in the lateral decubitus direction. The needle should be 
positioned between C5 and C6 or C6 and C7 in order to 
achieve a proper block for the shoulder surgery. In the case 
of catheter insertion, we prefer to pass the Tuohy needle 
through the middle scalene muscle below the dorsal scapu­
lar and long thoracic nerves to give the catheter better 
anchoring into the plexus. A fascial click is often felt when 
the needle penetrates the middle scalene fascia in order to 
reach the interscalene space (Figs. 5.10 through 5.17).
PEARLS
•	 The phrenic nerve and brachial plexus are within 
2 mm of each other at the cricoid cartilage level, 
with additional 3 mm separation for every cm more 
caudal in the neck. Therefore puncture localization 
1–2 cm caudal to the cricoid cartilage can be helpful 
in reducing phrenic nerve palsy after interscalene 
block.
•	 The transverse cervical artery or dorsal scapular 
artery is sometimes visible at the targeted site of 
injection. Therefore color Doppler can be useful to 
identify those vessels, as they might be misidentified 
as nerve structures.
•	 The needle insertion in the middle scalene muscle 
should be at a lower level to the dorsal scapular and 
long thoracic nerves. Injury to the dorsal scapular 
nerve is characterized by a dull ache along the 
medial border of the scapula and weakness and 
hypotrophy of the rhomboid and/or the levator 
scapulae muscles. Injury to the long thoracic nerve 
will result in chronic pain syndrome of the shoulder 
and different degree of serratus muscle weakness.
39
Interscalene Block
Fig. 5.10  ​Lateral decubitus position (posterior approach) for the interscalene block.
Subclavian artery
Subclavian vein
External
jugular vein
Brachial plexus
Clavicle
1st rib
Anterior scalene
muscle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Middle scalene
muscle
Fig. 5.11  ​Anatomy of the interscalene block and the lateral decubitus position.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
40
Fig. 5.12  ​The brachial plexus is scanned in the cephalad direction from supraclavicular region to identify the roots of brachial plexus in 
the interscalene region between anterior and middle scalene muscle.
41
Interscalene Block
Fig. 5.13  ​In-plane technique for interscalene block with the needle direction from posterior to anterior in the lateral decubitus 
position.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
42
Anterior
Posterior
C6
Nerve root
Anterior
scalene muscle
Sternocleido-
mastoid
muscle
Middle scalene muscle
Carotid
artery
Jugular
vein
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
C7
C6
C5
Anterior scalene muscle
Dorsal
scapular
nerve
Middle
scalene
muscle
Fig. 5.14  ​Interscalene block. Notice the needle has to pass through middle scalene muscle to reach the roots of the brachial plexus in 
the interscalene groove.
Fig. 5.15  ​The needle position between C5 and C6 roots of 
the brachial plexus.
43
Interscalene Block
Interscalene
block
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Clavicle
Brachial plexus
Fig. 5.16  ​The anatomy of the interscalene block. Notice the roots are blocked in this technique.
Fig. 5.17  ​Ultrasound of interscalene. Note the roots of the brachial plexus are sandwiched between the scalenus anterior and the scalenus 
medius.
This page intentionally left blank
Supraclavicular Block
Ehab Farag and David L. Brown6
PERSPECTIVE
Supraclavicular block provides anesthesia of the entire 
upper extremity in the most consistent, efficient manner of 
any brachial plexus technique. It is the most effective block 
for all portions of the upper extremity and is carried out 
at the division level of the brachial plexus; perhaps this is 
why there is often little or no sparing of peripheral nerves 
if an adequate paresthesia is obtained. If this block is to be 
used for shoulder surgery, it should be supplemented with 
a superficial cervical plexus block to anesthetize the skin 
overlying the shoulder.
Patient Selection. Almost all patients are candidates for 
this block, with the exception of those who are uncoopera­
tive. In addition, in less experienced hands it may be inap­
propriate for outpatients. Although pneumothorax is an 
infrequent complication of the block, such an event often 
becomes apparent only after a delay of several hours, when 
an outpatient may already be at home. Also, because the 
supraclavicular block relies principally on bony and mus­
cular landmarks, very obese patients are not good candi­
dates because they often have supraclavicular fat pads that 
interfere with easy application of this technique.
Pharmacologic Choice. As with other brachial plexus 
blocks, the prime consideration in drug selection should be 
the length of the procedure and the degree of motor block­
ade desired. Mepivacaine (1%–1.5%), lidocaine (1%–1.5%), 
bupivacaine (0.5%), and ropivacaine (0.5%– 0.75%) are all 
applicable to brachial plexus block. Lidocaine and mepiva­
caine will produce 2–3 hours of surgical anesthesia without 
epinephrine and 3–5 hours when epinephrine is added. 
These drugs can be useful for less involved or outpatient 
surgical procedures. For extensive surgical procedures 
requiring hospital admission, a longer-acting agent like 
bupivacaine can be chosen. Plain bupivacaine produces sur­
gical anesthesia lasting from 4–6 hours, and the addition of 
epinephrine may prolong this time to 8–12 hours, whereas 
ropivacaine is slightly shorter acting.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The anatomy of interest for this block is the rela­
tionship between the brachial plexus and the first rib, the 
subclavian artery, and the cupola of the lung (Fig. 6.1). Our 
experience suggests that this block is more difficult to teach 
than many of the other regional blocks, and for that reason 
two approaches to the supraclavicular block are illustrated: 
the classic Kulenkampff approach and the vertical (“plumb 
bob”) approach. The vertical approach has been developed 
in an attempt to overcome the difficulty and time necessary 
to become skilled in the classic supraclavicular block 
approach. Both techniques are clinically useful once mas­
tered. As the subclavian artery and brachial plexus pass over 
the first rib, they do so between the insertion of the anterior 
and middle scalene muscles onto the first rib (Fig. 6.2). The 
nerves lie in a cephaloposterior relationship to the artery; 
thus a paresthesia may be elicited before the needle contacts 
the first rib. At the point where the artery and plexus cross 
the first rib, the rib is broad and flat, sloping caudad as it 
moves from posterior to anterior, and although the rib is a 
curved structure, there is a distance of 1–2 cm on which a 
needle can be “walked” in a parasagittal anteroposterior 
direction. Remember that immediately medial to the first 
rib is the cupola of the lung; when the needle angle is too 
medial, pneumothorax may result.
Position: Classic Supraclavicular Block. The patient lies 
supine without a pillow, with the head turned opposite the 
side to be blocked. The arms are at the sides, and the anes­
thesiologist can stand either at the head of the table or at 
the side of the patient, near the arm to be blocked.
Needle Puncture: Classic Supraclavicular Block. In the 
classic approach, the needle insertion site is approximately 
1 cm superior to the clavicle at the clavicular midpoint 
(Fig. 6.3). This entry site is closer to the middle of the 
clavicle than to the junction of the middle and medial 
thirds (as often described in other regional anesthesia 
texts). In addition, if the artery is palpable in the supracla­
vicular fossa, it can be used as a landmark. From this point, 
the needle and syringe are inserted in a plane approximately 
parallel to the patient’s neck and head, taking care that the 
axis of the syringe and needle does not aim medially toward 
the cupola of the lung. A 22-gauge, 5-cm needle typically 
will contact the rib at a depth of 3 to 4 cm, although in a 
very large patient it is sometimes necessary to insert it to a 
depth of 6 cm. The initial needle insertion should not be 
carried out past 3–4 cm until a careful search in an antero­
posterior plane does not identify the first rib. During 
the insertion of the needle and syringe, the assembly should 
be controlled with the hand, as illustrated in Fig. 6.4. 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
46
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle (mastoid origin)
C6
Clavicle
1st rib
T1
Vertebral artery
Middle scalene muscle
Phrenic nerve
Brachial plexus
Subclavian artery
Anterior scalene muscle
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
(clavicular head)
(sternal head)
Cupola 
of lung
Fig. 6.1  ​Supraclavicular block: anatomy.
Clavicle
Clavicle
Thyroid
cartilage
1st rib
1st rib
Scalene muscle
(middle)
(anterior)
External jugular vein
Brachial
plexus
Subclavian
artery
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Cricoid
cartilage
Brachial plexus
Middle
scalene muscle
Anterior
scalene muscle
Subclavian
artery
Subclavian
vein
1st rib
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Anterior
scalene muscle
Fig. 6.2  ​Supraclavicular block: functional anatomy (with detail).
47
Supraclavicular Block
Clavicle
1ST RIB
1st rib
1/3
2/3
Fig. 6.3  ​Supraclavicular block (classic approach): insertion site.
1 cm
Fig. 6.4  ​Supraclavicular block (classic approach): hand and syringe assembly positioning.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
48
The hand can rest lightly against the patient’s supraclavicu­
lar fossa because patients often move the shoulder with 
elicitation of a paresthesia.
Position: Vertical (Plumb Bob) Supraclavicular Block. 
The vertical approach to the supraclavicular block was 
developed to simplify the anatomic projection necessary 
for the block. The patient should be positioned in a manner 
similar to that used for the classic approach, lying supine 
without a pillow, with the head turned slightly away from 
the side to be blocked. The anesthesiologist should stand 
lateral to the patient at the level of the patient’s upper arm. 
This block involves inserting the needle and syringe assem­
bly at approximately a 90-degree angle to that used in the 
classic approach.
Needle Puncture: Vertical (Plumb Bob) Supraclavicular 
Block. Patients are asked to raise the head slightly off the 
block table so that the lateral border of the sternocleido­
mastoid muscle can be marked as it inserts onto the 
clavicle. From that point, a plane is visualized running 
parasagittally through that site (Fig. 6.5). The name 
“plumb bob” was chosen for this block concept because if 
one were to suspend a plumb bob vertically over the entry 
site (Fig. 6.6), needle insertion through that point, along 
the continuation of the vertical line defined by the plumb 
bob, would result in contact with the brachial plexus in 
most patients. Fig. 6.6 also illustrates a parasagittal section 
obtained by magnetic resonance imaging in the sagittal 
plane necessary to carry out this block. As illustrated, 
the brachial plexus at the level of the first rib lies 
posterior and cephalad to the subclavian artery. Once this 
skin mark has been placed immediately superior to the 
clavicle at the lateral border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle as it inserts into the clavicle, the needle is inserted 
in the parasagittal plane at a 90-degree angle to the table­
top. If a paresthesia is not elicited on the first pass, the 
needle and syringe are redirected cephalad in small steps 
through an arc of approximately 20 degrees. If a paresthe­
sia still has not been obtained, needle and syringe are 
reinserted at the starting position and then moved in 
small steps through an arc of approximately 20 degrees 
caudad (Fig. 6.7).
Because the brachial plexus lies cephaloposterior to the 
artery as it crosses the first rib, often a paresthesia can be 
elicited before either the artery or the first rib is contacted. 
If that occurs, approximately 30 mL of local anesthetic is 
inserted at this single site.
If a paresthesia is not elicited with the maneuvers 
described, but the first rib is contacted, the block is carried 
out just as it is in the classic approach—by “walking” along 
the first rib until a paresthesia is elicited. As in the classic 
Subclavian vein
Clavicle
Middle scalene muscle
Anterior scalene muscle
Brachial plexus
Subclavian artery
1st rib
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Fig. 6.5  ​Supraclavicular block (plumb bob): functional anatomy.
49
Supraclavicular Block
C
B
A
Clavicle
Needle
entry
site
Lung
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
1st rib
Clavicle
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Anterior
scalene muscle
Brachial plexus
Subclavian
artery/vein
Fig. 6.6  ​Supraclavicular block (plumb bob): parasagittal anatomy. (A) Schematic, showing plumb bob and needle path. (B) Magnetic 
resonance image. (C) Needle path.
approach, care should be taken not to allow the syringe 
and needle assembly to aim medially toward the cupola 
of the lung.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
The most feared complication of this block is pneumotho­
rax, the principal cause of which is a needle/syringe angle 
that aims toward the cupola of the lung. Special attention 
should be directed to “walking” the needle in a strict 
anteroposterior direction. Pneumothorax incidence is 
between 0.5% and 5% and becomes less frequent as an 
anesthesiologist becomes skilled. The cupola of the lung 
rises proportionally higher in the neck in thin, asthenic 
individuals, and perhaps in these individuals the incidence 
of pneumothorax is higher. Pneumothorax most often 
develops over a number of hours as the result of impinge­
ment of the needle on the lung, rather than due to immedi­
ate entrance of air into the pleural space as the needle is 
inserted. Phrenic nerve block occurs probably in the range 
of 30%–50% of patients, and the block’s use in patients 
with significantly impaired pulmonary function must be 
weighed. The development of hematoma after supracla­
vicular block as a result of puncture of the subclavian 
artery usually simply requires observation.
PEARLS
The predictability and rapid onset of this block allow the 
anesthesiologist to keep up with a fast orthopedic surgeon. 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
50
1st rib
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Subclavian vein
Clavicle
1
3
2
Middle scalene muscle
Anterior scalene muscle
Subclavian artery
Brachial plexus
Needle
entry site
Fig. 6.7  ​Supraclavicular block (plumb bob): paresthesia-seeking approach.
Use of this block allows regional anesthesia to be used for 
hand surgery, even in a busy practice. Because this block 
requires a longer time for the anesthesiologist to attain 
proficiency than most other regional blocks, the anesthesi­
ologist should develop a system for its use. “Wishful” 
probing at the root of the neck without a system is not the 
way to approach this block. Likewise, one should choose 
either the classic or the vertical approach and give each a 
fair trial before abandoning either.
If a pneumothorax occurs after supraclavicular block, it 
most often can be observed while the patient is reassured. 
If the pneumothorax is large enough to cause dyspnea or 
patient discomfort, aspiration of the pneumothorax 
through a small-gauge catheter is often all that is necessary 
for treatment. The patient should be admitted for observa­
tion; however, it is the exceptional patient who needs 
formal, large-bore chest tube placement for reexpansion of 
the lung. Obviously, difficult patients should not be chosen 
as subjects while the anesthesiologist is developing exper­
tise with this block.
Some anesthesiologists combine the axillary and inter­
scalene blocks (in the so-called AXIS block) to approximate 
the results achieved from a more typical supraclavicular 
block. An AXIS block requires that the total doses of local 
anesthetic be increased; one must be willing to use almost 
60 mL of whichever drug is injected. Time will tell whether 
this combined approach offers any advantages over the 
supraclavicular block. In the AXIS block, the axillary 
portion should be blocked first, with the interscalene block 
performed second to minimize the risk of injecting into an 
area already blocked by local anesthetic.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
SONOANATOMY
The brachial plexus in the supraclavicular region is com­
posed mainly of three trunks: superior, middle, and inferior. 
51
Supraclavicular Block
Roots
(ventral rami
of spinal n.)
Branches
Axillary block
Division
Infraclavicular block
Trunk
Supraclavicular block
Interscalene block
Cords
Ulnar n
Axillary n
Radial n
Median n
Musculocutaneous n
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Fig. 6.8  ​Comparing the different block positions for the different techniques of brachial plexus block.
These trunks pass across the upper surface of the first rib, 
where they lie posterior and superior to the subclavian 
artery. The trunks then divide into anterior and posterior 
divisions behind the clavicle. With ultrasonography, the six 
divisions can be seen compactly arranged and located supe­
rior and posterior to the subclavian artery as the artery 
passes over the first rib. Practically, in the supraclavicular 
approach for the brachial plexus, the trunks and the divi­
sions appear as a compact group of nerves (like a bunch of 
grapes) lying superior and posterior to the artery (Figs. 6.8 
through 6.10).
INDICATIONS
•	 The supraclavicular block is very efficient for upper 
limb and hand surgeries.
•	 This block can be used for shoulder surgery; 
however, it can miss the suprascapular nerve, which 
supplies the sensory innervation to the glenohu­
meral joint. Therefore the block could fail to 
provide appropriate analgesia after shoulder surgery.
TECHNIQUE
The patient could be in either a semisitting position (beach-
chair position) by elevating the head of the bed 45 degrees 
or a supine position with the patient’s head turned to 
the opposite side to be blocked. The first position is prefer­
able in obese patients. The usual probe position is in 
the coronal oblique plane behind the midpoint of the 
clavicle to obtain the short-axis view. Scan the supracla­
vicular fossa to identify the subclavian artery and brachial 
plexus in the short-axis view. The first rib and the cervical 
pleura should be identified in this view as well. We prefer 
to use the in-plane approach for this technique, and 
the needle will be inserted from the posterior to anterior 
direction (Figs. 6.11 through 6.14).
KEY POINTS
•	 A small linear (20- to 25-mm footprint) transducer is 
preferred for this block.
•	 Try to identify the cervical pleura and keep the 
needle direction in a parallel position to the first rib 
to avoid injuring the pleura and prevent the 
development of pneumothorax.
•	 For catheter insertion, the Tuohy needle is usually 
used. The catheter is typically inserted superior to 
the subclavian artery in the case of shoulder surgery 
or in the corner pocket between the artery and the 
first rib in the case of hand surgery. The correct 
position of the catheter can be confirmed under 
ultrasound by either injecting local anesthetic or 
1 mL of air via the catheter and observing its 
distribution in relation to the plexus.
Supraclavicular
block
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Clavicle
Brachial plexus
Fig. 6.9  ​Anatomy of supraclavicular 
block. Note the block is performed 
at the level of trunks and divisions 
of brachial plexus.
Cutaneous innervation of the upper limb
Axillary nerve
Supraclavicular
nerve
Lateral
antebrachial
cutaneous
nerve
Medial
antebrachial
cutaneous
nerve
Medial
antebrachial
cutaneous
nerve
Radial nerve
Radial nerve
Median nerve
Dorsal view
Anterior view
Intercosto-
brachial
nerve
Intercosto-
brachial
nerve
Ulnar nerve
Ulnar nerve
Fig. 6.10  ​Anatomy for Supraclavicular Block.
53
Supraclavicular Block
Fig. 6.11  ​Patient position with the ultrasound machine for the supraclavicular block.
Fig. 6.12  ​The probe is in the coronal oblique plane. Note the in-plane position of the needle with the direction of the needle from posterior 
to anterior.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
54
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Middle scalene
muscle
Anterior scalene
muscle
Brachial plexus
Lung
1st rib
Subclavian artery
Fig. 6.13  ​The needle position beneath the brachial plexus 
parallel to the first rib.
Sternocleidomastoid m
Middle scalene m
Anterior
scalene m
Brachial
plexus
Lung
Cervical
pleura
1st rib
Subclavian a
Fig. 6.14  ​Ultrasound image of Fig. 6.13.
PEARLS
•	 For hand surgery, the local anesthetic should be 
inserted in the corner pocket between the subclavian 
artery and the first rib to avoid missing the lower 
trunk/divisions and therefore the ulnar nerve.
•	 For shoulder surgeries, try to visualize the supra­
scapular nerve by scanning more proximal away 
from the artery.
•	 If the patient developed chest pain and cough 
during the procedure, they might have developed 
pneumothorax. The procedure should be aban­
doned and chest x-ray should be ordered to confirm 
the diagnosis.
•	 Try to examine the anterior chest wall by ultrasound 
after every supraclavicular block to confirm the 
absence of pneumothorax by visualizing the intact 
pleura (sliding sign).
•	 Injury to the suprascapular nerve following supra­
clavicular block is usually presented by severe 
shoulder pain followed by weakness in the supraspi­
natus and infraspinatus muscles. To prevent this 
complication, try not to inject above the plexus to 
avoid exposing the nerve to toxic high concentra­
tions of local anesthetics. In addition, avoiding 
injection above the plexus might decrease the 
incidence of phrenic nerve palsy after the block.
•	 Parsonage-Turner syndrome has the same physical 
presentations as suprascapular nerve injury. 
However, Parsonage-Turner syndrome is often 
idiopathic in its etiology, although its onset has 
been associated with physical stressors, including 
surgery.
Suprascapular Block
Wael Ali Sakr Esa7
•	 Supplementation to the supraclavicular block for 
shoulder replacement surgeries if the patient has 
pain on the posterior part of the shoulder joint 
postoperatively.
TECHNIQUE
The patient ideally should be placed in a sitting position, 
and the operator should be behind the patient with the 
ultrasound machine in front of the patient and facing the 
operator. This will allow an uninterrupted field of view of 
the ultrasound screen. The ultrasound transducer should be 
placed parallel to the scapular spine. A transverse plane of 
imaging is optimum for the ultrasound-guided SSN block. 
By moving the transducer cephalad, the suprascapular fossa 
can be identified. While imaging the supraspinatus muscle 
and the bony fossa underneath, the ultrasound transducer 
should be slowly moved laterally to locate the suprascapular 
notch. The SSN should be seen as a round, hyperechoic 
structure beneath the transverse scapular ligament in the 
scapular notch. Also, with application of color Doppler, the 
SSN can be visualized medial to the pulsation of the supra­
scapular artery as an oval or round, slightly hyperechoic 
structure. We prefer to use the in-plane approach for this 
technique. The echoic needle should be advanced using the 
in-plane approach medial to lateral to visualize the whole 
length of the needle (Fig. 7.2). The endpoint for injection is 
an ultrasound image demonstrating the needle tip in prox­
imity to the SSN in the suprascapular notch below the 
transverse scapular ligament and the spread of the local 
anesthetic confirmed as a separation between the supraspi­
natus muscle and the spine of the scapula (Figs. 7.3 and 7.4).
PEARLS
•	 Adjust the focal point to the suprascapular notch to 
get a better image.
•	 If possible, ask the patient to adduct the arm and 
move it forward, thus bringing the nerve more 
superficially.
•	 Using color Doppler can be very helpful, as the SSN 
usually lies medial to the suprascapular artery.
•	 The block is painful, as the needle will pass through 
muscles, so prepare your patient with local anesthe­
sia, midazolam, and fentanyl.
Key Points
•	 High-frequency, 38-mm broadband linear array trans­
ducer is preferred for this block.
•	 For catheter insertion, the Tuohy needle is usually 
used. The catheter is placed beneath the transverse 
scapular ligament around the suprascapular nerve 
(SSN). The correct position of the catheter can be 
confirmed under ultrasound by injecting either local 
anesthetic or 1 mL of air via the catheter and observ­
ing its distribution in relation to the SSN and the 
transverse scapular ligament.
•	 The incidence of pneumothorax associated with SSN 
block is reported as less than 1%. The use of ultra­
sound and the in-plane approach will decrease this 
risk markedly.
SONOANATOMY
The SSN arises from the C5 and C6 nerve roots, emerges 
from the superior trunk of the brachial plexus, and then 
enters the supraspinatus fossa via the suprascapular 
notch underneath the superior transverse scapular liga­
ment. With application of color Doppler, the SSN can be 
visualized medial to the pulsation of the suprascapular 
artery as an oval or round, slightly hyperechoic structure. 
In the supraspinous fossa, the nerve is in direct contact 
with bone and exits the suprascapular fossa lateral to the 
infrascapular fossa and lateral to the spinoglenoid notch 
(Fig. 7.1).
INDICATIONS
•	 Shoulder arthroscopic surgeries that approach the 
joint from its posterior aspect. The SSN innervates 
up to 70% of the superior and posterior part of the 
shoulder. The superior articular branch from the 
SSN supplies the coracohumeral ligament, subacro­
mial bursa, and posterior aspect of the acromiocla­
vicular joint capsule, whereas the inferior articular 
branch from the SSN supplies the posterior joint 
capsule. The SSN has no innervation to the anterior 
and inferior shoulder regions.
•	 Frozen shoulder, dislocated shoulder, rotator cuff 
syndrome, and scapular fracture.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
56
Fig. 7.1  ​Anatomy of the suprascapular nerve.
Humerus
Scapula
Infraspinatus muscle
Teres major muscle
Teres minor muscle
Supraspinatus muscle
Rotator cuff
Spine of scapula
Clavicle
Suprascapular nerve
C4
C5
C6
Scapula
Teres minor m.
Teres major m.
Scapular notch
and ligament
Injection site
Infraspinatus m.
Supraspinatus m.
Spine of scapula
Suprascapular n.
Medial
Lateral
needle and 
injection site
Supraspinatus m.
Trapezius m.
Scapula
Suprascapular n.
Suprascapular a.
Scapular notch
and ligament
Suprascapular
block
Fig. 7.2  ​In-plane technique for suprascapular block. The needle direction is from medial to lateral.
57
Suprascapular Block
Needle
Supraspinatus
muscle
Suprascapular 
nerve and artery 
in suprascapular 
notch 
Fig. 7.4  ​Ultrasound image of a 22-gauge needle directed toward 
the suprascapular nerve.
Fig. 7.3  ​Position of the patient and ultrasound machine.
•	 Always use echogenic needles, as visualization of the 
needle is difficult due to the steep angle used in 
performing this block. Also, you can reduce the 
needle angle by using an insertion point as far as 
possible from the ultrasound probe while still 
maintaining an in-line approach and visualization 
of the entire needle during the block.
SUPRASCAPULAR BLOCK 
ANTERIOR APPROACH
This technique was described by Siegenthaler, et al. The 
SSN originates from the superior trunk of the brachial 
plexus, runs in a dorsocaudal direction, crosses deep to the 
inferior belly of the omohyoid muscle, and reaches the 
suprascapular fossa.
The patient is placed in slightly lateral position and using 
a high frequency linear ultrasound probe a 17 gauge Tuohy 
needle is advanced using in-plane technique deep to the 
inferior belly of the omohyoid muscle and superficial 
(anterior) to the prevertebral fascia. Five to 10 mL of a local 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
58
from its origin (nerve root C5) can facilitate its identifica­
tion. After placing the SSN catheter, a ropivacaine 0.2% 
infusion should be started at a basal rate of 5 mL/h and a 
demand dose of 5mL/h using an automated infusion pump, 
which the patient can take home for 5 days after surgery.
Advantages of SSN block over interscalene block are a 
marked decrease in the incidence of Horner syndrome and 
phrenic nerve blockade.
anesthetic is then injected and spread around the SSN. 
A 19 gauge catheter is threaded through the 17 gauge 
Tuohy needle and left around the SSN. If the SSN is 
not well visualized, the local anesthetic is injected deep into 
the inferior belly of the omohyoid and superficial to the 
prevertebral fascia, lateral to the main bulk of brachial 
plexus. Care should be taken when advancing the needle to 
avoid puncturing the omohyoid muscle. Tracing the SSN 
e1
Keywords: Suprascapular nerve, anterior approach, 
posterior approach
Infraclavicular Block
Kenneth C. Cummings III and Ehab Farag  8
PERSPECTIVE
Infraclavicular brachial plexus block is useful for both 
single-injection and continuous infusion techniques. 
This technique results in a sensory and motor block 
similar to a traditional axillary approach, albeit with 
certain advantages. Thus it is most useful for patients 
undergoing procedures on the elbow, forearm, or hand. 
Like the axillary block, this technique is carried out 
distant from both the neuraxial structures and the 
lung, thus minimizing complications associated with 
those areas.
Patient Selection. To undergo an infraclavicular block 
the patient need not abduct the arm at the shoulder, as is 
required for the axillary block, and thus the technique can 
substitute for an axillary block in patients who cannot 
abduct their arms due to pain or other limitation. However, 
abduction of the arm at the shoulder elevates the clavicle 
and pulls the plexus anteriorly, usually improving the ease 
of the procedure.
Pharmacologic Choice. Because prolonged brachial 
plexus analgesia requires less motor block than is needed 
for surgical anesthesia, the concentration of local anes­
thetic can be decreased during postoperative analgesia 
regimens. Appropriate drugs for infusion are bupiva­
caine 0.1%–0.15% or ropivacaine 0.2%, both adminis­
tered at initial rates of 8–12 mL/hr. If a single-injection 
technique is used, appropriate drugs are lidocaine 
(1%–1.5%), 
mepivacaine 
(1%–1.5%), 
bupivacaine 
(0.5%), or ropivacaine (0.5%–0.75%). Lidocaine and 
mepivacaine produce 2–3 hours of surgical anesthesia 
without epinephrine and 3–5 hours with the addition of 
epinephrine. These drugs are useful for less involved 
procedures or outpatient surgical procedures. For more 
extensive surgical procedures (or where a longer block 
is desired), longer-acting agents such as bupivacaine or 
ropivacaine are appropriate. Plain bupivacaine and ropi­
vacaine produce surgical anesthesia lasting 4 to 6 hours; 
the addition of epinephrine may prolong this period to 
8–12 hours. With the addition of adjuvants such as dexa­
methasone, blocks lasting as long as 18–24 hours are 
possible with higher concentrations of ropivacaine or 
bupivacaine.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. At the level of the proximal axilla, where the 
infraclavicular block is performed, the axilla is a pyramid-
shaped space with an apex, a base, and four sides 
(Fig. 8.1A). The base is the concave armpit, and the anterior 
wall is composed of the pectoralis major and minor muscles 
and their accompanying fasciae. The posterior wall of the 
axilla is formed by the scapula and the scapular muscula­
ture, the subscapularis, and the teres major. The latissimus 
dorsi muscle abuts the teres major muscle to form the 
inferior aspect of the posterior wall of the axilla (Fig. 8.1B). 
The medial wall of the axilla is composed of the serratus 
anterior muscle and its fascia, and the lateral wall is formed 
by the converging muscle and tendons of the anterior and 
posterior walls as they insert into the humerus (see 
Fig. 8.1B). The apex of the axilla is triangular and is formed 
by the convergence of the clavicle, the scapula, and the first 
rib. The neurovascular structures of the limb pass into the 
pyramid-shaped axilla through its apex (Fig. 8.2A).
The contents of the axilla are blood vessels and nerves—
the axillary artery and vein and the brachial plexus, 
respectively—in addition to lymph nodes and loose 
areolar tissue. The neurovascular elements are enclosed 
within the anatomically variable, multipartitioned axil­
lary sheath, a fascial extension of the prevertebral layer of 
cervical fascia covering the scalene muscles. The axillary 
sheath adheres to the clavipectoral fascia behind the pec­
toralis minor muscle and continues along the neurovas­
cular structures until it enters the medial intramuscular 
septum of the arm (Fig. 8.2B).
The brachial plexus divisions become cords as they enter 
the axilla. The posterior divisions of all three trunks unite 
to form the posterior cord; the anterior divisions of the 
superior and middle trunks join to form the lateral cord; 
and the anterior division of the inferior trunk forms the 
medial cord. These cords are named according to their 
relationship to the second part of the axillary artery 
(Fig. 8.3). From these cords nerves to the subscapularis, 
pectoralis major and minor, and latissimus dorsi muscles 
leave the brachial plexus. The medial brachial cutaneous, 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
60
A
B
Middle scalene muscle
Anterior scalene muscle
Lateral wall
Posterior wall
Anterior wall
Base
Medial wall
Apex
Scapula and scapular muscles
Pectoralis muscles
Armpit
Serratus anterior muscles
Clavicle
1st rib
Humerus and convergence of
anterior and posterior walls
Between scalene muscles,
clavicle, and first rib
Fig. 8.1  ​(A) Surface anatomy of infraclavicular block. (B) The concept of the pyramid-shaped axilla is important for infraclavicular block.
medial antebrachial cutaneous, and axillary nerves also 
leave the brachial plexus at the level of the cords.
At the lateral border of the pectoralis minor muscle 
(which inserts onto the coracoid process), the three cords 
reorganize to give rise to the peripheral nerves of the upper 
extremity. In a simplified scheme, the branches of the 
lateral and medial cords are all “ventral” nerves to the 
upper extremity. The posterior cord, in contrast, provides 
all “dorsal” innervation to the upper extremity. Thus the 
radial nerve supplies all the dorsal muscles in the upper 
extremity below the shoulder. The musculocutaneous 
nerve supplies muscular innervation in the arm and pro­
vides cutaneous innervation to the forearm. In contrast, 
the median and ulnar nerves are nerves of passage in the 
61
Infraclavicular Block
A
Axillary artery
Radial nerve
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle (cut)
Anterior scalene
muscle (cut)
Subclavian vein
Clavicle
1st rib
Pectoralis minor
muscle (cut)
C4
5
6
7
T1
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Axillary nerve
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Trapezius muscle
Clavicle
Brachial plexus
and vessels
Pectoralis minor muscle
Pectoralis major muscle
Lung
Sternum
Brachial plexus
and vessels
Pectoralis minor muscle
Pectoralis major muscle
Lung
B
Fig. 8.2  ​Anatomy important for infraclavicular block. (A) Muscles, bones, and neurovascular structures. (B) Cross-sectional (top) and 
parasagittal (bottom) anatomy.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
62
A
Axillary artery
Radial nerve
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle (cut)
Anterior scalene
muscle (cut)
Subclavian vein
Clavicle (cut)
1st rib
Pectoralis minor
muscle (cut)
C4
5
6
7
T1
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Axillary nerve
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Subclavian artery
Axillary artery
Anterior and
middle scalene
muscles
Axillary artery
Hook
Hook
C5
5 Roots
Trunks
3
Superior
Middle
Inferior
6
7
8
T1
1st
rib
B
Cords
3
Lateral
Medial
(ventral 
nerves to 
upper 
extremity)
Terminal
Branches
(C5, 6, 7)
(C5, 6)
(C6, 7, 8–T1)
(C8–T1)
(C5, 6, 7, 8–T1)
Musculo-
cutaneous nerve
Axillary nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Radial nerve
Posterior
(dorsal 
nerves to 
upper 
extremity)
Fig. 8.3  ​Brachial plexus anatomy important for infraclavicular block. (A) Regional anatomy. (B) Detailed infraclavicular anatomy.
arm, but in the forearm and hand they provide the ventral 
musculature with motor innervation. These nerves can be 
further categorized: the median nerve innervates more 
heavily in the forearm, whereas the ulnar nerve innervates 
more heavily in the hand.
Position. The patient is placed supine, with the arm to 
be blocked abducted at the shoulder at a 90-degree angle 
if possible. If pain prevents this, the arm can be left at the 
patient’s side and adjustments can be made with skin 
markings. The anesthesiologist can stand on the ipsilateral 
or the contralateral side of the patient, depending on his 
or her preference and the patient’s body habitus. We prefer 
to stand on the ipsilateral side of the patient.
Traditional Approach. The coracoid process is identified 
by palpation and a skin mark placed at its most prominent 
portion. The skin entry mark is then made at a point 2 cm 
medial and 2 cm caudad to the previously marked coracoid 
process (Fig. 8.4A). Deeper infiltration is then performed 
with a 25-gauge, 5-cm needle while the needle is directed 
from the insertion site in a vertical parasagittal plane. Then 
a 7- to 9.5-cm, 20- to 22-gauge needle is inserted in a direc­
tion similar to that taken by the infiltration needle. If a 
63
Infraclavicular Block
Insertion
site
Cephalocaudal arc
of needle redirection
C6
2.5 cm
Chassaignac’s
tubercle
A
B
Fig. 8.4  ​Technique of infraclavicular block. (A) Surface markings for block. (B) Parasagittal view showing arc of needle redirection.
paresthesia technique is used, a distal upper extremity par­
esthesia is sought; if a nerve stimulator technique is used, 
a distal upper extremity motor response is sought. If needle 
redirection is needed to achieve either a paresthesia or a 
motor response, the needle should be redirected only in a 
cephalocaudad arc (Fig. 8.4B). To avoid inadvertent entry 
into the thorax, it is important not to direct the needle path 
medially. The depth of contact with the brachial plexus 
depends on body habitus and needle angulation; it ranges 
from 2.5–3 cm in slender patients and from 8–10 cm in 
larger individuals.
Once adequate needle position has been achieved, either 
the single-injection dose of local anesthetic is administered 
incrementally, or 20 mL of preservative-free normal saline 
solution (5% dextrose if a stimulating catheter is used) is 
injected before threading the continuous brachial plexus 
catheter. For a single-injection technique, the block can be 
administered in a manner similar to that used in either a 
supraclavicular or an axillary block. For a continuous tech­
nique, we currently use a stimulating catheter device to 
optimize catheter placement.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
An infraclavicular block should not cause neuraxial or 
pulmonary complications. Although vascular compromise 
(puncture of the axillary artery or vein) is theoretically 
possible, in our experience this occurs infrequently. If a 
continuous catheter technique is chosen, there is the pos­
sibility that despite adequate initial needle position, the 
catheter may be threaded too far away from the plexus to 
result in an effective block. However, the use of stimulating 
catheters has decreased this concern.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
SONOANATOMY
The brachial plexus in the infraclavicular region consists of 
three cords, each named for its classical position relative to 
the second portion of the axillary artery: medial, lateral, 
and posterior. There is, however, significant anatomic vari­
ation. The cords and axillary vessels lie deep to the pecto­
ralis major and minor muscles, just below the fascia of the 
pectoralis minor. The ultrasound transducer should be 
placed in a parasagittal orientation caudal to the coracoid 
process, roughly perpendicular to the clavicle, so that the 
plane of the ultrasound beam cuts the brachial plexus cords 
and axillary vessels in the short-axis view. The axillary 
artery is seen in cross section as a hypoechoic, noncom­
pressible pulsatile structure, whereas the axillary vein 
usually lies inferior and/or superficial to the artery. With 
the left side of the screen oriented cephalad, the lateral, 
posterior, and medial cords are often found at 9 to 
10 o’clock, 6 to 7 o’clock, and 4 to 5 o’clock relative to the 
artery, respectively. The cords are often difficult to dis­
tinctly identify, emphasizing the importance of placing the 
local anesthetic deep to the pectoral fascia (Fig. 8.5). 
Depending on how medially the transducer is placed, ribs 
and/or pleura may be identified in the inferior part of 
the image.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
64
Fig. 8.5  ​Anatomy of infraclavicular block.
INDICATIONS
•	 Infraclavicular blocks are very effective for arm, elbow, 
forearm, and hand surgeries.
•	 Both single-shot and continuous techniques are 
possible. Continuous infraclavicular nerve blocks 
may provide superior analgesia compared with 
other techniques.1
TECHNIQUE
The patient may be placed either supine or semisitting. The 
patient’s head should be turned away from the side to be 
blocked. In the classic technique for the infraclavicular 
block, the arm is adducted to the side; therefore it is called 
the lateral infraclavicular technique. However, to improve 
visualization of the cords, we prefer to use the medial 
infraclavicular approach in which the arm is abducted 
110 degrees, externally rotated, and the elbow is flexed 
90 degrees. This will bring the cords closer together, supe­
rior to the axillary artery, and they may lie closer to the 
skin. The puncture site is made at the apex of the deltopec­
toral groove in the parasagittal plane. An in-plane approach 
is recommended from the cephalad end of the probe along 
its long axis. In the case of catheter insertion, we prefer 
using a 22-gauge needle to inject the local anesthetics 
around the three cords separately first; then we use a Touhy 
needle to place the catheter beneath the posterior cord 
(Figs. 8.6 through 8.8).
65
Infraclavicular Block
Fig. 8.6  ​Medial approach for infraclavicular block. Note the arm is abducted.
Alternative Approaches
Costoclavicular Block
The costoclavicular space lies deep to the clavicle and 
superficial to the second rib. In this space, the cords of the 
brachial plexus are more closely positioned and are typi­
cally all lateral to the axillary artery. This allows the use of 
lower doses of local anesthetic (20 mL has been reported 
as an effective volume). The patient is placed supine with 
the arm abducted at the shoulder with the head turned 
slightly away. The transducer is placed immediately caudad 
to and parallel with the clavicle in the midclavicular line 
(Fig. 8.9). The transducer is angled caudally slightly, to 
direct the plane of the ultrasound beam cranially under­
neath the clavicle. Using an in-plane technique, the needle 
path is lateral to medial, with the target location between 
the three cords just lateral to the axillary artery (Fig. 8.10). 
In principle, this should show the neurovascular structures 
in short axis. However, the transducer may be rotated rela­
tive to the clavicle to optimize the short axis view. As with 
any block closer to the thorax, this block carries the risk of 
pneumothorax.
Retroclavicular Block
An alternative approach has been proposed in which the 
needle entry point is superior to the clavicle rather than 
between the clavicle and transducer. This allows easier visu­
alization of the needle as it approaches the plexus due to a 
more perpendicular orientation relative to the ultrasound 
beam. We do not endorse this approach due to the inability 
to visualize the needle as it passes posterior to the clavicle 
and the close proximity of the suprascapular nerve to the 
needle path.2
KEY POINTS
•	 A linear or small curved transducer is preferred for 
this block to minimize the transducer footprint.
•	 The axillary artery is usually 4–5 cm below the skin 
in a typical patient.
•	 Because of the steep angle of needle insertion 
relative to the ultrasound beam, direct visualization 
of the needle may be difficult.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
66
Fig. 8.7  ​Lateral approach for infraclavicular block. Note the arm is adducted. In both, the in-plane technique is used with the needle 
direction from proximal to distal.
•	 Approximately 15–30 mL of local anesthetic is 
typically sufficient to provide complete block of 
the plexus. A single injection at the 6 o’clock 
position commonly suffices, but multiple injec­
tions may be required to ensure spread around 
the three cords.
•	 Unlike an axillary block, the medial brachial and 
antebrachial cutaneous nerves are blocked with this 
technique. The intercostobrachial nerve (arising 
from T2) may be separately blocked under the arm 
if desired.
•	 For catheter insertion, a Tuohy needle is usually 
used. The catheter is usually inserted posterior to 
the axillary artery and advanced 2–3 cm past the 
needle tip. The correct position of the catheter can 
be confirmed under ultrasound by injecting either 
local anesthetic or 1 mL of air via the catheter and 
observing its distribution relative to the plexus.
•	 Catheters are typically coiled on the skin over the 
insertion site and covered with a transparent sterile 
dressing.
PEARLS
•	 If visualization of all three cords is not possible, it is 
typically sufficient to ensure that local anesthetic 
spreads in a “U” shape surrounding the axillary 
artery. The contrast provided by the local anesthetic 
commonly improves visualization of the cords 
during the block.
•	 A reverberation artifact from the axillary artery may 
lead to the incorrect impression of a nerve structure 
deep to the artery.
•	 Because of the acute needle-to-transducer angle, it 
may be necessary to rely on indirect signs of needle 
location such as hydrodissection with normal saline 
or tissue movement while jiggling the needle. 
Textured (“echogenic”) needles may be easier to 
visualize with this approach.
•	 Excessive transducer pressure may occlude veins and 
increase the chance of inadvertent intravenous 
injection or hematoma formation
67
Infraclavicular Block
Distal
Proximal
Pectoralis major muscle
Pectoralis minor muscle
needle
Local 
anesthetics 
MC
LC
PC
Axillary
artery
Axillary
vein
Fig. 8.8  ​In-plane technique of infraclavicular block. The needle direction is from proximal to distal. LC, Lateral cord; MC, medial cord; 
PC, posterior cord.
Fig. 8.9  ​Transducer position and needle approach for costoclavicular block. The inset demonstrates the transducer angulation and 
relative position of the neurovascular structures.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
68
•	 Because of the greater distance between the plexus 
structures at this level, a larger volume of local 
anesthetic is commonly needed compared with 
more proximal brachial plexus blocks. Larger 
patient-controlled or programmed boluses 
(8 – 12 mL once per hour in our practice) via an 
indwelling catheter are also often needed to 
provide adequate analgesia.
•	 The infraclavicular location is particularly appealing 
for continuous blocks because the insertion site is 
away from the patient’s head and neck, and passing 
through the pectoral muscles stabilizes the catheter.
•	 In contrast to the interscalene or supraclavicular 
approaches to the brachial plexus, the infraclavicular 
approach does not produce phrenic nerve paralysis. 
This characteristic makes infraclavicular blocks an 
appealing option in patients with compromised 
pulmonary function.
Fig. 8.10  ​Ultrasound image of the brachial plexus and needle 
path using the costoclavicular approach.  (Image courtesy 
Ehab Farag MD, FRCA.)
•	 Placing the transducer as laterally as possible (but 
still medial to the coracoid process) increases the 
distance to the pleura and provides a larger margin 
of safety.
References
1.	 Mariano ER, Sandhu NS, Loland VJ, et al. A randomized 
comparison of infraclavicular and supraclavicular continu­
ous peripheral nerve blocks for postoperative analgesia. 
Region Anesth Pain M. 2011;36:26–31.
2.	 Sancheti SF, Uppal V, Sandeski R, Kwofie MK, Szerb JJ. A 
cadaver study investigating structures encountered by the 
needle during a retroclavicular approach to infraclavicular 
brachial plexus block. Region Anesth Pain M. 2018;3:
752–755.
e1
Key words: Nerve block, infraclavicular; ultrasound; upper 
extremity
Axillary Block
Wael Ali Sakr Esa and David L. Brown9
PERSPECTIVE
Axillary brachial plexus block is most effective for surgical 
procedures distal to the elbow. Some patients can undergo 
procedures on the elbow or lower humerus with an axillary 
technique, but strong consideration should be given to a 
supraclavicular block for those requiring more proximal 
procedures. It is discouraging to carry out a “successful” 
axillary block only to find that the surgical procedure 
extends outside the area of the block. This block is appro­
priate for hand and forearm surgery; thus it is often the 
most appropriate technique for outpatients in a busy hand 
surgery practice. Some anesthesiologists find the axillary 
block suitable for elbow surgical procedures, and continu­
ous axillary catheter techniques may be indicated for post­
operative analgesia in these patients. Because this block is 
carried out distant from both the neuraxial structures and 
the lung, complications associated with those areas are 
avoided.
Patient Selection. To undergo an axillary block, patients 
must be able to abduct the arm at the shoulder. As 
the experience of the operator increases the need for abduc­
tion decreases, but this block cannot be carried out with 
the arm at the side. Because the block is most appropriate 
for forearm and hand surgery, it is a rare patient with a 
surgical condition at those sites who cannot abduct the arm 
as needed.
Pharmacologic Choice. Because hand and wrist proce­
dures often require less motor blockade than procedures 
on the shoulder, the concentration of local anesthetic 
needed for axillary block can usually be slightly less than 
that needed for supraclavicular or interscalene block. 
Appropriate drugs are lidocaine (1% to 2%), mepivacaine 
(1% to 2%), bupivacaine (0.5%), and ropivacaine (0.5% to 
0.75%). Lidocaine and mepivacaine produce 2 to 3 hours 
of surgical anesthesia without epinephrine and 3 to 5 hours 
with the addition of epinephrine. These drugs can be useful 
for less involved procedures or outpatient surgical proce­
dures. For more extensive surgical procedures requiring 
hospital admission, a longer-acting agent such as bupiva­
caine can be chosen. Plain bupivacaine and ropivacaine 
produce surgical anesthesia that lasts from 4 to 6 hours; the 
addition of epinephrine may prolong this period to 8 to 
12 hours. The local anesthetic timeline must be considered 
when prescribing a drug for outpatient axillary block 
because blocks lasting as long as 18 to 24 hours can result 
from higher concentrations of bupivacaine with added epi­
nephrine. With continuous catheter techniques used for 
postoperative analgesia or chronic pain syndromes, 0.25% 
bupivacaine or 0.2% ropivacaine may be used, and even 
lower concentrations of these drugs may be used after a 
trial.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. At the level of the distal axilla, where the axillary 
block is undertaken (Fig. 9.1), the axillary artery can be 
visualized as the center of a four-quadrant neurovascular 
bundle. We conceptualize these nerves in quadrants like a 
clock face because multiple injections during axillary block 
result in more acceptable clinical anesthesia than does 
injection at a single site. The musculocutaneous nerve is 
found in the 9 to 12 o’clock quadrant in the substance of 
the coracobrachialis muscle. The median nerve is most 
often found in the 9 to 12 o’clock quadrant; the ulnar nerve 
is “inferior” to the median nerve in the 2 to 3 o’clock quad­
rant; and the radial nerve is located in the 5 to 6 o’clock 
quadrant. The block does not need to be performed in the 
axilla; in fact, needle insertion in the middle to lower 
portion of the axillary hair patch or even more distal to this 
is effective. It is clear from radiographic and anatomic 
study of the brachial plexus and the axilla that separate and 
distinct sheaths are associated with the plexus at this point. 
Keeping this concept in mind will help decrease the number 
of unacceptable blocks performed. This more distal 
approach to axillary block is similar to the midhumeral 
brachial plexus block.
Position. The patient is placed supine, with the arm 
forming a 90-degree angle with the trunk, and the forearm 
forming a 90-degree angle with the upper arm (Fig. 9.2). 
This position allows the anesthesiologist to stand at the 
level of the patient’s upper arm and palpate the axillary 
artery, as illustrated in Fig. 9.2. A line should be drawn 
tracing the course of the artery from the midaxilla to the 
lower axilla; overlying this line, the index and third fingers 
of the anesthesiologist’s left hand are used to identify 
the artery and minimize the amount of subcutaneous tissue 
overlying the neurovascular bundle. In this manner, the 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
70
Fig. 9.1  ​Axillary block: functional quadrant anatomy of distal axilla.
Musculocutaneous nerve (Mc)
Mc
M
U
R
6
12
3
9
Humerus
Median nerve (M)
Radial nerve (R)
Ulnar nerve (U)
Fig. 9.2  ​Axillary block: position of patient arm and clinician’s fingers for palpation of axillary artery.
Musculocutaneous nerve
‘‘Gentle pressure’’
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
anesthesiologist can develop a sense of the longitudinal 
course of the artery, which is essential for performing an 
axillary block.
Needle Puncture. While the axillary artery is identified 
with two fingers, the needle and syringe are inserted 
as shown in Fig. 9.3. Some local anesthetic should be 
deposited in each of the quadrants surrounding the axillary 
artery. If paresthesia is obtained, it is beneficial, although 
undue time should not be expended or patient discomfort 
incurred from an attempt to elicit a paresthesia. As 
71
Axillary Block
illustrated in Fig. 9.4, effective axillary block is produced 
by using the axillary artery as an anatomic landmark and 
infiltrating in a fanlike manner around the artery. Anesthesia 
of the musculocutaneous nerve is best achieved by infiltrat­
ing into the mass of the coracobrachialis muscle. This 
maneuver can be carried out by identifying the coracobra­
chialis and injecting anesthetic into its substance, or 
by inserting a longer needle until it contacts the humerus 
and injecting in a fanlike manner near the humerus (see 
Fig. 9.4).
When using a continuous catheter technique for an 
axillary block, stimulating or nonstimulating catheter kits 
may be used; we prefer the stimulating catheter (Fig. 9.5). 
With the nonstimulating catheter, the epidural needle is 
positioned either with the assistance of a nerve stimulator 
or with elicitation of paresthesia as an endpoint. After the 
needle is positioned, 20 mL of preservative-free normal 
saline solution is injected through the needle, and then the 
appropriate-size catheter is inserted approximately 10 cm 
past the needle tip. Once the catheter has been secured with 
a plastic occlusive dressing, the initial bolus of drug is 
injected and the infusion is started.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Problems with axillary block are infrequent because of the 
distance of this block from neuraxial structures and the 
lung. One occasional complication, which can be mini­
mized by using multiple injections rather than a fixed 
needle, is systemic toxicity. Use of a single immobile needle 
to inject large volumes of a local anesthetic increases 
the potential for systemic toxicity relative to the use of 
smaller volumes of local anesthetic injected at multiple 
sites. Another potential problem with axillary block is 
the development of postoperative neuropathy, but one 
should not assume that axillary block is the cause of all 
neuropathy after upper extremity surgery. One must follow 
a logical and systematic approach when seeking the cause 
Fig. 9.3  ​Axillary block: needle and syringe insertion.
Musculocutaneous
nerve
Humerus
Axillary artery
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
Fig. 9.4  ​Axillary block: fanlike injection pattern using axillary 
artery as guide.
Musculocutaneous nerve
Humerus
Axillary
artery
Median nerve
4
1
1
2
3
4
3
2
Radial
nerve
Ulnar
nerve
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
72
of a neuropathy if we are to understand the true incidence 
and causes of this condition after brachial plexus block and 
upper extremity surgery.
SONOANATOMY
The lateral cord of the brachial plexus divides into the 
musculocutaneous nerve and the lateral portion of the 
median nerve, the medial cord divides into the ulnar 
nerve and medial portion of the median nerve, and the 
posterior cord divides into the radial nerve and the axil­
lary nerve. In the axilla, the median, ulnar, and radial 
nerves travel in a neurovascular bundle with the axillary 
artery medial to the humerus. The musculocutaneous 
nerve travels separately and usually lies in the plane 
between the biceps and coracobrachialis muscles or in the 
body of the coracobrachialis.
The target nerves for the axillary block are the radial, 
median, ulnar, and musculocutaneous nerves. The struc­
tures of interest, including the axillary artery and sur­
rounding nerves, are superficial (1 to 3 cm) from the skin 
surface of the anteromedial aspect of the proximal arm. 
The median nerve is located superficial and lateral to the 
artery, whereas the ulnar nerve is superficial and medial to 
the artery, and the radial nerve is posterior and lateral or 
medial to the artery.
Under ultrasound, the median, ulnar, and radial nerves 
have a honeycomb appearance or can be seen as round 
hyperechoic structures. The musculocutaneous nerve is 
usually seen under ultrasound as a hypoechoic, flattened 
oval, with a bright hyperechoic border (Figs. 9.6, 9.7B, 
9.8A-B).
INDICATIONS
•	 Surgeries from midarm down to elbow (brachiobasilic 
fistula, elbow fixation).
•	 Surgeries on the hand and wrist.
TECHNIQUE
The patient ideally should be placed in the supine position, 
with the arm abducted 90 degrees and externally rotated so 
the dorsum of the hand rests on the bed, and preferably the 
operator should be positioned behind the patient, with 
the ultrasound machine in front of the patient and facing 
the operator. Injured extremities should be well supported 
during positioning. The ultrasound probe is placed trans­
versely on the proximal medial upper aspect of the arm in 
order to view the axillary artery and surrounding nerves in 
short-axis view. This starting point should place the ultra­
sound transducer over both the biceps and triceps muscles. 
Then slide the ultrasound transducer across the axilla until 
the thick-walled pulsatile axillary artery and the hypere­
choic surrounding nerves are visualized. Relative to the 
axillary artery, the median nerve usually lies around the 
9 to 12 o’clock position, the ulnar nerve around 2 to 
3 o’clock, and the radial nerve around 5 to 6 o’clock. We 
prefer to use the in-plane approach and a 2-inch, 22-gauge 
Fig. 9.5  ​Axillary block: continuous catheter technique after threading 10 cm of catheter proximally.
Coracoid process
Brachial artery
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Musculocutaneous nerve
Skin entry site for catheter
Ulnar nerve
73
Axillary Block
echogenic needle. The needle is inserted in plane from the 
cephalad aspect and directed to the location of the median, 
ulnar, and radial nerves using careful hydrodissection with 
a small amount of local anesthetic. Finally, the needle is 
withdrawn to the biceps muscle and redirected toward the 
hypoechoic flattened oval with a bright hyperechoic border 
musculocutaneous nerve (see Figs. 9.7A-B and 9.8A-B).
KEY POINTS
•	 High-frequency, 38-mm broadband linear array 
transducer is preferred for this block.
•	 Use between 20 and 25 mL of 0.5% ropivacaine or 
bupivacaine to inject the four nerves.
•	 We usually block the nerves around the axillary 
artery first—which are the median, ulnar, and radial 
nerves—and then the needle is withdrawn to the 
biceps muscle and redirected toward the hypoechoic, 
flattened oval musculocutaneous nerve.
PEARLS
•	 A reverberation artifact deep to the artery is often 
misinterpreted for the radial nerve. When you are in 
doubt, you can use nerve stimulation to confirm the 
location of the nerve.
•	 The axillary nerve is not blocked because it departs 
from the posterior cord high up in the axilla; that’s 
why the deltoid muscle is not anesthetized by the 
axillary block.
•	 Always aspirate before injection, and watch for the 
spread and the dose of the local anesthetic to avoid 
toxicity.
•	 When scanning, use minimal pressure with the 
ultrasound transducer to avoid obliteration of the 
veins, rendering the veins invisible and easily prone 
to being punctured with the needle if care is not 
taken.
•	 Unintentional multiple punctures of the veins 
surrounding the axillary artery can predispose 
the patient to local anesthetic toxicity.
AXILLARY CATHETER TECHNIQUE
Axillary block is performed first targeting the median, ulnar, 
radial, and musculocutaneous nerves using a 22-gauge 
needle 4 inches in length, to speed the onset of the block 
and to avoid vascular punctures with a Tuohy needle. From 
the same entry point the 19-gauge axillary catheter is then 
Fig. 9.6  ​Anatomy of axillary approach of brachial plexus block.
Axillary block
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Clavicle
Injection site
Musculocutaneous n.
Radial n.
Median n.
Ulnar n.
Brachial plexus
Brachial plexus
Radial nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
74
placed using a 17-gauge Tuohy needle, 3 inches in length, 
and the catheter is threaded around the targeted nerves for 
the surgical procedure. For example, if the surgery involves 
the little finger, then we thread the catheter around the ulnar 
nerve. If the surgery involves the whole hand, then 
we thread the catheter between the median and ulnar nerve, 
and usually the local anesthetic spreads to the radial nerve. 
Then we tunnel the catheter for 2 to 3 inches under the skin 
away from the axilla to decrease catheter migration and we 
use an adhesive dressing with built-in slow releasing 
chlorhexidine to prevent infection. We use a ropivacaine 
0.2% infusion at 5mL basal rate in the hospital, and 5mL 
per hour demand rate using an automated programmed 
pump to deliver the medication when the patient is at home. 
The axillary catheter is usually kept in place for 5 days after 
surgery. The catheter is then removed either by the patient 
or a family member, or by the surgeon at his office during 
the patient’s postoperative visit.
If there are multiple vessels around the axillary artery 
and between the nerves, infraclavicular block or supracla­
vicular block may be a better option to block surgeries for 
the hand, forearm, and elbow.
INDICATIONS FOR AXILLARY 
CATHETER
•	 Surgeries for hand, forearm, and elbow.
•	 Patients with morbid obesity (cannot have a good 
image to perform an infraclavicular block and 
Fig. 9.7  ​(A) Patient position with the arm abducted 90 degrees and externally rotated. (B) Ultrasound for the brachial plexus. RN, Radial 
nerve; UN, ulnar nerve.
A
B
75
Axillary Block
concerned about phrenic block when using a 
supraclavicular block).
•	 Patients with severe COPD (chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease), sleep apnea, asthma, on home 
oxygen, phrenic nerve palsy on the contralateral 
side of surgery, and refusal to have an infraclavicular 
block.
COMPLICATIONS FOR AXILLARY 
CATHETER
•	 Infections.
•	 Partially working block.
•	 Catheter migration and dislodgement.
Fig. 9.8  ​(A) In-plane technique for axillary block. Note the multiple injections of local anesthetics around the musculocutaneous nerve 
(MCN), median nerve (MN), radial nerve (RN), and ulnar nerve (UN). (B) Ultrasound image for musculocutaneous nerve injection. Notice 
the needle in close proximity to the nerve.
Medial
Lateral
MCN
UN
RN
MN
Axillary
artery
Biceps muscle
Coracobrachialis
muscle
Triceps muscle
needle and injection site
1
3
2
4
A
B
This page intentionally left blank
Distal Upper 
Extremity Blocks
Sree Kolli and Sanchit Ahuja10
(FDP) before entering through the carpal tunnel at the 
wrist. Motor branches (anterior interosseous nerve) supply 
the deep volar muscles in the forearm and thenar eminence 
of the hand, whereas sensory distribution is limited to the 
radial aspect of the hand. Notably, the median nerve does 
not provide any sensory distribution to the forearm; 
however, it innervates all muscles of the forearm except 
flexor carpi ulnaris and the ulnar aspect of flexor carpi 
radialis.
The ulnar nerve originates from the C8 and T1 nerve 
roots as the terminal branch of the medial cord of the 
brachial plexus and has mixed motor-sensory components. 
At the upper level of the arm, the ulnar nerve is medial to 
the axillary artery, and posterior to the brachial artery and 
median nerve. It does not provide any motor or sensory 
innervation at this level. However, in midarm, it descends 
along the posteromedial aspect and passes between the 
olecranon process and medial epicondyle to enter the 
forearm, where it lies superficial to the FDP and medial to 
the ulnar artery. At the forearm, the ulnar nerve can be 
located medial to the ulnar artery in close proximity, and 
hence facilitates sonographic determination. At the level of 
wrist, the nerve runs lateral to flexor carpi ulnaris and 
enters the hand superficial to the flexor retinaculum.
The radial nerve is a mixed motor-sensory nerve origi­
nating from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus via 
C5 to T1 nerve roots. It travels from medial to lateral within 
the spiral groove of the humerus and further descends 
along the medial and lateral heads of the triceps muscle 
to lie anterior to the lateral epicondyle in the elbow (see 
Fig. 10.1). At this level, the nerve divides into superficial 
and deep branches.
TECHNIQUE
MEDIAN NERVE
Landmark technique. At the level of elbow—antecubital 
crease, the median nerve is located 1 cm medial to 
pulsation of the brachial artery approximately 1–2 cm 
deep (Fig. 10.2). The needle is inserted at 45 degrees 
cephalad, and a resistance click of the bicipital 
aponeurosis may be felt 1–2 cm deep to the skin. 
At this point, paresthesia may be achieved, and after 
Key Points
•	 Blockade of peripheral nerves of the upper extremity 
is often accomplished by brachial plexus approaches. 
However, conditions such as infections to brachial 
plexus sites, coagulopathy, single nerve distribution, 
minor procedures (not requiring a tourniquet), and 
rescue supplementations of brachial plexus block 
may require individual nerve blockade.
•	 Distal peripheral nerve blocks are associated with a 
slightly higher likelihood of nerve injury, possibly 
because of the anatomical location of these sites 
where the nerve is contained within bony and liga­
mentous surroundings.
•	 As most distal forearm and hand surgery procedures 
are performed using a tourniquet, the patients may 
require deeper sedation to tolerate the high tourni­
quet inflation pressures.
•	 A high-frequency linear array transducer is preferred 
for these peripheral nerves; also it is easier to locate 
a nerve in short axis at a determined landmark and 
then follow in a cranial to caudal direction.
•	 Continuous nerve catheters are not recommended, 
perhaps because these nerves are confined in a tight 
space and carry the risk of compartment syndrome. 
Nevertheless, if prolonged analgesia is needed, axil­
lary continuous catheters may be considered.
SONOANATOMY
The three major peripheral nerves of the upper extremity, 
namely median, radial, and ulnar, may be blocked at various 
levels as follows: arm, elbow, forearm, and wrist.
The median nerve is composed of both motor and 
sensory components derived from the medial and lateral 
cords of the brachial plexus. It is bounded in a neurovas­
cular bundle in the upper arm where it accompanies the 
brachial artery. At the elbow, the median nerve courses 
medial to the brachial artery, and lies between the humeral 
and ulnar heads of the pronator teres muscle (Fig. 10.1). At 
mid-forearm, the median nerve separates from ulnar artery 
and is sandwiched between the muscle of the flexor digito­
rium superficialis (FDS) and flexor digitorum profundus 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
78
Fig. 10.1  ​Elbow nerve blocks: functional anatomy.
Biceps muscle
Biceps
tendon
Biceps
tendon
Radial nerve
Radial
nerve
Humerus
Olecranon
process
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Median
nerve
Brachial
artery
Brachial
artery
Fig. 10.2  ​Elbow nerve blocks: median and radial nerves.
Biceps muscle
Median nerve
Radial nerve
Brachioradialis
muscle
Brachial
artery
Medial
epicondyle
of humerus
79
Distal Upper Extremity Blocks
confirming, 5–10 mL of local anesthetic (LA) can be 
injected.
Ultrasound technique. Distal to the elbow, at the level of 
the mid-forearm, the median nerve is found as a 
hyperechoic structure embedded in hypoechoic FDS 
and FDP (Fig. 10.3). The nerve should be confirmed 
by fanning the probe along its course. Using an 
in-plane view, with a high frequency linear probe, the 
needle tip is advanced towards the base of the median 
nerve and 2–3 mL of LA is injected. The needle is then 
readjusted to the superior border of the nerve in order 
to effectively surround the nerve completely with LA. 
The total volume should be limited to 5–7 mL.
ULNAR NERVE
Landmark technique. At the level of elbow, the ulnar 
nerve can be accessed by mid-range flexion and 
abduction. Identification of ulnar groove and medial 
epicondyle landmarks are made, followed by 
insertion of a needle 1–2 cm deep and proximal to 
the medial epicondyle at 45 degrees cephalad to the 
skin (Fig. 10.4). After appropriate paresthesia is 
achieved, 3–5 mL of LA can be injected. Within the 
ulnar groove the nerve is immobile and care must 
be taken with regard to restricting the total volume 
(preferably less than 5 mL) injected to avoid causing 
pressure neurapraxia.
Ultrasound technique. We suggest an ulnar nerve block 
at the level of the mid-forearm for the following 
reasons: 1) the nerve is easily found at the ulnar 
artery landmark; 2) the nerve starts to separate and 
risk of arterial puncture may be avoided at a 
somewhat distal location; 3) there is a low risk of 
compartment syndrome; and 4) the ability to cover 
the dorsal and volar terminal branches of the ulnar 
nerve, which divides distal to this location. After the 
nerve is located (Fig. 10.5), the confirmation is done 
by fanning the probe along in a proximal to distal 
direction. Using an in-plane view with a low fre­
quency probe, the needle is inserted along the ulnar 
side of the transducer and no more than 3–5 mL of 
LA is used to surround the nerve. The ulnar nerve 
can also be blocked at the elbow, where it can be 
easily identified medial to the pulsatile brachial artery, 
appearing as a bright hyperechoic oval structure.
RADIAL NERVE
Landmark technique. At the level of elbow, the 
antecubital crease, medial epicondyle, lateral 
epicondyle, biceps and brachioradialis tendons are 
identified. The median nerve is located within the 
groove of brachioradialis and biceps tendon (see 
Fig. 10.2). An imaginary line can be drawn connect­
ing the medial and lateral epicondyle and the needle 
is inserted between the brachioradialis muscle and 
the biceps tendon, 2–4 cm deep to the skin. After 
appropriate paraesthesia (wrist extension) is 
achieved, 5–10 mL of LA can be injected.
Ultrasound technique. We recommend blocking the 
nerve at the upper arm level, which theoretically 
assures broader coverage. This technique involves 
placing a low frequency probe in an out-of-plane 
view and a transverse direction, approximately 
between the upper and middle third of the arm, 
over the triceps muscle as it crosses the humerus 
shaft. At this level, the radial nerve and deep 
brachial artery are visible. Color Doppler may be 
helpful in visualization. Scanning more distally, just 
Fig. 10.3  Ultrasound of mid-forearm showing median nerve.
Flexor Digitorum Superficialis
L
M
Median Nerve
Flexor Digitorum Profundus
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
80
above the elbow, the nerve may be seen sandwiched 
between the brachioradialis and brachialis muscle 
and more distal to this point it divides into superfi­
cial and deep branches. The radial nerve may also be 
traced from the cubital fossa more proximally to the 
mid-humeral level. However, the nerve is more 
superficial proximally, and the chance of vascular 
injury may be decreased when the injection is done 
at the cubital fossa. It can also be blocked at the 
mid-forearm level (Fig. 10.6), but does not get the 
benefit of blocking higher up in the mid-humeral or 
at the level of elbow.
Fig. 10.4  ​Ulnar nerve block: (A) positioning and (B) palpation of the ulnar groove and needle position.
Ulna
Olecranon
process
A
B
Needle
entry site
Medial epicondyle
of humerus
Ulnar nerve
81
Distal Upper Extremity Blocks
Fig. 10.5  ​Ultrasound of mid-forearm showing ulnar nerve.
Flexor Digitorum Superficialis
Ulnar Nerve
AL
PM
Flexor Carpi Ulnaris
Flexor Digitorum Profundus
Fig. 10.6  ​Ultrasound of mid-forearm showing radial nerve.
Brachioradialis
Radial Nerve
Radius
L
M
Extensor Carpi Radialis
Brevis
WRIST BLOCK
At the level of wrist 
(See Fig. 10.7)
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Radial nerve
Landmark technique
Position of wrist: 
Supine
Located between tendons of palmaris 
longus and flexor carpi radialis. Palmaris 
longus is the more prominent of these 
two and presents in 85% of the popula­
tion. Median nerve is blocked by 
inserting a needle at 45 degrees to skin, 
1 to 1.5 cm deep until a fascial click is 
felt. At this level paresthesia (thumb or 
index finger) can be achieved and 3 to 
5 mL of LA is injected.
Located between flexor carpi 
ulnaris and ulnar artery. 
Blocked by inserting the needle 
to a depth of 1–1.5 cm, 
5–10 mm past the flexor carpi 
ulnaris tendon towards the 
radial border of wrist, close to 
the ulnar styloid.
3–5 mL of LA is injected after 
achieving appropriate paresthesia.
LA is injected subcutane­
ously between the radial 
styloid and the dorsal 
midpoint of the wrist.
Ultrasound 
technique
Probe position:
Transverse at 
level of wrist
Nerve appears as an oval hypoechoic 
structure beneath the flexor retinaculum, 
confirmed by scanning proximally 
5–10 cm. Needle is inserted in-plane and 
3–5 mL of LA injected in a circumferen­
tial pattern.
Nerve appears as a triangular 
hyperechoic structure medial to 
the ulnar artery. Hyperechoic 
ulnar bone shadow is also seen 
posteriorly. Following negative 
aspiration 3–5 mL of LA is 
injected around the nerve.
A subcutaneous field 
block around radial styloid 
process can be used at 
this level. The radial 
styloid process is lateral to 
radial artery.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
82
DIGITAL BLOCK
The most common use of the digital block in the emer­
gency room is for the repair of lacerations and drainage of 
digital abscesses. It can also be used in certain elective 
digital surgeries.
The nerves appear to traverse laterally on a cross section 
of a digit. The digital nerves are the distal continuations 
of both the median and ulnar nerves (Fig. 10.8). They 
provide anesthesia distal to the distal interphalangeal 
joint.
Many techniques for performing a digital nerve block 
have been described. With the hand pronated the block is 
performed using a 27-gauge needle and injecting slowly 
and laterally into the base of a digit—1cm distal to the web 
space, along the side of periosteum. Angle the needle 
towards the palmar and dorsal surface and inject 1.5–2 mL 
of LA. A small subcutaneous swelling can be observed. 
Repeat on the opposite side.
Fig. 10.7  ​Wrist nerve blocks: functional anatomy, needle insertion and arm positioning.
Ulnar nerve
Ulnar styloid
process
Distal radial
prominence
Median nerve
Palmaris
longus tendon
Flexor carpi
radialis tendon
PEARLS
•	 Caution should be observed when injecting LA 
into the olecranon fossa. The ulnar nerve is located 
in a confined tight space at this location. To prevent 
intraneural injection it is preferable to use less 
than 5 mL of anesthetic, ensure that injection 
pressure is not high, and avoid overflexing the 
elbow.
•	 Color Doppler may be helpful in identifying and 
distinguishing the brachial artery and radial nerve 
in the proximal third of the upper arm, and also the 
forearm.
•	 In morbidly obese patients, it can be difficult to 
identify individual nerves. Therefore we recommend 
determining arterial location first and following its 
course, and finally confirming the location of the 
nerve with a peripheral nerve stimulator.
83
Distal Upper Extremity Blocks
•	 Inadvertent vascular injection can be avoided by 
applying firm pressure to the vascular structure via 
a transducer.
•	 When using an out-of-plane technique, injecting a 
small amount of normal saline may be helpful in 
determining the location of the tip of the needle.
•	 At times the median nerve can be confused with a 
muscle tendon; asking the patient to flex fingers and 
wrist may be helpful in distinguishing.
•	 Advantages of blocking terminal nerves 5–10 cm 
proximal to the wrist—more room for maneuver­
ability, wider coverage can be ensured by additional 
blockage of palmar branches of median and ulnar 
nerves, risk of neurapraxia may be reduced by 
avoiding injection in tight structures at the wrist.
•	 Never use LA with epinephrine for digital nerve 
block. Digital arteries are end arteries and epineph­
rine may cause ischemia and potentially necrosis.
Fig. 10.8  ​Digital nerve block: anatomy and needle insertion.
Proper palmar
digital nerve
Dorsal
digital nerve
Needle entry sites
This page intentionally left blank
Abstract: This chapter discusses the distal upper extremity 
nerve blocks. We discuss how and where to block them 
using anatomic landmarks and ultrasound. There are three 
major peripheral nerves in the upper extremity, namely 
median, radial and ulnar that can be blocked at various 
levels : arm, elbow, forearm and wrist. These nerves are 
usually hyperechoic and progressively taper in size as you 
scan distally towards the wrist. The nerves distally can look 
e1
Keywords: Ulnar nerve, radial nerve, median nerve, wrist 
block, digital block
like tendons and can be differentiated by asking patient to 
flex fingers. Small doses of local anesthetic per nerve is 
adequate, effective and avoid neurapraxia in tight spaces. 
Epinephrine should be avoided to prevent vasoconstriction 
and ischemia.
Intravenous
Regional Block
David L. Brown11
fractures and soft tissue operations. Intravenous regional 
block may not be appropriate for patients in whom 
movement of the upper extremity causes significant pain, 
because movement of the upper extremity is required to 
exsanguinate blood from the venous system adequately.
Pharmacologic Choice. The most commonly used 
agent for IV regional anesthesia is a dilute concen­
tration of lidocaine; however, prilocaine has also 
been used successfully. Lidocaine is used in a 0.5% 
concentration; approximately 50 mL is used for an 
upper extremity IV regional block.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The only anatomic detail necessary for 
clinical use of the IV regional block is identification 
of a peripheral vein; one must be cannulated in the 
involved extremity.
Position. The patient should be resting supine on the 
operating table with an IV tube already established in the 
nonsurgical arm. The involved arm should be extended 
on an armboard near available supplies (Fig. 11.2).
Needle Puncture. Before placement of the IV catheter 
in the operative extremity, a tourniquet, either 
double or single, should be placed around the upper 
arm of the patient. An IV cannula is then inserted in 
the operative extremity as distally as possible, most 
commonly in the dorsum of the hand (Fig. 11.3). 
Key Points
•	 Intravenous (IV) regional anesthesia is usually 
achieved using dilute lidocaine 0.5%; 50 mL of prilo­
caine has also been used successfully.
•	 The IV regional block is useful for procedures lasting 
90–120 minutes. This time limit is due to tourniquet 
time constraints rather than to diminution of the 
local anesthetic effect.
PERSPECTIVE
IV regional anesthesia was introduced by Bier in 1908. As 
illustrated in Fig. 11.1, in the initial description, a surgical 
procedure was required to cannulate a vein, and both prox­
imal and distal tourniquets were used to contain the local 
anesthetic in the venous system. After its introduction, the 
technique fell into disuse until the less toxic amino amides 
became available in the mid-20th century. This technique 
can be used for a variety of upper extremity operations, 
including both soft tissue and orthopedic procedures, pri­
marily in the hand and forearm. The technique has also 
been used for foot procedures with a calf tourniquet.
Patient Selection. The technique is best suited for patients in 
whom there is no disruption of the venous system of the 
involved upper extremity, because the technique relies on 
an intact venous system. It can be used for distal orthopedic 
Fig. 11.1  ​Early Bier block: surgical technique.
Venous
cutdown
Distal
tourniquet
Proximal
tourniquet
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
86
Fig. 11.2  ​Intravenous regional block: equipment.
Dilute local
anesthetic
Esmarch
bandage
Double-wide cuff
T-connection
Pressure source
Intravenous
catheter
Syringe and
IV tubing
Fig. 11.3  ​Intravenous regional block: distal IV site.
Distal IV
87
Intravenous Regional Block
There are two methods for exsanguinating the 
venous blood from the operative extremity. The 
traditional technique requires wrapping an Esmarch 
bandage from distal to proximal (Fig. 11.4). When 
the Esmarch bandage is not available or the patient 
is in too much pain to allow its placement, another 
method is to raise the arm for 3–4 minutes to allow 
gravity to exsanguinate the operative upper extrem­
ity (Fig. 11.5). After the blood has been exsangui­
nated from the upper extremity, the tourniquet is 
Fig. 11.4  ​Intravenous regional block: venous exsanguination with Esmarch bandage.
Esmarch
bandage
Fig. 11.5  ​Intravenous regional block: venous exsanguination by gravity.
Venous
exsanguination
by gravity
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
88
inflated. If a double tourniquet is used, only the 
upper tourniquet is inflated. Recommendations for 
tourniquet inflation pressures range from 50 mm Hg 
above systolic blood pressure with a wide cuff, 
to a cuff pressure double the systolic blood pressure, 
to 300 mm Hg regardless of blood pressure. Until 
more information is available, I caution against 
using pressures greater than 300 mm Hg during 
upper extremity block.
If an Esmarch bandage has been used, the elastic bandage 
is then unwrapped, and in the average adult 50 mL of 0.5% 
lidocaine without a vasoconstrictor is injected. Onset of the 
block usually occurs within 5 minutes, and the block is 
effective for procedures lasting as long as 90–120 minutes. 
This time limit is due to tourniquet time constraints rather 
than to diminution of the local anesthetic effect. The IV 
cannula is removed before preparation for operation. The 
block persists as long as the cuff is inflated and disappears 
shortly after deflation.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
The principal disadvantage of IV regional anesthesia is that 
physicians unfamiliar with treating local anesthetic toxicity 
may use the technique when appropriate resuscitation 
measures are not available. Although some workers report 
successful use of IV regional anesthesia for lower extremity 
surgery, especially if a calf tourniquet is used for foot 
surgery, its use is not widespread. During upper extremity 
use, a considerable number of patients complain about 
tourniquet pressure even when a double tourniquet is used, 
and this is often the clinically limiting feature of this tech­
nique. Appropriate use of IV sedatives is important for 
patient comfort.
PEARLS
Fig. 11.6 illustrates the two complementary theories of how 
IV regional anesthesia produces block. The figure concep­
tualizes local anesthetic entering the venous system and 
producing block by blocking the peripheral nerves running 
with the venous structures. It also outlines a theory that 
may be complementary—that is, the local anesthetic leaves 
the veins and blocks small distal branches of peripheral 
nerves. It is likely that both of these theories are operative. 
If IV regional anesthesia is to be used successfully, all 
members of the operating team should understand the 
importance of tourniquet integrity because the most sig­
nificant problems with the technique involve unintentional 
deflation of the tourniquet.
Fig. 11.6  ​Intravenous regional block: potential mechanism(s) of action.
Peripheral
nerve block
Distal block
of small
peripheral
nerves
Lower Extremity Blocks
Section 3
This page intentionally left blank
Lower Extremity Block 
Anatomy
David L. Brown12
branch redivides into the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal 
nerves, and the smaller inferior branch unites with a small 
superior branch of the second lumbar nerve to form the 
genitofemoral nerve (see Fig. 12.1).
The iliohypogastric nerve penetrates the transversus 
abdominis muscle near the crest of the ilium and supplies 
motor fibers to the abdominal musculature. It ends in an 
anterior cutaneous branch to the skin of the suprapubic 
region and a lateral cutaneous branch in the hip region 
(Fig. 12.4).
The ilioinguinal nerve courses slightly inferior to the 
iliohypogastric nerve. It then traverses the inguinal canal 
and ends cutaneously in branches to the upper and medial 
parts of the thigh and near the anterior scrotal nerves, 
which supply the skin at the root of the penis and the 
anterior part of the scrotum in males (see Fig. 12.4). In 
females, the comparable anterior labial nerves supply the 
skin of the mons pubis and labia majora.
The genitofemoral nerve divides at a variable level into 
genital and femoral branches. The genital branch is small; 
it enters the inguinal canal at the deep inguinal ring and 
supplies the cremaster muscle, small branches to the skin 
and fascia of the scrotum, and adjacent parts of the thigh. 
The femoral branch is the more medial of the two 
branches and continues under the inguinal ligament on 
the anterior surface of the external iliac artery. Below the 
inguinal ligament, it pierces the femoral sheath and 
passes through the saphenous opening to supply the skin 
over the femoral triangle lateral to that supplied by the 
ilioinguinal nerve (see Fig. 12.4). These three nerves are 
clinically important during regional block for inguinal 
herniorrhaphy or other groin procedures carried out 
under regional block.
Caudal to these three nerves are three major nerves of 
the lumbar plexus that exit from the pelvis anteriorly and 
innervate the lower extremity. These are the lateral femoral 
cutaneous, femoral, and obturator nerves (see Figs. 12.1 
and 12.2).
The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve passes under the 
lateral end of the inguinal ligament. It may be superficial 
or deep to the sartorius muscle, and it descends at first 
deep to the fascia lata. It provides cutaneous innervation 
to the lateral portion of the buttock distal to the greater 
trochanter and to the proximal two-thirds of the lateral 
aspect of the thigh.
The obturator nerve descends along the medial posterior 
aspect of the psoas muscle and through the pelvis to the 
Key Points
•	 Unlike the upper extremity, there are two nerve plex­
uses innervating the lower extremity; the lumbar 
plexus innervates the ventral aspect, whereas the 
lumbosacral plexus primarily innervates the dorsal 
aspect of the lower extremity.
•	 The three major branches of the lumbar plexus 
are the lateral femoral cutaneous, femoral, and 
obturator nerves. They exit from the pelvis anteri­
orly and innervate the ventral aspect of the lower 
extremity.
•	 The sciatic nerve is the combination of two 
major trunks: the tibial and common peroneal 
nerves.
Anesthesiologists are more comfortable carrying out lower 
extremity regional block than upper extremity regional 
block because of the ease and simplicity of blocking the 
lower extremities with neuraxial techniques. Also, in no 
anatomic site outside the neuraxis are the lower extremity 
plexuses as compactly packaged as are the nerves to the 
upper extremity in the brachial plexus. If one compares the 
path of lower extremity nerves over the pelvic brim with 
the path of the brachial plexus over the first rib, it is clear 
that the four major nerves to the lower extremity exit from 
four widely differing sites (Figs. 12.1 and 12.2). Thus 
regional block of the lower extremity focuses on block of 
individual peripheral nerves, and my approach to anatomy 
will follow that concept.
Two major nerve plexuses innervate the lower extremity: 
the lumbar plexus and the lumbosacral plexus. The lumbar 
plexus primarily innervates the ventral aspect, whereas the 
lumbosacral plexus primarily innervates the dorsal aspect 
of the lower extremity (see Fig. 12.2).
The lumbar plexus is formed from the ventral rami of 
the first three lumbar nerves and part of the fourth lumbar 
nerve. In approximately half of patients, a small branch 
from the twelfth thoracic nerve joins the first lumbar nerve. 
The lumbar plexus forms from the ventral rami of these 
nerves anterior to the transverse processes of the lumbar 
vertebrae deeply within the psoas muscle (Fig. 12.3). The 
cephalad portion of the lumbar plexus (i.e., the first lumbar 
nerve, and often a portion of the twelfth thoracic nerve) 
splits into superior and inferior branches. The superior 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
92
Fig. 12.1  ​Lower extremity anatomy: major nerves, anterior oblique view.
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Lumbosacral
plexus
Ilioinguinal n.
Iliohypogastric n.
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Lumbosacral
plexus
Lateral femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Ilioinguinal nerve
Iliohypogastric nerve
Genitofemoral
nerve
obturator canal into the thigh. This nerve supplies the 
adductor group of muscles, the hip and knee joints, and 
often the skin on the medial aspect of the thigh proximal 
to the knee.
The femoral nerve is the largest branch of the lumbar 
plexus. It emerges through the fibers of the psoas muscle 
at the muscle’s lower lateral border and descends in the 
groove between the psoas and the iliacus muscles. It passes 
under the inguinal ligament within this groove. Slightly 
before or on entering the femoral triangle of the upper 
thigh, the femoral nerve breaks into numerous branches 
supplying the muscles and skin of the anterior thigh, knee, 
and hip joints.
The lumbosacral plexus is formed by the ventral rami of 
the lumbar fourth and fifth and the sacral first, second, and 
third nerves. Occasionally, a portion of the fourth sacral 
nerve contributes to the sacral plexus. The nerve from the 
plexus that is of primary interest to anesthesiologists during 
lower extremity block is the sciatic nerve. The posterior 
femoral cutaneous nerve is sometimes listed as an addi­
tional branch important to anesthesiologists. In reality, the 
sciatic nerve is the combination of two major nerve trunks: 
the first is the tibial nerve, derived from the anterior 
branches of the ventral rami of the fourth and fifth lumbar 
and the first, second, and third sacral nerves, whereas the 
second is the common peroneal nerve, derived from the 
dorsal branches of the ventral rami of the same five nerves. 
These two major nerve trunks pass as the sciatic nerve 
through the upper leg to the popliteal fossa, where they 
divide into their terminal branches: the tibial and common 
peroneal nerves.
Figs. 12.5 and 12.6 illustrate the cutaneous innervation 
of the peripheral nerves of the lower extremity. This subject 
is illustrated with the patient’s lower extremity in both the 
anatomic and the lithotomy positions for greatest clinical 
utility. Fig. 12.7 illustrates the dermatomal innervation 
of the lower extremities in a similar manner. Fig. 12.8 illus­
trates the osteotome pattern of lower extremity innerva­
tion and will be most useful to anesthesiologists who are 
providing anesthesia for orthopedic procedures. Fig. 12.9 
helps clarify the cross-sectional anatomy pertinent to 
regional block of the lower extremity.
93
Lower Extremity Block Anatomy
Fig. 12.2  ​Lower extremity anatomy: major nerves, lateral view.
Lumbar
plexus
Tibial nerve
Lumbosacral
plexus
Saphenous
nerve
Deep peroneal
nerve
Superficial
peroneal
nerve
Common
peroneal
nerve
Femoral
nerve
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Obturator
nerve
Fig. 12.3  ​Lumbar plexus anatomy: cross-sectional view. Ao, Aorta; VC, vena cava.
Intermesenteric
aortic plexus
VC
Ao
Colon
Disk
between
L3, L4
Disk
between
L3, L4
VC
Ao
Colon
Sympathetic
trunk
Right lumbar
plexus L2, L3
Ilioinguinal nerve
Iliohypogastric nerve
Genitofemoral nerve
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
94
Fig. 12.4  ​Lower extremity anatomy: proximal innervation (peripheral nerves labeled on right side of the body, dermatomes on the left).
Ilioinguinal nerve
Pudendal nerve
L2
L1
S2, 3
L1
T10
T11
T12
T12
Subcostal
nerve
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
L2, L3
Femoral nerve
L2, L3, L4
Ilioinguinal
nerve
Genitofemoral
nerve, femoral
branch
Genitofemoral
nerve,
femoral branch
Femoral nerve
Genitofemoral
nerve,
genital branch
Genitofemoral
nerve, genital
branch
95
Lower Extremity Block Anatomy
Fig. 12.5  ​Lower extremity anatomy: proximal and distal innervation.
Posterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Cluneal nerve
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Saphenous nerve
Peroneal nerve
Sural nerve
Calcaneal nerve
Medial plantar
nerve
Genitofemoral nerve,
femoral branch
genital branch
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Saphenous nerve
Peroneal nerve
Sural nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Superficial
peroneal nerve
Iliohypogastric nerve,
lateral cutaneous
branch
Iliohypogastric
nerve, lateral
femoral
cutaneous branch
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
96
Fig. 12.6  ​Lower extremity anatomy in lithotomy position: proximal and distal peripheral nerves.
Cluneal
nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Saphenous
nerve
Superficial
peroneal nerve
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Posterior
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Calcaneal nerve
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Posterior
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Femoral nerve
Femoral
nerve
Obturator nerve
Medial
plantar nerve Calcaneal nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Genitofemoral
nerve,
genital branch
femoral branch
Iliohypogastric nerve,
lateral femoral cutaneous branch
genital branch
Genitofemoral
nerve,
femoral branch
Genitofemoral
nerve,
genital branch
Peroneal
nerve
Peroneal
nerve
Peroneal
     nerve
Obturator nerve
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Calcaneal nerve
Sural nerve
Sural
nerve
Medial
plantar nerve
Deep peroneal nerve
Superficial peroneal nerve
Fig. 12.7  ​Lower extremity anatomy in lithotomy position: dermatomes.
L5
L5
L5
L4
L4
S2
S2
L3
L3
L2
L2
L1
L1
L1 L2 L3
L3
L4
L4
L5
L5
L5
L5
S1
S1
S1
S1
S2
S3
S1
S2
L4
S2
L3
S5
S4
L2
L1
S1
S3 
S4 
S5 
L4
L5
L5
L5
L4
S1
L4
97
Lower Extremity Block Anatomy
Fig. 12.8  ​Lower extremity anatomy: osteotomes.
L2
S1
L3
L4
L4
L2
L3
L4
S1
S2
L4
After Iris Nichols
L5
S1
L5
L5
L4
L3
L5
S1
S1
S1
S1
L3
L4
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
L5
L4
L3
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
98
Fig. 12.9  ​Lower extremity anatomy: cross-sectional magnetic resonance images. (A) Location of sections. (B) Upper leg (below 
the hip). (C) Middle leg (above the knee). (D) Lower leg (above the ankle).
B
C
D
A
Tibialis anterior tendon
ANTERIOR
Extensor hallucis longus tendon
Extensor digitorum longus tendon
Greater saphenous vein
Medial malleolus
Lateral malleolus
Tibialis posterior tendon
Flexor digitorum longus tendon
Peroneus longus tendon
Peroneus brevis tendon
Tibial nerve
Flexor hallucis longus
muscle and tendon
Sural nerve
Soleus muscle
Calcaneus
B
Sartorius muscle
Femoral neurovascular bundle
Vastus lateralis muscle
Iliopsoas muscle
Adductor muscles
Proximal femur
Quadratus femoris muscle
Ischial tuberosity
Gluteus maximus muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Distal femur
Vastus lateralis muscle
Popliteal neurovascular bundle
Sartorius muscle
Biceps femoris muscle
(short and long heads)
Semimembranosus muscle
Semitendinosus muscle and tendon
POSTERIOR
POSTERIOR
POSTERIOR
ANTERIOR
ANTERIOR
 
Tibia
D
C
INGUINAL PERIVASCULAR BLOCK 
(THREE-IN-ONE BLOCK)
PERSPECTIVE
The inguinal perivascular block is based on the concept 
of injecting local anesthetic near the femoral nerve in an 
amount sufficient to track proximally along fascial 
planes to anesthetize the lumbar plexus. The three prin­
cipal nerves of the lumbar plexus pass from the pelvis 
anteriorly: the lateral femoral cutaneous, the femoral, 
and the obturator nerves. As illustrated in Fig. 13.1, the 
theory behind this block presumes that the local anes­
thetic will track in the fascial plane between the iliacus 
and the psoas muscles to reach the region of the lumbar 
plexus roots.
Patient Selection. As outlined, lower extremity block is 
often most effectively and efficiently performed with neur­
axial blocks. Nevertheless, in some patients avoidance of 
bilateral block or sympathectomy may make an alternative 
approach necessary.
Pharmacologic Choice. Local anesthetics should be 
selected by deciding whether a primarily sensory or a 
sensory and motor block is needed. Any of the amino 
amides can be used. It has been suggested that the 
volume of local anesthetic needed for adequate lumbar 
plexus block from this approach can be estimated 
by dividing the patient’s height, in inches, by three. 
That number is the volume of local anesthetic in mil­
liliters that theoretically will provide lumbar plexus 
block.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The concept behind this block is that the only 
anatomy one needs to visualize is the extension of sheath-like 
fascial planes that surround the femoral nerve.
Position. The patient should be placed supine on the 
operating table with the anesthesiologist standing at the 
patient’s side in position to palpate the ipsilateral femoral 
artery.
Needle Puncture. A short-beveled, 22-gauge, 5-cm 
needle is inserted immediately lateral to the femoral artery, 
caudal to the inguinal ligament in the lower extremity to 
be blocked. It is advanced with cephalad angulation until 
femoral paresthesia occurs; alternatively, nerve stimulation 
or ultrasonographic guidance is used to identify the correct 
perineural location of the needle tip. At this point, the 
needle is firmly fixed, and while the distal femoral sheath 
is digitally compressed, the entire volume of local anes­
thetic is injected.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Our clinical experience suggests that the principal problem 
with this technique is a lack of predictability. In addition, 
whenever a large volume of local anesthetic is injected 
through a fixed “immobile” needle, the risk of systemic 
toxicity is increased. If the technique is used, incremental 
injection of local anesthetic, accompanied by frequent aspi­
ration for blood, should be carried out.
PEARLS
This block should be used when the goal is lower extremity 
analgesia, not anesthesia during an operation. We do not 
believe one needs to master this technique to provide com­
prehensive regional anesthesia care.
PSOAS COMPARTMENT BLOCK
PERSPECTIVE
In theory, the psoas compartment block produces block 
of all lumbar and some sacral nerves, thus providing 
anesthesia of the anterior thigh. Based on the anatomical 
site and the expected end result of this block, it is some­
times described as a lumbar paravertebral block.
LUMBAR PLEXUS BLOCK
RELEVANT ANATOMY OF 
THE LUMBAR PLEXUS
The lumbar plexus is formed by the ventral rami of the first 
three lumbar nerves and the greater part of the ventral 
ramus of the fourth nerve. The first lumbar nerve, fre­
quently supplemented by the 12th thoracic nerve, splits 
into an upper branch that divides into the iliohypogastric 
Lumbar Plexus Block
Loran Mounir-Soliman and David L. Brown13
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
100
and ilioinguinal nerves. The lower branch unites with a 
branch from the second lumbar to form the genitofemoral 
nerve.
From the remains of the second lumbar nerve, the third 
and fourth nerves divide into ventral and dorsal divisions. 
The anterior divisions unite to form the obturator nerves, 
and the dorsal divisions form the lateral femoral cutaneous 
nerve and the larger femoral nerve.
The lumbar plexus and its branches are formed within 
the psoas major muscle in front of the transverse processes 
of the lumbar vertebrae. The anterior two-thirds of the 
psoas muscle originate from the anterolateral aspect of 
the vertebral body, and the posterior one-third of the 
muscle originates from the anterior aspect of the transverse 
processes, creating a fascial plane between both compart­
ments of the muscle that hosts the lumbar plexus.
It is important to appreciate that the lumbar plexus is 
located anterior to the transverse processes of the lumbar 
vertebrae and posterior (embedded in the post wall) of the 
psoas muscle. The erector spinae muscle covers the lumbar 
spine posteriorly medially and the quadratus lumborum 
muscle laterally.
Appreciation of the relations between the different 
muscles and spine anatomy, as well as the sonographic 
characteristics of these structures, is crucial to perform the 
block.
TECHNIQUE
The lumbar plexus block is a deep block that requires a 
lower-frequency (2-5 MHz), curvilinear ultrasound probe. 
A 4- to 6-inch needle is used, depending on the body 
habitus. Two techniques are described to perform the 
block.
Paramedian Longitudinal Scanning Tech­
nique  With the patient in the prone position (this 
can also be performed in the lateral position with the 
side blocked upwards), the ultrasound probe is placed 
parallel to the long axis of the sacrum to identify its 
flat surface. The probe is moved cephalad to identify the 
intervertebral space between L5 and S1 as an interruption 
of the sacral line continuity. The probe is moved 3-4 cm 
Fig. 13.1  ​Lumbar plexus anatomy: proposed mechanism of proximal local anesthetic spread.
Quadratus
lumborum
muscle
Psoas
muscle
Iliacus
muscle
Obturator
nerve
Femoral
nerve
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Local
anesthetic
spread
L2
L3
L4
L5
101
Lumbar Plexus Block
laterally (keeping the same orientation) to identify the 
transverse process of L5. The transverse processes of the 
other lumbar vertebrae are identified by cephalad scan in 
ascending order. The acoustic shadow of the transverse 
processes has a characteristic appearance often referred to 
as a trident sign.
The psoas muscle is imaged through the acoustic 
windows between the hyperechoic shadows of the trans­
verse processes. The lumbar plexus can be identified as 
hyperechoic striations in the posterior wall of the psoas 
muscle. However, appropriate identification of the plexus 
is confirmed by inducing quadriceps contraction or adduc­
tion when applying nerve stimulation to the insulated 
needle. The needle can be introduced using both the in-
plane and out-of-plane techniques in the middle of the 
probe or using the in-plane technique from the lower edge 
of the probe (Fig. 13.2A-D).
Transverse Oblique Scanning Technique 
This technique can be also used in the prone or lateral 
position with the side blocked up. The L3 to L4 transverse 
processes are identified by the same technique described 
earlier (scanning from the sacrum upwards). Once identified, 
the ultrasound probe is rotated horizontally parallel to 
the transverse processes. Next, it is directed slightly 
medially to scan the midline structures (transverse oblique 
orientation). The target structures of the ultrasound 
beam are:
•	 Quadratus lumborum (lateral) and erector spinae 
muscles (medial).
•	 Deeper to the muscles, the transverse processes of 
L3 to L4 and the anterolateral surface of the 
vertebral bodies can be scanned as hyperechoic 
structures with underlying drop-down shadows.
•	 The psoas muscle appears slightly hypoechoic with 
multiple hyperechoic striations deeper to the 
transverse processes.
•	 Slowly adjust the probe in the acoustic window 
between the transverse processes, allowing for 
visualization of the intervertebral foramen, and the 
articular process facet joint with the roots of the 
lumbar plexus as it emerges from the intervertebral 
foramen. The roots appear as hyperechoic struc­
tures adjacent to the posterior wall of the psoas 
muscle.
Fig. 13.2  ​(A) Anatomy of paramedian longitudinal technique for lumbar plexus block. 
Anterior
needle
and
injection
site
Psoas major muscle
Lumbar plexus
Transverse process
Erector spinae muscle
Posterior
A
Continued
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
102
The lumbar plexus is approached with the needle in the 
plane with the ultrasound beam from the lateral side of the 
probe (the approach from the medial side is also described), 
targeting the posterior border of the psoas muscle at the 
level of the intervertebral foramen. Using nerve stimulation 
is very helpful to confirm the proximity of the needle to 
the lumbar plexus and avoid intramuscular injection where 
local psoas contraction is induced. Care should be taken to 
avoid advancing the needle too medially, to reduce the risk 
of injury of the lumbar artery or its branches, and to avoid 
spread of local anesthetic into the neuraxial space 
(Fig. 13.3A-D).
B
PSOAS
PERITONEUM
PSOAS
ERECTOR SPINAE M
TRANSVERSE PROCESS
TRANSVERSE PROCESS
C
PSOAS
NEEDLE
PSOAS
ERECTOR SPINAE M
TRANSVERSE PROCESS
TRANSVERSE PROCESS
D
Unlabelled image  (B) Position of the patient and probe orientation for paramedian longitudinal technique. Note the in-plane technique 
for the paramedian longitudinal approach. (C) and (D) Ultrasound images for the paramedian approach for lumbar plexus that show the 
transverse processes and psoas muscle, and the needle position.
103
Lumbar Plexus Block
Fig. 13.3  (A) Anatomy of transverse oblique technique for lumbar plexus block. (B) Position of the patient for the transverse technique; 
note the in-plane technique used for the block. 
Erector spinae muscle
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
L-4
Lateral
cutaneous nerve
Lateral
Quadratus
lumborum muscle
needle and
injection site
Psoas major muscle
Transverse
process
A
B
Continued
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
104
INDICATIONS
•	 The lumbar plexus block is the most proximal 
approach to the lumbar plexus, providing the most 
reliable block of its major branches (femoral, 
obturator, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves).
•	 The block is ideal for hip surgeries and surgeries 
above the knee.
•	 When combined with sciatic nerve block, it provides 
complete unilateral lower limb anesthesia suitable 
for lower extremity surgeries.
•	 Continuous catheterization can be used for pro­
longed analgesia (Fig. 13.4).
KEY POINTS
•	 The lumbar plexus block is a deep block that 
makes it difficult to appreciate the difference in the 
echogenicity of the anatomic structures, especially 
in obese and elderly patients.
•	 The use of nerve stimulation is necessary to identify 
the lumbar plexus.
•	 Identification of small lumbar arteries is hard to 
visualize at deeper scan, and the block should be 
avoided in patients with coagulation disorders or at 
risk of bleeding.
•	 The spread of local anesthetic at the posterior 
surface of the psoas muscle is satisfactory.
PEARLS
•	 The lumbar plexus block is a technically advanced 
procedure with major potential for complications. 
Experience with ultrasound anatomy, scanning 
skills, and needle manipulations is necessary before 
attempting ultrasound-guided lumbar plexus 
block.
•	 The lumbar plexus is embedded within the body of 
the psoas muscle; hence the name psoas block is 
synonymous with lumbar plexus block.
VERTEBRAL
BODY (L3-4)
ROOT L3-4
AORTA
KIDNEY
PSOAS
QUADRATUS
LUMBORUM
ERECTOR SPINAE M
TRANSVERSE PROCESS
C
VERTEBRAL
BODY (L3-4)
ROOT L3-4
AORTA
KIDNEY
NEEDLE
PSOAS
LA
QUADRATUS
LUMBORUM
ERECTOR SPINAE M
TRANSVERSE PROCESS
D
Unlabelled image  (C) and (D) Ultrasound images for the transverse technique for lumbar plexus block; note the position of the needle in 
the psoas muscle deep to the quadratus lumborum muscle.
105
Lumbar Plexus Block
•	 The block can be performed in the prone and lateral 
positions. The advantage of the prone position is 
that it provides a more stable resting hand position, 
allowing more precise scanning and manipulations.
•	 At the level of L2 to L3, the kidney can be visualized 
as a hypoechoic structure that moves with 
respiration.
•	 Care should be taken to do frequent repeated 
aspiration and inject the local anesthetic in small 
increments to detect epidural or spinal spread early.
•	 The lumbar paravertebral space is a vascular and 
muscular space, which leads to significant systemic 
absorption of the local anesthetic and potentially 
high plasma levels.
Fig. 13.4  ​Anatomical distribution of lumbar plexus block.
Injection
site
Lumbar plexus
block
Inguinal
ligament
Obturator nerve
Femoral nerve
Ilioinguinal
nerve
Lateral
femoral
nerve
L2
L1
T12
L3
L4
L5
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Keywords: psoas compartment block, lumbar plexus, 
lumbar paravertebral
PERSPECTIVE
The sciatic nerve is one of the largest nerve trunks in the 
body, yet few surgical procedures can be performed with 
sciatic block alone. It is combined most often with femoral, 
lateral femoral cutaneous, or an obturator nerve block. The 
block is also effective for analgesia of the lower leg and may 
provide pain relief from ankle fractures or tibial fractures 
before operative intervention.
Patient Selection. This block may be indicated for 
patients needing analgesia before transport for definitive 
orthopedic surgical repair of lower leg or ankle fractures. 
For patients in whom it may be desirable to avoid the sym­
pathectomy accompanying neuraxial block, sciatic block 
combined with femoral nerve block often allows ankle and 
foot procedures to be carried out. One group of patients in 
whom this block is often useful is those undergoing distal 
amputations of the lower extremity, who have vascular 
compromise based on diabetes or peripheral vascular 
disease.
Pharmacologic Choice. Sciatic nerve block requires 
from 20–25 mL of local anesthetic solution. When this 
volume is added to that required for other lower extremity 
peripheral blocks, the total may reach the upper end of an 
acceptable local anesthetic dose range. Conversely, uptake 
of local anesthetic from these lower extremity sites is not 
as rapid as with epidural or intercostal block; thus a larger 
mass of local anesthetic may be appropriate in this region. 
If motor blockade is desired with this block, 1.5% mepiva­
caine or lidocaine may be necessary, whereas 0.5% bupiva­
caine or 0.5%–0.75% ropivacaine will be effective.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The sciatic nerve is formed from the L4 through 
S3 roots. These roots of the sacral plexus form on the 
anterior surface of the lateral sacrum and are assembled 
into the sciatic nerve on the anterior surface of the piri­
formis muscle. The sciatic nerve results from the fusion of 
two major nerve trunks. The “medial” sciatic nerve is func­
tionally the tibial nerve, which forms from the ventral 
branches of the ventral rami of L4 to L5 and S1 to S3; the 
posterior branches of the ventral rami of these same nerves 
form the “lateral” sciatic nerve, which is functionally the 
peroneal nerve. As the sciatic nerve exits the pelvis, it is 
anterior to the piriformis muscle and is joined by another 
nerve—the posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh. At the 
inferior border of the piriformis, the sciatic and posterior 
cutaneous nerves of the thigh lie posterior to the obturator 
internus, the gemelli, and the quadratus femoris. At this 
point these nerves are anterior to the gluteus maximus. 
Here, the nerve is approximately equidistant from the 
ischial tuberosity and the greater trochanter (Figs. 14.1–14.3). 
The nerve continues downward through the thigh to lie 
along the posteromedial aspect of the femur. At the cepha­
lad portion of the popliteal fossa, the sciatic nerve usually 
divides to form the tibial and common peroneal nerves. 
Occasionally this division occurs much higher, and some­
times the tibial and peroneal nerves are separate through 
their entire course. In the popliteal fossa, the tibial nerve 
continues downward into the lower leg, whereas the 
common peroneal nerve travels laterally along the medial 
aspect of the short head of the biceps femoris muscle.
CLASSIC APPROACH
Position. The patient is positioned laterally, with the side 
to be blocked nondependent. The nondependent leg is 
flexed and its heel placed against the knee of the dependent 
leg (Fig. 14.4). The anesthesiologist is positioned to allow 
insertion of the needle, as shown in Fig. 14.4.
Needle Puncture. A line is drawn from the posterior 
superior iliac spine to the midpoint of the greater trochan­
ter. Perpendicular to the midpoint of this line, another line 
is extended caudomedially for 5 cm. The needle is inserted 
through this point (Fig. 14.5). As a cross-check for proper 
placement, an additional line may be drawn from the sacral 
hiatus to the previously marked point on the greater tro­
chanter. The intersection of this line with the 5-cm perpen­
dicular line should coincide with the needle insertion site.
At this site, a 22-gauge, 10- to 13-cm needle is inserted, 
as illustrated in Fig. 14.4. The needle should be directed 
through the entry site toward an imaginary point where the 
femoral vessels course under the inguinal ligament. The 
needle is inserted until paresthesia is elicited or until bone 
is contacted. If bone is encountered before paresthesia is 
elicited, the needle is redirected along the line joining the 
sacral hiatus and the greater trochanter until paresthesia or 
Sciatic Block
Ehab Farag and David L. Brown14
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
108
Anterior br. of
ventral rami
of L4-L5 to S1-S3—
‘‘medial’’ sciatic nerve
(tibial nerve)
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
L2
L1
T12
L5
L4
L3
Femoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Sciatic nerve
Fig. 14.1  Sciatic nerve anatomy: anterior oblique view.
a motor response is elicited. During this redirection 
the needle should not be inserted more than 2 cm past the 
depth at which bone was originally contacted, or the 
needle tip will be placed anterior to the site of the sciatic 
nerve. Once paresthesia or a motor response is elicited, 
20–25 mL of local anesthetic is injected.
ANTERIOR APPROACH
Position. The anterior block of the sciatic nerve can be 
carried out in the supine patient whose leg is in 
the neutral position. The anesthesiologist should be at 
the patient’s side, similar to positioning during femoral 
nerve block.
Needle Puncture. In the supine patient, a line should be 
drawn from the anterior superior iliac spine to the pubic 
tubercle. Another line should be drawn parallel to this line 
from the midpoint of the greater trochanter inferomedially, 
as illustrated in Fig. 14.6. The first line is trisected, and a 
perpendicular line is drawn caudolaterally from the junc­
ture of the medial and middle thirds, as shown in Fig. 14.6. 
At the point where the perpendicular line crosses the more 
caudal line, a 22-gauge, 13-cm needle is inserted so that it 
contacts the femur at its medial border. Once the needle 
has contacted the femur, it is redirected slightly medially to 
109
Sciatic Block
slide off the medial surface of the femur. At approximately 
5 cm past the depth required to contact the femur, pares­
thesia or a motor response should be sought to ensure 
successful block (Fig. 14.7). Once paresthesia or a motor 
response is obtained, 20–25 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
In patients in whom the block is being used for an injury 
to the lower extremity, the classic position is sometimes 
difficult to use. This block can also be of long duration, and 
patients should be warned of this before surgery. Although 
it is unsubstantiated, some consider that dysesthesia may 
be more common after this block than after other periph­
eral blocks. The same problems pertaining to the classic 
approach should be considered with the anterior approach.
PEARLS
CLASSIC APPROACH
The keys to making this block work are adequate position­
ing of the patient and a systematic redirection of the needle 
until paresthesia is obtained.
ANTERIOR APPROACH
Although the anterior approach is conceptually simple, we 
are able to produce anesthesia using it slightly less often 
than when using the classic approach. Perhaps with addi­
tional experience this difference would not be as apparent. 
One observation that may help to improve one’s success 
rate with this block is to make sure that the lower extremity 
Fig. 14.2  ​Sciatic nerve anatomy: posterior view.
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Femoral nerve
L2
S1
S2
S3
L5
L4
L3
Obturator
nerve
Piriformis
muscle
Greater
trochanter
of femur
Sciatic
nerve
Posterior
cutaneous
nerve
Ischial
tuberosity
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
110
to be blocked is maintained in the neutral position and is 
not allowed to assume either a medially or a laterally 
rotated position. This block may be useful in supine 
patients who are in significant discomfort and cannot be 
positioned for the classic approach.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
SONOANATOMY
The sciatic nerve in the subgluteal region lies in the middle 
between the greater trochanter laterally and the ischial 
tuberosity medially. Under ultrasound, the subgluteal 
sciatic nerve has a triangular shape defined by the long 
head of the biceps femoris (posterolateral), the semitendi­
nosus (posteromedial), and the adductor magnus (ante­
rior). If it is difficult to identify the sciatic nerve in the 
subgluteal region, it can be identified in the midthigh 
region by tracing the nerve from the popliteal region 
(Fig. 14.8).
TECHNIQUE
The prone position is the preferred one to provide better 
imaging for the in-plane technique from the lateral aspect 
of the thigh. If the patient is not able to lie in the prone 
position, the lateral position with the hips and the knees 
flexed will be utilized. The curved array ultrasound probe 
is placed at the level of the inferior border of the gluteus 
maximus to visualize the sciatic nerve in the short axis as 
a hyperechoic structure between the greater trochanter 
Fig. 14.3  ​Sciatic nerve anatomy: lateral view.
L2
S1
S2
S3
L5
L4
L3
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Femoral
nerve
Obturator
nerve
Piriformis muscle
Sciatic nerve
Fig. 14.4  ​Sciatic nerve block: classic technique and positioning.
Sciatic nerve
Greater
trochanter
Posterior
superior
iliac
spine
Piriformis muscle
Piriformis muscle
Ischial
tuberosity
111
Sciatic Block
and ischial tuberosity. The in-plane approach will be used 
with the needle direction from medial to lateral in the 
prone position; however, in the lateral position, the needle 
direction should preferably be from posterior to anterior. 
The use of nerve stimulation, in addition to the ultra­
sound, is preferred in this technique to confirm the nerve 
identification, especially in obese patients. The medium-
frequency, linear, 50-mm footprint is used for the 
midthigh approach block for the sciatic nerve block. The 
continuous block can be performed using a catheter 
threaded through a Touhy needle. The catheter tip posi­
tion can be identified by injecting local anesthetic and 
observing its distribution using ultrasound or by inject­
ing 1 mL of air, which appears as a hyperechogenic arti­
fact (Figs. 14.9–14.11).
CLINICAL PEARLS
•	 Continuous sciatic block is very helpful for manag­
ing phantom limb pain after either below-knee or 
above-knee amputations.
•	 Single-shot sciatic block using 0.1% ropivacaine is 
very helpful to manage posterior knee pain after 
total knee arthroplasty without affecting the motor 
power and/or neurological examination of the lower 
limb after total knee arthroplasty.
•	 Combined femoral and sciatic blocks are quite 
sufficient for lower limb procedures, especially in 
high-risk patients in whom general and/or neur­
axial anesthesia can disturb their hemodynamic 
Fig. 14.5  ​Sciatic nerve block: surface marking technique.
Sciatic
nerve
Sacral
hiatus
Greater
trochanter
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
5 cm
Ischial
tuberosity
Needle
insertion site
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
112
Fig. 14.6  ​Sciatic nerve block: anterior technique.
Pubic
tubercle
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
Anterior
superior
iliac
spine
Greater
trochanter
Sciatic nerve
Needle insertion site
1|3
1|3
Fig. 14.7  ​Magnetic resonance image (cross-sectional) at level of anterior sciatic nerve.
Sciatic nerve
Femur
Ischial
tuberosity
Femoral
vessels
Gluteus
maximus m.
ANTERIOR
POSTERIOR
LATERAL
Quadratus
femoris muscle
113
Sciatic Block
Fig. 14.8  ​Anatomy of the subgluteal sciatic nerve block.
Sciatic nerve block
Tibial nerve
Common fibular nerve
Muscular branches of
 sciatic nerve
Sciatic nerve
Posterior cutaneous nerve
Sacrotuberous ligament
Posterior superior iliac spine
Greater trochanter
Sciatic nerve block
Fig. 14.9  ​Patient in lateral position. Note the in-plane approach with posterior to anterior needle direction.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
114
stability, such as very tight aortic stenosis or heart 
failure.
KEY POINTS
•	 Subgluteal and midthigh approaches are the most 
commonly used techniques for sciatic nerve block 
using ultrasound.
•	 Short axis with in-plane approach with lateral to 
medial needle direction is the preferred ultrasound 
technique for both subgluteal and midthigh sciatic 
blocks.
•	 Using a nerve stimulator is very helpful to confirm 
the identification of the sciatic nerve in the subglu­
teal approach, especially in obese patients.
Fig. 14.10  ​In-plane technique for subgluteal sciatic nerve block in prone position. Note the medial to lateral needle direction.
Greater
trochanter
Ischial
tuberosity
Medial
Lateral
Gluteus maximus muscle
Quadratus femoris muscle
Needle and local 
anesthetics 
GT
IT
Sciatic nerve
Fig. 14.11  ​Ultrasound still of sciatic nerve block.
PERSPECTIVE
This block is useful for surgical procedures carried out on 
the anterior thigh, both superficial and deep. It is most 
frequently combined with other lower extremity peripheral 
blocks to provide anesthesia for operations on the lower leg 
and foot. As an analgesic technique, it is used for femoral 
fracture analgesia or for prolonged continuous catheter 
analgesia after surgery on the knee or femur.
Patient Selection.  Because the patient is supine when 
this block is carried out, virtually any patient undergoing 
a surgical procedure of the lower extremity is a candidate. 
Because elicitation of paresthesia is not necessary to carry 
out femoral block, even anesthetized patients are 
candidates.
Pharmacologic Choice.  As with all lower extremity 
blocks, a decision must be made about the extent of sensory 
and motor blockade desired. If motor blockade is neces­
sary, higher concentrations of local anesthetic are needed. 
As with concerns about local anesthetic use in the sciatic 
block, the desire for motor blockade must be balanced 
against the volume of local anesthetic necessary if femoral, 
sciatic, lateral femoral cutaneous, and obturator blocks are 
combined. Approximately 20 mL of local anesthetic should 
be adequate to produce femoral block. With continuous 
catheter techniques used for postoperative analgesia, 0.25% 
bupivacaine or 0.2% ropivacaine may be used, and even 
lower concentrations of these drugs may be useful after a 
trial. With this technique, a rate of 810 mL per hour 
usually suffices.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy.  The femoral nerve travels through the pelvis in 
the groove between the psoas and the iliacus muscles, as 
illustrated in Fig. 15.1. It emerges beneath the inguinal liga­
ment, posterolateral to the femoral vessels, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15.2. It frequently divides into its branches at or above 
the level of the inguinal ligament.
Position.  The patient is in a supine position, and the 
anesthesiologist should stand at the patient’s side to allow 
easy palpation of the femoral artery.
Needle Puncture.  A line is drawn connecting the anter­
osuperior iliac spine and the pubic tubercle, as illustrated 
in Fig. 15.3. The femoral artery is palpated on this line, and 
a 22-gauge, 4-cm needle is inserted, as illustrated in 
Fig. 15.4. The initial insertion should abut the femoral 
artery in a perpendicular fashion, as shown in Fig. 15.5 
(position 1); a “wall” of local anesthetic is developed by 
redirecting the needle in a fanlike manner in progressive 
steps to position 2. (Ultrasonography highlights that the 
nerve is deep to the fascia iliaca, something difficult to 
appreciate without imaging guidance.) Approximately 
20 mL of local anesthetic is injected incrementally in this 
fashion. It may also be useful to displace the needle entry 
site laterally 1 cm, direct the needle tip to lie immediately 
posterior to the femoral artery, and then inject an addi­
tional 25 mL of drug. This allows a block of those fibers 
that may be in a more posterior relationship to the femoral 
artery. Elicitation of paresthesia is variable with this block; 
however, if one does occur, the mediolateral injection 
should still be carried out because the nerve often divides 
into branches cephalad to the inguinal ligament.
When using a continuous catheter technique, either 
stimulating catheter block kits, or traditional epidural 
needles and matched catheters may be used in adults 
(Fig. 15.6). In the latter situation, the epidural needle is 
positioned either with the assistance of a nerve stimula­
tor or with paresthesia elicitation as an endpoint. After 
the needle is positioned, 20 mL of preservative-free 
normal saline solution is injected through the needle, 
and then the appropriate-size catheter is inserted approx­
imately 10 cm past the needle tip. Once the catheter has 
been secured with a plastic occlusive dressing, the initial 
bolus injection of the drug is carried out and the infusion 
is started.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Patients with peripheral vascular disease often require uni­
lateral lower extremity block; thus a number of patients 
with prosthetic femoral arteries may be suitable candidates 
for this block. If lower extremity peripheral regional block 
has been chosen in a patient who has recently undergone 
placement of a prosthetic femoral artery, efforts should be 
made to avoid the prosthesis.
Femoral Block
Ehab Farag and David L. Brown 15
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
116
Quadratus
lumborum muscle
Psoas muscle
Iliacus muscle
Femoral nerve
Inguinal
ligament
L5
L4
L3
L2
L1
T12
Fig. 15.1  ​Femoral nerve anatomy: anterior oblique view.
117
Femoral Block
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery and vein
Pubic
tubercle
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
L5
L4
L3
L2
Anterior
superior
iliac spine
Fig. 15.2  ​Femoral nerve anatomy: at inguinal ligament.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
118
Femoral nerve
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Pubic
tubercle
Anterior
superior
iliac spine
Fig. 15.3  ​Femoral nerve block: skin markings for needle puncture.
L4
Femoral nerve
Femoral
artery
Inguinal
ligament
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Obturator nerve
Fig. 15.4  ​Femoral nerve block: needle puncture.
119
Femoral Block
Femoral nerve
1
2
L5
L4
L3
L2
Fig. 15.5  ​Femoral nerve block: local anesthetic injection. The initial insertion abuts the femoral artery in a 
perpendicular fashion (position 1); a “wall” of local anesthetic is developed by redirecting the needle in a fanlike 
manner in progressive steps to position 2.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
120
Catheter near
femoral nerve
External ilia
artery and vein
Skin entry site
Fig. 15.6  ​Femoral nerve block: use of continuous catheter.
PEARLS
Because a traditional block is actually a field block, enough 
“soak time” must be allowed to produce satisfactory anes­
thesia. When sciatic and femoral blocks are combined, it is 
often helpful to place the femoral block before the sciatic 
block, thus allowing extra soak time. Increasingly, patients 
undergoing surgery on the knee are effectively being offered 
femoral block as part of the postoperative analgesia 
regimen. Most often, this is provided as a single-shot tech­
nique; however, some practitioners provide the analgesia 
using a continuous catheter method.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
SONOANATOMY
The femoral nerve is the largest branch of the lumbar 
plexus and usually consists of the roots of segments L2 to 
L4. It runs distally to the inguinal region, typically posi­
tioned in the groove formed by the iliac and lateral 
psoas muscles posteriorly and covered by the iliac fascia 
anteriorly. At this level the iliac fascia, along with the 
internal aspect of the iliopsoas, thickens to form the 
iliopectineal band that separates the femoral vein and 
femoral artery from the nerve. The femoral nerve is 
often visualized distal to the inguinal ligament within a 
triangular hyperechoic region lateral to the femoral 
artery and superficial to the iliopsoas muscle. The nerve 
may be thin and flat in this region as it may divide into 
terminal branches. However, it can be visualized as 
a biconvex or oval hyperechoic structure. Therefore 
from superficial to deep, the fascia lata is first encoun­
tered, then the fascia iliaca, as a hyperechoic line 
(Figs. 15.7–15.9).
INDICATIONS
•	 Analgesia for fractured neck/shaft of femur.
•	 Analgesia after hip joint replacement.
121
Femoral Block
Femoral nerve
Inguinal
ligament
Femoral block
Femoral block
L2
L3
L4
L5
Lateral
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Fig. 15.7  ​Anatomy of femoral nerve.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
122
Femoral
nerve
Femoral
triangle
Iliacus muscle
Psoas major muscle
L2
L3
L4
L5
Inguinal
ligament
Femoral
artery
Adductor
longus muscle
Sartorius
muscle
Fig. 15.9  ​Anatomy of femoral nerve.
Femoral nerve
Iliacus muscle
Psoas major muscle
L2
L3
L5
Inguinal
ligament
Femoral artery
Adductor
longus muscle
Gracilis muscle
Fig. 15.8  ​Anatomy of femoral nerve.
•	 Analgesia after knee joint surgeries, such as total 
knee arthroplasty or anterior cruciate ligament 
repair.
•	 It can be combined with popliteal block to provide 
anesthesia for lower leg or foot surgeries.
TECHNIQUE
While the patient is in a supine position the ultrasound 
probe will be parallel to the inguinal crease to obtain the 
short axis of the nerve within the triangular hypoechoic 
region. The in-plane technique is most commonly used for 
this block. In this technique the needle will be inserted in-
plane and advanced from lateral to medial in the transverse 
plane of the image. After piercing the fascia iliaca, inject 2 
to 3 mL of saline to ensure the needle tip is beneath the 
fascia and the saline is spreading lateral to the femoral 
artery and in the vicinity of the nerve before injecting the 
local anesthetics (Figs. 15.10–15.15).
KEY POINTS
•	 High-resolution linear ultrasound (30- to 40-mm 
footprint) is preferred for the femoral nerve block.
•	 In some patients, the femoral nerve at the inguinal 
crease is already branched into superficial and 
deep divisions along with femoral artery division 
into superficial and profunda femoris branches. 
Therefore it is better to scan proximally to place 
the probe at the common femoral artery in order 
to ensure blocking the main trunk of the femoral 
nerve.
123
Femoral Block
Fig. 15.10.  ​Position of the patient and ultrasound machine.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
124
Fig. 15.11  ​Note the needle in-plane and the needle direction from lateral to medial.
125
Femoral Block
Femoral nerve
Inguinal
ligament
Fascia lata
Iliacus fascia
Psoas
minor
tendon
Femoral
sheath
Femoral
canal
Fig. 15.12  ​The needle should pierce the iliacus fascia in order to have a successful block.
Medial
Lateral
Iliopsoas muscle
Pectineus muscle
Iliopectineal fascia
Fascia lata
Fascia iliaca
needle
Local 
anesthetics 
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Fig. 15.13  ​The needle and the local anesthetics are beneath the fascia iliaca.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
126
Fig. 15.14  ​Ultrasound still of femoral block procedure.
Fig. 15.15  ​Ultrasound still of anatomy of femoral block.
•	 For catheter insertion, the Tuohy needle is used. The 
proper position of the tip of the needle beneath the 
fascia iliaca can be identified by injecting 23 mL of 
saline, which appears laterally to the artery and in 
the vicinity of the nerve. Then the catheter will be 
inserted 34 cm beyond the tip of the needle. For 
further confirmation of the location of the catheter 
tip, a small volume of air, which appears as a 
hyperechoic artifact, can be injected through the 
catheter.
PEARLS
•	 The femoral nerve can be confused in the short-axis 
view with inguinal lymph nodes, which also appear 
hyperechoic.
•	 If you are not able to identify the femoral nerve, 
injection in the hyperechoic triangle lateral to the 
femoral artery will suffice to produce successful 
block.
•	 After inserting the catheter through the Tuohy 
needle, keep the needle in situ and inject through 
the catheter 23 mL of saline or local anesthetic 
solution to identify the position of the catheter tip. 
This technique will help modify the catheter 
position by readjusting the needle and ensuring the 
catheter position in the vicinity of the nerve.
•	 The concentration of local anesthetic used in this 
block usually depends on the aim. For analgesic 
purposes, ropivacaine 0.1%0.2% is quite sufficient; 
however, ropivacaine 0.5% is ideal for anesthetic 
purposes.
PERSPECTIVE
The fascia iliaca compartmental block (FICB) can be used 
to provide complete sensory blockade of the medial, ante­
rior, and lateral thigh. This block has been used effectively 
for postoperative analgesia following hip and knee surgery. 
It can be used as an alternative to a traditional lumbar 
plexus block by targeting the femoral nerve, obturator, and 
lateral femoral cutaneous nerves, which lie deep to the 
fascia iliaca. It can also provide adequate analgesia for hip 
and proximal femur fractures as well as for total hip arthro­
plasty. As with any fascial plane block within the fascia 
iliacus plane, blockade of the femoral, obturator, and lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerves is achievable with a large enough 
volume of local anesthetic. Traditionally, the fascia iliaca 
block was performed using a ‘double pop’ technique as the 
needle traversed the fascia lata and fascia iliaca. This was 
associated with a significant block failure rate, as high as 
10%–37%. However, with advancements in ultrasound and 
the use of direct needle visualization under continuous 
ultrasound guidance, the success rate and consequently the 
popularity of this block is beginning to regain favor.
ANATOMY
The iliacus muscle lies over the ilium. It is a large flat tri­
angular shaped muscle that joins with the psoas major 
muscle forming the anisotropic hypoechoic iliopsoas 
muscle. The iliopsoas is covered by the hyperechoic broad 
ligament and fascia iliaca. The iliopsoas muscle then travels 
beneath the inguinal ligament, exiting the pelvis, winding 
around the proximal neck of the femur, and inserts into the 
lesser trochanter of the hip, functioning as a powerful hip 
flexor.
The fascia iliaca is located anterior to the iliacus muscle, 
bound superiorly and laterally by the iliac crest and merges 
with the overlying psoas muscle fascia medially. The 
femoral nerve descends through the psoas major muscle 
passing through its lateral border coursing between psoas 
and the iliacus muscle deep to the fascia iliaca.
The obturator nerve crosses the iliacus muscle deep to 
the fascia, innervating the distal medial thigh. The lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerve emerges from the lumbar plexus 
and courses inferiorly just lateral to the psoas muscle before 
crossing the iliacus just deep to the fascia iliaca (Fig. 16.1).
SONOANATOMY
TECHNIQUE
The FICB has been traditionally performed below the level 
of the inguinal ligament. However, substantial clinical evi­
dence and radiological studies suggest that the infraingui­
nal approach does not reliably block the femoral, obturator, 
and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves. Indeed block failure 
rate has been described as high as 10%–37%.
An alternative technique, the suprainguinal approach 
has been gaining favor because of improved outcomes in 
terms of median pain scores in hip fracture patients, and 
has a more consistent spread of local anesthetic to the 
lumbar plexus. A recent study identified improved cranial 
spread of local anesthetic with the suprainguinal approach, 
compared with a more caudal spread with the traditional 
infrainguinal injection. The suprainguinal approach has 
been shown to provide comparable analgesic efficacy to 
periarticular infiltration for total hip arthroplasty.
Typical injectate volumes include 20 mL of local anes­
thetic solution such as 0.5% ropivacaine for hip fractures 
and lower concentrations for postoperative analgesia fol­
lowing hip or knee surgery to minimize motor block.
The patient is positioned supine and a high frequency 
linear probe is placed in the inguinal crease to identify the 
femoral artery. Typical depths are 3-4cm from the skin. The 
probe is moved laterally to identify the sartorius muscle, 
Ultrasound for Fascia 
Iliaca and Inguinal 
Region Blocks
Mohammed Faysal Malik and Chihiro Toda16
Key Points
•	 A high-frequency linear transducer is preferred for 
this block.
•	 The fascia iliaca compartmental block (FICB) can be 
used as an alternative anterior approach to the 
lumbar plexus block, targeting the femoral, obtura­
tor, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerves.
•	 The suprainguinal approach to the FICB is associated 
with better cranial spread of local anesthetic and 
more complete sensory blockade of the anterior, 
medial, and lateral thigh compared with the tradi­
tional infrainguinal approach.
•	 The traditional infrainguinal approach required great 
volumes of local anesthetic to achieve adequate 
cephalad spread. The suprainguinal approach requires 
less volume to achieve adequate sensory blockade.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
128
which is then traced cephalad to its insertion point over the 
anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS). The ASIS can be easily 
identified by its hump-like hypoechoic shadow. Moving the 
probe 2-3 cm medial to the shadow identifies the iliacus 
muscle, which covers the ilium. The bright hyperechoic 
band covering the iliacus is the fascia iliaca.
The probe is then rotated in a slight parasagittal plane 
such that the medial end is pointing towards the umbili­
cus. At this position the anterior abdominal muscles may 
be identified from superficial to deep, as the internal 
oblique muscle, transversus abdominis, and the fascia 
iliaca overlying the iliacus muscle. The curve of the ilium 
will be identified on the inferior caudal side of the ultra­
sound image with the iliacus muscle overlying it. With 
this view, the classical “bow-tie” appearance may be 
appreciated (Fig. 16.2).
Sartorius
Iliacus
Int. Oblique
Fig. 16.1  ​Sonoanatomy of fascia iliaca compartmental block.
Fig. 16.2  Fascia iliaca compartmental block.
129
Ultrasound for Fascia Iliaca and Inguinal Region Blocks
The block needle is inserted and advanced caudad to 
cephalad such that it traverses the sartorius muscle above 
the inguinal ligament. It is then advanced in-plane just 
deep to the fascia iliaca. After piercing the fascia, 1-2 mL of 
local anesthetic is injected to confirm adequate spread cra­
nially, and peeling of the fascial layers lifting the fascia off 
the superficial layer of the iliacus muscle. Then 20-30mL 
of the block solution is deposited superficial to the iliacus 
muscle and deep to the fascia iliaca. Adequate spread of 
local anesthetic will expand the space between the iliacus 
muscle and fascia iliaca in a cephalad direction towards 
the superior edge of the iliacus muscle. In order to improve 
the spread of local anesthetic superiorly, the needle tip may 
be advanced superiorly into the space created by the 
injectate.
Although the FICB has enjoyed renewed interest and is 
deemed a safe and effective block, complications that have 
been described include bladder perforation, and inadver­
tent puncture of the deep circumflex iliac artery, inferior 
epigastric artery, external iliac artery, spermatic cord, and 
hernia contents. Careful use of real-time ultrasound and 
maintaining an in-plane needle approach should help miti­
gate these potential complications.
INGUINAL REGION BLOCKS
KEY POINTS
•	 The ilioinguinal and the iliohypogastric nerves 
supply the inguinal area, and are the targets of the 
block.
•	 It is a superficial block, and a high-frequency linear 
probe is used for ultrasound guidance.
•	 The local anesthetic should be given between the 
muscle layers of abdominal wall near the iliac crest 
for a successful block.
•	 The provider should keep in mind that the surgeon 
may give a local anesthetic intraoperatively as well, 
and should avoid injecting a total amount of local 
anesthetic, which would exceed the toxic dose.
INDICATION
The ilioinguinal nerve block provides surgical anesthesia 
for groin surgery, primarily inguinal herniorrhaphy. It is 
often combined with iliohypogastric and genitofemoral 
nerve blocks.
ANATOMY
Innervation of the inguinal region arises from the lumbar 
plexus nerves. The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves 
originate from the first lumbar nerve, and emerge from the 
upper part or the lateral border of the psoas major muscle. 
The genitofemoral nerve originates from the first and 
second lumbar nerves. These peripheral extensions of the 
lumbar plexus and the twelfth thoracic nerve follow a cir­
cular course. As they course anteriorly, they pass near the 
anterior superior iliac spine. The twelfth thoracic nerve and 
iliohypogastric nerves run between the internal and external 
oblique muscles near the anterior superior iliac spine. The 
ilioinguinal nerve runs between the transverse abdominis 
muscle and the internal oblique muscle and then pene­
trates the internal oblique muscle medial to the anterior 
superior iliac spine. All these nerves continue anteriorly in 
a medial orientation and become superficial as they termi­
nate in the skin and muscles of the inguinal region. The 
genitofemoral nerve follows a different course from other 
nerves, and it often requires supplemental block intraop­
eratively to make this regional block effective for inguinal 
herniorrhaphy.
BLOCK TECHNIQUE
Anatomical Landmark Technique  The patient is placed in 
supine position. The anterior superior iliac spine should 
be identified. A point approximately 3 cm medial and 
inferior from the anterior superior iliac spine should be 
marked. After preparing skin, a needle is inserted in a 
cephalolateral direction. Local anesthetic is injected as the 
needle is withdrawn through the layers of the abdominal 
wall. Then the needle should be inserted again at a steeper 
angle until it penetrates all three muscle layers of the 
abdominal wall. Ten to 20 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected as the needle is withdrawn. Patients who are 
obese or muscled may need another injection. The 
injection is extended from the previously placed skin 
wheal toward the umbilicus and creates a subcutaneous 
field block.
Ultrasound-Guided Technique  The patient is placed 
supine and the anterior superior iliac spine is identified 
as for the landmark technique. Draw a line from the 
anterior superior iliac spine to the umbilicus. A high-
frequency linear ultrasound probe is placed along the 
line, superior and medial to the anterior superior iliac 
spine (Fig. 16.3). The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric 
nerves are seen in the fascia plane, either between the 
internal oblique muscles and transverse abdominis, or 
between the internal oblique and external oblique 
muscles. These two nerves are often seen as a hypoechoic 
structure. Below the transverse abdominis is the 
peritoneal cavity. It is common to see small blood vessels 
close to these nerves. Color Doppler is helpful to identify 
blood vessels. After identifying the anatomy, a needle is 
inserted in-plane. Ten to 20 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected into the fascia plane.
MEDICATION
Lower concentrations of intermediate- to long-acting local 
anesthetics, such as 1% lidocaine, 1% mepivacaine, 0.25% 
bupivacaine, and 0.2% ropivacaine can be chosen. The 
anesthesiologist should keep in mind that the surgeon may 
need an additional injection of local anesthetic intraopera­
tively, and limit the dose of the initial injection to allow an 
additional injection without concern of local anesthetic 
systemic toxicity.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
130
COMPLICATIONS
The ilioinguinal block is a superficial block and has only a 
few major complications. These include post block ecchy­
mosis and hematoma formation in the region of the sper­
matic cord. This may make it difficult for the surgeon to 
perform an adequate surgical dissection. If a needle is 
advanced too deep and enters the peritoneal cavity, perfo­
ration of the colon could occur.
Fig. 16.3  ​Ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric block.
e1
Keywords: fascia iliaca, ilioinguinal
ANATOMY
The lateral femoral cutaneous nerve of the thigh (LFCN) 
is a pure sensory nerve and a derivative of posterior 
branches of the lumbar plexus, namely L2 and L3 spinal 
nerves. It travels downwards along the lateral border of the 
psoas muscle and continues inferior-lateral towards the 
anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS), where it angulates 
acutely and exits in the lower pelvis, under the inguinal 
ligament, and over the sartorius muscle into the thigh. 
Near the inguinal ligament the nerve lies beneath the fascia 
lata. The nerve divides into anterior (main trunk) and 
posterior branches as it crosses the inguinal ligament. 
Importantly, it has several distinct patterns of division—
the most common being caudal to the inguinal ligament. 
The anterior branch is roughly 7–10 cm below the ASIS 
and supplies the skin over the anterolateral aspect of the 
thigh, while the posterior branch passes through the fascia 
lata proximal to the division of the anterior branch, and 
supplies the lateral thigh, from greater trochanter to the 
midthigh.
LANDMARK TECHNIQUE
With the patient in a supine position, the ASIS is marked 
and the block needle is inserted at a point 2 cm medial 
and 2 cm caudal to the ASIS as shown in Fig. 17.1. The 
needle is advanced until a “pop” is felt as the needle passes 
through the fascia lata. Local anesthetic is then injected 
in a fanlike manner from medial to lateral as illustrated 
in Fig. 17.2.
SONOANATOMY
Under sonogram, the nerve is accessible for visualization 
before it exits the pelvis. The image of the nerve appears as 
a hyperechoic rimmed structure seated roughly 0.5–1 cm 
below the skin surface subfascially (not subcutaneous) and 
1–2 cm inferior and medial to the ASIS. It is found within 
a fat-filled space sandwiched between the two muscles, 
namely sartorius and the tensor muscle of fascia lata. The 
orientation of the nerve and its branches is lateral to the 
sartorius muscle, which is in an oblique and medial posi­
tion. The nerve can also be confirmed in a sagittal plane by 
visualization of the deep circumflex iliac artery. In this 
view, the artery is perpendicular to the course of the nerve 
and can be seen as a pulsating dot. There are occasions 
when the nerve has an aberrant course, and in these cases 
the area under the medial aspect of the inguinal ligament 
and immediately lateral to the ASIS should be searched.
ULTRASOUND-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
With the patient in a supine position, the ASIS is palpated 
and the lateral end of a high frequency transducer is posi­
tioned immediately inferior to the ASIS, in line with the 
inguinal ligament—angled slightly in a caudal direction. 
The inguinal ligament can be seen as a linear hyperechoic 
structure running from the pubic tubercle to the ASIS. 
When the probe is moved to a medial-caudad position, the 
nerve can be visualized in the fat-filled space between the 
sartorius medially and the tensor muscle of the fascia lata 
laterally. Once the nerve is found in the transverse plane, it 
can be traced proximally and distally (Fig. 17.3A-B). 
Confirmation of the nerve can also be done in a sagittal 
plane by visualizing deep circumflex vessels (via Doppler), 
which course parallel to the inguinal ligament and perpen­
dicular to the course of the nerve. It is essential to confirm 
the nerve by either method as described above, because it 
is not uncommon to mistake the hyperechoic tendinous 
part of the sartorius muscle for a nerve. After confirmation, 
the needle is inserted in a lateral to medial fashion using 
an in-plane technique, and 5 mL of local anesthetic can be 
injected subfascially or perineurally.
Another recently described technique involves identify­
ing the LFC nerve in the fat-filled flat tunnel (FFFT), 
formed by the double layer of the fascia lata between the 
Lateral Femoral 
Cutaneous Nerve Block
Sanchit Ahuja and Sree Kolli  17
Key Points
•	 This block can be used to provide postoperative anal­
gesia following hip surgery, upper lateral thigh skin 
grafting, and neurolysis for refractory meralgia 
paresthetica.
•	 Combined with other lower extremity blocks, it 
reduces the discomfort from the tourniquet during 
procedures on the lower leg.
•	 This is a very superficial block, hence a high-fre­
quency transducer is preferred for this block.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
132
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Lateral femoral
cutaneous nerve
Anterior
superior
iliac spine
L5
L4
L3
2 cm
2 cm
Fig. 17.1  ​Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve: anatomy.
Iliopsoas
muscle
Gluteus
maximus muscle
Gluteus
medius and
minimus muscles
1
2
Ilium
Fascia lata
Fig. 17.2  ​Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve block: 
technique.
133
Lateral Femoral Cutaneous Nerve Block
Pre-Injection
Post-Injection
Fig. 17.3  ​Ultrasound-guided lateral femoral cutaneous nerve block. ASIS, Anterior superior iliac spine; FL, fascia lata; SAR, sartorius; 
arrowheads, needle; *, lateral femoral cutaneous nerve.
sartorius and the tensor muscle of fascia lata, about 10 cm 
from the ASIS. The needle is inserted out-of-plane into the 
FFFT and 10 mL of local anesthetic is injected intermit­
tently and simultaneously advancing the needle tip inside 
the FFFT towards the ASIS, while tracking the needle tip 
with ultrasonography in real time.
PEARLS
•	 This block can be used in lieu of lumbar plexus 
block after hip surgery. However, an injection of a 
high volume of local anesthetic in the fascia iliaca 
can spread as far as the anterior and posterior 
divisions of the femoral nerve.
•	 The nerve appears as a small hyperechoic struc­
ture containing hypoechoic vesicles and must be 
differentiated from the hyperechoic tendinous part 
of the sartorius muscle by scanning the course of 
the nerve. Hydro dissection of fascia iliaca and 
tensor muscle of fascia lata may also help improve 
visualization of the nerve.
•	 It is not uncommon to see variations in the course of 
the nerve. It is sometimes helpful to locate the nerve 
distally, between the sartorius and tensor muscle of 
fascia lata and then trace it up proximally towards the 
ASIS at the insertion site of the sartorius. Also the 
deep circumflex artery landmark may be useful.
•	 Because of the superficial nature of this block, apply 
light pressure and plenty of ultrasound gel for better 
nerve visualization.
•	 Peripheral nerve catheters are not studied with this 
block.
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Abstract: This chapter discusses the lateral cutaneous nerve 
of thigh block including anatomic landmarks and 
ultrasound-guided procedural techniques. The block is 
utilized to provide analgesia following hip surgery, lateral 
thigh skin grafting, and refractory meralgia. The lateral 
cutaneous nerve of thigh is a pure sensory nerve, which 
innervates the lateral part of the thigh, and is identified 
sonographically as a small hyperechoic structure containing 
hypoechoic vesicles. It is important to distinguish the nerve 
with the hyperechoic tendon of the sartorial muscle by 
scanning the nerve in cranial to caudal direction. It is most 
commonly identified just below the anterior superior iliac 
spine, in line with the inguinal ligament, slightly in a caudal 
direction. It is not uncommon to encounter an anatomical 
variant to this nerve. A single-shot perineural or subfascial 
local injection is appropriate to provide postoperative 
analgesia; however peripheral nerve catheters are not 
studied with this block.
Keywords: Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh block, lateral 
thigh analgesia, local anesthesia, ultrasound.
PERSPECTIVE
This block is most often combined with the sciatic, femoral, 
and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve blocks to allow surgi­
cal procedures on the lower extremities. If an operation on 
the knee using these peripheral blocks is planned, the obtu­
rator block is often essential. Another use for this block is 
in patients who have hip pain. It can be used diagnostically 
to help identify the cause of pain because obturator nerve 
block may provide considerable pain relief if the nerve’s 
articular branch to the hip is involved in pain transmission. 
The block also may be useful in the evaluation of lower 
extremity spasticity or chronic pain syndromes.
Patient Selection.  As with femoral and lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerve blocks, elicitation of paresthesia is not 
essential for obturator block. Any patient able to lie supine 
is a candidate.
Pharmacologic Choice.  Motor blockade is most often 
not necessary for surgical patients receiving obturator 
nerve block; thus lower concentrations of local anesthetics 
are appropriate for obturator block: 0.75% to 1.0% lido­
caine or mepivacaine, 0.25% bupivacaine, or 0.2% 
ropivacaine.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy.  The obturator nerve emerges from the medial 
border of the psoas muscle at the pelvic brim and travels 
along the lateral aspect of the pelvis anterior to the obturator 
internus muscle and posterior to the iliac vessels and ureter. 
It enters the obturator canal cephalad and anterior to the 
obturator vessels, which are branches from the internal iliac 
vessels. In the obturator canal, the obturator nerve divides 
into anterior and posterior branches (Fig. 18.1). The anterior 
branch supplies the anterior adductor muscles and sends an 
articular branch to the hip joint and a cutaneous area on the 
medial aspect of the thigh. The posterior branch innervates 
the deep adductor muscles and sends an articular branch to 
the knee joint. In 10% of patients, an accessory obturator 
nerve may be found.
Position.  The patient should be supine with the legs in 
a slightly abducted position. The genitalia should be pro­
tected from antiseptic solutions.
Needle Puncture.  The pubic tubercle should be located 
and an “X” marked 1.5 cm caudad and 1.5 cm lateral to the 
tubercle (Fig. 18.2). The needle is inserted at this point, and 
at a depth of approximately 1.5 to 4 cm it contacts the 
horizontal ramus of the pubis. The needle is then with­
drawn, redirected laterally in a horizontal plane, and 
inserted 2 to 3 cm deeper than the depth of the initial 
contact with bone. The needle tip now lies within the obtu­
rator canal (see Fig. 18.2). With the needle in this position, 
10 to 15 mL of local anesthetic solution is injected while 
the needle is advanced and withdrawn slightly to ensure 
development of a “wall” of local anesthetic in the canal.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
The obturator canal is a vascular location; thus the poten­
tial exists for intravascular injection or hematoma forma­
tion, although these are more theoretical than clinical 
concerns.
PEARLS
This block, even in trained hands, has a variable success 
rate. Our experience suggests that one must rely on volume 
of anesthetic delivered rather than on absolute accuracy of 
needle position. Fortunately, use of an obturator block with 
the other lower extremity peripheral nerve blocks is not an 
absolute requirement for most surgical procedures. If this 
block is used diagnostically for patients with chronic pain, 
it is helpful to use a nerve stimulator to guide needle place­
ment. This will minimize diagnostic confusion when pain 
relief is produced with a small volume of local anesthetic. 
Obturator Block
Loran Mounir-Soliman and David L. Brown  18
Key Points
•	 The success of the block depends on the appropriate 
spread of local anesthetics in the appropriate fascial 
planes superficially and deeply to the adductor 
brevis muscle.
•	 Care should be taken to confirm the spread in the 
intermuscular fascial planes and not intramuscular.
•	 Change in adductor strength is the best assessment 
method for the block since the sensory distribution 
is variable.
•	 With a successful block, some residual adductor 
strength is secondary to the formal innervation to 
the pectineus, as well as some sciatic innervation to 
the adductor magnus.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
136
Obturator block
Inguinal
ligament
Block
Obturator n.
Anterior branch
Posterior branch
L2
L3
L4
L5
Fig. 18.1  ​Obturator nerve: functional anatomy.
Large-volume injections (approximately 15 mL) are per­
formed with this block for many surgical procedures.
SONOANATOMY
The obturator nerve is formed from the anterior primary 
rami of the L2 to L4 roots as a branch of the lumbar plexus 
within the psoas muscle. The nerve exits the pelvis through 
the obturator foramen then typically divides into an ante­
rior and posterior branch before entering the thigh. The 
anterior branch provides sensory supply to a variable area 
of the medial aspect of the thigh, as well as motor fibers to 
the adductor muscles. The posterior branch provides pri­
marily motor fibers to the adductor muscles and occasional 
articular sensation to the medial aspect of the knee joint. 
Notably, the articular branch of the hip joint provided by 
the obturator nerve usually originates from the main obtu­
rator nerve before division.
In the thigh, the two nerves run within the adductor 
compartment and medial to the femoral compartment. 
The anterior branch has a more superficial course between 
the fascia of the pectineus and adductor brevis muscles, 
whereas the posterior branch runs at a deeper level 
between the adductor brevis and adductor magnus 
muscles (Fig. 18.3).
INDICATIONS
•	 Avoid adductor muscle contractions during trans­
urethral bladder surgery under spinal anesthesia or 
when administration of muscle relaxants is 
undesirable.
137
Obturator Block
Obturator 
externus m.
Obturator n.
Adductor 
brevis m.
Adductor 
magnus m.
Femur
Lateral
Medial
Adductor longus m.
Adductor brevis m.
Adductor magnus m.
Obturator n. 
(anterior branch)
Obturator n. 
(posterior branch)
Pectineus m.
Femur
Femoral a. and v.
Fig. 18.3  ​Obturator anatomy.
Pubic tubercle
1.5 cm
Redirected
Initial
Obturator
foramen
Obturator
nerve
L5
L4
L3
Fig. 18.2  ​Obturator nerve block: technique.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
138
Fig. 18.4  ​Obturator nerve block: position.
•	 Provide complementary analgesia for major knee 
and thigh surgeries as a reliable alternative to 3-in-1 
block, in conjunction with femoral and lateral 
femoral cutaneous nerve block; 3-in-1 block is a 
large volume local anesthetic injected near the 
femoral nerve.
TECHNIQUE
With the patient in the supine position, the thigh is 
slightly abducted and laterally rotated to better access the 
adductor compartment on the medial side of the thigh. 
The ultrasound probe is positioned in a transverse orien­
tation to the thigh (short-axis view to the adductor 
muscles) (Fig. 18.4). Usually the pectineus muscle is 
medial to the femoral vessels slightly below the inguinal 
crease. Moving the probe farther medially to the pectin­
eus muscle identifies the three adductor muscles aligned 
from superficial to deep: adductor longus, adductor 
brevis, and adductor magnus. The anterior and posterior 
branches of the obturator nerve are identified as hyper­
echoic and “white bands” superficial and deep to the 
adductor brevis muscle, respectively. Sometimes the 
nerves are difficult to identify, especially in morbidly 
obese patients—the goal of the block is to install 10-15 mL 
of local anesthetic both superficially and deeply into the 
adductor brevis muscle. The posterior division of the 
obturator nerve can be blocked by installing the local 
anesthetic deeper to the adductor brevis in the fascial 
plane between the adductor brevis and adductor magnus 
muscles. The anterior branch is blocked superficially to 
the adductor brevis in the fascial plane between the pec­
tineus or adductor longus and the adductor brevis muscle 
(known as the interfascial injection technique) (Fig. 18.5).
PEARLS
•	 Both out-of-plane and in-plane approaches of the 
needle have been used successfully.
•	 When approaching the needle from the lateral side 
of the probe (in-plane technique), care must be 
taken to avoid vascular injury of the femoral or 
profunda femoris vessel or its branches.
•	 Separate injection of both branches in the thigh is 
mandatory because the obturator externus muscle 
separates both branches.
•	 Confirmation of the identified nerve-by-nerve 
stimulation inducing adduction is reassuring but 
not necessary for successful blocks.
139
Obturator Block
1
2
Medial
Lateral
needle and injection site
Adductor
longus m.
Adductor
brevis m.
Adductor
magnus m.
Obturator n. 
(anterior
branch)
Obturator n. 
(posterior
branch)
Pectineus m.
Femoral
a. and v.
Fig. 18.5  ​Obturator ultrasound.
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Keywords: obturator nerve block, adductor muscles, hip 
pain
PERSPECTIVE
The nerves blocked in the popliteal fossa—the tibial and 
peroneal nerves—are extensions of the sciatic nerve. The 
principal use of this block is for foot and ankle surgery. 
The addition of a saphenous nerve block improves 
comfort, because medial lower leg and ankle sensory 
blockade makes tourniquets and medial ankle surgery 
more comfortable.
Patient Selection. To use the classic form of this block, 
the patient must be able to assume the prone position. 
Elicitation of paresthesia or a motor response is desirable 
but not essential; however, block effectiveness decreases 
without these endpoints.
Pharmacologic Choice. The principal use of these 
blocks is to provide sensory analgesia; thus lower con­
centrations of a local anesthetic are practical in contrast 
to situations in which motor blockade is essential. 
Concentrations of 1% lidocaine, 1% mepivacaine, 0.25% 
to 0.5% bupivacaine, and 0.2% to 0.5% ropivacaine are 
effective.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. As illustrated in Fig. 19.1, the cephalad popli­
teal fossa is defined by the semimembranosus and semi­
tendinosus muscles medially and the biceps femoris 
muscle laterally. Its caudad extent is defined by the gas­
trocnemius muscles both medially and laterally. If this 
quadrilateral area is bisected, as shown in Fig. 19.1, the 
area of interest to the anesthesiologist is the cephalolat­
eral quadrant (hatched area), where both a tibial and 
common peroneal nerve block is possible. The tibial 
nerve is the larger of these two nerves; it separates from 
the common peroneal nerve at the upper limit of the 
popliteal fossa and sometimes higher. The tibial nerve 
continues the straight course of the sciatic nerve and 
runs lengthwise through the popliteal fossa immediately 
under the popliteal fascia. Inferiorly, it passes between 
the heads of the gastrocnemius muscles. The common 
peroneal nerve follows the tendon of the biceps femoris 
muscle along the cephalolateral margin of the popliteal 
fossa, as illustrated in Fig. 19.2. After the common pero­
neal nerve leaves the popliteal fossa, it travels around the 
head of the fibula and divides into the superficial pero­
neal and deep peroneal nerves.
Position. The patient is placed in a prone position, and 
the anesthesiologist stands at the patient’s side to allow 
palpation of the borders of the popliteal fossa.
Needle Puncture. With the patient in the prone posi­
tion, they are asked to flex the leg at the knee, which 
allows more accurate identification of the popliteal fossa. 
Once the popliteal fossa has been defined, it is divided 
into equal medial and lateral triangles, as shown in 
Fig. 19.1. An “X” is placed 5–7 cm superior to the skin 
crease of the popliteal fossa and 1 cm lateral to the midline 
of the triangles, as shown in Fig. 19.1. Through this site, 
a 22-gauge, 4- to 6-cm needle is advanced at an angle of 
45–60 degrees to the skin while being directed anterosu­
periorly (Fig. 19.3). Paresthesia or a motor response is 
sought; when obtained, 30–40 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected.
When a saphenous block is added for foot and ankle 
surgery, the patient’s knee is bent at approximately a 
45-degree angle and the medial aspect of the leg is 
exposed. Two primary techniques are used for a saphe­
nous block. A superficial ring of local anesthetic may be 
injected just distal to the medial surface of the tibial 
condyle. Often 5–10 mL of local anesthetic is needed. 
Conversely, a more proximal technique at the cross-
sectional level of the superior border of the patella is 
possible (Fig. 19.4). In this case, a 22- to 25-gauge, 3- to 
4-cm needle is inserted immediately deep to the sartorius 
muscle in the plane between the vastus medialis and the 
sartorius muscles, and 10 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Although vascular structures also occupy the popliteal 
fossa, intravascular injection should be infrequent if the 
usual precautions are taken. Hematoma formation is 
possible.
Popliteal and 
Saphenous Block
Maria Yared and David L. Brown  19
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
142
DISTAL
MEDIAL
PROXIMAL
LATERAL
Tibial nerve
Interosseous nerve
of leg
Sural nerve
Common peroneal
nerve
Deep branch of common
peroneal nerve
Superficial branch of common
peroneal nerve
Fig. 19.2  ​Popliteal fossa: neural anatomy.
Fig. 19.1  Popliteal fossa: surface anatomy and technique for popliteal block.
Common
peroneal nerve
Tibial nerve
Gastrocnemius muscle
DISTAL
MEDIAL
PROXIMAL
LATERAL
Biceps
femoris
muscle
Cephalolateral
quadrant
5 cm
1 cm
Semimembranosus
muscle
Semitendinosus
muscle
143
Popliteal and Saphenous Block
45°
60°
Fig. 19.3  ​Popliteal fossa: needle angle technique for popliteal block.
MEDIAL VIEW
Medial
CROSS SECTION
Anterior
Vastus medialis muscle
Saphenous
nerve
Sartorius
muscle
Hook
Vastus medialis muscle
Gracilis muscle
Semitendinosus tendon
Saphenous nerve
Saphenous branch of 
descending genicular
artery
Semimembranosus tendon
Sartorius muscle (cut)
Tibial collateral ligament
Infrapatellar branch
of saphenous nerve
Medial patellar
retinaculum
Patellar ligament
Tuberosity of tibia
Fig. 19.4  ​Saphenous nerve block: anatomy and proximal technique.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
SONOANATOMY
The sciatic nerve courses through the popliteal fossa where 
it is blocked. It is beneficial to use ultrasound for this block 
because the division of the sciatic nerve into posterior 
tibial and common peroneal nerves occurs at variable dis­
tances from the popliteal crease. The goal is to block the 
sciatic nerve before it divides and inject the local anes­
thetic within the epineurium. This allows for a more con­
sistent blockade of both divisions and use of lower volumes 
of local anesthetic. The same anatomic landmarks that are 
used for the nerve stimulator-guided technique are also 
used for the ultrasound-guided block. However, with the 
ultrasound, the goal is to find the popliteal vessels first 
(Figs. 19.5 and 19.6).
INDICATIONS
The sciatic nerve block at the popliteal fossa is done when 
the goal is to block the distal leg and foot (S2 to S4) for the 
following:
•	 Tibia or fibula repair
•	 Achilles tendon repair
•	 Calf tourniquet pain
•	 Ankle and toe surgeries
•	 Below-the-knee amputations
•	 Posterior knee pain
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
144
Femoral artery
Sciatic nerve
Popliteal artery
Medial head of
gastrocnemius
Lateral head of
gastrocnemius
Semitendinosus
muscle
Semimembranosus
muscle
Biceps femoris
(long head)
Common
fibular nerve
Sural nerve
Tibial nerve
Biceps femoris
(short head)
Lateral
Medial
Fig. 19.5  ​Anatomy of the popliteal fossa.
To have full surgical anesthesia of the area below the 
knee, one must also block the saphenous nerve, which is 
the terminal branch of the femoral nerve and innervates 
the skin of the medial portion of the lower leg.
TECHNIQUE
The popliteal block can be done with the patient in the 
prone, lateral decubitus, or supine position. We find the 
prone position to be easiest because it allows us to easily 
rest and stabilize the hand that is holding the ultrasound 
probe on the patient’s leg, once the desired image has 
been achieved, especially when placing a nerve catheter 
(Fig. 19.7). However, if the patient has a cast, external 
fixation device, or fracture making positioning difficult, 
then it may be preferable to place the patient lateral decu­
bitus (operative site being superior and placing pillows 
between the knees), or supine (hip and knee are flexed 
with blankets serving as a footrest). Whichever approach 
you decide to use, the ultrasound image will be the same; 
it is the needle path that changes (Fig. 19.8).
After identifying the popliteal fossa, place the linear 
ultrasound probe, which is 8–13 MHz, in the transverse 
position at the crease and ensure that the left side of the 
screen corresponds to the lateral side of the patient (where 
the biceps femoris muscle will lie). Then scan medially and 
laterally to find the popliteal artery, which tends to be about 
4 cm deep. The popliteal vein, which is a compressible 
hypoechoic structure, can be lateral or deep to the artery. 
145
Popliteal and Saphenous Block
Superior
gluteal nerve
Sciatic nerve
Popliteal block
Popliteal block
Posterior
cutaneous nerve
Tibial nerve
Common
fibular nerve
Fig. 19.6  ​Anatomy of the popliteal block and dermatomal coverage.
The posterior tibial nerve usually lies superficial and lateral 
to the artery. The posterior tibial nerve will be a hypere­
choic oval with a honeycomb interior. Once the posterior 
tibial nerve is identified, slowly move the ultrasound probe 
cephalad. Adjust the probe as you scan to maintain a good 
view of the nerves. As you move cephalad, the popliteal 
artery tends to course deeper (more anteriorly) and may 
disappear from the ultrasound view. The common pero­
neal nerve, usually smaller in size than the tibial nerve, will 
emerge laterally and move medially to join the posterior 
tibial nerve until they are enveloped within a common 
epineural sheath. Their unity forms the sciatic nerve and 
usually occurs around 5 to 10 cm from the crease, but the 
distance varies (Fig. 19.9).
We usually prefer the in-line approach when performing 
this block (Figs. 19.10 to 19.12). For a single-shot nerve 
block, after the posterior tibial and common peroneal 
nerves join, we usually move the probe 1 to 2 cm more 
cephalad to ensure that the injected local anesthetic will 
surround both nerves. When placing a continuous nerve 
catheter, we insert a 17-gauge Tuohy needle. Once the tip 
is located near the 6 o’clock position in relation to the 
nerve, we insert the catheter through the Touhy needle and 
follow its trajectory by visualizing the catheter or tissue 
movement caused by the catheter in order to ensure that it 
does not migrate. Insert the catheter 5 cm beyond the tip 
of the Tuohy needle (Fig. 19.11). Please refer to Chapter 20 
for a review of the ultrasound-guided adductor canal block.
KEY POINTS
•	 Use a linear transducer probe (8 to 13 MHz), 
starting at a depth of 4 cm.
•	 For a single-shot nerve block, use a 21-gauge, 4-inch 
or 100-mm needle (stimulating or nonstimulating).
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
146
Fig. 19.7  ​Patient position and ultrasound machine for the popliteal block in prone position.
147
Popliteal and Saphenous Block
Fig. 19.8  ​Patient position and ultrasound machine for the popliteal block in lateral position.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
148
Sciatic nerve
Common
peroneal nerve
Posterior tibial nerve
Posterior tibial nerve
Popliteal Artery
Popliteal Artery
S
nerve
ciatic
Common
peroneal n
ve
nerv
P
nerve
osterior tibial n
Posterior bial nerve
r tib
Poplitea Artery
al A
Popliteal Artery
At the popliteal crease, the popliteal
artery tends to be about 4 cm deep;
however, it may be deeper in
patients who are morbidly obese.
The popliteal vein is often compressed
by the pressure of the ultrasound probe
and can be lateral or deep to the artery.
The posterior tibial nerve usually lies
superficial and lateral to the artery.
As you move the ultrasound probe
cephalad, the popliteal artery tends to
course deeper and may disappear
from view. The common peroneal
nerve comes into view from the
lateral /left side of the screen. As it
merges with the posterior tibial nerve,
they create the "dumbbell sign," with
each nerve resembling the weight
portion of the dumbbell and the
connective tissue in between the
nerves resembling the bar. This sign
helps you find the nerves on the
ultrasound image.
Further cephalad, the "dumbbell sign"
disappears because the nerves unite
and are enveloped within a common
epineural sheath, forming the sciatic
nerve. It is at this point, or preferably
1 to 2 cm above the division of the
sciatic nerve, that local anesthetic is
injected. A halo of hypoechoic
fluid surrounding the hyperechoic,
honeycomb appearing sciatic nerve
indicates appropriate local anesthetic
spread.
Fig. 19.9  ​This illustration demonstrates the movement of the ultrasound probe as you move it cephalad from the popliteal crease. 
Within the popliteal fossa, the popliteal artery and the sciatic nerve’s two main terminal branches (posterior tibial and common peroneal 
nerves) are visualized. One scans proximally/cephalad until the two branches unite together to form the sciatic nerve. Note that the 
ultrasound probe is in the transverse position; also note the in-plane technique, with the needle directed from lateral to medial, parallel 
to the ultrasound probe.
149
Popliteal and Saphenous Block
Femoral artery
Sciatic nerve
Adductor magnus muscle
Semitendinosus
muscle
Semimembranosus
muscle
Biceps femoris
(long head)
Biceps femoris
(short head)
Fig. 19.10  ​In-plane technique for the popliteal block with needle from lateral to medial.
Fig. 19.11  ​Ultrasound still of popliteal block procedure. Note the needle is in-plane, thus visualizing the entire needle shaft.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
150
Femoral artery
Sciatic nerve
Adductor magnus
muscle
Semitendinosus
muscle
Semimembranosus
muscle
Biceps femoris
(long head)
Biceps femoris
(short head)
Fig. 19.12  ​Out-of-plane technique for popliteal block.
•	 For local anesthetic solution in a single shot nerve 
block, bupivacaine or ropivacaine 0.5% 20 mL 
(for ultrasound-guided approach) and 30–40 mL 
(for anatomic approach alone) can be used.
•	 For a continuous nerve block, use a 17-gauge, 
3.5-inch Tuohy needle with a 20-gauge catheter 
(stimulating or nonstimulating). You can inject 
ropivacaine 0.2% or bupivacaine 0.25% 20 mL and 
use a bag of solution containing ropivacaine 0.2% 
running at 8 mL per hour with a 12-mL bolus 
every 60 minutes.
•	 Confirm local anesthetic injection within the 
epineurium by tracking the local anesthetic spread 
proximally and distally from the site of injection 
around the nerves.
•	 If you are having trouble finding the artery, 
use color Doppler (artery pulsates and is 
hypoechoic).
PEARLS
•	 If you are having trouble getting a good image of 
the nerves, try tilting the ultrasound probe caudad 
to ensure that the ultrasound beams are hitting the 
nerves at a 90-degree angle.
•	 As you move the probe cephalad and the nerve tracks 
deeper, it may be more difficult to visualize the nerve 
and needle tip despite various attempts at probe 
manipulation. In this scenario, using the combined 
technique of ultrasound and nerve stimulation is 
helpful, or try hydrodissecting with dextrose.
•	 Muscle tendons may be mistaken for nerves. As 
you track the course of the tendon cephalad, it 
will disappear as it turns into muscle. Nerves will 
stay constant. Furthermore, asking the patient to 
dorsiflex the ankle will make the nerves rotate 
or move in relation to their surroundings.
e1
Abstract: This chapter discusses which surgical procedures 
benefit from a popliteal block. We discuss how to perform 
a popliteal block using anatomic landmarks, nerve stimula­
tion and ultrasound. It is important to be aware of the 
different transducer and needle orientations as well as 
the various patient positions in which this block can be 
performed. We will review components of the sciatic nerve 
(posterior tibial and common peroneal nerves) and blood 
vessels to avoid. There are different local anesthetic options 
for both single shot injections and continuous infusions 
through a catheter. 
Keywords: Popliteal block, sciatic nerve, ultrasound, lower 
leg analgesia, foot analgesia, continuous infusion catheter
SONOANATOMY
The saphenous nerve, a terminal branch of the posterior 
division of the femoral nerve, provides sensory innervation 
to the medial, anteromedial, and posteromedial aspects of 
the lower extremity from the distal thigh to the medial 
malleolus. It travels along the lateral aspect of the superfi­
cial femoral artery in the proximal artery within the adduc­
tor canal (Hunter’s canal). It then crosses over the superficial 
femoral artery anteriorly just proximal of the lower end of 
the adductor magnus muscle and runs medially alongside 
the superficial femoral artery until emerging from the canal 
with the saphenous branch of the descending genicular 
artery. After leaving the adductor canal, the saphenous 
nerve divides into the infrapatellar branch, which provides 
a sensory branch to the peripatellar plexus of the knee, and 
the sartorial branch, which perforates the superficial fascia 
between the gracilis and sartorius muscles and emerges to 
lie in the subcutaneous tissue below the knee fold. It then 
descends along the medial tibial border with the saphenous 
vein giving cutaneous branches to the medial aspect of the 
leg, ankle, and the forefoot. The nerve to the vastus medialis 
is also a branch of the posterior division of the femoral 
nerve. It travels lateral to the superficial femoral artery 
within the adductor canal sending multiple branches to the 
vastus medialis, and supplies the anteromedial portion of 
the knee capsule.
The adductor canal is an aponeurotic tunnel in the 
middle third of the thigh. It courses between the anterior–
medial compartment of the thigh and is covered by strong 
aponeurosis, the vastoadductor membrane. The canal 
contains the superficial femoral artery, vein, saphenous 
nerve, nerve to the vastus medialis, and the terminal nerve 
endings of the posterior branch of the obturator nerve.
The short-axis ultrasound image of the adductor canal 
at the midthigh usually shows the sartorius muscle and the 
saphenous nerve as a hyperechoic structure, which lies 
lateral to the artery and anterior to the vein. The vastus 
medialis muscle lies laterally to the saphenous nerve, and 
the adductor longus and adductor magnus muscles are on 
its medial side (Figs. 20.1 and 20.2).
Adductor Canal Block
Ehab Farag20
Key Points
•	 A high-frequency transducer is preferred for this block.
•	 This approach is the most effective and easiest one 
for saphenous nerve block.
•	 It can be used in lieu of femoral nerve block after 
total knee arthroplasty to avoid quadriceps muscle 
weakness.
•	 It can be used as a block for the saphenous nerve 
after surgeries in the medial side of the foot and 
the ankle.
Fig. 20.1  ​Anatomy of the adductor canal.
Inguinal  ligament
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Adductor longus muscle
Adductor canal
Adductor brevis muscle
Adductor magnus muscle
Saphenous nerve
Gracilis muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Vastus intermedius muscle
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
152
Fig. 20.2  ​Cross-sectional anatomy of the adductor canal.
TECHNIQUE
At the midthigh level, approximately halfway between the 
superoanterior iliac spine and the patella, a high-frequency 
linear ultrasound transducer will be placed in the transverse 
cross-sectional view to obtain the short-axis view of the 
adductor canal and its contents. The femoral artery will be 
identified underneath the sartorius muscle with the vein 
just underneath the artery. The saphenous nerve usually 
appears at this position lateral to the artery as a hyperechoic 
structure. The block needle is usually inserted in-plane from 
the lateral side of the transducer, through the sartorius 
muscle, with the tip of the needle placed lateral to the artery. 
After careful aspiration, 20 mL of local anesthetic will be 
injected lateral to the artery (Figs. 20.3 through 20.6).
PEARLS
•	 This block is very useful as an alternative to the 
femoral nerve block after total knee arthroplasty to 
avoid quadriceps weakness. However, an injection of 
a high volume of local anesthetic in the adductor 
canal can spread as far as the anterior and posterior 
divisions of the femoral nerve to induce quadriceps 
weakness. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that 
there is no boundary between the apex of the 
femoral triangle and the adductor canal.
•	 The saphenous nerve block via the adductor canal 
approach can be successfully used to block the 
medial sides of the foot and the ankle after foot and 
ankle surgeries, either as a solo block or in addition 
to the popliteal nerve block.
•	 In morbidly obese patients, it can be difficult to 
identify the adductor canal and the femoral artery at 
the midthigh level. Therefore we usually identify the 
femoral artery at the inguinal crease and follow it 
distally into the adductor canal.
•	 The combination of vastoadductor membrane 
and vessel sheaths within the adductor canal can 
appear as hyperechoic structures resembling the 
saphenous nerve during ultrasound imaging. 
However, placing the needle tip through the 
vastoadductor membrane, within the adductor 
canal, may result in the successful localization of 
the saphenous nerve.
•	 For catheter insertion, with the Tuohy needle placed 
just lateral to the artery and the saphenous nerve, the 
catheter will be inserted 58 cm through the needle. 
To correctly position the catheter tip, the catheter 
will be slowly withdrawn while injecting 10 mL of 
normal saline under ultrasound guidance, until an 
Adductor canal block
Adductor 
longus muscle
Femoral artery, vein
Sartorius muscle
Saphenous nerve
Vastus medialis muscle
Adductor canal 
block
Adductor canal
Gracilis muscle
Lateral
Medial
153
Adductor Canal Block
Fig. 20.3  ​Position for the patient and the ultrasound machine.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
154
Fig. 20.4  ​In-plane technique with needle direction from lateral to medial.
Fig. 20.5  ​Position of the needle with local anesthetic in the adductor canal. Note there should be separation of the artery from the 
fascia by the local anesthetic.
Medial
Lateral
Adductor longus muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Saphenous nerve
Sartorius
Adductor canal
needle
Local 
anesthetics 
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
155
Adductor Canal Block
Fig. 20.6  ​Ultrasound image of adductor canal.
expansion between the fascia that separates the 
sartorius muscle from the adductor canal and 
the vessels is visualized. After negative aspiration 
for blood through the catheter, the local anesthetic 
can be injected.
•	 Because the femoral artery lies above the vein in the 
adductor canal, the author usually applies firm 
pressure with the ultrasound transducer to occlude 
the vein for better nerve visualization and to decrease 
the incidence of inadvertent vascular injection.
This page intentionally left blank
PERSPECTIVE
This block is often used for surgical procedures carried out 
on the foot, especially for those not requiring high lower-
leg tourniquet pressure.
Patient Selection. The ankle block is principally an infil­
tration block and does not require elicitation of paresthe­
sia. Thus patient cooperation is not mandatory. Although 
the block is most efficient for the anesthesiologist if the 
patient can assume both the prone and supine positions, 
this is not essential.
Pharmacologic Choice. Because motor blockade is not 
often needed for procedures carried out during ankle block, 
lower concentrations of local anesthetics may be used. Practical 
choices are 1% lidocaine, 1% mepivacaine, 0.25%–0.5% 
bupivacaine, and 0.2%–0.5% ropivacaine. Many physicians 
suggest that epinephrine not be used during ankle block, espe­
cially if injection is circumferential.
TRADITIONAL BLOCK TECHNIQUE
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The peripheral nerves requiring block are derived 
from the sciatic nerve, with the exception of a terminal 
branch of the femoral nerve—the saphenous nerve. The 
saphenous nerve is the only branch of the femoral nerve 
below the knee; it courses superficially anterior to the 
medial malleolus, providing cutaneous innervation to an 
area of the medial ankle and foot. The remaining nerves 
requiring block at the ankle are terminal branches of the 
sciatic nerve—the common peroneal and tibial nerves. The 
tibial nerve divides into the posterior tibial and sural 
nerves, which provide cutaneous innervation as outlined 
in Figs. 21.1 and 21.2. The common peroneal nerve divides 
into its terminal branches—the superficial and deep pero­
neal nerves—in the proximal portion of the lower leg. 
Their cutaneous innervation is also illustrated in Fig. 21.2. 
Fig. 21.3 identifies the locations of these nerves in a cross-
sectional view at the level of ankle block.
Needle Puncture: General. It is often helpful (although 
not necessary) to have the patient in the prone position 
initially to facilitate block of the posterior tibial and sural 
nerves. Once these two nerves have been blocked, the 
patient assumes the supine position so that block of the 
saphenous and peroneal nerves can be carried out. The 
block can be performed with the patient in the supine posi­
tion if the lower leg is placed on a padded support, and this 
position facilitates appropriate intravenous sedation.
Needle Puncture: Posterior Tibial Nerve. With the 
patient in the prone position, the ankle to be blocked is 
supported on a pillow. A 22-gauge, 4-cm needle is directed 
anteriorly at the cephalad border of the medial malleolus, 
just medial to the Achilles tendon, as shown in Fig. 21.3. 
The needle is inserted near the posterior tibial artery, and 
if paresthesia is obtained, 3–5 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected. If paresthesia is not obtained, the needle is allowed 
to contact the medial malleolus, and 5–7 mL of local anes­
thetic is deposited near the posterior tibial artery.
Needle Puncture: Sural Nerve. The sural nerve is blocked 
with the patient positioned as for the posterior tibial nerve 
block. As illustrated in Fig. 21.3, the sural nerve is blocked 
by inserting a 22-gauge, 4-cm needle anterolaterally imme­
diately lateral to the Achilles tendon at the cephalad border 
of the lateral malleolus. The sural nerve (lateral ankle) is 
found in a more superficial position relative to the malleo­
lus than is the tibial nerve (medial ankle). If paresthesia is 
not obtained, the needle is allowed to contact the lateral 
malleolus, and 5–7 mL of local anesthetic is injected as the 
needle is withdrawn.
Needle Puncture: Deep Peroneal, Superficial Peroneal, 
and Saphenous Nerves. After the patient assumes the 
supine position, the anterior tibial artery pulsation is 
located at the superior level of the malleoli. A 22-gauge, 
4-cm needle is advanced posteriorly and immediately 
lateral to this point (see Figs. 21.3 and 21.4). An alterna­
tive is to insert the needle between the tendons of the 
anterior tibial and the extensor hallucis longus muscles. 
Approximately 5 mL of local anesthetic is injected into 
this area to block the deep peroneal nerve. From this 
midline skin wheal, a 22-gauge, 8-cm needle is advanced 
subcutaneously laterally and medially to the malleoli, 
injecting 3–5 mL of local anesthetic in each direction. 
These lateral and medial approaches block the superficial 
peroneal and saphenous nerves, respectively.
Ankle Block
Maria Yared and David L. Brown21
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
158
Fig. 21.1  ​Image of the anterior and posterior leg showing the course of the nerves as well as a cross section of the leg showing the 
location of the nerves in relationship to arteries, veins, muscles, and bones. The tibia is medial and anterior, and the fibula is lateral.
Unlabelled image
Unlabelled image
159
Ankle Block
ULTRASONOGRAPHY-GUIDED 
TECHNIQUE
SONOANATOMY
Ankle blocks have a variable success rate because of the 
variable positions of the nerves and multiple branches of 
the superficial nerves. The tibial and deep peroneal nerves 
supply deep structures of the foot and therefore must be 
blocked beneath the deep fascia of the ankle. Under ultra­
sound guidance, these two nerves are hyperechoic but 
small and may be difficult to visualize or distinguish from 
tendons; thus identifying the associated artery or muscle is 
beneficial. The recommendation is to block these first since 
subcutaneous injection of the superficial nerves can change 
the appearance of structures under ultrasound. The 
remaining nerves supply sensory innervation to the skin 
and can be blocked superficially by making a circular wheal 
from the lateral Achilles tendon to the medial Achilles 
tendon. As a reminder, the distal end of the tibia forms the 
medial malleolus while the distal end of the fibula forms 
the lateral malleolus of the ankle.
INDICATIONS
•	 Toe and metatarsal foot surgeries (amputation, 
debridement, podiatric surgery) that do not require 
calf tourniquet pressure.
•	 It does not block the ankle itself.
•	 Preserves motor function of the leg thus not 
impacting postoperative ambulation.
TECHNIQUE
The ankle block can be done using anatomical landmarks 
as described earlier in the chapter and/or under ultrasound 
guidance. There are five nerves to the ankle, two that are 
deep beneath the fascia of the ankle—tibial and deep pero­
neal nerves—and three superficial ones—sural, saphenous, 
and superficial peroneal nerves. If the superficial/sensory 
nerves are difficult to visualize under ultrasound, which is 
not uncommon, block them subcutaneously, making a skin 
wheal, using anatomic landmarks.
When performing the ankle block under ultrasound, the 
patient can be positioned supine with a footrest or pillow 
under the calf. While performing the block, the leg may need 
to be rotated internally or externally as needed depending on 
the nerve being blocked. It may be efficient for the procedur­
alist to walk around the foot as the block is performed. The 
entire foot should be cleaned and a linear transducer used. 
The needle can be in-plane or out-of-plane depending on the 
patient’s position. These nerves are so small that injecting 
3–5 mL of local anesthetic per nerve is usually effective.
Tibial Nerve  This is the largest of the five nerves at the 
level of the ankle. Because of its extensive coverage, a successful 
Saphenous nerve
Superficial
peroneal nerve
LATERAL
MEDIAL
KEY
(PT)
 Femoral nerve
 Sciatic nerve
 Branch of posterior 
    tibial nerve
Deep
peroneal nerve
Sural nerve
Sural nerve
Saphenous n.
Saphenous nerve
Calcaneal nerve
(PT)
Calcaneal nerve
(PT)
Plantar nerve
(PT)
Plantar nerve
(PT)
Superficial
peroneal nerve
Fig. 21.2  ​Ankle block: peripheral innervation.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
160
block of this nerve is essential for surgical anesthesia of the 
foot; using a combination of anatomic landmarks, ultrasound, 
and neurostimulation (note plantarflexion of the toes) will 
maximize the chance of a successful block.
To block this nerve, the foot may need to be externally 
rotated. A linear ultrasound transducer (high frequency 
10–15 MHz) is placed transversely just proximal/cephalad 
to the medial malleolus. Behind the medial malleolus, iden­
tify the posterior tibial artery (with or without help of color 
Doppler), and the nerve is posterior to the artery, about 
halfway between the medial malleolus and the Achilles 
tendon (Fig. 21.5). The nerve is hyperechoic with a honey­
comb pattern. The tibialis posterior tendon, flexor digito­
rum longus tendon, and flexor hallucis longus tendon are 
also in the vicinity and can be distinguished from the nerve 
by tracking the tendons and seeing them turn into a muscle; 
they also move with ankle flexion.
Deep Peroneal Nerve  The deep peroneal nerve is 
a branch of the common peroneal nerve; it innervates the 
ankle extensor muscles, the ankle joint, and the web space 
between the first and second toes. The linear ultrasound 
transducer probe is placed transversely/horizontally at the 
intermalleolar level of the ankle across the anterior surface 
of the tibia and extensor retinaculum. The nerve is on the 
surface of the tibia and lateral to the dorsalis pedis artery 
(also referred to as the anterior tibial artery) the majority of 
the time, although occasionally it is located medial to it 
(Fig. 21.6). It is a small nerve and may be difficult to identify; 
thus local anesthetic injection around the artery may create 
enough contrast to make the nerve visible. Another landmark 
is created when dorsiflexing the toes. Local anesthetic is 
injected, 2–4 mL, on both sides of the artery. From this 
landmark on the tibia, the needle can be advanced laterally 
towards the lateral malleolus to block the superficial peroneal 
nerve and then advanced medially towards the medial 
malleolus to block the saphenous nerve; as the needle is 
moved, it should stay at the level of the ankle, making an 
imaginary horizontal line across the upper borders of both 
malleoli, while avoiding the great saphenous vein.
Extensor hallucis
longus tendon
Deep peroneal nerve
Tibialis anterior
tendon
Saphenous nerve
Superficial
peroneal nerve
Posterior tibial artery
Posterior tibial nerve
Flexor hallucis muscle
Peroneus brevis muscle
Sural nerve
Tendocalcaneus
(Achilles tendon)
Ankle section
1
1
2
2
1
3
2
Tibia
Fibula
Tibia
Fibula
Fig. 21.3  ​Ankle block: cross-sectional anatomy and technique.
161
Ankle Block
Superficial Peroneal Nerve  Under ultrasound 
guidance, the linear transducer probe is placed transversely 
on the lower leg 5–10 cm above the lateral malleolus. 
Although this nerve is hyperechoic, it is small and may have 
already branched and be difficult to see in the subcutaneous 
tissue superficial to the fascia. Thus the probe may have to 
be moved cephalad, 10–20 cm from the ankle along the 
anterolateral surface of the leg, to find the nerve prior to 
its division into branches. The superficial peroneal nerve 
can be visualized in the intermuscular septal groove created 
Fig. 21.4  ​Image of the lateral and medial ankle showing the course of the nerves in relationship to arteries and veins.
Unlabelled image
Unlabelled image
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
162
Fig. 21.5  ​Ultrasound still of the tibial nerve and surrounding anatomy.
Fig. 21.6  ​Ultrasound still of the deep peroneal nerve and surrounding anatomy.
by the extensor digitorum longus and peroneus brevis 
muscle (Fig. 21.7). At this level, the nerve is now deep to 
the fascia but lying above the muscles. The nerve can be 
blocked at this level or traced back distally and blocked at 
the ankle.
Saphenous Nerve  Again the linear transducer 
probe is placed transversely on the lower leg. The saphenous 
nerve is best seen 10–15 cm cephalad and anterior to the 
medial malleolus. It can be tracked, traveling down the 
medial leg with the great saphenous vein. A calf tourniquet 
can help increase the size of the vein. The nerve is anterior 
to the saphenous vein and superficial to the medial malleolus 
(Fig. 21.8).
Sural Nerve  The linear transducer probe is placed just 
cephalad to the lateral malleolus and the nerve is near the 
small saphenous vein, which can be easily compressed/
collapsed by the pressure exerted on the transducer by the 
proceduralist. The nerve is between the superior border of 
the lateral malleolus and the Achilles tendon (Fig. 21.9). If 
needed, the nerve can be traced along the posterior aspect of 
the leg, midline, and superficial to the gastrocnemius muscles. 
A calf tourniquet can also help increase the size of the vein.
KEY POINTS
•	 Use a linear transducer probe (8–18 MHz), starting 
at a depth of 2 cm.
•	 Use a 22- to 25-gauge, 4-inch or 100-mm needle 
(stimulating or nonstimulating) and 10 mL syringes 
to ease injection effort.
•	 Either bupivacaine or ropivacaine 0.5% 20–30 mL 
without epinephrine may be used. Avoid epineph­
rine since circumferential injections might cause 
vasoconstriction and ischemia.
•	 Three 10-mL syringes are needed to block all five 
nerves, injecting about 5 mL per nerve.
•	 Low risk of systemic complications. However, 
patient may have residual paresthesias. Small nerves 
are more sensitive to intraneural injections. 
Preferable not to repeat deep nerve injections.
•	 Bleeding risk is mainly from the greater saphenous 
vein located at the level of the medial malleolus.
•	 This block should not be chosen if high tourniquet 
pressures are required to carry out the surgical 
procedure.
163
Ankle Block
Fig. 21.7  ​Ultrasound still of the superficial peroneal nerve and surrounding anatomy.
Fig. 21.8  ​Ultrasound still of the saphenous nerve and surrounding anatomy.
Fig. 21.9  ​Ultrasound still of the sural nerve and surrounding anatomy.
PEARLS
•	 Patients should be adequately sedated during this block 
because it is primarily a “volume” block requiring 
several different needle insertions and superficial 
injection of local anesthetic, which can be uncomfort­
able. An alert patient is not essential for the block.
•	 When injecting local anesthetic to block superficial 
nerves, make sure to see a wheal to ensure that the 
needle is in the correct superficial plane.
•	 Both the posterior tibial and deep peroneal nerves 
are deep to fascia.
•	 When used for outpatient foot surgery, ankle block 
allows most patients to walk with assistance, thus 
facilitating earlier discharge from the surgery center.
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Abstract: This chapter discusses the surgical procedures 
that benefit from an ankle block. We discuss how to perform 
an ankle block using anatomic landmarks, nerve stimula­
tion, and ultrasound. There are five nerves to the ankle, two 
that are deep beneath the fascia of the ankle—tibial and 
deep peroneal nerves—and three superficial ones—sural, 
saphenous, and superficial peroneal nerves. These nerves 
are small and may be difficult to visualize under ultra­
sound, so locating associated blood vessels helps. You may 
also have to scan proximally to confirm the identity of the 
nerve. If the superficial nerves are difficult to visualize 
Keywords: ankle block, foot analgesia, local anesthesia, 
ultrasound.
under ultrasound, block them subcutaneously, making a 
skin wheal, injecting from the medial Achilles tendon to the 
lateral Achilles tendon. These nerves are also more sensitive 
to local anesthetic, thus 5 milliliters of local anesthetic per 
nerve is adequate and effective. Different local anesthetics 
can be used as long as epinephrine is avoided to prevent 
vasoconstriction and ischemia.
Head and Neck Blocks
Section 4
This page intentionally left blank
Retrobulbar 
(Peribulbar) Block
David L. Brown22
the facial nerve, blockade of these fibers is required to 
ensure a quiet eye during ophthalmic operations. The 
ciliary ganglion, measuring approximately 2–3 mm in 
length, lies deep in the orbit just lateral to the optic 
nerve and medial to the lateral rectus muscle. From 
this ganglion, the long and short ciliary nerves extend 
forward in the orbit. Immediately posterior to the 
ciliary ganglion, the ophthalmic artery can be found at 
the lateral side of the optic nerve as it crosses superior 
to it and passes forward medially (Fig. 22.1).
Position. Patients are placed in the supine position and 
are instructed to maintain their primary gaze 
directly ahead, not “up and in” as in earlier recom­
mendations. With the globe in primary gaze, the 
optic nerve position minimizes potential intraneural 
injection. The anesthesiologist is positioned for the 
injection as illustrated in Fig. 22.2.
Needle Puncture. While the patient’s gaze is directed 
cephalad and opposite to the site of injection, a 
27-gauge, 31-mm, sharp-beveled needle is inserted at 
the inferolateral border of the bony orbit and directed 
toward the apex of the orbit, as illustrated in Fig. 22.3. 
The needle should be oriented so that the bevel 
opening faces toward the globe. A “pop” may be 
appreciated as the needle tip traverses the bulbar fascia 
and enters the orbital muscle cone. Before 2–4 mL of 
local anesthetic is injected, careful needle aspiration 
should be carried out. After retrobulbar block, 
5–10 minutes should be allowed to pass before the 
operation is started. This helps avoid operating on 
patients who develop retrobulbar hematomas. During 
these 5–10 minutes, the anesthesiologist can apply gentle 
pressure to the globe, principally to facilitate lowering the 
intraocular pressure. If a peribulbar technique is chosen, 
needle insertion begins like that used for retrobulbar 
(inferotemporal) injection; however, the operator inserts 
the needle parallel and lateral to the lateral rectus muscle 
and bulbar fascia rather than making an effort to 
puncture it. Many practitioners also now suggest making 
a second injection of 3–5 mL for a peribulbar block 
either in the superomedial orbit or at the extreme medial 
side of the palpebral fissure. To complete the local block 
for ocular surgery, the orbicularis oculi muscle must be 
blocked to produce an immobile eye. This is carried out 
by blocking the facial nerve fibers that innervate the 
muscle.
There are many ways of performing blocks of these facial 
nerve fibers, and the method illustrated in Fig. 22.4 is the 
KEY POINTS
•	 The most common complication of the retrobulbar 
block is hematoma formation, which can be mini­
mized by using a needle shorter than 31 mm or per­
forming a peribulbar approach.
•	 Sudden apnea may happen secondary to unexpected 
spinal anesthesia—related to injection within the 
optic nerve sheath.
•	 Additional block of the facial nerve is essential to 
produce an immobile eye by blocking the orbicularis 
oculi muscle.
PERSPECTIVE
This block is performed more often by ophthalmologists than 
by anesthesiologists. The combination of retrobulbar anesthe­
sia and block of the orbicularis oculi muscle allows most intra­
ocular surgery to be performed. This regional block is most 
useful for corneal, anterior chamber, and lens procedures.
Patient Selection. Patients who require retrobulbar 
(peribulbar) anesthesia are principally older patients 
who are undergoing ophthalmic operations.
Pharmacologic Choice. If retrobulbar block is used, 
2–4 mL of local anesthetic is all that is required to 
produce adequate retrobulbar anesthesia. 
Conversely, if the peribulbar approach is chosen 
(i.e., the needle tip is not purposely inserted 
through the cone of extraocular muscles), slightly 
larger volumes—4–6 mL—may be necessary. Almost 
any of the local anesthetic agents are applicable, 
with many ophthalmic anesthetists using combina­
tions of bupivacaine and lidocaine.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. Sensation to the eye is provided by the ophthal­
mic nerve through the long and short posterior ciliary 
nerves. Autonomic innervation is provided by the 
same nerves, and sympathetic fibers traveling with the 
arteries and parasympathetic fibers carried by the 
inferior branch of the oculomotor nerve provide 
additional autonomic innervation. Because the 
innervation of the orbicularis oculi muscle is through 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
168
Superior
rectus muscle
Optic nerve
Ciliary
ganglion
Ophthalmic artery
Lacrimal
artery
Lateral
rectus
muscle
Fig. 22.1  ​Orbital anatomy.
Fig. 22.2  ​Retrobulbar (peribulbar) block: position.
169
Retrobulbar (Peribulbar) Block
Superior
rectus muscle
Optic nerve
Ciliary
ganglion
Ophthalmic artery
Lateral
rectus
muscle
Fig. 22.3  ​Retrobulbar (peribulbar) block: needle puncture.
1
2
3
Fig. 22.4  ​Regional block of orbicularis oculi muscle: van Lint method.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
170
example of the van Lint block. In this block, a 25-gauge, 
4-cm needle is inserted at needle position 1 until the lower 
inferolateral orbital rim is reached. When the needle tip 
contacts the bony surface, 1 mL of local anesthetic is 
injected. Through this skin wheal, the needle is reposi­
tioned along the lateral and inferior margins of the orbit 
(needle positions 2 and 3), and 2–3 mL of local anesthetic 
is injected along each needle path.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
The most common complication with retrobulbar block is 
hematoma formation. This can be minimized by using a 
needle shorter than 31 mm. Hematoma formation is more 
likely if a longer needle is used and the needle tip rests in the 
vicinity of the ophthalmic artery as it crosses the optic nerve. 
Hematoma can also be minimized by using a peribulbar 
approach. Other complications that can accompany retro­
bulbar block include local anesthetic toxicity, development 
of the oculocardiac reflex, and cases of sudden apnea and 
obtundation after retrobulbar injection. The latter two 
results are probably related to injection within the optic 
nerve sheath, resulting in unexpected spinal anesthesia, or 
intravascular injection affecting the respiratory centers in 
the midbrain, as illustrated in Fig. 22.5.
PEARLS
If anesthesiologists carry out retrobulbar anesthesia, they 
must work with ophthalmologists who are supportive and 
willing to share this part of their practice. Theoretically, 
many of the complications of retrobulbar anesthesia can 
be avoided if peribulbar block is carried out. This can be 
produced by placing the needle along the muscular cone of 
extraocular muscles rather than within the muscular cone. 
Although slightly larger volumes of local anesthetic are 
required with this technique, most of the major complica­
tions can be avoided.
Lateral
rectus muscle
Superior oblique muscle
Superior rectus muscle
Distal optic nerve
(and sheath)
Proximal
optic nerve (and
sheath)
Long and short
ciliary nerve
Ciliary ganglion
Cranial nerve VI
Ophthalmic artery
Cranial nerve IV
Fig. 22.5  ​Orbital functional anatomy.
Cervical Plexus Block
Jacob Ezell and Samantha Stamper23
TECHNIQUE
The posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle 
should be located. This can be a challenge in obese patients. 
For those in whom identification of the sternocleidomas­
toid muscle is difficult, asking the patient to raise his or her 
head off the bed can help identify the muscle belly. Drawing 
a line between the mastoid process and the clavicular head 
of the sternocleidomastoid can also identify the posterior 
border. Halfway along this line approximates the fourth 
cervical vertebra and site of injection.
Using ultrasound, with the patient in a supine or sitting 
position, the head is turned slightly away from the operative 
site. With the probe in a transverse, short-axis position, a 
small collection of nodules are identified (dark oval struc­
tures) deep to the sternocleidomastoid border at the poste­
rior border of the halfway point of the sternocleidomastoid 
(Fig. 23.3). The nerves lie above the prevertebral fascia. 
Attention is given to avoid injection below the prevertebral 
fascial plane in order to avoid a motor block. Ideally, local 
anesthetic is injected below the sternocleidomastoid next to 
the cervical plexus between the cervical fascia and posterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid. By advancing the needle 
in an in-plane fashion, approximately 5–10 mL can be used 
for this block following careful aspiration (Fig. 23.4A,B). In 
the illustration, the needle passes lateral to the sternocleido­
mastoid muscle to pierce the cervical fascia but does not 
penetrate below the deeper prevertebral fascia. Classically 
this block is performed without ultrasound but by using a 
superficial, fanning-needle injection just below the border of 
the posterior sternocleidomastoid.
PEARLS
•	 The block described is very useful and easily 
performed, even without ultrasound; however, 
the deep cervical plexus block is considered an 
advanced procedure and can have serious or even 
life-threatening complications.
•	 Visualization of the cervical plexus is not required 
for a successful block placement. Proper identifica­
tion of the posterior border of the sternocleidomas­
toid and injection immediately posterior to this 
muscle will result in a successful block.
•	 If identification of the fascial planes proves difficult 
near C4, scanning caudad to the level of the sixth 
cervical vertebra may elucidate tissue planes.
Key Points
•	 A high-frequency transducer is preferred for this 
block due to the shallow nature of the cervical 
plexus.
•	 This approach is for the superficial cervical plexus 
nerve block, which aims to spare the motor compo­
nents and avoid serious complications that are more 
associated with the deep cervical plexus block.
•	 This block can be used for surgeries such as a carotid 
endarterectomy, superficial neck surgery, lymph 
node dissection, vascular access surgery, and exci­
sion of thyroglossal duct cysts or brachial cleft cysts.
SONOANATOMY
The cervical plexus, which originates from the anterior 
rami of the cervical vertebrae 2 to 4, provides sensory 
innervation to the ipsilateral neck, jaw, occiput, and ante­
rior supraclavicular area (Fig. 23.1). It begins at the level of 
the first cervical vertebra, anterior to the levator scapulae 
and middle scalene muscles before piercing the platysma 
muscle near the posterior border of the sternocleidomas­
toid muscle. The cervical plexus divides into four terminal 
cutaneous branches: the lesser occipital nerve, greater 
auricular nerve, transverse cervical nerve, and supracla­
vicular nerve (Fig. 23.2). Before the cutaneous branches, 
the cervical plexus also divides to supply motor innerva­
tion to the phrenic nerve, the ansa cervicalis (innervation 
to the geniohyoid and infrahyoid muscles), components of 
the accessory nerve to sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles, and direct branches to the prevertebral muscles of 
the neck. The location of the division of the motor and 
sensory components is at the posterior border of the ster­
nocleidomastoid. The fascia planes at this location allow 
for selective sensory blockade without compromising the 
neck and accessory muscles. Several authors use these 
planes to divide the cervical plexus block into superficial, 
intermediate, and deep blocks. This chapter focuses on the 
superficial cervical plexus block to target only the sensory 
portion of the nerve. This technique to correctly place a 
superficial cervical plexus block is easy, safe, and provides 
most anesthetic goals. For this nerve block technique, 
local anesthetic should be injected above the deep cervical 
fascia.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
172
Fig. 23.1  ​A representation of the sensory distribution of the cervical plexus.
173
Cervical Plexus Block
Fig. 23.2  ​The anatomy of the cervical plexus is seen as it emerges from the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
174
Fig. 23.3  ​Proper positioning of the patient showing the preferred technique to perform a right-sided cervical plexus block.
175
Cervical Plexus Block
Fig. 23.4  ​(A) A comparison of an actual ultrasound image and (B) an illustrated example.
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Keywords: Superficial cervical plexus block; ultrasound 
nerve block; superficial neck surgery
Stellate Ganglion 
Block
Vicente Roqués-Escolar and Ana Isabel Sánchez-Amador24
Pharmacologic Choice. Even during diagnostic use of 
stellate ganglion block, it is often desirable to produce a 
long-lasting block. Therefore a solution of 0.25% bupiva­
caine or 0.2% ropivacaine with epinephrine is often used. 
Steroid coadjutants are frequently added in this technique.
Thermal and pulsed radiofrequency have been success­
fully used in some cases and can be considered an option 
in the treatment of these patients to prolong the effects of 
the blockade.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The sympathetic chain is each of the pair of gan­
glionated longitudinal cords of the sympathetic nervous 
system, situated on either side of the vertebral column. The 
sympathetic trunk travels from the base of the skull to the 
coccyx, just lateral to the vertebral bodies. The cervical 
portion of the chain extends from the base of the skull to the 
first rib, below which it becomes continuous with the tho­
racic part of the chain. In the neck, the cervical sympathetic 
chain lies embedded in the deep fascia between the carotid 
sheath and the prevertebral layer of deep fascia. The cervical 
sympathetic chain is composed of three ganglia: superior 
cervical ganglion, immediately below the skull; middle cervi­
cal ganglion, at the level of carotid cartilage; and inferior 
cervical ganglion, between the first rib and the transverse 
process of the seventh cervical vertebra. In most people, the 
inferior cervical ganglion is fused with the first thoracic gan­
glion and forms the stellate ganglion (Fig. 24.1A,B).
Position. The patient is placed in the supine position 
with the neck slightly extended and the head rotated slightly 
to the opposite side of the block. This is often facilitated by 
removing the patient’s pillow before positioning.
Ultrasound-guided injection technique. A high-frequency 
linear transducer (6-13 MHz) is placed at the level of C6 to 
allow visualization of the anterior and posterior tubercle of 
the transverse process. At that level the longus colli muscle, 
prevertebral fascia, carotid artery, jugular vein, thyroid gland, 
trachea, and esophagus must be located.
Key Points
•	 Used for treatment or diagnosis of complex regional 
pain syndromes as well as upper limb vascular 
syndromes.
•	 Ultrasound appears to allow a more effective and 
precise sympathetic block.
•	 Long-lasting local anesthetics with steroid are com­
monly used.
•	 C7 transverse process and longus colli muscle must 
be located with a high-frequency linear transducer 
(6-13 MHz).
•	 The needle should be directed in-plane from lateral 
to medial towards the prevertebral fascia located 
over the longus colli muscle and below the carotid 
artery.
•	 A total of 5 mL of local anesthetic is then injected 
with real time visualization of spread, avoiding intra­
vascular injection.
PERSPECTIVE
This is also called a cervicothoracic sympathetic block and 
has been used since the 1920s for treatment or diagnosis of 
complex regional pain syndrome. It has also been used to 
treat refractory angina, phantom limb pain, vascular insuf­
ficiency, and other pain and vascular syndromes.
Stellate ganglion blocks have traditionally been per­
formed blindly by palpating the anterior tubercle of the 
transverse process of C6 (Chassaignac tubercle) and infil­
trating as much as 20 mL of local anesthetic. This method 
has a relatively high failure rate, with numerous significant 
and even potentially fatal adverse effects.
Ultrasound allows for a more effective and precise sym­
pathetic block with the use of a small injectate volume. It 
may also improve the safety of the procedure by real-time 
visualization of vascular structures and soft tissue 
structures.
Indications.
Pain Syndromes
Vascular Insufficiency
Complex regional pain 
syndrome type I and II
Raynaud’s syndrome
Refractory angina
Scleroderma
Pain Syndromes
Vascular Insufficiency
Phantom limb pain
Frostbite
Herpes zoster
Obliterative vascular disease
Vasospasm
Trauma
Emboli
Angina
Hyperhidrosis
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
178
Fig. 24.1  ​(A) Stellate ganglion block: sympathetic chain anatomy. (B) Cross-sectional anatomy at C7 level.
The transducer is slightly displaced caudally until the C7 
transverse process is located with a single posterior tubercle 
and C7 root that will constitute the middle trunk by itself. 
At that point, the vertebral artery and vein must be identi­
fied. For the lateral approach over this scanning plane, the 
needle should be directed in-plane from lateral to medial 
towards the prevertebral fascia located over the longus colli 
muscle and below the carotid artery (Fig. 24.2). A total of 
5 mL of local anesthetic is then injected with real-time 
visualization of spread, avoiding intravascular injection.
179
Stellate Ganglion Block
Fig. 24.2  ​Ultrasound-guided stellate ganglion block. (A) Transducer position and needle insertion point. Axial cross-section over C7 
level. (B) Sonoanatomy for ultrasound-guided stellate ganglion approach.
Unlabelled image
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
180
POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
Complications have been described due to malposition of 
the needle:
•	 Hematoma caused by carotid, jugular, or vertebral 
artery trauma.
•	 Neural injury in case of vagus or brachial plexus 
root trauma.
Complications due to the spread of local anesthetic:
•	 Intravascular injection.
•	 Neuraxial or brachial plexus spread.
•	 Phrenic nerve or recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy.
•	 Infection caused by esophageal perforation or 
meningitis.
PEARLS
•	 Possible postprocedural effects should be explained 
to the patient including ptosis, miosis, blurred 
vision, enophthalmos, anhidrosis, facial and con­
junctival flushing, upper extremity numbness or 
weakness and sense of dyspnea, dysphagia, or a 
lump in the throat.
•	 It is crucial to identify potential dangerous structures 
such as the vertebral artery and vein, esophagus, 
trachea, and brachial plexus roots prior to puncture.
•	 A constant and real-time view of the needle trajectory 
and distribution of the local anesthetic over the 
longus colli muscle should be maintained all the time.
e1
Keywords: chronic pain treatment, regional anesthesia, 
stellate ganglion block.
Abstract: Stellate ganglion block (SGB) is utilized in the 
diagnosis and management of various vascular disorders 
and sympathetically mediated pain in the upper extremity, 
head and neck. Various techniques of SGB are described. 
The ability to identify soft tissues, the trajectory of the 
needle, and the spread of the injected solution have made 
ultrasound the most accepted option.
Airway Blocks
Section 5
This page intentionally left blank
Airway Block Anatomy
David L. Brown25
vagus. If nasal intubation is planned, some method of anes­
thetizing the maxillary branches from the trigeminal nerve 
will need to be carried out. Because manipulations involve 
the pharynx and posterior third of the tongue, glossopha­
ryngeal block will be required. Structures more distal in the 
airway to the epiglottis will require block of vagal branches.
Specific glossopharyngeal nerves that are of interest to 
anesthesiologists who undertake airway anesthesia are 
the pharyngeal nerves, which are primarily sensory to the 
pharyngeal mucosa; the tonsillar nerves, which provide 
sensation to the mucosa overlying the palatine tonsil and 
contiguous parts of the soft palate; and sensory branches 
to the posterior third of the tongue. The glossopharyn­
geal nerve exits the skull through the jugular foramen in 
close contact with the spinal accessory nerve. As the glos­
sopharyngeal nerve exits the jugular foramen, it is also 
in close contact with the vagus nerve, which likewise 
travels within the carotid sheath in the upper portion of 
the neck.
Key Point
•	 Block of the glossopharyngeal nerve is required for 
manipulations of the posterior third of the tongue 
and pharyngeal wall. Structures more distal in the 
airway to the epiglottis will require block of vagal 
branches.
If there is one set of regional blocks that an anesthesiologist 
should master, it is airway blocks. Even those anesthesiolo­
gists who prefer to use general anesthesia for the majority 
of their cases will be faced with the need to provide airway 
blocks before anesthetic induction in patients who may 
have airway compromise, trauma to the upper airway, or 
unstable cervical vertebrae. As illustrated in Fig. 25.1, 
innervation of the airway can be separated into three prin­
cipal neural pathways: trigeminal, glossopharyngeal, and 
Fig. 25.1  ​Airway blocks: simplified functional anatomy.
Vagus nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Trigeminal nerve
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
184
Fig. 25.2  ​Airway blocks: anatomy of laryngeal innervation.
Pharyngeal nerve
Superior laryngeal nerve
Internal laryngeal branch
External laryngeal branch
Inferior laryngeal branch
(recurrent laryngeal nerve)
Vagus nerve
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Cervical sympathetic
ganglion
Inferior ganglion
of vagus nerve
The vagus nerve supplies innervation to the mucosa of 
the airway from the level of the epiglottis to the distal 
airways through both the superior and the recurrent laryn­
geal nerves, as illustrated in Figs. 25.2 and 25.3. Although 
the vagus is primarily a parasympathetic nerve, it also con­
tains some fibers from the cervical sympathetic chain, as 
well as motor fibers to laryngeal muscles. The superior 
laryngeal nerve provides sensation to the surfaces of the 
epiglottis and to the airway mucosa to the level of the vocal 
cords. It provides innervation to the mucosa after entering 
the thyrohyoid membrane just inferior to the hyoid bone 
between the greater and the lesser cornua of the hyoid. This 
mucosal innervation is carried out through the internal 
laryngeal nerve, a branch of the superior laryngeal nerve. 
The superior laryngeal nerve also continues as the external 
laryngeal nerve along the exterior of the larynx; it provides 
motor innervation to the cricothyroid muscle.
The recurrent laryngeal nerve is a branch of the vagus 
nerve that ascends along the posterolateral margin of the 
trachea after looping under the right subclavian artery as 
it leaves the vagus nerve on the right, or around the left side 
of the arch of the aorta, lateral to the ligamentum arterio­
sum on the left. The recurrent nerves ascend and innervate 
the larynx and the trachea caudal to the vocal cords. This 
anatomy is illustrated in Figs. 25.2 through 25.4. Fig. 25.5 
shows a sagittal magnetic resonance image with an inter­
pretive illustration of airway innervation keyed to the 
colors used in Fig. 25.1.
185
Airway Block Anatomy
Fig. 25.3  ​Airway blocks: anatomy of laryngeal, vagal, and sympathetic connections.
Superior laryngeal nerve
Epiglottis
Hyoid bone
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricothyroid
membrane
Cricoid
cartilage
Internal laryngeal branch
External laryngeal branch
Vagus nerve
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Innominate artery
Cervical sympathetic
ganglion
Inferior ganglion
of vagus nerve
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
186
Opening for
superior laryngeal nerve
Superior 
laryngeal nerve
Recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Epiglottis (cut)
Greater cornu
Hyoid bone
Lesser cornu
Thyroid
cartilage (cut)
Thyroepiglottic
ligament (cut)
Thyrohyoid
membrane (cut)
Cricothyroid membrane
Trachea
Cricoid cartilage (cut)
Superior cornu
thyroid cartilage
Vestibular fold (cut)
Ventricle
Vocal ligament (cut)
Inferior cornu
thyroid cartilage
Fig. 25.4  ​Airway blocks: anatomy of laryngeal structures and simplified innervation.
187
Airway Block Anatomy
Thyroid
cartilage
Tongue
Trigeminal nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Airway innervation
Vagus nerve
C2
3
4
5
6
7
T1
Mandible
Cricoid
cartilage
Fig. 25.5  ​Airway blocks: sagittal anatomy on magnetic resonance imaging and an interpretive line drawing.
This page intentionally left blank
Glossopharyngeal 
Block
David L. Brown26
be provided to allow needle placement at the base of the 
posterior tonsillar pillar. If the block is to be carried out in 
a peristyloid manner, the patient does not need to be able 
to open the mouth.
Needle Puncture: Intraoral Glossopharyngeal Block. 
After topical anesthesia of the tongue, the patient’s mouth 
is opened widely and the posterior tonsillar pillar (palato­
pharyngeal fold) is identified by using a no. 3 Macintosh 
laryngoscope blade. An angled 22-gauge, 9-cm needle (see 
comment in Pearls section) is inserted in the caudad 
portion of the posterior tonsillar pillar. The needle tip is 
inserted submucosally and then, after careful aspiration for 
blood, 5 mL of local anesthetic is injected. The block is 
repeated on the contralateral side (Fig. 26.2).
Needle Puncture: Peristyloid Approach. The patient lies 
supine with the head in a neutral position. Marks are 
placed on the mastoid process and the angle of the man­
dible, as illustrated in Fig. 26.3. A line is drawn between 
these two marks, and at the midpoint of that line the needle 
is inserted to contact the styloid process. To facilitate styloid 
identification, a finger palpates the styloid process with 
deep pressure and, although this can be uncomfortable for 
the patient, the short 22-gauge needle is then inserted until 
it impinges on the styloid process. This needle is then with­
drawn and redirected off the styloid process posteriorly. As 
soon as bony contact is lost and aspiration for blood is 
negative, 5–7 mL of local anesthetic is injected. The block 
can then be repeated on the contralateral side.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Both the intraoral and the peristyloid blocks have few com­
plications if careful aspiration for blood is carried out. In 
the peristyloid approach, the glossopharyngeal nerve is 
closely related to both the internal jugular vein and the 
internal carotid artery. In the intraoral approach, the ter­
minal branches of the glossopharyngeal nerves are closely 
related to the internal carotid arteries, which lie immedi­
ately lateral to the needle tips if they are correctly 
positioned.
PEARLS
A frequent problem with the intraoral glossopharyngeal 
block is finding a needle to use for the block. This problem 
can be easily overcome by using a 22-gauge disposable 
Key Points
•	 The distal branches of the glossopharyngeal nerve 
are located submucosally immediately posterior to 
the palatine tonsil, deep to the posterior tonsillar 
pillar.
•	 Glossopharyngeal blocks can be achieved from an 
intraoral approach or externally next to the styloid 
process.
•	 Bending the tip of the needle helps positioning the 
needle submucosally in posttonsillar be when per­
forming the intraoral approach.
PERSPECTIVE
Glossopharyngeal block is useful for anesthesia of the 
mucosa of the pharynx and soft palate, as well as for elimi­
nating the gag reflex that results when pressure is applied 
to the posterior third of the tongue.
Patient Selection. Glossopharyngeal block can be used 
in most patients who need atraumatic, sedated, spontane­
ously ventilating, “awake” tracheal intubation.
Pharmacologic Choice. The local anesthetic chosen for 
glossopharyngeal block does not need to provide motor 
blockade. Lidocaine (0.5%) is an appropriate choice of 
local anesthetic.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The glossopharyngeal nerve exits from the 
jugular foramen at the base of the skull, as illustrated in 
Fig. 26.1, in close association with other structures of the 
carotid sheath, vagus nerve, and styloid process. The glos­
sopharyngeal nerve descends in the neck, passes between 
the internal carotid and the external carotid arteries, and 
then divides into pharyngeal branches and motor branches 
to the stylopharyngeus muscle, as well as branches inner­
vating the area of the palatine tonsil and the posterior third 
of the tongue. These distal branches of the glossopharyn­
geal nerve are located submucosally immediately posterior 
to the palatine tonsil, deep to the posterior tonsillar pillar.
Position. Glossopharyngeal block can be carried out 
intraorally or in a peristyloid manner. If the block is to be 
carried out intraorally, the patient must be able to open the 
mouth, and sufficient topical anesthesia of the tongue must 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
190
Maxilla
Sympathetic
trunk
Mandibular
ramus
Internal
jugular vein
Styloid process
Vagus nerve
Accessory
nerve
Hypoglossal
nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Carotid artery
Fig. 26.1  ​Glossopharyngeal block: cross-sectional view of peristyloid anatomy with detail.
spinal needle. In an aseptic manner, the stylet should be 
removed from the disposable spinal needle and discarded. 
Subsequently, using the sterile container in which the 
22-gauge spinal needle was packaged, the distal 1 cm of the 
needle is bent to allow more control during submucosal 
insertion.
This block is underused when airway anesthesia is needed 
for sedated, spontaneously ventilating, “awake” patients 
requiring tracheal intubation. The author believes that the 
block is effective in further reducing the gag reflex that results 
from pressure on the posterior third of the tongue, even after 
adequate topical mucosal anesthesia has been obtained.
191
Glossopharyngeal Block
Palatine tonsil
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Fig. 26.2  ​Glossopharyngeal block: intraoral anatomy and technique.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
192
Sympathetic
trunk
Mastoid
Mandibular angle
Internal carotid artery
Styloid process
INITIAL
AFTER
REDIRECTION
Internal
jugular vein
Glossopharyngeal
nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Accessory nerve
Vagus nerve
Fig. 26.3  ​Glossopharyngeal block: peristyloid technique.
Superior Laryngeal 
Block
David L. Brown27
Position. The patient is placed supine with the neck 
extended. The anesthesiologist should displace the hyoid 
bone toward the side to be blocked by grasping it between 
the index finger and the thumb (Fig. 27.2). A 25-gauge, 
short needle is then inserted to make contact with the 
greater cornu of the hyoid. The needle is “walked off” the 
caudal edge of the hyoid and advanced 2–3 mm so that the 
needle tip rests between the thyrohyoid membrane laterally 
and the laryngeal mucosa medially. Two to 3 mL of the 
drug is then injected; an additional 1 mL is injected while 
the needle is withdrawn.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
It is possible to place the needle into the interior of the 
larynx with this approach, although that should not result 
in long-term problems. If the block is carried out as 
described, intravascular injection should be infrequent 
despite the presence of the superior laryngeal artery and 
vein, which pierce the thyrohyoid membrane with the 
internal laryngeal nerve.
PEARLS
One helpful maneuver when performing this block is to 
firmly displace the hyoid bone toward the side to be blocked, 
even if it causes the patient some minor discomfort. The 
discomfort usually can be minimized by using appropriate 
amounts of sedation. If a three-ring syringe is used, the seda­
tion, coupled with an efficient block, provides an acceptable 
experience for both patient and anesthesiologist.
Key Points
•	 The superior laryngeal nerve is blocked at the lower 
border of the hyoid bone.
•	 A small 25-gauge, short needle is used to reduce the 
risk of intravascular or intralaryngeal injections.
PERSPECTIVE
The superior laryngeal nerve block is one of the methods 
of providing airway anesthesia. Block of the superior laryn­
geal nerve provides anesthesia of the larynx from the epi­
glottis to the level of the vocal cords.
Patient Selection. This block may be appropriate for any 
patient requiring tracheal intubation before anesthetic 
induction.
Pharmacologic Choice. Lidocaine (0.5%) is an appro­
priate local anesthetic for this block.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. The superior laryngeal nerve is a branch of the 
vagus nerve. After it leaves the main vagal trunk, it courses 
through the neck and passes medially, caudal to the greater 
cornu of the hyoid bone, at which point it divides into an 
internal branch and an external branch. The internal 
branch is the nerve of interest in superior laryngeal nerve 
block, and it is blocked where it enters the thyrohyoid 
membrane just inferior to the caudal aspect of the hyoid 
bone (Fig. 27.1).
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
194
Fig. 27.1  ​Superior laryngeal nerve block: anatomy.
Greater cornu
hyoid bone
Opening for internal branch
of superior laryngeal nerve
in thyrohyoid membrane
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
External branch
Internal branch
Superior
laryngeal nerve
Inferior ganglion
of vagus nerve
Fig. 27.2  ​Superior laryngeal nerve block: technique.
Superior 
laryngeal
nerve
Greater cornu
hyoid bone
Hyoid
Thyroid
Cricoid
Thyroid
Cricoid
DISPLACE
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Translaryngeal Block
David L. Brown28
tracheal structures and coughed onto the more superior 
laryngeal structures (Fig. 28.1).
Position. The patient should be in a supine position, 
with the pillow removed and the neck slightly extended. As 
illustrated in Fig. 28.2, the anesthesiologist should be in 
position to place the index and third fingers in the space 
between the thyroid and the cricoid cartilages (cricothyroid 
membrane).
Needle Puncture. The cricothyroid membrane should be 
localized, the midline identified, and the needle, 22-gauge 
or smaller, inserted into the midline until air can be freely 
aspirated. When air can be freely aspirated, 3 mL of local 
anesthetic is rapidly injected. The needle should be removed 
immediately because it is almost inevitable that the patient 
will cough at this point. Conversely, a needle-over-the-
catheter assembly (intravenous catheter) can be used for 
the block. Once air has been aspirated, the inner needle is 
removed and the injection is performed through the 
catheter.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
This block can result in coughing, which should be consid­
ered in patients in whom coughing is clearly undesirable. 
The midline should be used for needle insertion because 
the area is nearly devoid of major vascular structures. The 
needle does not need to be misplaced far off the midline to 
encounter significant arterial and venous vessels.
PEARLS
This block is most effective after the patient has been 
appropriately sedated. There has long been a belief that this 
block should be used cautiously, if at all, in patients at high 
risk for gastric aspiration. The author’s belief is that the 
block is more frequently misused by not being applied in 
appropriate situations than by being applied when the 
patient is at risk for gastric aspiration.
Another hint is to perform the local anesthetic injection 
after asking the patient to forcefully exhale. This forces the 
patient to initially inspire before coughing, making distal 
airway anesthesia predictable.
Key Points
•	 It is a useful block in providing topical anesthesia to 
the laryngotracheal mucosa innervated by branches 
of vagus nerve.
•	 Injection through the cricothyroid membrane results 
in the solution being spread onto the tracheal struc­
tures and coughed onto the more superior laryngeal 
structures.
•	 Air should be aspirated freely before injecting the 
local anesthetics.
PERSPECTIVE
This block, like all airway blocks, can be useful in sedated, 
spontaneously ventilating, “awake” patients requiring tra­
cheal intubation.
Patient Selection. Any patient is a candidate in whom it 
is desirable to avoid the Valsalva-like straining that may 
follow awake tracheal intubation (in which the patient is 
sedated and spontaneously ventilating).
Pharmacologic Choice. The local anesthetic most often 
chosen for this block is 3–4 mL of 4% lidocaine. When 
multiple airway blocks are administered, the anesthesiolo­
gist should be aware of the total dose of local anesthetic 
used.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. Translaryngeal block is most useful in providing 
topical anesthesia to the laryngotracheal mucosa inner­
vated by branches of the vagus nerve. Both surfaces of the 
epiglottis and laryngeal structures to the level of the vocal 
cords receive innervation through the internal branch of 
the superior laryngeal nerve, a branch of the vagus. The 
distal airway mucosa also receives innervation through the 
vagus nerve but through the recurrent laryngeal nerve. 
Translaryngeal injection of local anesthetic is helpful in 
providing topical anesthesia for both of these vagal branches 
because injection below the cords through the cricothyroid 
membrane results in the solution being spread onto the 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
196
Fig. 28.1  ​Translaryngeal block: anatomy and local anesthetic spread.
Vestibular
fold (cut)
Epiglottis (cut)
Local
anesthetic
spread
Hyoid
Thyroid (cut)
Cricoid (cut)
Trachea
Hyoid
Thyrohyoid 
membrane (cut)
Thyroid (cut)
Cricoid (cut)
Trachea
Cricothyroid 
membrane (cut)
Ventricle
Vocal
ligament (cut)
Fig. 28.2  ​Translaryngeal block: anatomy and technique.
Trachea
Thyroid
gland
isthmus
Thyroid
Thyroid
Hyoid
Hyoid
Thyrohyoid
membrane
Cricothyroid
membrane—
midline
injection
Truncal Blocks
Section 6
This page intentionally left blank
Truncal Block Anatomy
David L. Brown29
somatic nerve block, such as intercostal or paravertebral 
nerve block, will be able to provide even more useful post­
operative analgesia. This is approaching clinical relevance 
with thoracic paravertebral use during care of patients 
undergoing breast surgery.
One of the advantages that somatic (paravertebral) 
block has over neuraxial blocks is the ability to avoid 
widespread interruption of the sympathetic nervous 
system. As shown in Fig. 29.2, the major somatic nerves 
are the ventral rami of the thoracic and lumbar nerves. 
In addition, as shown in the inset in Fig. 29.2, the nerves 
contribute preganglionic sympathetic fibers to the sym­
pathetic chain through the white rami communicantes 
and receive postganglionic neurons from the sympa­
thetic chain through gray rami communicantes. These 
rami from the sympathetic system connect to the spinal 
nerves near their exit from the intervertebral foramina. 
The dorsal rami of these spinal nerves provide innerva­
tion to dorsal midline structures. The medial branch of 
the dorsal primary ramus supplies the dorsal vertebral 
structures, including the supraspinous and intraspinous 
ligaments, the periosteum, and the fibrous capsule of the 
facet joint.
Key Points
•	 Thoracic and lumbar somatic innervation extends 
from the chest and axilla to the toes.
•	 Paravertebral block has an advantage over neuraxial 
block in its ability to avoid widespread interruption 
of the sympathetic nervous system.
•	 Major somatic nerves are the ventral rami of the 
thoracic and lumbar nerves.
•	 The dorsal rami of the spinal nerves provide innerva­
tion to dorsal midline structures.
A number of regional anesthetic techniques rely on block 
of the thoracic or lumbar somatic (paravertebral) nerves. As 
illustrated in Fig. 29.1, thoracic and lumbar somatic inner­
vation extends from the chest and axilla to the toes. Although 
few major surgical procedures can be carried out under 
somatic block alone, appropriate use of somatic block with 
long-acting local anesthetics provides unique and useful 
analgesia. Also, when even longer-acting local anesthetics 
become available, possibly some form of thoracic or lumbar 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
200
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
Fig. 29.1  ​Truncal anatomy: dermatomes.
201
Truncal Block Anatomy
External
intercostal muscle
Spinal
cord
Internal
intercostal
muscle
Innermost
intercostal
muscle
Serratus
anterior
muscle
Latissimus dorsi
muscle
Lateral cutaneous branch
Anterior cutaneous
branch
(ventral ramus)
Intercostal nerve
(ventral ramus)
Paraspinous muscle
Dorsal rootlets
Ventral rootlets
Gray and white
rami communicantes
Sympathetic trunk
(ganglion)
Dorsal ramus
Spinal ganglion
Medial branch
Lateral branch
Dorsal ramus
Fig. 29.2  ​Truncal anatomy: cross-sectional view.
This page intentionally left blank
PECS and Pecto-
Intercostal Blocks
Loran Mounir-Soliman30
PERSPECTIVE AND BACKGROUND
The introduction of ultrasound to regional anesthesia 
allowed identification of various interfascial planes between 
the different muscles, including the chest wall musculature. 
Some of the interfascial planes (between the investing 
fascias of the muscles) are considered neurovascular poten­
tial spaces, hosting the different nerves and vessels supply­
ing the chest wall. Along the course of the intercostal 
nerves, they branch and communicate with the adjacent 
intercostal nerves as well as other pectoral nerves when 
crossing between those different interfascial planes.
The ventral rami of the thoracic spinal nerves (T2–T9) 
pierce the intercostal muscles giving lateral and anterior cuta­
neous branches that further divide into posterior, anterior, 
medial and lateral branches, providing sensory innervations 
to the anterior and lateral aspects of the chest wall including 
the breast (T4–5–6) . The apex of the axilla is innervated by 
the intercostobrachial nerve, a branch of T2 spinal nerve. 
These multiple divisions of the spinal nerves communicate 
with the branches of the adjacent spinal nerves through the 
neurovascular planes existing between the muscles of the chest 
wall, mainly pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, and serratus 
anterior muscles, bounded by the fascial layers covering the 
muscles (interfascial planes). Those planes also host branches 
of the brachial plexus along their course in the chest; mainly 
medial pectoral nerve (C8–T1), lateral pectoral nerve (C5–7), 
long thoracic nerve (C5–7), and thoracodorsal nerve (C6–8) 
(Figs. 30.1–30.4).
PECS 1 BLOCK
Injection of local anesthetics in the interval between the 
pectoralis major and minor muscles at the level of the third 
to fourth rib is viewed as PECS 1 block. Along this plane, the 
medial (C8–T1) and lateral pectoral (C5–7) nerves can be 
anesthetized by injecting a relatively large volume of local 
anesthetics. This block targets surgeries involving the pecto­
ralis major muscle; for example, expander insertion, port-a-
cath placement, and implantable cardiac devices (Fig. 30.5).
PECS 2 BLOCK
For more extensive surgeries of the anterior chest wall 
including mastectomies, sentinel node biopsies, and axil­
lary dissections, blockade of the intercostal nerves, inter­
costobrachial nerves, as well as long thoracic nerves, is 
necessary. It is achieved through injection of the local anes­
thetics at a deeper level between the pectoralis minor and 
serratus anterior muscle at the level of the fourth to fifth 
ribs (PECS 2 block). Typically, PECS 1 block is performed 
as part of the PECS 2 block through the same entry point 
during the passage of the needle between the pectoralis 
major and pectoralis minor muscles (Fig. 30.6).
PECTO-INTERCOSTAL BLOCK
For a sternal wound, the anterior cutaneous branches of 
the intercostal nerves can be blocked by infiltrating local 
anesthetics in the fascial plane between the pectoralis major 
and intercostal muscles on both sides of the sternum 
(pecto-intercostal block) (Figs. 30.7 and 30.8).
ULTRASOUND-GUIDED INJECTION 
TECHNIQUE
The patient is usually positioned supine for the PECS and 
pecto-intercostal blocks with the anesthesiologist standing 
at the head of the patient. Ideally, the ultrasound machine 
should be facing the anesthesiologist across from the patient, 
to allow him to view the screen as well as the needle entry 
point and needle direction within the same visual field.
PECS 1 and 2. A high frequency, linear probe is best suited 
for these superficial blocks to better identify the different 
fascial planes and borders of the chest wall muscles. Scanning 
Key Points
•	 Anterior chest wall blocks are used as alternatives to 
thoracic epidurals and paravertebral blocks for breast 
surgeries and procedures involving the anterior chest 
walls.
•	 Serratus plane blocks and supraclavicular blocks may 
be required for more extensive surgeries.
•	 Pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, and serratus ante­
rior muscles are the main landmarks for the PEC 
blocks at the level of the fourth and fifth ribs.
•	 Bilateral pecto-intercostal blocks are required for 
sternal wound incisions.
•	 All fascial plane blocks need ultrasound guidance, 
skill with ultrasound-guided procedures, and larger 
volume of local anesthetics.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
204
Fig. 30.2  ​Anatomy of the 
anterior chest wall with a 
cross section showing the 
correct interfascial planes for 
PECS 1 and 2.
Fig. 30.1  ​Cross section showing the muscles of the chest wall, indicating the correct interfascial planes for PECS 1 and 2 blocks.
205
PECS and Pecto-Intercostal Blocks
Fig. 30.3  ​Probe position for PECS 1,2. Note the in-plane 
technique for the block
Fig. 30.4  ​Ultrasound image for the PECS 1 and 2 shows the 
muscles.
Lateral
Medial
RIB
PLEURA
PECTORAL MINOR
PECTORAL
MAJOR
INTERCOSTAL M.
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
Fig. 30.5  ​Ultrasound image for the PECS 1 shows the position 
of the needle deep to the pectoralis major muscle.
NEEDLE
RIB
LA
PECTORAL MINOR
PECTORAL
MAJOR
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
PLEURA
INTERCOSTAL M.
Fig. 30.6  ​Ultrasound image of the PECS 2 shows the position 
of the needle and the local anesthetics deep to the pectoralis 
minor muscle.
NEEDLE
RIB
LA
PECTORAL MINOR
PECTORAL
MAJOR
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
is started by placing the probe parallel to the long axis of the 
body (cephalo-caudad direction) medial to the coracoid 
process, visualizing the axillary artery and the cords of the 
brachial plexus surrounding it deep to the pectoralis major 
muscle. At this point, tilting the probe medially will allow 
visualization of the second rib and pleura. Scanning caudad 
will enable viewing of the pectoralis minor deeper to pecto­
ralis major, especially when angulating the leading edge of the 
probe slightly lateral at the same time towards the axilla and 
lateral edge of the pectoralis muscle (see Fig. 30.2). By count­
ing down the ribs, the interval between the third and fourth 
ribs, in addition to the fourth and fifth ribs is identified. The 
probe is usually turned oblique to the long axis of the body 
to allow the needle path from a cephalo-medial to a caudal 
and lateral direction. The target of infiltration of local anes­
thetics is between the pectoralis minor and serratus (PECS 2), 
followed by the interval between the pectoralis major and 
pectoralis minor (PECS 1) at those two levels. It is easier to 
perform the deeper block first when doing both blocks with 
a single needle path. That will also avoid obliteration of the 
deeper fascial ultrasound identification if air is accidentally 
injected during the first injection. Care should be taken to 
avoid vascular punctures of the multiple small branches of 
the thoracoacromial vessels hosted within the same targeted 
planes (neurovascular fascial planes) (Figs. 30.4–30.6).
Pecto-intercostal. The probe is placed an inch lateral and 
parallel to the long axis of the sternum in a longitudinal 
orientation. The level of injection is typically at the level of 
the midsternum. With this view, multiple ribs can be visual­
ized with the intercostal muscles between them and the 
pleural underneath both. The pectoralis major muscle is the 
only muscle covering the ribs and the intercostal muscles. 
The interfascial interval between the pectoralis muscle and 
the underlying ribs and intercostal muscles is the target of 
infiltration of local anesthetics, in order to block the anterior 
cutaneous branches for sternal incisions. Care should be 
taken to avoid vascular injuries of the branches of the inter­
nal thoracic artery (Figs. 30.7 and 30.8).
POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
Intramuscular hematoma and pleural puncture can be pos­
sible complications of this block, however these are rare. 
Care should be taken to visualize the needle the whole time 
it is advanced underneath the ultrasound beam to avoid 
vascular or pleural puncture.
Multiple encounters of the surface of the ribs are unneces­
sary, can be painful to patients, and should be minimized.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
206
Fig. 30.7  ​Cross section showing the anatomical course of the anterior cutaneous branches of the intercostal nerves.
Fig. 30.8  ​Anatomy and needle position for the pecto-intercostal block. Note the needle and local anesthetics deep to pectoralis major and 
superficial to the intercostal muscles.
PEARLS
•	 Injection of local anesthetics underneath the pectora­
lis major high up in the chest (at the level of the 
second rib) can lead to an accidental block of the 
brachial plexus.
•	 Like most fascial plane blocks, the target is not a 
specific nerve as much as it is a plexus of nerves 
formed by the communication of multiple branches. 
The injection of a large volume (20-30 mL) is 
necessary to have a wider spread and block most of 
those branches. Care should be taken to calculate 
the maximum dose of local anesthetics injected to 
avoid systemic toxicity.
•	 Combining PECS blocks to the serratus anterior 
block may be necessary to cover anterior and 
anterolateral chest wall incisions.
•	 For continuous infusion techniques, intermittent 
bolus programming may provide better spread and 
more effective block.
•	 The area immediately below the clavicle and the 
upper part of the breast is supplied by the supra­
clavicular nerve (C3–4), and nerve to subclavius 
(C5–6). The typical injection for PECS 1 and 2 
blocks does not provide coverage to this area. 
Separate injection of the supraclavicular nerve 
(superficial injection above the clavicle) and nerve 
to subclavius (superficial injection below the 
clavicle) may be needed as a supplement if the 
incision extends high up in the chest towards the 
clavicle.
•	 Original hydrodissection can be achieved by saline 
to limit the total dose of local anesthetics used.
e1
Keywords: PECS 1; PECS 2; pecto-intercostal; anterior 
chest wall; sternotomy; breast surgery
Serratus Anterior 
Block
Loran Mounir-Soliman 31
Key Points
•	 Serratus anterior block is indicated for anterolateral 
chest wall incisions, targeting the lateral and postcu­
taneous branches of upper and middle thoracic 
dermatomes.
•	 The block has been used for different thoracoscopic 
and open chest wall incisions as well as chest tube 
placements and rib fractures.
•	 The long thoracic nerve is included in the serratus 
anterior block.
•	 Injection of the local anesthetic either superficial or 
deep to the serratus anterior muscle leads to similar 
results clinically.
•	 The optimal point of injection should be posterior to 
the midaxillary line at the level of fifth or sixth ribs. 
This allows better identification of the muscle as well 
as better spread of the medication.
RELEVANT ANATOMY
The serratus anterior muscles originate from the anterior 
surface of the first to eighth ribs at the lateral chest wall 
and insert along the entire anterior length of the medial 
border of the scapula, as well as the ventral aspect of its 
inferior angle. It consists of multiple serrated tendinous 
projections connecting the ribs, with the costal margin of 
the scapula pulling the scapula forward around the chest 
(protraction), especially when pushing forwards. It also 
helps with upward rotation of the scapula, adding to the 
trapezius muscle action. The muscular serrations are 
thinner at its origin (anteriorly) and get bigger along its 
course posteriorly.
The serratus anterior receives its nerve supply from the 
long thoracic nerve, also called nerve to serratus anterior; 
it originates from the roots of the brachial plexus (C5–C7). 
Its injury results in “winging” of the scapula. It has multiple 
sensory and motor branches and typically runs in a course 
between the middle and posterior axillary lines.
Anterior to the anterior axillary line, the serratus ante­
rior muscle is covered by the pectoralis muscles. Along its 
dorsal course starting at the level of the fifth rib, the ser­
ratus anterior is covered by the latissimus dorsi muscle. 
Accordingly, posterior to the midaxillary lines, there are 
two potential fascial planes: superficial and deep to the 
serratus muscle. Superficial to the serratus anterior, the 
fascial plane is bounded by the deep surface of the latissi­
mus dorsi, and deep to the serratus the plane is bounded 
by the ribs and intercostal muscles.
The lateral and posterior cutaneous branches of T2–T9 
intercostal nerves, along with the long thoracic nerve, travel 
across those two fascial planes: superficial and deep to the 
serratus anterior muscle posterior to the midaxillary line. 
Clinical results indicate that injection of local anesthetic 
along both planes results in similar outcomes; mainly 
blocking upper and midthoracic dermatomes of the lateral 
chest wall (Fig. 31.1).
ULTRASOUND-GUIDED INJECTION 
TECHNIQUE
Typically, a high-frequency linear probe is used for the ser­
ratus anterior block to better identify the superficial and 
deep boundaries of the muscle. However, a curvilinear 
probe can be more useful in morbidly obese patients 
to allow deeper penetration and broader visual window. 
The patient is positioned laterally with the side to be 
blocked, uppermost. Transverse scanning along the course 
of the serratus muscle posteriorly at the level of the fifth 
rib identifies the muscle starting in the midaxillary line. 
The size of the muscle varies according to its position along 
the chest wall, being larger posteriorly. Tilting the probe 
from side to side can also change the viewable section of 
the muscle according to the trajectory of the beam. The 
muscle is identified by its position just on top of the ribs, 
distinguished from the intercostal muscles located between 
the costal hyperechoic lines. As the probe moves posteri­
orly, the beam will encounter the large latissimus dorsi 
muscle, superficial to the serratus anterior. The needle is 
inserted in-plane from anterior to posterior (however, it 
can be introduced from the dorsal side of the probe, if 
needed). The local anesthetic is injected in one of two 
fascial planes: superficial to the serratus anterior (deep to 
the latissimus dorsi), or deep to the serratus anterior, lifting 
the muscle of the ribs and intercostal muscles. As men­
tioned previously, clinical results have been reported to be 
similar since the long thoracic nerve and the branches of 
the intercostal nerves run across both planes. It is the 
author’s practice to install half of the volume in each plane, 
starting with the deeper one first, for wider spread.
The optimal level of injection is at the posterior axillary 
line at the level of the fifth or sixth rib to allow more cover­
age of the lateral and posterior cutaneous branches.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
208
Fig. 31.1  ​Anatomy of the anterior chest wall showing the sensory distribution of serratus anterior block.
The single-shot technique, as well as continuous 
indwelling catheter, have been described for this block 
(Figs. 31.2–31.4).
POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
Intramuscular hematoma, as well as pleural puncture, can 
be possible complications of this block, but are rare. Care 
should be taken to visualize the needle the entire time it is 
advanced below the ultrasound beam to avoid vascular or 
pleural puncture.
Multiple encounters of the surface of the ribs are 
unnecessary, can be painful to patients, and should be 
minimized.
PEARLS
•	 The serratus anterior block is usually a superficial 
block going 2–3 inches deep in most patients. 
Accordingly, there is no need to use a needle longer 
than 3–4 inches in length.
•	 Like most fascial plane blocks, the target is not a 
specific nerve as much as it is a plexus of nerves 
formed by the communication of multiple branches. 
The injection of a large volume (20–30 mL) is 
necessary to have a wider spread and block most of 
those branches. Care should be taken to calculate 
the maximum dose of local anesthetic injected to 
avoid systemic toxicity.
•	 Combining PECS blocks to the serratus anterior 
block may be necessary to cover anterior and 
anterolateral chest wall incisions.
•	 For continuous infusion techniques, intermittent 
bolus programming may provide better spread and 
more effective block.
209
Serratus Anterior Block
RIB
Cranial
Caudal
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
PLEURA
INTERCOSTAL MUSCLES
Fig. 31.3  ​Ultrasound image of the serratus anterior block 
showing the serratus anterior and intercostal muscles. It is very 
important to visualize the pleura when performing the block as 
shown in the figure.
Fig. 31.2  ​Ultrasound probe position. Note the in-plane 
technique of the block.
NEEDLE
RIB
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
PLEURA
INTERCOSTAL MUSCLES
Fig. 31.4  ​Ultrasound image of the serratus anterior block with 
the needle deep to serratus anterior muscle but superficial to 
the intercostal muscles. The injection of local anesthetic is 
between the serratus anterior and intercostal muscles. Note, 
the pleura is always visualized when performing the block to 
avoid pneumothorax or injury to the lung.
This page intentionally left blank
Ultrasound for 
Intercostal Block
Ehab Farag and Rajeev Krishnaney Davison 32
Key Points
•	 Intercostal nerves supply major parts of the skin and 
musculature of the chest and abdominal wall.
•	 Intercostal nerve block is now commonly performed 
for treatment of acute and chronic pain conditions 
affecting the thorax and upper abdomen.
•	 Intercostal nerve block provides excellent analgesia 
for chest trauma such as rib fractures and after chest 
and upper abdominal surgeries.
•	 Ultrasound provides the safest and most successful 
way for intercostal nerve blocks.
•	 The online technique is the preferred way for per­
forming the block.
SONOANATOMY
There are three layers of intercostal muscles: external, inter­
nal, and innermost intercostal muscles, which are all 
incomplete, thin layers of muscle and tendinous fibers. The 
neurovascular bundle lies between the internal and inner­
most intercostal muscles in the costal groove. Of note, the 
neurovascular bundle lies midway between the ribs in the 
majority of cases. The use of ultrasound allows the visual­
ization of the pleura and the different layers of the inter­
costals. The pleura will be easily identified as a hyperechoic 
line that glides with respiration (sliding sign).
TECHNIQUE
A linear probe with high resolution (6–13 Hz) is used 
for the technique. The patient can be placed in prone 
position, sitting position, or lateral position with the side 
to be blocked facing upward. The angle of the rib, which 
is 6–7.5 cm from the spinous process or on the lateral 
edge of the paraspinal muscle, is the common site of 
injection as the rib is the thickest at this site and the 
intercostal nerve has not yet branched. The probe is 
usually placed in the short axis to the ribs, so the two 
consecutive ribs are in view. The probe can also be placed 
in the long axis of the consecutive ribs, the author’s pre­
ferred technique. Both in-plane and out-of-plane tech­
niques could be used for intercostal nerve block. The 
author prefers the in-plane technique as the complete 
needle path can be visualized. The needle is advanced 
under real time ultrasound guidance until the tip is posi­
tioned between intercostal and innermost intercostal 
muscles. After proper positioning of the needle 4–5 mL 
of local anesthetic is usually injected for each intercostal 
space (Figs. 32.1A,B–32.3).
PEARLS
•	 The preferred local anesthetic for this block is either 
0.2% ropivacaine for sensory block or 0.5% for 
surgical block.
•	 The pleura should be observed at all times when 
performing the technique.
•	 After performing the block, ultrasound can be 
used to scan for the possible complication of 
pneumothorax.
•	 Pneumothorax can be diagnosed by absence of the 
sliding sign and/or comet-tail artifacts that appear 
as vertical lines to the pleura.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
212
RIB
PLEURA
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
EXTERNAL INTERCOSTAL M.
INTERNAL INTERCOSTAL M.
INNERMOST INTERCOSTAL M.
RIB
NEEDLE
B
Fig. 32.1  ​(A) The position of the ultrasound probe at the angle of the ribs is either at short axis (A, across the ribs) or at long axis 
(B, parallel to the ribs). Note that in-plane technique is preferred. (B) Ultrasound image of the intercostal block shows the three 
intercostal muscles and the pleura.
213
Ultrasound for Intercostal Block
RIB
PLEURA
SERRATUS ANTERIOR
MUSCLE
EXTERNAL INTERCOSTAL M.
INTERNAL INTERCOSTAL M.
INNERMOST INTERCOSTAL M.
RIB
LA
NEEDLE
B
Fig. 32.2  ​(A) Needle position and injection is between internal intercostal and innermost intercostal muscles. (B) Ultrasound image 
of intercostal block shows the position of the needle and local anesthetic distribution between internal intercostal and innermost 
intercostal muscles.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
214
Fig. 32.3  ​The distribution of analgesia after intercostal block.
INDICATIONS
• Thoracic paravertebral catheter can be used in lieu 
of thoracic epidural analgesia for unilateral proce­
dures like thoracotomies, nephrectomies (either 
partial or radical), rib fractures, and breast surgeries.
• This block is used in cases where epidural catheter is 
difficult or epidural analgesia failed, for unilateral 
procedures.
• Bilateral paravertebral blocks, with or without 
catheter insertion, can be used for bilateral proce­
dures taking care to avoid the development of 
bilateral pneumothoraces and local anesthetic 
overdose toxicity.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
• The same contraindications exist as with epidural 
catheter insertions regarding the use of anticoagu­
lants and antiplatelet drugs.
• Pneumothorax is the main complication of thoracic 
paravertebral block, with or without catheter inser­
tion. Therefore, inexperience performing regional 
anesthesia using ultrasound is considered a relative 
contraindication for thoracic paravertebral block.
SONOANATOMY
The thoracic paravertebral space lies adjacent to the tho­
racic spine bodies and contains the spinal nerves as they 
emerge from the intervertebral foramina, the anterior divi­
sions (intercostal nerves), the posterior divisions, and the 
rami communicantes. The thoracic paravertebral space is 
sandwiched between the parietal pleura anteriorly and the 
superior costotransverse ligament posteriorly. The verte­
bral body, intervertebral disc, and intervertebral foramen 
form the medial boundary. The thoracic paravertebral 
space is connected to the level above and below, with the 
caudad limit being the origin of the psoas major at T12.
The thoracic paravertebral space can be scanned in both 
the transverse (intercostal) and paramedian approaches. In 
the transverse approach, the probe is aligned in the space 
between two adjacent ribs overlying the transverse process. 
In this approach, the external intercostal muscle, internal 
intercostal membrane that binds medially with the costo­
transverse ligament, and the parietal pleura can be viewed. 
The landmarks in this scan are the bony reflections from 
the transverse process, with its dropout shadow, and the 
pleural reflection, which moves with respiration.
In the paramedian (longitudinal) approach, the probe 
lies in the paramedian plane of the transverse processes. 
The main landmarks in this approach are reflections and 
dropout from the tips of the transverse processes. The 
external intercostal muscle and costotransverse ligament lie 
between the transverse processes. The parietal pleura lie 
deep to these layers and can be recognized by their move­
ment with respiration as evidenced in ultrasound by char­
acteristic sliding and comet tails signs (Fig. 33.1).
TECHNIQUE
The linear ultrasound probe (50-mm footprint) is usually 
used for this block. In the transverse approach, the probe 
is aligned over the long axis of the rib; then it is moved 
medially to visualize the transverse process. By toggling 
(tilting) the probe, the external intercostal muscle, internal 
intercostal membrane that binds medially with the costo­
transverse ligament, and the parietal pleura can be identi­
fied. The needle is introduced in-plane at the lateral end of 
the probe from the lateral to medial direction. The needle 
tip should be positioned just deep to the costotransverse 
ligament in the paravertebral space. Local anesthetic spread 
should cause displacement of the pleura anteriorly.
In the paramedian (longitudinal) approach, the linear 
ultrasound probe (50-mm footprint) or curvilinear probe 
can be used for this approach. However, the author prefers 
to use the linear probe for this block. First, the technician 
Paravertebral Block33
Ehab Farag 
Key Points
• The thoracic paravertebral block, with or without 
catheter, can be used in lieu of thoracic epidural 
catheter for unilateral procedures and for breast 
surgeries.
• Pneumothorax is the major complication of this 
block.
• When performing the block and the injection, 
make sure the needle tip always remains visible in 
the plane.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
216
Spinal nerve
Dorsal ramus
Ventral ramus (intercostal nerve)
Lateral cutaneous nerve
Posterior branch of
lateral cutaneous nerve
Anterior branch of
lateral cutaneous nerve
Anterior cutaneous nerve
Medial branch of
anterior cutaneous nerve
Lateral branch of
anterior cutaneous nerve
A.
B.
Fig. 33.1  ​Anatomy of paravertebral space.
scans the spinous process and then moves the probe later­
ally to visualize the transverse process. The probe then will 
be rotated through 90 degrees to lie 2.5 cm lateral to the 
spine over the desired thoracic levels. The needle is intro­
duced in-plane at the lower end of the probe. For better 
needle visualization, the probe can be rotated to lie oblique 
to the spine rather than parallel to it. As in the transverse 
approach, the needle tip should be positioned just deep to 
the costotransverse ligament in the paravertebral space. 
Injecting local anesthetic will displace the pleural anteri­
orly. In both techniques the catheter can be inserted via 
Tuohy needle (Figs. 33.2–33.5).
PEARLS
• Patients may be positioned in the sitting, lateral 
decubitus (surgical side up), or prone position 
during the block.
• The parietal pleura appear as a glittering hyper­
echoic structure between the transverse processes.
• The presence of lung sliding, which is the to and fro 
movement of the lung caused by respiration, and 
comet tail signs rule out pneumothorax after 
thoracic paravertebral block.
• Patients with lung hyperventilation, as in chronic 
obstructive lung disease, are at higher risk of 
developing pneumothorax.
• The costotransverse ligament can be mistakenly 
identified as parietal pleura, and the injection of 
local anesthetic superficial to the ligament will result 
in block failure. Optimizing the image depth and 
gain will help with proper identification of the 
pleura and the costotransverse ligament. 
Furthermore, asking the patient to take a deep 
breath will identify the visceral and parietal pleura. 
The latter maneuver will cause a visible movement 
of the visceral and parietal pleura over each other 
(sliding sign).
• The paramedian approach is the preferred one for 
catheter insertion, as theoretically it decreases the 
incidence of placing the catheter in the epidural space.
• The continuous thoracic paravertebral catheter 
infusion rate is 5–10 mL per hour of 0.2% ropiva­
caine. However, for paravertebral block without 
catheter insertion, 5 mL of 0.2% or 0.5% ropiva­
caine is injected at each level.
• Pneumothorax is the major complication of this 
block. Injections into the root canal and epidural or 
spinal blockade are other possible complications.
217
Paravertebral Block
Fig. 33.2  ​Patient positioned with ultrasound machine for paravertebral block.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
218
Endothoracic
fascia
Interpleural
space
Anterior
Posterior
B.
Ventral ramus 
(intercostal
nerve)
Neck of rib
   
Transverse process
   
Superior 
costo-
transverse 
ligament
Inter-
transverse 
ligament
   
Paraspinal
muscle
Subendo-
thoracic 
compartment
Extrapleural 
compartment
Lung
needle and
injection site
Dorsal
ramus
Ventral ramus (intercostal nerve)
Inner intercostal membrane 
External
intercostal muscle
   
Internal
intercostal muscle
   
Innermost
intercostal muscle
   
Subendothoracic 
compartment
Endothoracic fascia
Extrapleural
compartment
Pleura:
  -visceral
  -parietal
Superior costotransverse ligament
Paravertebral space
Lung
needle and
injection site
Medial
Lateral
A.
Fig. 33.3  ​(A) Transverse intercostal technique for paravertebral block. Note the internal intercostal membrane binds medially with the 
costotransverse ligament. (B) Paramedian (longitudinal) approach for paravertebral block.
219
Paravertebral Block
Fig. 33.5  ​Paramedian (longitudinal) approach for paravertebral 
block.
Fig. 33.4  ​Transverse approach for paravertebral block.
This page intentionally left blank
Erector Spinae Plane 
Block
Vicente Roqués-Escolar and Mauricio Forero  34
PERSPECTIVE
The ESPB was first described by Forero et al in 2017, and 
was initially applied in the management of thoracic neuro­
pathic pain. Actually, there are more than 100 reports pub­
lished, most of which demonstrated efficacy for acute and 
chronic thoracoabdominal pain syndromes.
The ESPB is an interfacial plane block whereby local 
anesthetic is injected within a plane beneath the erector 
spinae muscle, to achieve multimodal analgesia for thoracic 
or abdominal surgery. Its analgesic effect appears to be the 
result of local anesthetic diffusion into the paravertebral 
space, affecting both the dorsal and ventral ramus of the 
thoracic spinal nerves.
Clinical results indicate that local anesthetic injected over 
the transverse process and beneath the erector spinae muscle 
spreads cranial and caudal to achieve multiple vertebral levels 
and reaches the paravertebral space to anesthetize dorsal and 
ventral ramus as well as the rami communicantes, which 
supply the sympathetic chain. The exact pathway by which the 
local anesthetic reaches the spinal nerves is still undefined. 
Between the erector spinae plane and paravertebral space, we 
can find a series of anatomical structures that conceptually are 
given the name of “intertransverse connective tissue complex”. 
This complex is a layer composed of multiple separate struc­
tures (intertransverse and costotransverse ligaments, levator 
costarum, rotator costarum, external intercostal muscles, and 
fat). As such, there may well be perforations that allow local 
anesthetic to diffuse through into the paravertebral space.
KEY POINTS
•	 The erector spinae plane block (ESPB) is actually used 
for acute and chronic thoracoabdominal pain syn­
dromes, although its indication has been described 
for the treatment of pain in other locations.
•	 It is advisable to use a high frequency transducer 
(7–12 MHz).
•	 Clear identification of the transverse process is man­
datory prior to infiltration or catheter insertion.
•	 Injection volumes ranging from 20–40 mL of a long-
lasting local anesthetic are commonly used.
•	 Local anesthetic injected over the transverse process 
and beneath the erector spinae muscle spreads 
cranial and caudal to achieve multiple vertebral 
levels and reaches the paravertebral space.
Indications
Spine region
Indications
High Thoracic
T2 or T3
Chronic shoulder pain syndrome
Postsurgical shoulder pain
Mid Thoracic
T4 to T6
Rib fracture (midpoint of level of ribs 
fracture)
Open thoracotomy and VATS 
lobectomy (T5)
Rescue after TE failure for thoracic 
surgery (T5)
Cardiac surgery-sternotomy (T5)
Breast surgery with axillary lymph node 
dissections (T3)
Chronic postherpetic neuralgia (level of 
segment involved)
Chronic postthoracotomy pain (level of 
segments involved)
Metastatic ribs cancer (level of segments 
involved)
Low Thoracic
T7 to T12
Nephrectomies (T8)
Hysterectomies (T10)
Laparoscopic ventral hernia repair with 
mesh (T7)
Laparotomies ( T7)
Chronic postherpetic neuralgia (level of 
segment involved)
Chronic abdominal pain syndrome (T7 to 
T10)
Chronic pelvic pain syndrome (T10)
Lumbar (L4)
Vertebral surgery (midpoint of levels 
involved)
Postsurgical hip replacement pain 
management (L4)
TE, Thoracic epidural anesthesia; VATS, video assisted thoracoscopic 
surgery.
Pharmacologic Choice. Long acting local anesthetics 
(bupivacaine, levobupivacaine, or ropivacaine) are used at 
concentrations of 0.5% (unilateral) or 0.25% (bilateral), 
with 2.5 µg/cc of epinephrine. Further studies are necessary 
to determine the optimal dosing of both single-shot and 
continuous techniques.
The exact volume and concentration of local anesthetic 
to be used in ESPB is not well established. Injection volumes 
ranging from 20–40 mL are commonly used.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
222
Following the administration of 20 mL initial bolus, a 
catheter can be inserted for long lasting analgesia. For uni­
lateral infusions the local anesthetic recommended is bupi­
vacaine 0.2% and for bilateral infusions is 0.125%, at a rate 
between 8–12 mL per catheter per hour. Usually 12 mL per 
hour provides sensory block to around 6 spinal levels. As 
pressure during injections may be an important factor for 
its effectiveness, PCA (patient controlled analgesia) pro­
grammed intermittent boluses have been suggested as a 
better option than continuous infusions.
Anatomy. The back plays a major role in how the entire 
body functions. By virtue of its attachments to the vertebral 
column, the back integrates the activity of the lower limbs, 
upper limbs, spine, and pelvis.
The muscles of this region can be easily divided into two 
major groups:
•	 The extrinsic back muscles functionally belong to 
the upper limbs, but are situated on the posterior 
aspect of the trunk also known as “immigrant” 
muscles (trapezius, rhomboid, latissimus dorsi, and 
serratos posterior inferior muscles) (Fig. 34.1A).
•	 The intrinsic back muscles act specifically on the 
vertebral column. The erector spinae muscle is 
included in this group (Fig. 34.1B).
The ESPB targets the erector spinae plane, which lies in the 
chest wall between the anterior surface of the erector spinae 
muscles and the posterior surface of the spinal transverse 
processes.
The erector spinae are not just one muscle, but a bundle 
of muscles and tendons. Actually, the erector spinae muscle 
consists of three columns of muscles (the iliocostalis, lon­
gissimus, and spinalis muscles) each running parallel on 
either outer side of the vertebral column. This muscular 
column is encased in a retinaculum (a complex sheet of 
blended aponeurosis and fascia) that extends from the 
sacrum to the skull base (Fig. 34.2A,B).
Each spinal nerve splits into a dorsal and ventral ramus 
as it exits from the intervertebral foramen. The dorsal 
ramus travels posteriorly through the costotransverse 
process and gets into the erector spinae muscle. The ventral 
ramus travels laterally as the intercostal nerve, running 
deep to the internal intercostal membrane.
Position. Depending on the operator’s and patient’s comfort, 
sitting, lateral decubitus, or a prone position is chosen.
Ultrasound guided injection technique. A high-frequency 
linear transducer (7–12 MHz) is used. For high BMI  (body 
mass index; person’s weight in kilograms divided by his or 
her height in meters squared) or low thoracic and lumbar 
region a curvilinear transducer (2–6 MHz) is advised.
Initially, place the probe in transverse orientation over 
the spinous process in the midline, and transverse process 
laterally (axial view). The tip of the transverse process, 
costotransverse joint, and rib are well-defined as a hyper­
echoic structure superficial and lateral to the lamina. 
This axial view allows marking our target (transverse 
process tip) over the skin of the patient to posteriorly 
rotate the transducer in a cranial-caudal orientation 
(sagittal-paramedian view). It is important to keep the 
tip of the target transverse process on the middle of the 
ultrasound screen.
As the transducer moves lateral or medial, the acoustic 
shadows generated by the costotransverse joint, rib, or 
lamina respectively can be observed. Clear identification 
of the transverse process is mandatory prior to infiltration 
or catheter insertion. The transverse process will be more 
superficial, blunter, and wider, while the rib will be deeper, 
rounder, and thinner (Fig. 34.3).
Cranial-caudal in-plane approach is preferred to facili­
tate diffusion of local anesthetic. The needle insertion 
point is 1 to 1.5 cm away from the ultrasound probe. Once 
the tip of the needle approaches the transverse process in 
its distal end, hydrodissection of normal saline is used to 
ensure spread anterior to the anterior fascia of erector 
muscle and posterior to the transverse process. Following 
confirmation of appropriate cranial-caudal spread, the 
total volume of local anesthetic is deposited (Fig. 34.4).
Fig. 34.1  ​(A) The extrinsic back muscles: trapezius, rhomboid major and minor, latissimus dorsi and serratus posterior inferior muscles. 
(B) The intrinsic back muscles: longissimus, spinalis, and iliocostalis muscles and thoracolumbar fascia.
223
Erector Spinae Plane Block
Fig. 34.2  ​(A) Sagittal paramedian cross section of posterior wall of thorax. (B) Axial cross section at T4 level.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
224
Fig. 34.3  ​Sonoanatomy of anatomical structures in sagittal paramedian scanning for erector 
spinae plane block.
225
Erector Spinae Plane Block
Fig. 34.3—cont’d
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
226
Fig. 34.4  ​In-plane approach, from cranial-caudal in sagittal paramedian view.
POTENTIAL COMPLICATIONS
No complications have been reported, although the high 
volumes and doses of local anesthetic used are associated 
with high plasma levels that could facilitate local anesthetic 
toxicity.
PEARLS
•	 When scanning you can find the transverse process 
tip moving either from medial to lateral (from 
lamina to transverse process) or from lateral to 
medial (from rib to transverse process). It is 
probably easier moving from lamina, which is a flat 
and deeper bony structure to lateral, where the 
transverse process will be identified clearly as more 
superficial bony flat structure.
•	 The needle must be aligned with the axis of the 
ultrasound probe. Place the target transverse process 
in the middle of the ultrasound screen, then make 
sure that your needle entry point is 1–1.5 cm away 
from the ultrasound to avoid a steep angle of the 
needle.
•	 The ESP block’s success fully depends on the 
appropriate spread of the local anesthetic during the 
injection. Careful and detailed hydrodissection 
ensures that the injectable is located between the 
most anterior fascia layer of the erector muscle and 
the transverse process. After appropriate hydrodis­
section using low volumes as 5 mL of normal saline, 
the spread must be seen in a cranial and caudal 
direction in at least three spinal levels. After confir­
mation of appropriate spread, the total of injectable 
must be delivered in aliquots of 3 mL following 
safety maneuvers during injection to avoid intravas­
cular depositions.
•	 If a catheter is inserted, we recommend placing it 
after an initial single shot bolus (usually 20 mL) to 
open up the space.
e1
Keywords: chronic pain treatment, postoperative pain 
treatment, regional anesthesia, thoracoabdominal pain.
Abstract: The ESPB (erector spinae plane block) is an 
interfascial plane block whereby local anesthetic is injected 
over the transverse process and beneath the erector spinae 
muscle, to achieve multimodal analgesia for thoracic or 
abdominal surgery. Clinical results indicate that local 
anesthetic  spreads cranial and caudal to achieve multiple 
vertebral levels and reaches the paravertebral space to 
anesthetize dorsal and ventral ramus as well as the rami 
communicants which supply the sympathetic chain. 
Rectus Sheath Block 
and Catheter in Adults
Jacob Ezell, Junaid Mukhdomi, Samantha Stamper 
and John Seif35
SONOANATOMY
The rectus abdominis muscle receives sensorimotor inner­
vation through thoracolumbar spinal segmental nerves 
from spinal levels T7–L1. These nerves travel in the fascial 
plane between the internal oblique and the transversus 
abdominis muscles to the anterior abdominal wall.
At the lateral border of the rectus abdominis, the apo­
neuroses of the external oblique, internal oblique, and 
transversus abdominis muscle combine to form the linea 
semilunaris. At this lateral aspect, the thoracolumbar spinal 
segmental nerves pierce through the rectus abdominis 
muscle and create a nerve plexus to provide motor and 
sensation to the rectus abdominis muscles (Fig. 35.1). The 
common aponeurosis splits into an anterior and posterior 
aponeurosis that encase the rectus abdominis muscle and 
nerve plexus in a sheath.
The rectus sheath is composed of an anterior and poste­
rior aponeurosis that bind the rectus abdominis muscle and 
form the rectus sheath. At midline, the anterior and posterior 
aponeuroses of the right and left rectus abdominis muscles 
combine to form the linea alba, a thick fibrous band of fascia. 
The thoracolumbar spinal nerves do not cross the linea alba; 
therefore a rectus sheath block requires a bilateral block or 
two separate catheters to be performed.
It is important to note the deep epigastric artery pro­
vides blood supply to the rectus abdominis muscle and 
enters the muscle body at the level of the arcuate ligament. 
To avoid this, the block should always be performed at or 
above the level of the umbilicus. Beneath the rectus sheath 
the peritoneal cavity can be appreciated with the presence 
of abdominal contents, which can usually be observed 
during the block.
TECHNIQUE
With the patient in a supine position, a high-frequency, 
linear ultrasound probe is placed in a transverse position just 
lateral to the umbilicus (Fig. 35.2). The lens-shaped rectus 
abdominis muscle is identified below the ultrasound trans­
ducer with attention to identify and avoid the deep epigastric 
artery during the procedure (Fig. 35.3). The authors recom­
mend sliding the probe lateral from this position to identify 
the linea semilunaris. This location allows for a more direct 
visualization of the posterior rectus sheath and a more 
superficial access to the posterior fascial plane (Fig. 35.4). 
Direct identification of the intercostal nerves is not required 
in order to complete a successful rectus sheath block.
In this position, the block needle is inserted in plane 
from the lateral side of the transducer at a 45-degree angle, 
through the anterior abdominal fascia and rectus abdomi­
nis muscle body. When the needle tip is near to the poste­
rior rectus sheath, an aspiration test followed by injection 
of a small amount of local anesthetic or saline can elucidate 
the exact location of the needle tip. For placement of cath­
eters, the authors recommend using normal saline for this 
step in order to conserve local anesthetic for ultrasound 
visualization of local anesthetic spread through the nerve 
catheter after placement. If intramuscular, the needle is 
carefully advanced 1–2 mm followed by an aspiration test 
and injection until a satisfactory position is obtained.
Once confirmed, 10–20 mL of local anesthetic is injected 
after aspiration. During injection, advancement of the 
needle under direct ultrasound visualization separates the 
rectus abdominis from the posterior fascial sheath, to 
create a lens-shaped space and ensure coverage of intercos­
tal nerves, while avoiding displacement of the needle as the 
rectus abdominis muscle is separated from the posterior 
fascial sheath. The authors recommend optimizing this 
space prior to attempting catheter insertion.
Upon placement of a catheter, a negative aspiration, injec­
tion of local anesthetic through the catheter, and visualiza­
tion of an expanding cavity confirms correct placement.
Key Points
•	 A high-frequency transducer is preferred for this 
block.
•	 The rectus sheath block provides periumbilical 
somatic analgesia from the levels T9–T11 and is used 
for surgeries involving a periumbilical incision.
•	 The block is performed at or slightly above the level 
of the umbilicus to avoid injury to the deep epigastric 
artery.
•	 Direct visualization of the nerves is not required to 
perform a successful rectus sheath nerve block; 
instead, identification of the fascial plane is 
paramount.
•	 The branches of the thoracolumbar nerves do not 
cross midline; therefore in order to provide a bilat­
eral block, a right and left rectus abdominis block is 
performed.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
228
Fig. 35.1  ​A representation of the sensory distribution of the T9–T11 thoracolumbar spinal nerves in the rectus abdominis muscle.
Fig. 35.2  ​A depiction of the preferred orientation to perform a rectus sheath block.
229
Rectus Sheath Block and Catheter in Adults
Fig. 35.3  ​A coronal section showing the path the thoracoabdominal nerves travel to the rectus abdominis muscle. Next to it is an illustration 
of an ultrasound image at the level of the umbilicus and the anterior and posterior rectus sheath components encasing the muscle.
Fig. 35.4  ​An ultrasound image showing an ideal image to perform a successful block.
PEARLS
•	 The block needle should be inserted from the lateral 
side of the transducer at a 45-degree angle or shallower 
in order to avoid penetration through the peritoneum.
•	 Normal saline should be used for placement of 
rectus sheath catheters in order to conserve local 
anesthetic for direct ultrasound visualization 
through the catheter when placed.
•	 Once proper needle insertion is observed under 
ultrasound (rectus abdominis separating from 
posterior rectus sheath), 10–20 mL of local anes­
thetic can be injected after a negative aspiration.
•	 During injection, advancement of the needle into 
the newly formed lens-shaped space using direct 
ultrasound visualization separates the rectus 
abdominis from the posterior fascial sheath to 
ensure coverage of the intercostal nerves.
This page intentionally left blank
e1
Keywords: rectus sheath block; ultrasound nerve block; 
periumbilical surgery
Transversus Abdominis 
Plane Block (Classic 
Approach)
Loran Mounir-Soliman36
RELEVANT ANATOMY
The ventral rami of the lower six thoracic nerves (T7 to L1) 
emerge through the intervertebral foraminae to pass 
through the corresponding intercostal spaces, and enter a 
fascial plane between the transversus abdominis and the 
internal oblique muscles of the abdominal muscular wall 
(known as the TAP) accompanied by blood vessels. They 
follow the curvilinear course of this neurovascular plane to 
reach the anterior abdominal wall as far as the semilunar 
line at the lateral border of the rectus abdominis muscle 
(Fig. 36.1).
The abdominal wall consists of three muscle layers: the 
external oblique, the internal oblique, and the transversus 
abdominis muscles and their associated fascial sheaths. The 
three muscles, as well as the parietal peritoneum, are inner­
vated by the ipsilateral ventral rami of T7 to L1. The exter­
nal oblique and the anterior lamella of the internal oblique 
aponeurosis pass anteriorly to the rectus muscle, forming 
the anterior rectus sheath. The aponeuroses from the pos­
terior lamella of the internal oblique muscle and the trans­
versus abdominis muscle pass posteriorly to the rectus 
muscle, forming the posterior layer of the sheath. At this 
point, the ventral rami of the lower thoracic nerves are 
located between the posterior rectus sheath and the rectus 
muscle. They run medially within the sheath before perfo­
rating the muscle anteriorly, forming the anterior cutane­
Key Points
•	 The transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block is a 
tissue plane block depending on adequate spread of 
local anesthetics through the plane—accordingly a 
minimum volume of 20 mL is usually needed for 
effective block.
•	 Frequent, small, incremental injections of saline 
while advancing the needle can identify the progress 
of the needle tip through the various tissue planes.
•	 When performed appropriately, the TAP block is very 
safe and devoid of major complications and can be 
placed safely in anesthetized patients.
•	 For midline incisions, bilateral blocks are needed; the 
rectus sheath block may be considered as an 
alternative.
ous branches. Along their course through the TAP, the 
lower thoracic spinal nerves give origin to the lateral cuta­
neous branches posterior to the midaxillary line. Within 
the TAP, the nerves communicate with each other, forming 
neural plexuses in close proximity to the vessels in this 
neurovascular plane.
TECHNIQUE
A linear, high-frequency probe (8–12 MHz) is usually 
used for optimal identification of the different muscle 
layers and their corresponding fascial sheaths. However, a 
curvilinear, lower-frequency probe (2–5 MHz) may be 
used in obese patients. The block can be performed in the 
supine or lateral position, with the side to be blocked 
upwards, and a wedge beneath the lower side in order to 
stretch the flank on the upper side. The lower costal 
margin and the iliac crest are identified, and the probe is 
placed in a transverse orientation between the two bony 
landmarks at the midaxillary line. The probe is moved 
both cephalad and caudad to get the best view of the three 
muscles. Scanning too medially may only show two 
muscle layers because the external oblique muscle forms 
an aponeurosis; also, scanning more posteriorly may 
encounter the large latissimus dorsi muscle, which may 
confuse the view of the muscles.
The fascial layers appear as hyperechoic structures under 
ultrasound, giving the muscles their characteristic multiple 
striations.
A blunt needle is introduced from the posterior edge of 
the probe with the in-plane technique (parallel to the ultra­
sound beam) and advanced in a medial anterior direction 
through the skin, subcutaneous fat, and external and inter­
nal oblique muscles to reach the interfascial layer between 
the internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles 
(TAP). The endpoint of the needle should be superficial to 
the transversus abdominis muscle. Deeper to this muscle, 
there is a layer of preperitoneal fat separating it from the 
peritoneum and the bowels, which are often identified by 
their peristaltic movements. A blunt needle is preferred to 
appreciate the tactile “pop” when crossing each fascial layer. 
The intramuscular location of the needle within the inter­
nal oblique muscle is identified by retraction of the needle 
when it is released, as well as swelling of the muscle with 
injection instead of separation from the transversus 
abdominis.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
232
INDICATIONS
•	 The TAP block can potentially provide unilateral 
analgesia to the skin, muscles, and parietal perito­
neum of the anterior abdominal wall, although the 
extent of the block has been reported to be variable 
in different studies.
Fig. 36.1  Ultrasound still of anatomy of TAP block.
•	 Bilateral blocks have been used for midline and 
transverse incisions.
•	 Classical TAP has been reported to provide adequate 
analgesia following caesarian section, hysterectomy, 
hernia repair, kidney transplant, colostomy closure, 
and multiple other lower abdominal surgeries.
•	 Both single-shot and continuous catheters have been 
used successfully.
•	 The TAP block has been used for patients with 
chronic abdominal pain to identify somatic pain 
originating from the abdominal muscular wall and 
the parietal peritoneum versus visceral pain, which 
is transmitted via sympathetic innervation instead.
PEARLS
•	 Placement of the needle as far posteriorly as possible 
(by the midaxillary line or behind) has the theoreti­
cal advantage of blocking the lateral cutaneous 
branches before they exit the TAP.
•	 The internal oblique muscle is usually identified as the 
largest muscle among the three abdominal muscles.
•	 The transversus abdominis muscle sometimes shows 
as a hypoechoic band that can be confused with the 
underlying preperitoneal fatty layer. The peristaltic 
movements of the bowels within the preperitoneal 
fatty layer can identify it from the muscular layer.
•	 An out-of-plane technique can be more suitable in 
obese patients when the needle path is not easily seen.
37
Subcostal Transversus 
Abdominal Plane Block
Ehab Farag
SONOANATOMY
There are four paired muscles of the anterolateral abdomi­
nal wall: the anterior rectus abdominis muscles and, from 
deep to superficial, the three lateral muscles: transversus 
abdominis, internal oblique, and external oblique muscles. 
It is only in the lateral abdomen that the three fleshy muscle 
bellies overlie one another because medially they become 
an aponeurosis. Under ultrasound the rectus abdominis 
can be easily identified, and by moving laterally, the trans­
versus abdominis muscle will appear beneath the rectus 
abdominis muscle. The transversus abdominis has two key 
features on ultrasound imaging. It is usually darker (more 
hypoechoic) than other muscles, and it passes beneath the 
rectus abdominis muscle (Fig. 37.1).
Key Points
•	 The subcostal transversus abdominal plane (TAP) 
approach is very useful for supraumbilical 
procedures.
•	 The most cephalad sensory dermatomal spread is T8.
•	 The bilateral continuous catheter infusion can be 
used in the upper abdominal surgeries where epidu­
ral analgesia is contraindicated or failed.
•	 The key for the success of this technique is the 
proper identification of the fascial plane between 
the transversus abdominis and rectus abdominis 
muscles.
Medial
Lateral
Rectus
abdominis
Transverse
abdominis
Internal oblique
External oblique
Transverse
abdominis
T10 nerve
T11 nerve
T12 nerve
Internal oblique
aponeurosis (cut)
Internal
oblique
External
oblique
needle and
injection site
Fig. 37.1  Anatomy of anterior abdominal wall.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
234
TECHNIQUE
The linear ultrasound probe will be placed over the 
anterior abdominal wall immediately inferior and par­
allel to the costal margin. The rectus abdominis muscle 
will be identified medially, and then the probe will be 
moved laterally until the transversus abdominis muscles 
are also identified. Further lateral movement of the 
ultrasound probe will demonstrate the lateral abdomi­
nal wall muscles (external and internal obliques and 
transverse abdominis muscles) to provide further con­
firmation of sonographic anatomy. Using the in-plane 
approach, the needle will be inserted from the postero­
lateral position and advanced anteromedially until its 
tip is in the fascial plane between the rectus abdominis 
and transverse abdominis muscles. The author usually 
injects 20 mL of ropivacaine 0.5% in each side of the 
bilateral block (Figs. 37.2–37.4).
INDICATION
•	 Used in supraumbilical procedures.
•	 Bilateral continuous subcostal TAP can be used in 
lieu of epidural analgesia for midline supraumbilical 
procedures.
PEARLS
•	 When performing the procedure on the right side, 
care should be taken not to injure the liver, especially 
in patients with hepatomegaly or a thin patient.
•	 For the single-shot technique, the author prefers to 
use 22-gauge needles; however, in the continuous 
catheter technique, the author inserts the catheter 
via a 17- to 18-gauge Tuohy needle.
Fig. 37.2  Position of the patient and the ultrasound machine. Note the probe position is immediately inferior and parallel to the costal 
margin. Moving the probe laterally will visualize the rectus abdominis and transverse abdominis muscles.
235
Subcostal Transversus Abdominal Plane Block
needle and
injection site
Medial
Lateral
Rectus
abdominis
Transverse 
  abdominis
Internal oblique
External oblique
Transverse abdominis
Internal oblique
External oblique
Fig. 37.3  In-plane technique for the subcostal TAP block. The needle direction is from lateral to medial.
Local anesthetic (LA)
muscle
Fig. 37.4  Ultrasound image of subcostal TAP block with needle.
This page intentionally left blank
38
Quadratus
Lumborum Block
Hesham Elsharkawy and Ehab Farag
SONOANATOMY
The ultrasound probe is placed in the posterior axillary 
line between the iliac crest and the costal margin 
(Fig. 38.1). The transversalis fascia (TF) covers the peri­
toneal surface of the transversus abdominis muscle 
and continues posteromedially covering the anterior 
side of the investing fascia of both the quadratus lumbo­
rum (QL) and psoas major (PM) muscles. The QL muscle 
is generally visualized as hypoechoic relative to the 
hyperechoic PM muscle located anteromedial to the QL 
muscle.
The QL muscle surrounded by the thoracolumbar fascia 
(TLF) is the target of the injection, not the muscle itself. 
The three-layered model of TLF is comprised of anterior, 
middle, and posterior layers. The posterior layer surrounds 
the erector spinae muscles; the middle-layer of the TLF 
passes between the erector spinae muscles and the QL 
muscle; and the anterior layer is thin and lies anterior to 
both the QL and PM muscles. The anterior layer of the 
TLF turns posterior between the QL and the psoas and 
attaches to the anterior aspect of each transverse process 
(Fig. 38.2).
At the L3–L4 level, the transverse process of the third or 
fourth lumbar vertebrae, erector spinae muscle, PM muscle, 
and the QL muscle can be identified as the so-called 
“Shamrock sign”.
The external oblique muscle abuts the latissimus dorsi 
muscle. The internal oblique, with the transversus abdomi­
nis muscles, forms the aponeurosis of the middle thoraco­
lumbar fascia (lateral raphe) posterior to the QL muscle 
(Fig. 38.2).
Key Points
•	 Quadratus lumborum (QL) block is a novel approach 
for managing postoperative pain in patients under­
going abdominal and hip surgeries.
•	 The sensory dermatomal coverage of the QL block 
can extend from T7 to L2.
•	 There is currently no general consensus on the 
mechanism of action of QL blockade.
•	 This is a “tissue plane” block and thus requires a 
large volume of local anesthetic to obtain a reliable 
block.
Fig. 38.1  Patient in the lateral decubitus position for QL Blocks.
TECHNIQUES (FIG. 38.3–38.8)
•	 Lateral QL (Previously referred as QL 1 block) The 
needle can be directed from anterior to posterior 
towards the junction of tapered transversus abdomi­
nis muscle and QL muscle; local anesthetic (LA) will 
then be deposited in the lateral border of QL muscle 
at the junction of the transversalis fascia and 
penetrate the aponeurotic attachment of the 
transversus abdominis muscle (lateral raphe) 
(Fig. 38.3–38.4). 
•	 Posterior (Previously referred as QL 2 block) By 
advancing the needle more posteriorly, local 
anesthetic can be deposited posterior to the lateral 
edge of the QL muscle, between the QL muscle and 
the erector spinae and latissimus dorsi muscles 
(Fig. 38.3–38.4).
•	 Anterior (Previously referred as transmuscular, QL 3 
block) The needle can be advanced either posteri­
orly through the erector spinae muscle, or anteriorly 
through the latissimus dorsi muscle, and then 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
238
Fig. 38.2  ​A schematic 
illustration of cross section 
showing the quadratus 
lumborum muscle with the 
different layers of the 
thoracolumbar fascia. (three 
layers model).
Fig. 38.3  ​A schematic illustration showing the different sites of injection of local anesthetics in relation to the quadratus lumborum 
muscle.
through the muscle (transmuscular approach) to 
deposit the local anesthetic in the fascial plane 
between the QL and PM muscles (Fig. 38.3–38.4).
•	 The subcostal (Paramedian oblique sagittal) The 
ultrasound transducer is positioned lateral to the 
lumbar spinous process at the L1–L2 level. Using 
a curvilinear transducer with the orientation 
marker of the ultrasound directed cranially, the 
probe is slightly tilted medially. The needle is 
advanced in the plane with ultrasound in a 
caudal to cephalad direction, through the 
latissimus dorsi, and QL muscles; then LA is 
deposited anterior to the QL muscle, between 
the QL muscle and the anterior layer of the 
thoracolumbar fascia (ATLF)/transversalis fascia, 
observing spread in cephalad direction close to 
239
Quadratus Lumborum Block
VB
ES
TP
QL
PM
TA
IO
EO
LD
Lateral
Medial
Anterior
Posterior
Lateral
Fig. 38.4  ​Ultrasound still showing the different sites of injection 
in relation to the Quadratus Lumborum muscle. EO, External 
Oblique; IO, Internal oblique; TA, Transversus Abdominus; LD, 
Latissimus Dorsi; QL, Quadratus Lumborum; PM, Psoas Major; 
VB, Vertebral body; TP, Transverse process; ES, Erectror Spinae.
Fig. 38.5  ​Schematic representation of the subcostal approach 
the last rib, a lunar shaped distribution of local 
anesthetic with anterior displacement of the 
ATLF (Fig. 38.5–38.6).
•	 The suprailiac anterior Above the iliac crest a 
curvilinear transducer is placed in a transverse 
orientation with slight medial and caudal angula­
tion to obtain a transverse oblique view at the 
L5 transverse process. The ultrasound probe is 
further tilted so the lateral end of the ultrasound 
probe is more cranial than the medial side of the 
probe to avoid the acoustic shadow of the iliac 
crest. The needle is advanced in-plane in a lateral-
to-medial direction, through the latissimus dorsi 
and QL muscle, to position the tip between the QL 
and psoas major muscles close to the transverse 
process. Spread is deemed appropriate when the 
injectant is seen between QL and PM muscles and 
tracked medially towards the L5 transverse process 
(Fig. 38.7–38.8). This approach blocks T10 to L3 
nerve territories and has clinical utility for analge­
sia in hip surgery. (Fig. 38.7–38.8).
Local anesthetic
(LA)
A
SPI
B
LD
QL
LA
Rib
Catheter
PM
Cranial 
Caudal
Fig. 38.6  ​Ultrasound picture of the local anesthetics spread and 
catheter placement through the subcostal approach. (A) Between 
the Quadratus Lumborum and Thoracolumbar fascia (B) Between 
the Quadratus Lumborum and psoas major SPI, serratus 
posterior inferior; LD, Latissimus Dorsi; QL, Quadratus 
Lumborum; LA, Local Anesthetics; PM, Psoas Major 
Fig. 38.7  Schematic representation of the local anesthetic site 
through the Suprailiac Anterior approach.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
240
LDA
QL
PM
L5 TP
ES
Antero lateral and cranial 
Postero medial and caudal 
LA
Fig. 38.8  Ultrasound picture of the local anesthetic spread 
through the Suprailiac Anterior approach. L 5 TP, Acoustic 
shadow; QL, Quadratus Lumborum; PM, Psoas Major; LDA, 
Latissimus Dorsi Aponeurosis; ES, Erector Spinae; LA, Local 
Anesthetics.
PEARLS
•	 The QL muscle is attached to the transverse process, 
which once identified provides orientation for the 
operator.
•	 If the QL muscle is small and difficult to delineate, 
the ipsilateral hip joint is abducted and laterally 
flexed towards the same side of the block to contract 
the QL muscle; this temporarily thickens the QL 
muscle.
•	 While performing the block especially with the 
subcostal approach, it is common to visualize the 
lower pole of the kidney and lower lobe of the liver 
and spleen; great caution should be taken to avoid 
any visceral injury.
•	 The QL muscle acts like a bed for the kidney, which 
helps to identify the QL muscle.
•	 Apply color Doppler before insertion of the needle to 
detect the abdominal branches of the lumbar arteries 
on the posterior aspect of the quadratus lumborum 
muscle or any other vessels close to the transverse 
process, and on the intended track of the needle.
•	 The tactile feedback (as pops) when encountering 
different fascial planes is not accurate in QL blocks 
due to the complexity of the anatomical planes, 
multilayered components of the TLF muscle, and the 
approach angle; therefore the visual confirmation 
using ultrasound and hydrodissection should be used.
•	 With the anterior QL block, the local anesthetic is 
deposited in the plane between the QL and psoas 
major muscle. Both during administration of and 
subsequent to administration of the local anesthetic 
solution, the transducer should be moved from the 
transverse to the longitudinal position. With the 
curvilinear probe in the longitudinal position, the 
local anesthetic can be seen to spread cephalad from 
the iliac crest to the 12th rib.
•	 The usual initial dose is 0.3 mL/kg of ropivacaine 
0.2%. However, higher doses up to 0.6 mL/kg can 
cover more dermatomes.
e1
Keywords: Quadratus Lumburom, ThoracoLumbar Fascia, 
Abdominal Wall, Fascial Plane blocks.
Neuraxial Blocks
Section 
 7
This page intentionally left blank
Ultrasound-Assisted 
Neuraxial Blocks
Loran Mounir-Soliman39
RELEVANT SONOANATOMY OF 
THE SPINE
There are a couple of challenges for ultrasound imaging of 
the spine and the neuraxial structures. The depth of the 
spine makes it less than optimal for the ultrasound beams to 
produce higher-resolution images. Also, the osseous struc­
ture of the laminae and articular processes conceal the 
underlying neuraxial structures of interest to perform the 
blocks. Accordingly, it is important to have a visual apprecia­
tion of the spine outline when scanning for neuraxial blocks.
In general, scanning the vertebrae demonstrates three 
hyperechoic levels: the spinous process, the lamina, and the 
articular facet joint with the transverse process.
The spinous processes reflect the most superficial hyper­
echoic shadow closest to the skin. Careful scanning, cepha­
lad and caudad to the spinous process, reveals an acoustic 
window representing the interspinous space occupied with 
the less echogenic interspinous ligaments. Careful examina­
tion of the deeper layer of the ligamentous structure shows 
the ligamentum flavum as a slightly more hyperechoic layer 
separated from another hyperechoic layer—the posterior 
dura—by the epidural space. The spinal canal underneath 
represents the next anechoic layer deeper to the posterior 
dura. On the deeper side of the spinal canal (anterior), the 
anterior dura with the postlongitudinal ligament form a 
hyperechoic structure called the anterior complex.
With the aforementioned echogenic characteristics of the 
neuraxial structures in mind, scanning the different levels 
of the spine leads to different views. These views also depend 
on the scanning plane and orientation of the ultrasound 
beam. These are the main planes for scanning the spine:
•	 Median sagittal plane: A longitudinal scan along 
the midline where the beam of the ultrasound is 
parallel to the long axis of the spine on top of the 
spinous processes (unless the spine is scoliotic).
•	 Paramedian sagittal plane: A longitudinal scan 
parallel to the long axis of the spine but off 
the midline. The beams are usually on top of 
the transverse processes or the laminae, with the 
articular joints (facets) between the adjacent spines.
•	 Paramedian sagittal oblique plane: Another 
longitudinal plane that is similar to the paramedian 
sagittal plane with the probe tilted medially to direct 
the beams toward midline. The ultrasound beams 
usually travel across the laminae with the interverte­
bral foraminae in between. Access to the ligaments, 
dura, and spinal canal are usually accessed with the 
beam within the interlaminar windows.
•	 Transverse axial view: A transverse view where the 
beam of the ultrasound is perpendicular to the long 
axis of the spine. With this orientation, the ultra­
sound probe can be on top of the vertebra where 
the beams cross the spinous process, lamina, and 
transverse process. If the beam is steered cephalad 
or caudad by sliding the probe or tilting it, an 
interspinous (acoustic) window is obtained. The 
ligaments, epidural space, and spinal canal can be 
visualized through this window.
TECHNIQUE
Except for the caudal block, the neuraxial scanning requires 
a low-frequency (2–5 MHz) curvilinear probe to see the 
depth of the target structures. In addition to the ability to 
scan deeper structures, the curved probe provides a divergent 
beam, giving a wider field of vision and helping to scan the 
different anatomic structures in a single view compared with 
the limited field of vision produced by the linear probe. The 
disadvantage of the curved probe is a lack of spatial resolution 
at deeper levels, making viewing the needle a challenge when 
performing the block. Scanning the spine for procedures can 
Key Points
•	 Prepuncture ultrasound scanning is helpful to deter­
mine the midline, the depth from the skin, the 
desired level, and rotation of the spine.
•	 There are limited outcome data on the real-time 
guidance with ultrasound for neuraxial blocks.
•	 The available evidence suggests that the use of ultra­
sound may improve the success rate from the first 
attempt, reduce the number of attempts, and 
improve patient comfort.
•	 The use of ultrasound for epidural access is a techni­
cally advanced procedure. It requires adequate expe­
rience with ultrasound scanning and ultrasound 
guidance of the needle at deep levels with a less-
than-optimal angle of incidence.
•	 Thorough understanding of the neuraxial anatomy 
and conceptual visualization of the different echo­
genic structures are necessary for ultrasound scanning 
of the epidural space.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
244
be performed in sitting, lateral, and prone positions depend­
ing on the level of the procedure to be performed.
CAUDAL EPIDURAL BLOCK
Because the sacral hiatus is a relatively superficial structure, 
a high-frequency linear probe (6–13 MHz) is usually used 
for caudal scanning. The block is performed in the prone 
position with a pillow under the pelvis. The ultrasound 
probe is placed in a transverse orientation (axial scan) to 
scan the sacral cornua as two hyperechoic, reversed 
U-shaped structures. The sacrococcygeal ligament con­
necting both cornua, forming the superficial boundary of 
the sacral hiatus, appears as a hyperechoic band. The ante­
rior boundary of the sacral canal is formed by the posterior 
surface of the sacrum, which appears as another hypere­
choic linear structure anterior (deep) to the sacrococcygeal 
ligament. The sacral hiatus appears as a hypoechoic space 
between these two described hyperechoic lines. With this 
view, the needle can be introduced in the middle of the 
probe, perpendicular to the ultrasound beams, out of the 
plane approach, and targeting the sacral hiatus (Fig. 39.1).
With the sacral hiatus and the sacrococcygeal ligament 
identified, the ultrasound probe can be rotated 90 degrees 
to the median sagittal plane scan. A long-axis view of the 
sacrococcygeal ligament and the sacral bony surface 
are reidentified with the sacral hiatus between them. 
The needle is introduced with an in-plane approach from 
the caudal end of the probe to be able to visualize the whole 
length of the needle. Crossing the tip of the needle into the 
sacrococcygeal membrane into the sacral canal is associated 
with a “pop” feeling, especially when using a blunt needle. 
The sacral bony structure impedes the ultrasound beams, 
making it hard to see the tip of the needle or the spread of 
the injection in the sacral canal (Figs. 39.2–39.4).
Sacral hiatus
Sacral cornua
Sacrum
Ischial spine
Coccyx
Sac
acrum
Sacral cornua
Sacral canal
Sacrococcygeal
membrane
Needle
Local
anesthetic
ua
al
ygeal
Fig. 39.1  Transverse approach to the caudal block. The needle is introduced in out-of-plane direction in the middle of the probe targeting 
the sacral hiatus.
245
Ultrasound-Assisted Neuraxial Blocks
L2
L1
T12
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
Conus medullaris
terminates at L1
Dural sac
terminates at S2
Dur
uralal sac
ac
ac
te
term
rminat
ates
es at t S2
S2
L2
L1
T12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
Sacrococcygeal
membrane
S1
S2
S3
S4
450
S5
Coccyx
Dura mater
Local
anesthetics
Caudal block
g
y
membrane
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Coc
Dura mater
Caudal b
Fig. 39.3  Anatomy of the caudal block with median approach. Note the in-plane position of the needle and its direction from caudal to 
cephalad position.
Fig. 39.2  Median approach of caudal block. Note the probe is in long-axis view of the sacrococcygeal ligament.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
246
Fig. 39.4  Ultrasound machine position during caudal block performance. Note the probe is in long-axis view of the spine.
LUMBAR NEURAXIAL BLOCKS
The lumbar epidural space can be scanned in the 
sitting, lateral, or prone position. The author’s prefer­
ence is to perform the scan in the sitting position to 
allow for maximum flexion of the spine (similar to the 
familiar landmark technique). Identification of the 
desired level for the procedure starts by placing the 
ultrasound probe parallel to the long axis of the sacrum 
in the midline to identify its flat surface. The probe is 
moved cephalad slowly to identify the intervertebral 
space between L5 and S1 as an interruption of the con­
tinuity of the sacral line. The ultrasound probe can be 
advanced longitudinally cephalad along this midline 
plane or turned 90 degrees to obtain a transverse view 
of the L5 to S1 interspinous space and then advanced 
cephalad, keeping the transverse orientation of the 
probe. Counting the spinous processes (hyperechoic 
shadows) and the interspinous spaces (hypoechoic 
windows) will help identify the desired level for the 
block.
Transverse Axial View  The ligamentous structure on the 
interspinous space is identified at the desired level by its 
characteristic echogenic appearance (as discussed previously), 
as well as the ability to see the deeper spinal canal. The needle 
is usually advanced from lateral to medial, parallel to the 
ultrasound beam (in-plane approach) until the tip of the 
needle is engaged in the ligamentum flavum. The epidural 
space is usually identified by the traditional loss of resistance 
technique by putting the ultrasound probe down (single 
operator) or through a second operator.
Tip: The lateral edge of the ultrasound probe can be 
lifted off the skin to obtain a needle insertion point closer 
to the midline (Figs. 39.5 and 39.6).
Paramedian Sagittal Oblique View  After identifying the 
appropriate level (as described earlier), the probe is oriented 
in a paramedian sagittal oblique view (discussed earlier) to 
allow identification of the epidural space through the 
interlaminar acoustic window. The epidural space shows as 
a hypoechoic space between two hyperechoic lines: the 
ligamentum flavum (posteriorly) and posterior dura 
(anteriorly). The spinal canal (intrathecal space) can be 
seen as an anechoic space anterior to the posterior dura, 
separating it from the anterior complex that appears as a 
hyperechoic structure.
The needle can be approached through either an in-
plane technique from the caudad side of the probe or an 
out-of-plane technique from the medial side (midline) of 
the middle of the probe (Fig. 39.7).
247
Ultrasound-Assisted Neuraxial Blocks
needle and
injection site
Ligamentum flavum
Dura mater
Epidural space
Spinal ganglion
Spinal cord
m flavum
ace
glion
Fig. 39.5  Transverse axial view for lumbar neuraxial block.
Fig. 39.6  Patient and ultrasound machine position for lumbar neuraxial block using the transverse axial view.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
248
•	 Usually, loss of resistance is needed to confirm the 
position of the needle tip within the epidural space.
•	 In pediatric patients and thin patients, some changes 
can be identified with loss of resistance to saline, a 
characteristic of correct needle placement, mainly:
•	 Widening of the epidural space with anterior 
displacement of the posterior dura.
•	 Compression of the thecal sac can be seen 
occasionally.
•	 Doppler flow of the injected fluid (mainly in 
small children).
•	 Spring-loaded syringes have been recently 
introduced to the market. They make it possible 
to perform real-time ultrasound-guided access to 
the epidural space with loss of resistance con­
firmed by a single operator.
THORACIC NEURAXIAL BLOCKS
The same concepts and ultrasound techniques are used for 
scanning the thoracic spine. However, due to the acute 
angulation and narrower interspinous and interlaminar 
spaces, the echogenic windows are more challenging to 
identify and the neuraxial structures are less visible. 
Paramedian scanning is the only relevant technique for 
approaching the thoracic epidural space (especially the 
midthoracic segments with the maximum angulation). 
Usually, the ultrasound is used to guide the needle to the 
upper edge of the corresponding lamina, and loss of resis­
tance is used to guide the needle through the ligamentum 
flavum and epidural space.
PEARLS
•	 Echogenic Tuohy needles can be helpful to identify 
the tip of the needle.
Fig. 39.7  Paramedian sagittal oblique view for lumbar neuraxial block. (A) Midline longitudinal view: Spinous process level. 
(B) Paramedian longitudinal view: Lamina and articular process level. (C) Paramedian longitudinal view: transverse process level. 
(D) Transverse axial view: transverse process level.
Spinal Block
David L. Brown 40
PERSPECTIVE
Spinal anesthesia is unparalleled in that a small mass of 
drug, virtually devoid of systemic pharmacologic effect, 
can produce profound, reproducible surgical anesthesia. 
Further, by altering the small mass of drug, very different 
types of spinal anesthesia can be produced. Low spinal 
anesthesia, a block below T10, has a different physiologic 
impact than does a block performed to produce higher 
spinal anesthesia (above T5). The block is unexcelled for 
lower abdominal or lower extremity surgical procedures. 
However, for operations in the midabdomen to upper 
abdomen, light general anesthesia may have to supplement 
the spinal block because stimulation of the diaphragm 
during upper abdominal procedures often causes some dis­
comfort. This area is difficult to block completely through 
high spinal anesthesia because to do so requires blockade 
of the phrenic nerve.
Patient Selection. Patient selection for spinal anesthesia 
often places too much emphasis on a side effect of the 
technique—namely, spinal headache—than on the appli­
cability of the technique in a given patient. It is clear that 
the incidence of spinal headache increases with decreasing 
age and female sex; however, with proper technique and 
selection of needle size and tip configuration, the incidence 
of headache should not preclude the use of spinal anesthe­
sia in young, healthy patients if the block has advantages 
over epidural anesthesia. Almost any patient who is to have 
a lower extremity operation is a candidate for spinal anes­
thesia, as are most patients scheduled for lower abdominal 
surgery, such as inguinal herniorrhaphy and gynecologic, 
urologic, and obstetric procedures.
Pharmacologic Choice. In the United States, three local 
anesthetics are commonly used to produce spinal anesthe­
sia: lidocaine, tetracaine, and bupivacaine. Lidocaine is a 
short-acting to intermediate-acting spinal drug; tetracaine 
and bupivacaine provide intermediate- to long-acting 
block. Lidocaine, without epinephrine, is often chosen for 
procedures that can be completed in 1 hour or less. It is 
likely that the lidocaine mixture most commonly used is 
still a 5% solution in 7.5% dextrose, although increasingly 
anesthesiologists are using 1.5%–2% concentrations of 
lidocaine without dextrose as alternatives. When epineph­
rine (0.2 mg) is added to lidocaine, the useful length of 
clinical anesthesia in the lower abdomen and lower extrem­
ities is approximately 90 minutes. Tetracaine is packaged 
both as niphanoid crystals (20 mg) and as a 1% solution 
(2 mL total). When dextrose is added to make tetracaine 
hyperbaric, the drug generally produces effective clinical 
anesthesia for procedures of up to 1.5–2 hours in the plain 
form, for up to 2–3 hours when epinephrine (0.2 mg) is 
added, and for up to 5 hours for lower extremity proce­
dures when phenylephrine (5 mg) is added as a vasocon­
strictor. Bupivacaine spinal anesthesia is commonly carried 
out with 0.5% or 0.75% solution, either plain or in 8.25% 
dextrose. My impression is that the clinical difference 
between 0.5% tetracaine and 0.75% bupivacaine as a 
hyperbaric solution is minimal. Bupivacaine is appropriate 
for procedures lasting up to 2 or 3 hours.
In addition, local anesthetics can be mixed to produce 
hypobaric spinal anesthesia. A common method of formu­
lating a hypobaric solution is to mix tetracaine in a 0.1% 
to 0.33% solution with sterile water. Also, lidocaine can be 
mixed to provide useful hypobaric spinal anesthesia. This 
drug is diluted from a 2% solution with sterile water to 
make a 0.5% solution using a total of 30–40mg.
Many anesthesiologists avoid vasoconstrictors for fear of 
somehow increasing the risk with spinal anesthesia. These 
anesthesiologists believe that phenylephrine or epineph­
rine has such potent vasoconstrictive action that it puts the 
blood supply of the spinal cord at risk. There are no human 
data supporting this theory. In fact, because most local 
anesthetics are vasodilators, the addition of these vasocon­
strictors does little more than maintain spinal cord blood 
flow at a basal level. Commonly used doses of vasoconstric­
tors are 0.2 to 0.3 mg of epinephrine and 5 mg of phenyl­
ephrine added to the spinal anesthetic.
Key Points
•	 Spinal anesthesia is unparalleled in that a small mass 
of local anesthetic can produce dense surgical 
anesthesia.
•	 Bupivacaine is the ideal drug for spinal anesthesia.
•	 Identification of the lamina at 1 cm lateral to the 
spinous process is very crucial for a successful para­
median approach.
•	 The use of a 25-gauge spinal needle is very helpful 
to avoid postdural puncture spinal headache.
•	 Taylor technique is a paramedian approach that is 
performed at L5-S1 interspace, the largest interlami­
nar interspace of the vertebral column.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
250
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. As outlined in Chapter 39, Neuraxial Block 
Anatomy, the spinous processes of the lumbar vertebrae have 
an almost horizontal orientation in relation to the long axis 
of their respective vertebral bodies (Fig. 40.1). When a midline 
needle is inserted between the lumbar vertebral spinous pro­
cesses, it is most effective if it is placed almost perpendicularly 
in relation to the long axis of the back. To facilitate spinal 
anesthesia, the anesthesiologist must constantly keep in mind 
the midline of the patient’s body and the neuraxis in relation 
to the needle. As illustrated in Fig. 40.1, as a midline needle 
is inserted into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), it logically must 
puncture the skin, subcutaneous tissue, supraspinous liga­
ment, interspinous ligament, ligamentum flavum, epidural 
space, and finally the dura mater and arachnoid mater to 
reach the CSF.
Position. Spinal anesthesia is carried out in three princi­
pal positions: lateral decubitus (Fig. 40.2), sitting (Fig. 40.3), 
and prone jackknife (Fig. 40.4). In both the lateral decubitus 
and sitting positions, a well-trained assistant is essential if 
the block is to be easily and efficiently administered by the 
anesthesiologist. As illustrated in Fig. 40.2, the assistant can 
help the patient assume the position of legs flexed on the 
abdomen and chin flexed on the chest. This is most easily 
Skin
L4
Subcutaneous fat
Supraspinous
ligament
Interspinous
ligament
Ligamentum flavum
Epidural space
Dura mater
and arachnoid
Cauda equina
Fig. 40.1  Spinal block: functional lumbar anatomy.
S2
L4
L1
End of cord
Fig. 40.2  Spinal block: lateral decubitus position.
251
Spinal Block
A
End of cord
L1
Fig. 40.3  Spinal block: sitting position. (A) Lateral view. 
accomplished by having the assistant pull the head toward 
the chest, place an arm behind the patient’s knees, and push 
the head and knees together. The position can also be facili­
tated by using an appropriate amount of sedation that 
allows the patient to be relaxed yet cooperative.
In some patients, the sitting position can facilitate loca­
tion of the midline, especially in obese patients or in those 
with some scoliosis that makes midline identification more 
difficult. As illustrated in Fig. 40.3A, the patient should 
assume a comfortable sitting position, with the legs placed 
over the edge of the operating table and the feet supported 
by a stool. A pillow should be placed in the patient’s lap 
and the patient’s arms allowed to drape over the pillow, 
resting on the flexed lower extremities. The assistant should 
be positioned immediately in front of the patient, support­
ing the shoulders and allowing the patient to minimize 
lumbar lordosis, while ensuring that the vertebral midline 
remains in a vertical position (see Fig. 40.3B).
Sometimes it is more efficient to place the patient in a 
prone jackknife position before administering the spinal 
anesthetic (see Fig. 40.4). An assistant is not as essential for 
this technique as for the lateral decubitus and sitting posi­
tions, although to make the most efficient use of operating 
room block time, it is often helpful for the assistant to posi­
tion the patient in the prone jackknife position while the 
anesthesiologist readies the spinal anesthesia tray and 
drugs.
In all three positions, the goal is to place the patient so 
that the midline is readily identifiable and lumbar lordosis 
is reduced. Fig. 40.5 shows what the lumbar anatomy looks 
like when the patient’s lumbar lordosis has been ineffec­
tively reduced by poor positioning. As illustrated, the intra­
laminar space is small and difficult to enter with a needle 
in the midline. In contrast, Fig. 40.6 illustrates how effective 
positioning can open the intralaminar space to allow easy 
access for subarachnoid puncture.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
252
B
End of 
dural sac
End of 
cord
L1
S2
Fig. 40.4  Spinal block: prone jackknife position.
Fig. 40.3 cont’d  (B) Posterior view.
253
Spinal Block
Spinal canal
L5
L1
Fig. 40.5  Spinal block: lumbar vertebra. Lumbar lordosis is present because the positioning is inadequate.
Needle Puncture. One of the first decisions to be made 
in considering spinal anesthesia is what kind of needle to 
use. Although there are many eponyms for spinal needles, 
they fall into two main categories: those that cut the dura 
sharply and those that disrupt the dural fibers by spreading 
with a cone-shaped tip. The former category includes the 
traditional disposable spinal needle, the Quincke–Babcock 
needle; the latter category comprises the Greene, Whitacre, 
and Sprotte needles. If a continuous spinal technique is 
chosen, the use of a Tuohy or other thin-walled, curve-
tipped needle will facilitate passage of the catheter. To make 
a logical choice of a spinal needle, the risks and benefits of 
each must be understood. The use of small needles reduces 
the incidence of postdural puncture headache; the use of 
larger needles improves the tactile sense of needle place­
ment, thus increasing operator confidence.
Probably the risk–benefit calculation is not as simple as 
this. For example, the use of a small needle, such as a 
27-gauge needle, will not decrease the incidence of head­
ache in younger patients if a number of “passes” through 
the dura are required before CSF flow is recognized. 
Likewise, a larger needle, such as a 22-gauge Whitacre 
needle, may result in a lower incidence of postdural punc­
ture headache if the subarachnoid needle location is recog­
nized on the first pass. Different needle tip designs result 
in differences in the incidence of postdural puncture head­
ache even when needle sizes are comparable.
With the patient in the proper position, the anesthesi­
ologist uses the palpating hand to clearly identify the 
patient’s intervertebral space and midline. As illustrated in 
Fig. 40.7 (Step 1), the anesthesiologist can effectively carry 
out this important maneuver by moving the fingers of the 
palpating hand alternately cephalocaudad and rolling 
them from side to side. When the appropriate interverte­
bral space has been clearly identified, a skin wheal is raised 
over the space. Next, an introducer is inserted into the 
substance of the interspinous ligament, taking care to 
firmly seat it in the midline (Fig. 40.7, Step 2). The intro­
ducer is grasped with the palpating fingers and steadied 
while the other hand holds the spinal needle, somewhat 
like a dart, as illustrated in Fig. 40.7 (Step 3). With the fifth 
finger of the needle hand used as a tripod against the 
patient’s back, the needle, with bevel (if present) parallel 
to the long axis of the spine, is advanced slowly to heighten 
the sense of tissue planes traversed, as well as to avoid 
skewing the nerve roots, until a characteristic change in 
resistance is noted as the needle passes through the liga­
mentum flavum and dura. The stylet is then removed, and 
CSF should appear at the needle hub. If it does not, the 
needle is rotated in 90-degree increments until CSF 
appears. If CSF does not appear in any quadrant, the 
needle should be advanced a few millimeters and rechecked 
in all four quadrants. If CSF still has not appeared and the 
needle is at a depth appropriate for the patient, the needle 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
254
Spinal canal
L5
L1
Fig. 40.6  ​Spinal block: lumbar vertebra. Lumbar lordosis is reversed with ideal spinal positioning.
and introducer should be withdrawn and the insertion 
steps repeated because the most common reason for lack 
of CSF return is that the needle was inserted off the 
midline. Another common error preventing subarachnoid 
placement is insertion of the needle with too great a ceph­
alad angle on the initial insertion (Fig. 40.8).
Once CSF is freely obtained, the dorsum of the anes­
thesiologist’s nondominant hand steadies the spinal 
needle against the patient’s back while the syringe con­
taining the therapeutic dose is attached to the needle. CSF 
is again freely aspirated into the syringe, and the dose is 
injected. Sometimes, when the syringe has been attached 
to a needle from which CSF was clearly previously drip­
ping, aspiration of additional CSF becomes impossible. 
As illustrated in Fig. 40.9, one technique that can be used 
to facilitate CSF aspiration is to “unscrew” the syringe 
plunger (see Fig. 40.9A) rather than providing constant 
steady pressure (see Fig. 40.9B).
After the local anesthetic has been injected, the patient 
and the operating table should be placed in the position 
appropriate for the surgical procedure and the drugs being 
used. The midline approach to subarachnoid block is the 
technique of first choice because it requires anatomic pro­
jection in only two planes, and the needle insertion plane 
is a relatively avascular one. When difficulties with needle 
insertion are encountered with the midline approach, an 
option is to use the paramedian route, which does not 
require the same level of patient cooperation or reversal of 
lumbar lordosis to be successful. As illustrated in Fig. 40.10, 
the paramedian approach exploits the larger “subarachnoid 
target” that exists if a needle is inserted slightly lateral to 
the midline. In the paramedian approach, the palpating 
fingers should identify the caudal edge of the cephalad 
spinous process of the intervertebral space chosen, and a 
skin wheal should be raised 1 cm lateral and 1 cm caudal 
to this point. A longer needle, such as a 4-cm, 22-gauge, 
short-beveled needle, is then used to infiltrate the deeper 
tissues in a cephalomedial plane. The spinal introducer and 
needle are then inserted 10–15 degrees off the sagittal plane 
in a cephalomedial plane, as noted in Fig. 40.10. As with 
the midline approach, the most common error made with 
this technique is to angle the needle too far cephalad in its 
255
Spinal Block
3
2
1
Fig. 40.7  Spinal block: technique.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
256
Dura and arachnoid
Subcutaneous
fat
L4
Supraspinous
ligament
Interspinous
ligament
Ligamentum
flavum
Cauda equina
Fig. 40.8  Spinal block: avoiding too large a cephalad angle on insertion.
initial insertion. Once the needle contacts bone with this 
approach, it is redirected in, slightly cephalad. If bone is 
again contacted after the needle has been redirected, but at 
a deeper level, this needle redirection is continued because 
it is likely that the needle is being “walked up” the lamina 
toward the intervertebral space. After CSF is obtained, the 
block continues in the same way as that described for the 
midline approach.
A variation of the paramedian approach is the lumbosa­
cral approach of Taylor. The technique is carried out at the 
L5 to S1 interspace, the largest interlaminar interspace of 
the vertebral column. As illustrated in Fig. 40.11, the skin 
insertion site is 1 cm medial and 1 cm caudal to the ipsi­
lateral posterosuperior iliac spine. Through this point, a 
12- to 15-cm spinal needle is inserted in a cephalomedial 
direction toward the midline. If bone is encountered on the 
first needle insertion, the needle is “walked off” the sacrum 
into the subarachnoid space, as in the method used for a 
lumbar paramedian approach. Once CSF is obtained, the 
steps are similar to those previously outlined.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
The complication most feared by patients and many anes­
thesiologists after spinal anesthesia is neurologic injury. 
However, the risk–benefit calculation of neurologic injury 
after anesthesia must include those cases that are possible 
after general anesthesia. These comparisons may show that 
the incidence of neurologic injury after spinal anesthesia is 
in fact lower than that after general anesthesia. However, 
this statement must remain speculative.
In patients in whom the spinal block level has to be 
precisely controlled or in whom the operation is expected 
to outlast the usual duration of the anesthetic drugs, a 
continuous spinal catheter may be used. However, when 
using a continuous spinal technique, one should be cau­
tious about repeating local anesthetic injections if the block 
height does not reach the predicted levels. Neurotoxicity 
(cauda equina syndrome) is hypothetically possible when 
the spinal catheter position allows local anesthetic concen­
trations to reach higher-than-expected levels.
A more common complication of spinal anesthesia is 
postoperative headache. Factors that influence the inci­
dence of postdural puncture headache are age (more fre­
quent in younger patients), sex (more likely in female 
patients), needle size (more frequent with larger needles), 
needle bevel orientation (increased incidence when dural 
fibers are cut transversely), pregnancy (incidence increased), 
and number of dural punctures necessary to obtain CSF 
(more likely with multiple punctures). Perhaps more 
important to physicians than knowing the factors resulting 
in an increased incidence of postdural puncture headache 
is the knowledge of how and when to carry out definitive 
therapy—that is, an epidural blood patch. To use spinal 
anesthesia effectively, epidural blood patching, when indi­
cated, must be used early. The success rate from a single 
epidural blood patch should be in the 90% to 95% range, 
and if a second patch is required, a similar percentage 
should be obtainable.
One other common side effect of spinal anesthesia is the 
appearance of a backache in approximately 25% of patients. 
Patients often blame “the spinal” for backache, but, when 
looked at systematically, it appears that just as many 
patients have backaches after general anesthesia as after 
spinal anesthesia. Thus backache after neuraxial block 
should not be attributed immediately to “needling” of the 
back.
257
Spinal Block
B
A
Fig. 40.9  Spinal block: syringe technique to facilitate aspiration of cerebrospinal fluid. (A) Unscrew 
syringe plunger. (B) Avoid applying constant aspiration.
PEARLS
Probably the most important factor contributing to success 
with spinal anesthesia in the day-to-day life of an anesthe­
siologist is the efficiency of the technique. If nurses and 
surgeons are to be advocates of spinal anesthesia, its use 
cannot measurably add time to the surgical day. Thus one 
should plan ahead to maximize efficiency. Often over­
looked in this maxim is the fact that patient preparation 
for operation can begin almost as soon as the block is 
administered if the patient is properly sedated.
Intraoperatively during high spinal anesthesia (often 
during cesarean section) patients occasionally complain of 
dyspnea. This often appears to be a result of loss of chest 
wall sensation rather than of significantly decreased inspi­
ratory capacity. The loss of chest wall sensation does not 
allow the patient to experience the reassurance of a deep 
breath. This impediment to patient acceptance can often 
be overcome simply by asking the patient to raise a hand 
in front of his or her mouth and exhale forcefully. The 
tactile appreciation of a deep exhalation often seems to 
provide the needed reassurance.
If spinal anesthesia has been used and a neurologic com­
plication is noted after surgery, it is essential to obtain neuro­
logic consultation early. In this way, an unbiased consultant 
can examine the patient and determine whether the “new” 
neurologic finding preexisted, is related to a peripheral neu­
ropathy, or, more rarely, is potentially related to the spinal 
anesthetic. Latent electromyographic alterations associated 
with denervation due to neurologic injury take time to develop 
in the lower extremities (14–21 days). Therefore after a poten­
tially spinal anesthesia–related lesion has been identified, elec­
tromyographic studies should be obtained early to establish a 
preblock baseline and allow serial comparison.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
258
10–15°
L4
Midline
Paramedian
L3
L4
Fig. 40.10  Spinal block: paramedian technique.
It is also useful to consider adding fentanyl (15–25 µg) 
rather than epinephrine to some shorter-acting spinal local 
anesthetic mixtures (e.g., lidocaine) because it prolongs the 
effective sensory block without measurably prolonging the 
motor block or the time to voiding. This is especially useful 
in selected surgical outpatients.
Another way to titrate spinal anesthesia for outpatients, 
or any surgical procedure in which the length of surgery is 
difficult to predict, is to use a combined spinal–epidural 
technique. In this technique an epidural needle is placed in 
the epidural space in a standard fashion, and then a small-
gauge spinal needle is advanced through the epidural 
needle into the CSF. A spinal local anesthetic mixture is 
then injected and matched to the projected length of the 
shortest surgical procedure planned. After removal of the 
spinal needle, an epidural catheter is inserted into the epi­
dural space. At this point, if the surgical procedure lasts 
longer than anticipated, the epidural catheter can be 
injected with a local anesthetic appropriate for the antici­
pated surgical needs. This combined spinal–epidural tech­
nique provides the flexibility for both spinal and epidural 
anesthesia in selected patients.
259
Spinal Block
1 cm
1 cm
Sacrum
Posterior
superior
iliac
spine
L5
Fig. 40.11  Spinal block: L5 to S1 paramedian technique (Taylor’s approach).
This page intentionally left blank
Epidural Block
David L. Brown41
PERSPECTIVE
Epidural anesthesia is the second primary method of neur­
axial block. In contrast to spinal anesthesia, epidural block 
requires pharmacologic doses of local anesthetics, making 
systemic toxicity a concern. In skilled hands, the incidence 
of postdural puncture headache should be lower with epi­
dural anesthesia than with spinal anesthesia. Nevertheless, 
as outlined in Chapter 40, Spinal Block, I do not believe 
this should be the major differentiating point between the 
two techniques. Spinal anesthesia is typically a single-shot 
technique, whereas frequently intermittent injections are 
given through an epidural catheter, thus allowing reinjec­
tion and prolongation of epidural block. Another differ­
ence is that epidural block allows production of segmental 
anesthesia. Thus if a thoracic injection is made and an 
appropriate amount of local anesthetic is injected, a band 
of anesthesia that does not block the lower extremities can 
be produced.
Patient Selection. Epidural block is appropriate for vir­
tually the same patients who are candidates for spinal 
anesthesia, except that epidural anesthesia can be used in 
the cervical and thoracic areas as well—levels at which 
spinal anesthesia is not advised. As with spinal anesthesia, 
if epidural block is to be used for intraabdominal proce­
dures involving the upper abdomen, it is advisable to 
combine this technique with a light general anesthetic 
because diaphragmatic irritation can make the patient, 
surgeon, and anesthesiologist uncomfortable. Other 
candidates for epidural anesthesia are patients in whom a 
continuous technique has increasingly been found to be 
helpful in providing epidural local anesthesia or opioid 
analgesia after major surgical procedures. This clinical 
application likely explains the increased interest in epidural 
block over the last 20 years.
Pharmacologic Choice. To use epidural local anesthetics 
effectively, one must combine an understanding of the 
potency and duration of local anesthetics with estimates of 
the length of the operation and the postoperative analgesia 
requirements. Drugs available for epidural use can be cat­
egorized as short-acting, intermediate-acting, and long-
acting agents; with the addition of epinephrine to these 
agents, surgical anesthesia ranging from 45–240 minutes 
after a single injection is possible.
Chloroprocaine, an amino ester local anesthetic, is a 
short-acting agent that allows efficient matching of the 
length of the surgical procedure and the duration of epi­
dural analgesia, even in outpatients. 2-Chloroprocaine is 
available in 2% and 3% concentrations; the latter is prefer­
able for surgical anesthesia and the former for techniques 
not requiring muscle relaxation.
Lidocaine is the prototypical amino amide local anes­
thetic and is used in 1.5% and 2% concentrations epidur­
ally. Concentrations of mepivacaine necessary for epidural 
anesthesia are similar to those of lidocaine; however, mepi­
vacaine lasts from 15–30 minutes longer at equivalent 
dosages. Epinephrine significantly prolongs (i.e., by 
approximately 50%) the duration of surgical anesthesia 
with 2-chloroprocaine and either lidocaine and mepiva­
caine. Plain lidocaine produces surgical anesthesia that lasts 
from 60–100 minutes.
Bupivacaine, an amino amide, is a widely used long-
acting local anesthetic for epidural anesthesia. It is used in 
0.5% and 0.75% concentrations, but analgesic techniques 
can be performed with concentrations ranging from 
0.125%–0.25%. Its duration of action is not prolonged as 
consistently by the addition of epinephrine, although up to 
240 minutes of surgical anesthesia can be obtained when 
epinephrine is added.
Ropivacaine, another long-acting amino amide, is also 
used for regional and epidural anesthesia. For surgical 
anesthesia, it is used in 0.5%, 0.75%, and 1% concentra­
tions. Analgesia can be obtained with concentrations of 
0.2%. Its duration of action is slightly less than that of 
bupivacaine in the epidural technique, and it appears to 
produce slightly less motor blockade than a comparable 
concentration of bupivacaine.
Key Points
•	 Epidural block can be performed in cervical, thoracic, 
and lumbar regions of the vertebral column.
•	 Paramedian approach is the preferred technique for 
thoracic epidural, while median and paramedian 
approaches are suitable for lumbar epidural.
•	 T5–T6 interspace is the preferred position for tho­
racic epidural catheter insertion.
•	 The ligamentum flavum is congenitally absent in the 
midline in some people, which makes them prone to 
the dural puncture during epidural block.
•	 Checking for the coagulation status of the patients is 
very crucial before attempting the epidural block.
•	 Early diagnosis and management for epidural hema­
toma are crucial to avoid permanent neural damage.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
262
In addition to the use of epinephrine as an epidural 
additive, some anesthesiologists recommend modifying 
epidural local anesthetic solutions to increase both the 
speed of onset and the quality of the block produced. One 
recommendation is to alkalinize the local anesthetic solu­
tion by adding bicarbonate to it to achieve both these pur­
poses. Nevertheless, the clinical advisability of routinely 
adding bicarbonate to local anesthetic solutions should be 
determined by local practice protocols.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. As with spinal anesthesia, the key to carrying out 
successful epidural anesthesia is understanding the three-
dimensional midline neuraxial anatomy that underlies the 
palpating fingers (Fig. 41.1). When a lumbar approach to 
the epidural space is used in adults, the depth from the skin 
to the ligamentum flavum is commonly near 4 cm; in 80% 
of patients the epidural space is cannulated at a distance of 
3.5–6 cm from the skin. In a small number of patients the 
lumbar epidural space is as near as 2 cm from the skin. In 
the lumbar region, the ligamentum flavum is 5–6 mm thick 
in the midline, whereas in the thoracic region it is 3–5 mm 
thick. In the thoracic region, the depth from the skin to the 
epidural space depends on the degree of cephalad angula­
tion used for the paramedian approach, as well as the body 
habitus of the patient (Fig. 41.2). In the cervical region the 
depth to the ligamentum flavum is approximately the same 
as that in the lumbar region, 4–6 cm.
The ligamentum flavum will be perceived as a thicker 
ligament if the needle is kept in the midline than if the 
needle is inserted off the midline and enters the lateral 
extension of the ligamentum flavum. Fig. 41.3 illustrates 
how important it is to maintain the midline position of the 
epidural needle (needle A) during lumbar epidural tech­
niques. If an oblique approach is taken, a “false release” can 
be produced (needle C) or the perception of a thin ligament 
can be reinforced (needle B).
Position. Patient positioning for epidural anesthesia is 
similar to that for spinal anesthesia, with lateral decubitus, 
sitting, and prone jackknife positions all applicable. The 
lateral decubitus position is applicable for both lumbar and 
thoracic epidural techniques, and the sitting position allows 
the administration of lumbar, thoracic, and cervical epidu­
ral anesthetics. The prone jackknife position allows access 
to the caudal epidural space.
Needle Puncture: Lumbar Epidural. A technique similar 
to that used for spinal anesthesia should be carried out to 
identify the midline structures; and the bony landmarks 
should be used to determine the vertebral level appropriate 
for needle insertion (Fig. 41.4). When choosing a needle 
for epidural anesthesia, one must decide whether a con­
tinuous or single-shot technique is desired. This is the prin­
cipal determinant of needle selection. If a single-shot 
epidural technique is chosen, a Crawford needle is appro­
priate; if a continuous catheter technique is indicated, a 
Tuohy or other needle with a lateral-facing opening is 
chosen.
The midline approach is most often indicated for a 
lumbar epidural procedure. The needle is inserted into the 
midline in the same way as for spinal anesthesia. In the 
epidural technique, the needle is slowly advanced until the 
change in tissue resistance is noted as the needle abuts the 
ligamentum flavum. At this point, a 3- to 5-mL glass syringe 
is filled with 2 mL of saline solution, and a small (0.25 mL) 
air bubble is added. The syringe is attached to the needle, 
and if the needle tip is in the substance of the ligamentum 
Supraspinous ligament
Interspinous ligament
Ligamentum flavum
Dura mater
Fat in epidural space
Subarachnoid space
Subdural space
Arachnoid
Fig. 41.1  ​Epidural block: cross-sectional anatomy.
263
Epidural Block
Spinous 
process
Epidural space
Spinal nerve
Dura mater
Spinal 
cord
Thoracic vertebra
Lamina
Ligamentum 
  flavum
A
Spinal cord
B
Dura mater
Ligamentum flavum
Spinal nerve
Lamina
Spinous process
Fig. 41.2  ​Thoracic epidural block anatomy: overlapping of midthoracic spinous processes requires a paramedian technique. (A) Cross 
section, superior view. (B) Lateral view, paramedian section.
flavum, the air bubble will be compressible (Fig. 41.5A). If 
the ligamentum flavum has not yet been reached, pressure 
on the syringe plunger will not compress the air bubble 
(Fig. 41.5B). Once compression of the air bubble has been 
achieved, the needle is grasped with the nondominant 
hand and pulled toward the epidural space, while the dom­
inant hand (thumb) applies constant steady pressure on the 
syringe plunger, thus compressing the air bubble. When the 
epidural space is entered, the pressure applied to the syringe 
plunger will allow the solution to flow without resistance 
into the epidural space. An alternative technique, although 
one that the author believes has a less precise endpoint, is 
the hanging-drop technique for identifying entry into the 
epidural space. In this technique, when the needle is placed 
in the ligamentum flavum, a drop of solution is introduced 
into the hub of the needle (Fig. 41.6A). No syringe is 
attached, and when the needle is advanced into the epidu­
ral space, the solution should be “sucked into” the space 
(Fig. 41.6B).
No matter what method is chosen for needle insertion, 
when the epidural space is cannulated with a catheter, 
success may be increased by advancing the needle 1–2 mm 
farther once the space has been identified. In addition, 
the incidence of unintentional intravenous cannulation 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
264
Iliac
crest
Posterior
superior
iliac spine
L1
L4
S2
T7
Tip of 
scapula
C7
Fig. 41.4  ​Neuraxial anatomy: surface relationships.
Ligamentum
flavum
B
C
A
Fig. 41.3  ​Epidural block: functional anatomy of ligamentum flavum. This figure shows how important it is to maintain the midline 
position of the epidural needle (needle A) during lumbar epidural techniques. If an oblique approach is taken, a “false release” can be 
produced (needle C) or the perception of a thin ligament can be reinforced (needle B).
with an epidural catheter may be decreased by injecting 5 
to 10 mL of solution before threading the catheter. If a 
catheter is inserted, it should be inserted only 2–3 cm into 
the epidural space because threading it farther may 
increase the likelihood of catheter malposition. Obstetric 
patients require catheters to be inserted 3–5 cm into the 
epidural space to minimize dislodgement during labor 
analgesia.
Needle Puncture: Thoracic Epidural. As with lumbar 
epidural anesthesia, patients are usually placed into a lateral 
decubitus position for needle insertion into the thoracic 
epidural space (Fig. 41.7). In this technique, the paramedian 
approach is preferred because it allows easier access to the 
epidural space. This is because the spinous processes in the 
midthoracic region overlap each other from cephalad to 
caudad (Fig. 41.8). The paramedian approach is carried out 
in a manner similar to that used for the lumbar epidural 
space, although in almost every instance the initial needle 
insertion will result in contact with the thoracic vertebral 
lamina by the epidural needle (Fig. 41.9). When this occurs, 
the needle is withdrawn slightly and the tip redirected ceph­
alad in small incremental steps until the needle is firmly 
seated in the ligamentum flavum. At this point, the loss-of-
resistance technique and insertion of the catheter are carried 
265
Epidural Block
Solution
Solution
Ligamentum
flavum
Ligamentum
flavum
B
A
Fig. 41.6  ​Epidural block: hanging-drop technique. (A) A drop of solution is introduced into the hub of the needle, and when advanced 
into the epidural space, (B) the solution should be “sucked into” the space.
Noncompressed
bubble
A
Compressed
bubble
Needle seated
in ligamentum
flavum
B
Fig. 41.5  ​Epidural block: loss-of-resistance technique showing (A) noncompression and (B) bubble compression.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
266
A    Posteroanterior
Ligamenta
flava
Dura mater
Laminae
B    Oblique
C    Lateral
E    Patient in left lateral decubitus position
D
Right lateral view—vertebral 
arch partially sectioned
The purple vertebra highlights the 
overlap of the spinous processes
in the thoracic region
Fig. 41.7  ​Thoracic epidural block anatomy: midthoracic spine. (A) Posteroanterior view. (B) Oblique view. (C) Lateral view. (D) Lateral 
view after removal of right vertebral arch. (E) Patient in left lateral decubitus position for thoracic epidural anesthesia.
out in a manner identical to that used for lumbar epidural 
block. Again, the hanging-drop technique is an alternative 
method of identifying the thoracic epidural space, although 
the classic Bromage needle–syringe grip is the author’s first 
choice for the thoracic epidural block (Fig. 41.10).
Needle Puncture: Cervical Epidural. In the cervical epidu­
ral technique, the patient is typically in a sitting position with 
the head bent forward and supported on a table (Fig. 41.11). 
A comparison of the cervical epidural block with the lumbar 
epidural block reveals many similarities. The spinous pro­
cesses of the cervical vertebrae are nearly perpendicular to the 
long axis of the vertebral column; thus a midline technique 
is applicable for the cervical epidural block. The most promi­
nent vertebral spinous processes, those of C7 and T1, are 
identified with the neck flexed (Fig. 41.12). The second 
(index) and third fingers of the palpating hand straddle the 
space between C7 and T1, and the epidural needle is slowly 
inserted in a plane approximately parallel to the floor (or 
267
Epidural Block
parallel to the long axis of the cervical vertebral spinous pro­
cesses). Abutment of the needle onto the ligamentum flavum 
will be appreciated at a depth similar to that seen in the 
lumbar epidural block (i.e., 3.5–5.5 cm), and needle place­
ment is then performed using the loss-of-resistance tech­
nique as in the other epidural methods. The hanging-drop 
method is also an option for identification of the cervical 
epidural space.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
One of the most feared complications of epidural anesthe­
sia is systemic toxicity resulting from intravenous injection 
of the intended epidural anesthetic (Fig. 41.13). This can 
occur with either catheter or needle injection. One way to 
minimize intravenous injection of the pharmacologic 
doses of local anesthetic needed for epidural anesthesia is 
to verify needle or catheter placement by administering a 
test dose before the definitive epidural anesthetic injec­
tion. The current recommendation for the test dose is 
3 mL of local anesthetic solution containing 1:200,000 
epinephrine (15 µg of epinephrine). Even if the test dose 
is negative, the anesthesiologist should inject the epidural 
solution incrementally, be vigilant for unintentional intra­
vascular injection, and have all necessary equipment and 
drugs available to treat local anesthetic-induced systemic 
toxicity.
Another problem that can occur with epidural anesthe­
sia is the unintentional administration of an epidural 
Dura mater
Paramedian section
A
B
Lateral
Oblique
      Ligamenta flava
Ligamentum
flavum
Spinal cord
Spinal nerve
Lamina
Vertebral body
Superior
Vertebral
notch
Inferior
Superior articular
process
Facets for rib
Transverse process
(costal facet)
Inferior articular
process
Spinous process
9
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
Spinous
process
Fig. 41.8  ​Thoracic vertebral anatomy: degree of spinous process overlap changes from high thoracic to midthoracic to low thoracic. 
(A) Oblique view. (B) Lateral view and paramedian section.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
268
A            Oblique
B
Insertion site
Laminae
Ligamenta
flava
– Ligamenta flava
– Laminae
Parasagittal section
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm
1
2
Fig. 41.9  ​Thoracic epidural block technique. (A) Using the paramedian approach, needle insertion site is 1 cm caudad and 1 cm lateral to 
the tip of the more cephalad spinous process, similar to the needle insertion used in the lumbar paramedian technique. (B) Parasagittal 
view of needle insertion and initial contact with lamina (blue shading).
dose into the spinal fluid. In this event, as when any neur­
axial block reaches high sensory levels, blood pressure and 
heart rate should be supported pharmacologically and 
ventilation should be assisted as indicated. Usually atro­
pine and ephedrine will suffice to manage this situation, 
or at least will provide time to administer more potent 
catecholamines. If the entire dose (20–25 mL) of local 
anesthetic is administered into the cerebrospinal fluid, 
tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation are indi­
cated because it will be approximately 1–2 hours before 
the patient can consistently maintain adequate spontane­
ous ventilation. When epidural anesthesia is performed 
and a higher-than-expected block develops after a delay 
of only 15–30 minutes, subdural placement of the local 
anesthetic must be considered. Treatment is symptomatic, 
with the most difficult part involving recognition that a 
subdural injection is possible.
As with spinal anesthesia, if neurologic injury occurs 
after epidural anesthesia, a systematic approach to the 
problem is necessary. No particular local anesthetic, use of 
needle versus catheter technique, addition or omission of 
epinephrine, or location of epidural puncture seems to be 
associated with an increased incidence of neurologic injury. 
Despite this observation, the performance of cervical or 
thoracic epidural techniques demands special care with 
hand and needle control because the spinal cord is imme­
diately deep to the site of both these epidural blocks.
An additional problem with epidural anesthesia is the 
fear of creating an epidural hematoma with the needles or 
catheters. This probably happens less frequently than 
269
Epidural Block
C7
Fig. 41.10  ​Thoracic epidural block technique: Bromage grip for loss-of-resistance technique in thoracic block.
severe neurologic injury after general anesthesia. Concern 
about epidural hematoma formation is greater in patients 
who have been taking antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin or 
who have been receiving preoperative anticoagulants. The 
magnitude of an acceptable level of preoperative antico­
agulation and the risk–benefit calculation of performing 
epidural anesthesia in the anticoagulated patient remain 
indeterminate at this time. The use of epidural techniques 
in patients receiving subcutaneous heparin therapy is 
probably acceptable if the block can be performed atrau­
matically, although the risk–benefit ratio of the technique 
must be weighed for each patient. Perioperative antico­
agulant regimens that demand special consideration are 
the use of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), or 
potent antiplatelet drugs concurrently with epidural block. 
LMWH is used for prophylaxis of deep venous thrombosis 
and produces more profound effects than other intermit­
tently dosed heparin products. It is currently recom­
mended that no procedure, including withdrawal or 
manipulation of an epidural catheter, should occur within 
12 hours after a dose of LMWH, and the next dose of 
LMWH should be delayed for at least 2 hours after atrau­
matic epidural needle or catheter insertion or manipula­
tion. The antiplatelet drugs (e.g., ticlopidine, clopidogrel, 
and platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists) are 
sometimes combined with aspirin and other anticoagu­
lants. Expert guidelines need to be consulted when using 
regional blocks in the increasing number of patients on 
antiplatelet compounds.
As in spinal anesthesia, postdural puncture headache can 
result from epidural anesthesia when unintentional sub­
arachnoid puncture accompanies the technique. When 
using the larger-diameter epidural needles (18 and 19 
gauge), it can be expected that at least 50% of patients 
experiencing unintentional dural puncture will have a 
postoperative headache.
PEARLS
Avoiding catheters during epidural anesthesia—that is, 
by selecting an appropriate local anesthetic—can avoid 
a potential source of difficulty with the technique. 
Epidural catheters can be malpositioned in a number of 
ways. If a catheter is inserted too far into the epidural 
space, it can be routed out of the foramina, resulting in 
patchy epidural block. The catheter can also be inserted 
into the subdural or subarachnoid space or into an epi­
dural vein. Similarly, the use of epidural catheters may 
be complicated by a prominent dorsomedian connective 
tissue band (epidural septum or fat pad), which is found 
in some patients.
Another means of facilitating the success of epidural 
anesthesia is to allow the block enough “soak time” before 
beginning the surgical procedure. This is most effectively 
accomplished if the block is carried out in an induction 
room separate from the operating room. There appears to 
be a plateau effect in the doses of epidural local anesthetics; 
that is, once a certain quantity of local anesthetic has been 
injected, more of the same agent does not significantly 
increase the block height, but rather may make the block 
denser, perhaps improving quality.
One observation about epidural anesthesia through a 
catheter that needs to be emphasized is the often faulty 
clinical logic that by giving incremental doses through a 
catheter, the level of sensory anesthesia can be slowly 
developed, thereby allowing frail and physiologically 
compromised patients to undergo epidural anesthesia. 
However, when this approach is taken, anesthesiologists 
usually do not allow enough time between injections 
because of the reality of time pressures in the normal 
operating room. They inject small doses through the 
catheter, but then do not allow sufficient time to pass 
before performing the next incremental injection. Often 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
270
the clinical result is high block levels in just those 
patients in whom lower levels were the goal. Furthermore, 
this approach to epidural anesthesia unnecessarily delays 
preparing the patient for the operation and makes surgi­
cal and nursing colleagues less accepting of the 
technique.
Epidural catheters are indicated in many situations, 
especially when the technique is used for postoperative 
analgesia. To place a known length of catheter into the 
epidural space, either both the catheter and needle must 
have distance markers, or a way must be found to main­
tain the catheter position once the needle has been 
Plane of
cross section
Parasagittal section
Posterior
A
B
C     Cross section
C7
Ligamentum
flavum
Dura mater
T1
T1
Fig. 41.11  ​Cervical epidural anatomy. (A) Patient sitting with head supported by table, and plane of vertebral cross section. (B) Posterior 
view. (C) Vertebral cross section at C7 to T1.
271
Epidural Block
A
B
C
D
E
C7
Ligamentum
flavum
Dura mater
Midline
C7
T1
T1
C7
Midline
Needle in midline
(inferior to C7)
Entry site
T1
T1
Entry site:
space between
C7 and T1
Fig. 41.12  ​Cervical epidural technique. (A) Patient sitting with head supported by table with needle oriented parallel to floor. (B) Application 
of fingers to posterior neck to facilitate cervical epidural block. (C) Insertion of needle into ligamentum flavum. (D) Insertion of needle during 
palpation. (E) Bromage grip during needle advancement.
withdrawn over the catheter. Because some epidural 
needles do not have distance markers, a method of main­
taining catheter position while the needle is withdrawn 
over the catheter is required. One technique of position­
ing the catheter is illustrated in Fig. 41.14. An object of 
known length, such as a syringe or the anesthesiologist’s 
finger is selected, and that object is placed next to the 
needle–catheter assembly after the catheter has been 
inserted 3 cm (or other known distance) into the epidu­
ral space. Because the catheter is marked, a known point 
on the catheter can be related to a known point on either 
the finger or the syringe. As shown in Fig. 41.14A, the 
15-cm mark is opposite the plunger on the syringe or the 
anesthesiologist’s knuckle. Once this relationship has 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
272
been noted, the needle is removed while the catheter 
position is maintained. The measurement object is then 
placed next to the catheter, as illustrated in Fig. 41.14B, 
and the catheter is withdrawn to the point at which the 
distance marker on the catheter relates to the previously 
Subdural
Foraminal
Septal
Septum
Solution
Subarachnoid
IV
Fig. 41.13  ​Epidural block: cross-sectional anatomy, showing potential incorrect injection sites. IV, intravenous.
A
B
15-cm
mark
15-cm
mark
Fig. 41.14  ​Epidural block: catheter measurement technique. (A) The 15-cm mark is opposite the plunger on the syringe or the 
anesthesiologist’s knuckle. (B) The measurement object is then placed next to the catheter.
identified point. In this example, the 15-cm mark on the 
catheter is placed opposite the plunger of the syringe 
or the anesthesiologist’s knuckle. By using this technique, 
the epidural catheter can be accurately placed without 
the need for either a marked needle or a ruler.
Caudal Block
David L. Brown42
PERSPECTIVE
With advances in lumbar epidural anesthesia, caudal anes­
thesia has become an infrequently used and taught tech­
nique. Nevertheless, caudal anesthesia can be effectively 
used for anorectal and perineal procedures, as well as some 
lower extremity operations.
Patient Selection. Patient selection for caudal anesthesia 
should be determined by examining the anatomy of the 
sacral hiatus. In approximately 5% of adult patients, the 
sacral hiatus is nearly impossible to cannulate with needle 
or catheter; thus in 1 of 20 patients the technique is clini­
cally unusable. Likewise, there are patients in whom the 
tissue mass overlying the sacrum makes the technique dif­
ficult, and if another technique is applicable, caudal anes­
thesia should be avoided. Probably more so than for any 
other block, experience and confidence on the anesthesi­
ologist’s part are necessary to carry out the technique 
effectively.
Pharmacologic Choice. When choosing local anesthetics 
for caudal anesthesia, the same considerations as those 
applied to epidural anesthesia are needed. Volumes of local 
anesthetic in the 25- to 35-mL range are necessary to pre­
dictably provide a sensory level of T12 to T10 with caudal 
injection for adults.
PLACEMENT
Anatomy. Anatomy pertinent to caudal anesthesia centers 
on the sacral hiatus (Fig. 42.1). This can be most effectively 
localized by finding the posterosuperior iliac spines bilat­
erally, drawing a line to join them, and then completing 
an equilateral triangle caudad. The tip of the equilateral 
triangle will overlie the sacral hiatus (Fig. 42.2). The 
caudal tip of the triangle will rest near the sacral cornua, 
which are unfused remnants of the spinous processes of 
the fifth sacral vertebra. Overlying the sacral hiatus is a 
fibroelastic membrane, which is the functional counter­
part of the ligamentum flavum. Perhaps more than with 
any other sex difference found in regional anesthesia, the 
sacrum is distinctly different in men and women. In men, 
the cavity of the sacrum has a smooth curve from S1 to 
S5. Conversely, in women, the sacrum is quite flat from 
S1 to S3, with a more pronounced curve in the S4 to S5 
region (Fig. 42.3).
Position. Caudal block can be carried out in a lateral 
decubitus position or a prone position. In adults, the 
author finds the prone position with a pillow placed 
beneath the lower abdomen most effective. In this posi­
tion, patients can be sufficiently sedated to make the block 
comfortable, and it makes the midline more easily identifi­
able than in the lateral position. As illustrated in Fig. 42.4, 
pediatric caudal anesthesia is commonly carried out with 
the child in the lateral decubitus position. Because most 
pediatric caudal blocks are performed after induction with 
general anesthesia, the lateral position is almost manda­
tory. Identification of the midline and performance of the 
block are less complicated in the pediatric patient, thus 
making the lateral position clinically practical. To optimize 
identification of the sacral hiatus, the prone patient should 
have the legs abducted to a 20-degree angle with the toes 
rotated inward and the heels outward. This helps relax the 
gluteal muscles, making it easier to identify the sacral 
hiatus (Fig. 42.5).
Needle Puncture. As with lumbar epidural anesthesia, 
caudal anesthesia requires a decision about the use of a 
single-injection or a catheter technique. If a single-shot 
caudal block is to be performed, almost any needle of suf­
ficient length to reach the caudal canal is acceptable. In 
adults, a needle of at least 22 gauge is recommended 
because it is large enough to allow sufficiently rapid injec­
tion of solution to help detect misplaced local anesthetic 
injections. If a catheter is to be used, a needle that is large 
enough to allow passage of the catheter is required. As 
illustrated in Fig. 42.6, after the sacral hiatus is identified, 
the index and middle fingers of the palpating hand are each 
placed on the sacral cornua, and the caudal needle is 
inserted at an angle of approximately 45 degrees to the 
Key Points
•	 In approximately 5% of adult patients, the sacral 
hiatus is nearly impossible to cannulate with needle 
or catheter.
•	 The tissue mass overlying the sacrum in some 
patients makes the technique difficult.
•	 The sacral hiatus lies at the tip of equilateral triangle 
that joins the poster superior iliac spines bilaterally.
•	 Caudal block can be performed in a lateral decubitus 
or a prone position.
•	 Volumes of local anesthetic in the 25- to 35-mL range 
can be injected in adult patients to reach a sensory 
level of T12 to T10 with caudal block.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
274
L5
Posterior superior
iliac spines
Sacral
hiatus
Fig. 42.1  ​Caudal block: surface anatomy.
L5
Posterior superior
iliac spines
Sacral
hiatus
Fig. 42.2  ​Caudal block: surface anatomy showing sacral hiatus localization.
275
Caudal Block
MEN
WOMEN
Note
straight line
S1–S3
Smooth
curve
S1
wider
S1
Fig. 42.3  ​Caudal block: relationship of sacral anatomy to sex.
Sacral
cornua
Fig. 42.4  ​Caudal block: pediatric position.
sacrum. As the anesthesiologist advances the needle, he or 
she will become aware of a decrease in resistance as the 
needle enters the caudal canal (needle position 1). The 
needle is then advanced until it contacts bone; this should 
be the dorsal aspect of the ventral plate of the sacrum. The 
needle is then withdrawn slightly and redirected so that the 
angle of insertion relative to the skin surface is decreased. 
In male patients, this angle will be almost parallel with the 
tabletop, whereas in female patients, a slightly steeper angle 
will be necessary (needle position 2).
During the redirection of the needle and after noting loss 
of resistance, the needle should be advanced approximately 
1–1.5 cm into the caudal canal. Further advance is not 
advised because dural puncture and unintentional intra­
vascular cannulation become more likely. Before the injec­
tion of the therapeutic dose of local anesthetic, aspiration 
should be performed and a test dose administered because 
a vein or the subarachnoid space can be entered uninten­
tionally, as is the case in lumbar epidural anesthesia.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Caudal anesthesia entails most of the same complications 
that can accompany lumbar epidural anesthesia, although 
there are some differences. The frequency of local anesthetic 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
276
toxicity after caudal anesthesia appears to be higher than it 
is with lumbar epidural block. Another distinct difference 
is that the incidence of subarachnoid puncture is exceed­
ingly low with the caudal technique. The dural sac ends at 
approximately the level of S2; thus unless a needle is 
inserted deeply within the caudal canal, subarachnoid 
puncture is unlikely. In children, the dural sac is more 
distally placed in the caudal canal, and this should be 
considered when carrying out pediatric caudal anesthesia.
Perhaps the most frequent problem with caudal anesthe­
sia is ineffective blockade, which results from the consider­
able variation in the anatomy of the sacral hiatus. If 
anesthesiologists are unfamiliar with the caudal technique 
and the needle passes anterior to the ventral plate of the 
sacrum, puncture of the rectum or, in obstetric anesthesia, 
of fetal parts is possible. As illustrated in Fig. 42.7, the area 
surrounding the sacral hiatus can be imagined as a poten­
tial “circle of errors.” The practitioner may be faced with a 
slitlike hiatus that does not allow easy needle insertion; the 
hiatus may be located more cephalad than anticipated or, 
in fact, may be closed. Likewise, loss of resistance may be 
encountered as the needle is inserted into one of the sacral 
foramina rather than the hiatus. In the lateral view, it is 
obvious that needles may be misdirected into subcutane­
ous or periosteal locations as well as into the marrow of 
sacral bones.
PEARLS
To produce effective caudal anesthesia, anesthesiologists 
should be selective about the patients in whom it is 
attempted. It makes no sense to use the technique in a 
patient whose anatomy is unfavorable. Because of the ana­
tomic variations in the area around the sacral hiatus, this 
block seems to require more operator experience and a 
longer time to attain proficiency than many other regional 
blocks. As a result, anesthesiologists should develop their 
technique in patients whose anatomy is favorable.
One helpful hint that will confirm needle location when 
carrying out caudal anesthesia is illustrated in Fig. 42.8. 
Once the needle has entered what is thought to be the 
caudal canal, the anesthesiologist should place a palpating 
hand across the sacral region dorsally. Then 5 mL of saline 
solution should be rapidly injected through the caudal 
needle. By placing the hand as shown, the anesthesiologist 
should be immediately aware of the subcutaneous needle 
position overlying the sacrum. If the needle is misposi­
tioned subcutaneously, a bulge during injection will 
develop in the midline. If the needle is correctly positioned 
in the caudal canal, no midline bulge should be palpable. 
In thin individuals, accurate needle placement in the caudal 
canal and rapid injection of solution may allow the anes­
thesiologist to feel small pressure waves more laterally over­
lying the sacral foramina. These smaller pressure waves 
should not be confused with those associated with a mis­
placed subcutaneous needle.
Pillow
20°
TOES POINTING INWARD
Fig. 42.5  ​Caudal block: prone position.
277
Caudal Block
Sacral
cornua
1
1
15°
2
2
Sacral
hiatus
Sacral
hiatus
Sacral
hiatus
Sacral canal
Sacral canal
FEMALE
MALE
Fig. 42.6  ​Caudal block: technique.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
278
Subperiosteal
Interosseous
Circle of errors
Subcutaneous
Foramen
Cornu
Closed
High
Slitlike
hiatus
Fig. 42.7  ​Caudal block: circle of errors.
Midline pressure wave
indicates mispositioned needle
Transforaminal
pressure wave acceptable
Fig. 42.8  ​Caudal block: palpation technique.
e1
Keywords: caudal; sacral hiatus; ultrasound
Pediatric Regional 
Using Ultrasound
Section 8
This page intentionally left blank
Caudal Block in Pediatrics
John Seif 43
POSITION
After induction with general anesthesia, the lateral decubi­
tus position is the most optimum position for full exposure 
of the sacral hiatus. Flex both knees to the abdomen and 
identify the mid line above the gluteal crease, where the 
sacral hiatus can be palpated.
ANATOMY
Draw a triangle with the base line between the two postero­
superior iliac spines (PSIS) and the apex at the sacral 
hiatus. The caudal tip will lie between the two sacral cornua 
of the fifth sacral vertebrae. The sacrococcygeal ligament, 
which resembles the ligamentum flavum, lies between the 
two sacral cornua (Fig. 43.1).
SONOANATOMY
This technique becomes even more complex when consid­
ering variation in patient age, weight, and varying levels of 
bone ossification. Ultrasound guidance for this procedure 
is helpful in identifying the underlying anatomic struc­
tures. The ones most commonly of interest include the 
sacral hiatus, sacral cornua, coccyx, and sacrococcygeal 
ligament. Although probe orientation can be done using 
either a transverse or longitudinal view of the midline, it is 
typically best to orient and assess landmarks before per­
forming the procedure. Placing the probe’s transverse plane 
at the coccyx, the sacral cornua are viewed laterally as 
humps. The sacral hiatus is located between an upper 
hyperechoic line, representing the sacrococcygeal mem­
brane or ligament, and an inferior hyperechoic line, repre­
senting the dorsum of the pelvic surface of the sacrum 
(Figs. 43.2 and 43.3).
TECHNIQUE
If single-shot analgesia is required, a 22-gauge Angiocath 
is used, and if an epidural catheter is required, then a 
larger Angiocath—for example, 20- or 18-gauge—is the 
appropriate choice. After identifying the anatomy, palpate 
the sacral cornua with the index finger. Advance the 
needle at a 45-degree angle to the skin, distal to the index 
finger. A doughy sensation is felt as the needle is advanced. 
Then the angle of the Angiocath is dropped to 15 degrees 
and advanced until a loss of resistance is felt (a light 
“pop” in the pediatric population). Before injecting the 
local anesthetic, aspiration and a test dose should be 
performed.
PEARLS
•	 Check the block with normal saline first before 
injecting the local anesthetic, and palpate the 
sacrum for any subcutaneous injection.
•	 Patient selection and experience play a big role in 
the success of the block.
Key Points
•	 Checking the anatomy with ultrasound before and 
during the procedure assures success. Because the 
sacrum is not fully ossified, it can still be penetrated 
by the ultrasound beams.
•	 Loss of resistance is not significant when placing an 
epidural because the sacrococcygeal ligament is 
softer in the pediatric population.
•	 The needle may be misplaced in the subcutaneous 
periosteal location or in the dural sac.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
282
Sacral hiatus
Sacral cornua
Sacrum
Sacral cornua
Superficial sacrococcygeal ligament
Posterior sacrococcygeal ligament
Sacrum
Posterior superior 
iliac spine
Posterior inferior 
iliac spine
Ischial spine
Coccyx
Coccyx
End of dural sac
Supraspinous ligament
Sacrum
Sacral cornua
Superficial sacrococcygeal ligament
Posterior sacrococcygeal ligament
terior superior 
spine
terior inferior 
spine
l spine
Coccyx
End of dural sac
Supr
upr
upr
upr
p asp
asp
aspino
ino
ino
nous
us 
us lig
lig
ligame
ament
nt
nt
Fig. 43.1  ​Surface anatomy of caudal space; PSIS and sacral hiatus.
Fig. 43.3  ​Ultrasound still of anatomy of caudal block in pediatrics.
Fig. 43.2  ​Ultrasound still of anatomy of caudal block in 
pediatrics.
Ilioinguinal and 
Iliohypogastric Block
John Seif44
POSITION
The patient is placed in the supine position with exposure 
of the abdominal and pelvic areas (Fig. 44.1).
ANATOMY
Identify the anterosuperior iliac spine (ASIS) and the 
umbilicus, and draw a line between these two points. 
Divide this line into three equal distances at the point 
where the outer one-third meets the inner two-thirds. This 
is the point of the needle entry. This point is about 2 cm 
medial and cephalad to the ASIS (Fig. 44.2).
The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves are formed 
by branches from T12 to L1, which pass between the inter­
nal oblique and transversalis muscles. Performing this 
block provides good analgesia for most operations of the 
inguinal regions.
SONOANATOMY AND TECHNIQUE
Place the ultrasound probe on the line connecting the umbi­
licus to the ASIS. A transverse longitudinal view will reveal 
the underlying muscles: the external oblique, internal 
oblique, and transversus abdominis muscle (Fig. 44.3). 
Advance the blunt injecting needle in-plane with the ultra­
sound probe until two “pops” are felt. The first pop occurs 
between the external oblique and the internal oblique 
muscles. The second pop occurs between the internal oblique 
and the transversus abdominis muscle (Fig. 44.4A)—this is 
where the local anesthetic is injected (Fig. 44.4B).
PEARLS
•	 Visualizing the spread of local anesthetic in the 
plane between the internal oblique muscle and the 
transversus abdominis muscle can help ensure 
excellent results.
•	 Tenting the muscles is common when using the 
blunt needle, so a more perpendicular angle needle 
entrance technique is used.
Key Points
•	 Identifying the different layers of the muscles is 
crucial because the peritoneum is the shiniest layer 
under the transversus abdominis muscle. When the 
bowels are seen under the peritoneum under ultra­
sound, the sliding sign appears in response to 
breathing.
•	 Loss of resistance when penetrating the different 
muscle layers can be felt as a pop. Extra caution is 
needed because the needle could advance acciden­
tally into the peritoneum and perforate the bowel.
•	 Avoid puncturing the blood vessels, especially the 
inferior epigastric vessels, because they sometimes 
accompany the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves 
along their path. Ultrasound aids in visualizing these 
small vessels, especially if using Doppler mode.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
284
Fig. 44.1  ​The inguinal and the abdominal areas are exposed and the ultrasound is on the opposite side of the block.
285
Ilioinguinal and Iliohypogastric Block
Ilioinguinal and
Iliohypogastric block
Inguinal
ligament
Block
Ilioinguinal n.
Iliohypogastric n.
L2
L3
L4
L5
Fig. 44.2  ​Identify the anterosuperior iliac spine and the umbilicus and draw a line connecting these two points. Apply the ultrasound 
probe on this line and the needle entrance point will be at the outer third junction of the line.
Medial
Lateral
Internal oblique
External oblique
Transverse abdominis
ASIS
Ilioinguinal, Iliohypogastric n.
Fig. 44.3  ​The needle is advanced under ultrasound in-plane approach, penetrating the external and internal oblique muscles targeting 
the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves lying in the plane between the internal oblique and the transverse abdominus muscles.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
286
A
B
Fig. 44.4  (A) The three muscles under ultrasound, visualizing the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves (arrows). (B) Local anesthetic 
spread between the internal oblique and transverse abdominus muscles as shown on the image. ASIS, Anterosuperior iliac spine; EO, 
external oblique; IO, internal oblique; LA, local anesthetic; TA, transverse abdominus.
Superficial Cervical 
Plexus Block
John Seif45
POSITION
Place the patient in the supine position without a pillow. 
The head is turned to the opposite side of the one being 
blocked (Fig. 45.1).
ANATOMY AND TECHNIQUE
The superficial cervical plexus provides cutaneous innerva­
tion to the ventral rami of C1 to C4 (Fig. 45.2). It includes 
the lesser occipital, greater auricular, transverse cervical, 
and supraclavicular nerves (Fig. 45.3). At the midpoint on 
the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle is 
the point of needle entry. The needle is inserted, and local 
anesthetic is injected behind and along the posterior border 
of the clavicular head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
Under ultrasound, use the linear probe and place it 
in a transverse position at the needle entry point over the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. The needle is aligned with 
the ultrasound probe in the in-plane position. Visualizing 
the local anesthetic spread on the posterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle is the key to a successful block 
(Fig. 45.4).
PEARLS
•	 If deep injection occurs, it could lead to deep 
cervical plexus block and partial phrenic nerve 
block. Hoarseness and an inability to clear secre­
tions may occur.
•	 Superficial injection of local anesthetic with a 
22-gauge needle is recommended.
•	 This block covers only cutaneous sensation and 
could be used in mastoidectomy and in clavicular 
bone fracture, especially in the lateral one-third 
of the clavicle, for postoperative pain control 
(see Fig. 45.4).
Key Points
•	 Stabilize the neck position, and identify the sterno­
cleidomastoid muscle.
•	 If not using the ultrasound, always feel for the 
infiltration with the other hand to avoid injecting 
the local anesthetic in any vascular structure.
•	 Infiltrate along the posterior border of the sterno­
cleidomastoid muscle superior and inferior to the 
point of needle entry.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
288
Fig. 45.1  ​Supine position turning the head to the opposite side of the block and ultrasound position on the opposite side of the block 
facing the physician.
Fig. 45.2  ​Superficial plexus block provides cutaneous innervation of C1 to C4.
C5
C4
C3
C2
C1
C6
C7
Cervical plexus
289
Superficial Cervical Plexus Block
Greater Auricular nerve
Lesser occipital nerve
Accessory nerve
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Transverse cervical
Lateral supraclavicular nerve
Medial supraclavicular nerve
Gre
Gr
G
ater r r r 
ve
ve
Tran
T
ar
ar
ar
ar
a ner
er
erve
ve
ve
ve
ve
ve
Jugular vein
Carotid artery
Deep cervical fascia
Superficial cervical fascia
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Anterior
Posterior
Needle and
injection site
Levator 
scapulae muscle
Middle scalene muscle
Longus capitis muscle
Lesser o
A
Ante
nterio
r r
cle
s muscle
Fig. 45.3  ​The superficial plexus block will cover the following: lesser occipital, greater auricular, transverse cervical, and 
Medial and lateral supraclavicular nerves, Accessory nerve.
Supraorbitalis nerve
Infraorbitalis nerve
Transverse
cervical nerve
Supraclavicularis
nerve
Cutaneous 
cervical nerve
Minor 
occipitalis nerve
Major
occipitalis nerve
Auriculotemporal nerve
S
is
e
A
Fig. 45.4  ​Visualizing the needle advancement in linear approach, targeting the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle, and infiltrating the area with local anesthetic.
This page intentionally left blank
Pudendal Nerve Block
John Seif46
INDICATIONS
•	 Perineal operations in both sexes.
•	 Hypospadias and circumcision are the most 
common surgeries.
•	 Scrotal and testicular surgeries with a supplementation 
of ilioinguinal blockade.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
•	 Infection or presence of perianal inflammation.
SONOANATOMY
•	 The pudendal nerve derives its fibers from the 
ventral branches of the second, third, and fourth 
sacral nerves. It leaves the pelvis through the lower 
part of the greater sciatic foramen, passes behind 
the spine of the ischium, and reenters the pelvis 
through the lesser sciatic foramen. It accompanies 
the internal pudendal vessels along the medial 
border of the ischial tuberosity (Fig. 46.1).
•	 Placing the patient in a frog-like or lithotomy 
position helps to expose the area and identify the 
underlying structures. The linear ultrasound 
transducer probe is placed on the perineum lateral 
to the anus at 3 to 9 o’clock and overlies the ischial 
tuberosity (Fig. 46.2).
•	 The pudendal artery can be visualized medial to the 
ischial tuberosity.
TECHNIQUE
•	 The ischial tuberosity is visualized and the needle is 
introduced out-of-plane at a 45-degree angle to the 
skin. The needle is advanced in an anterior to 
posterior direction in the middle of the ultrasound 
probe just medial to the ischial tuberosity where the 
local anesthetic solution is deposited (Fig. 46.3).
•	 Little resistance will be experienced by passing 
through the sacrotuberous ligament.
•	 A nerve stimulator is used 0.3mA to 1.0 mA beside 
the ultrasound where penile and anal contractions 
are observed, and this also confirms the pudendal 
nerve. Sometimes it is challenging to find the nerve 
under ultrasound.
•	 Bupivacaine 0.25% up to 1mL/kg in pediatric 
populations.
•	 This block is performed bilaterally to reach 
maximum pain relief.
PEARLS
•	 Positioning in lithotomy/frog-like position facilitates 
the block performance.
•	 Use color Doppler ultrasound to visualize the 
pudendal artery medial to the ischial tuberosity 
where the pudendal nerve is located.
•	 Visualizing the local anesthetic spread medial to the 
ischial tuberosity increases the success rate of the 
block.
Key Points
•	 Patient selection plays a major role in performing 
the block; it is challenging with obese patients.
•	 Ultrasound experience is required to maximize the 
success rate of the block.
•	 Vascular injection is a risk if no spread is visualized with 
deposition of local anesthetics under ultrasound.
•	 Avoid contamination as the area of injection is close 
to the perianal area.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
292
Fig. 46.1  ​Pudendal nerve is located medial to the ischial tuberosity under the ischial spine ligament.
Fig. 46.2  ​In lithotomy/frog-like position, the ischial tuberosity is the most medial bony prominence. Linear ultrasound probe overlies the 
ischial tuberosity.
Fig. 46.3  ​Needle-tip target is medial to the ischial tuberosity, where the local anesthetic is deposited.
Paravertebral Catheters 
in Pediatrics
John Seif47
INDICATIONS
•	 Patients who undergo operative procedures of the 
chest and upper abdomen.
•	 Unilateral coverage as thoracotomies, cholecystec­
tomy, mastectomies, and other urological procedures 
with preservation of the pulmonary functions.
•	 Inadequate or unsuccessful epidural placement 
where bilateral catheters are placed.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
•	 Caution with populations using anticoagulation and 
antiplatelet therapy.
SONOANATOMY
•	 The thoracic paravertebral space is a small triangular 
space lateral to the vertebral column.
•	 Bounded posteriorly by superior costotransverse 
ligament, anteriorly by the parietal pleura, and 
superiorly and inferiorly by the adjacent head and 
neck of the adjacent rib.
•	 The paravertebral space can be scanned in both the 
transverse and paramedian approach.
•	 In the transverse approach (short access) the 
ultrasound probe is aligned in the space between the 
two adjacent ribs overlying the transverse process. In 
this approach the space can be identified between 
the external intercostal muscle and intercostal 
membrane superiorly, and parietal pleura inferiorly.
•	 In the paramedian approach (long access) the probe 
lies in the paramedian plane of the transverse 
process. The external intercostal muscle and 
costotransverse ligament lie between the transverse 
process and deeper to it is the parietal pleura. The 
area between is the paravertebral space.
TECHNIQUE
•	 In the transverse approach, the linear ultrasound 
probe is aligned over the long axis of the rib. 
Identifying the transverse process medially and the 
intercostal muscles and deep to it is the parietal 
pleura (sliding sign) (Fig. 47.1).
•	 The needle, 18-gauge Tuohy, is introduced in line 
with the linear ultrasound probe from lateral to 
medial under direct visualization. The needle tip 
ends in the paravertebral space deep to the 
costotransverse ligament and just above the 
parietal pleura where the local anesthetic is 
deposited. Then a 19-gauge paravertebral catheter 
is inserted thorough the Tuohy needle up to 5 cm 
beyond the length of the needle.
•	 Local anesthetic used is ropivacaine 0.2% 
(1mL/kg) bolus up to 10 mL followed by a 
continuous infusion (max 0.4 mg/kg/hour).
•	 In the paramedian approach a linear ultrasound 
probe is used (short access) visualizing the trans­
verse process and the intercostal muscles and 
identifying the lung pleura deeper. The local 
anesthetic is deposited above the pleura and 
underneath the internal intercostal membrane.
PEARLS
•	 Placing the patient in a lateral position is the best 
option in the pediatric population.
•	 Identify the parietal pleura from the costotransverse 
ligament by visualizing the sliding sign where the 
parietal and visceral layer of the lung rub against 
each other.
•	 The presence of the lung sliding sign before and 
after the procedure is important as it rules out 
pneumothorax.
•	 Pneumothorax, complete spinal blockade, and local 
anesthetic toxicity are common complications for 
this block, which can be avoided when performed 
by experienced practioners.
Key Points
•	 Performing this block requires ultrasound experience.
•	 Needle visualization plays a major role in achieving a 
successful block.
•	 Epidural spread can occur from a unilateral injection.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
294
Fig. 47.1  ​Ultrasound probe in a transverse approach with needle advancement from lateral to medial approaching the paravertebral 
space.
Obstetrics Regional 
Anesthesia
Section 
 9
This page intentionally left blank
Regional Techniques During 
Pregnancy and Delivery
Cynthia A. Wong48
PERSPECTIVES
The anesthesia care of obstetric patients is dominated 
by regional anesthesia and analgesia, primarily neuraxial 
techniques (spinal, epidural, combined spinal-epidural). 
The anesthetic care of the obstetric patient must also con­
sider effects on the fetus/neonate. In general, neuraxial 
compared to systemic analgesia/anesthesia results in less 
drug transfer across the placenta to the fetus.
Neuraxial analgesia is the only analgesic technique that 
can provide complete analgesia for labor and vaginal deliv­
ery. Given that labor lasts a variable duration (less than an 
hour to several days), a continuous technique is optimal. 
Neuraxial labor analgesia is typically initiated with a bolus 
injection of local anesthetic combined with a lipid-soluble 
opioid into the subarachnoid or epidural space. An epidu­
ral catheter (rarely a spinal catheter) is sited and used to 
maintain analgesia throughout labor and delivery. Other 
regional techniques and nerve blocks may be performed, 
often by the obstetrician (bilateral paracervical blocks, 
bilateral pudendal nerve blocks), but these techniques are 
not continuous and do not provide complete analgesia. 
Paracervical blocks provide analgesia for the first stage of 
labor, when pain impulses originate from the cervix and 
lower uterine segment. Pudendal nerve blocks are useful 
for the second stage of labor as the fetus descends in the 
birth canal, when pain originates from the vagina and 
perineum. Only neuraxial analgesia can block these pain 
impulses simultaneously.
Neuraxial anesthesia is considered the optimal technique 
for cesarean delivery, both scheduled and intrapartum 
deliveries. Advantages compared with general anesthesia 
include: 1) it is safer for the mother (no need to manipulate 
the airway), 2) less drug(s) crosses the placenta and 
depresses the fetus/neonate, and 3) it allows the mother to 
be awake and father to be present for the delivery of their 
child. Single-shot spinal anesthesia is frequently used for 
elective procedures. Combined spinal-epidural anesthesia 
is used when long case duration is anticipated (e.g., repeat 
procedure, obese body habitus). Epidural anesthesia is a 
common technique for intrapartum cesarean delivery in 
women who have an indwelling epidural catheter sited for 
labor analgesia; epidural analgesia is transitioned to epidu­
ral anesthesia.
Postcesarean delivery analgesia is most often provided 
using multimodal analgesia—a common component of 
multimodal analgesia is single-shot neuraxial morphine 
analgesia. In women who are not able to receive neuraxial 
morphine (e.g., general anesthesia is used), the transversus 
abdominal plane block (see Chapter 36), and the quadratus 
lumborum block (see Chapter 38) have been shown to 
supplement systemic analgesia. However, these blocks do 
not improve the analgesia provided by neuraxial morphine 
and are therefore not indicated in women who receive 
spinal or epidural morphine.
PATIENT SELECTION
Most obstetric patients are candidates for neuraxial 
analgesia/anesthesia. Contraindications mimic those for 
nonpregnant patients. Absolute contraindications include 
patient refusal, coagulopathy, infection at the site of needle 
placement, and uncorrected maternal hypotension (e.g., in 
the setting of hemorrhage). Systemic infection is a relative 
contraindication, although most clinicians will proceed 
with a neuraxial technique once antibiotics have been 
administered and the patient is not exhibiting signs of 
frank septicemia. Thromboembolic disease is a major cause 
of maternal morbidity and mortality; thus many pregnant 
women receive pharmacologic anticoagulation. Guidelines 
for the initiation of neuraxial procedures in women who 
have received pharmacologic anticoagulation generally 
Key Points
•	 Neuraxial analgesia/anesthesia (spinal, epidural, 
combined spinal-epidural) are mainstays of safe 
anesthesia care of the obstetric patient. The anes­
thesia provider is caring for the mother, and by 
extension, the fetus.
•	 Hormonal and anatomic changes during pregnancy 
influence neuraxial technique and drug administration.
•	 Neuraxial analgesia (usually epidural or combined 
spinal-epidural) is the only analgesic technique that 
provides complete analgesia for labor and vaginal 
delivery.
•	 Neuraxial labor analgesia is usually initiated in a 
midlumbar interspace; a sensory block from T10 
to S4 is necessary for complete labor analgesia.
•	 During cesarean delivery, a dense block to T6 is 
necessary to block afferent nerves innervating pelvic 
and abdominal organs. The addition of lipid-soluble 
opioids to neuraxial local anesthetics potentiates 
the density of the block.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
298
mimic those for the nonobstetric population, although a 
thorough risk-benefit analysis should be individualized to 
each patient. Several obstetric conditions are associated 
with a frank consumptive coagulopathy, including placen­
tal abruption and amniotic fluid embolism. Coagulopathy 
should be ruled out in these women before proceeding with 
a neuraxial procedure.
PHARMACOLOGIC CHOICE
In the United States, four local anesthetics are commonly 
used for obstetric neuraxial analgesia/anesthesia. Bupiva­
caine (0.0625%–0.125%) and ropivacaine (0.1%–0.2%) are 
commonly used for epidural labor analgesia. Spinal anes­
thesia for cesarean delivery is usually initiated with 0.75% 
bupivacaine with dextrose (hyperbaric bupivacaine), 
although some clinicians use plain bupivacaine. In most 
patients this formulation is slightly hypobaric. Epidural 
anesthesia is commonly initiated with 2% lidocaine plus 
epinephrine 1:200,000, or 3% 2-chloroprocaine (useful for 
emergency procedures when short latency to onset of anes­
thesia is critical). Typically, 18–25 mL of a local anesthetic 
solution is required for epidural anesthesia for cesarean 
delivery. Neuraxial anesthesia is also indicated for cervical 
cerclage placement (both elective and rescue procedures) 
and postpartum tubal ligation surgery, although these are 
usually short-duration procedures and use of short-acting 
local anesthetic agents may be appropriate.
In almost all cases, a lipid-soluble opioid (fentanyl or 
sufentanil) is added to the local anesthetic. The opioid 
and local anesthetic work synergistically, thus lower 
doses of both drugs are needed, contributing to 
decreased side effects from both the local anesthetic and 
opioid. Fentanyl 10–25 µg and sufentanil 1.5–5 µg are 
common spinal adjuvants for initiation of combined 
spinal-epidural labor analgesia and spinal anesthesia 
for cesarean delivery. Fentanyl 1.5–3 µg/mL or sufent­
anil 0.2–0.4 µg/mL is often combined with a low-
concentration local anesthetic solution to maintain 
epidural labor analgesia. Neuraxial morphine is com­
monly used as part of a multimodal technique for post­
cesarean delivery analgesia (spinal dose 0.050–0.150 mg, 
epidural dose 2–4 mg).
Epinephrine (0.2 mg) may be added to spinal bupiva­
caine to prolong the duration of anesthesia. Spinal and 
epidural clonidine may enhance analgesia and anesthe­
sia, although the use is off-label in the United States for 
obstetric patients, because it may cause hypotension and 
sedation.
PLACEMENT
ANATOMY
During labor, painful impulses from the uterus and cervix 
are transmitted by visceral afferent nerve fibers that travel 
with sympathetic nerve fibers and enter the spinal cord 
at the low thoracic and high lumber (T10 through L1) 
spinal segments. As labor progresses and the fetus descends 
in the birth canal, distention of the vagina and stretching 
of the perineum results in pain impulses that are transmit­
ted via the pudendal nerves to the S2 to S4 spinal segments. 
Epidural catheters are commonly sited in the midlumbar 
epidural space. Early in labor, the sensory block must 
extend cephalad to T10 to block labor pain. Later in labor, 
sensory blockade must also extend caudad to the sacral 
dermatomes to provide complete analgesia as the fetus 
descents in the birth canal.
During cesarean delivery, afferent nerves innervating the 
abdominal and pelvic organs must be blocked. These 
nerves travel with sympathetic nerves fibers from the T5 
through L1 spinal segments. Therefore dense motor and 
sensory block, which extends from the sacral dermatomes 
to T6, is necessary to provide satisfactory cesarean delivery 
anesthesia. Because of differential sensory blockade (i.e., 
block to touch occurs at a lower dermatome than block to 
temperature), most clinicians aim for a sensory block to a 
cold stimulus at the T4 dermatome. Inadequate extent and 
density of anesthesia during cesarean delivery—which is 
more common with epidural than spinal anesthesia—will 
contribute to intraoperative nausea, vomiting, and pain.
Anatomic and hormonal changes during pregnancy 
contribute to progressively lower anesthetic requirements 
as gestation advances. Elevated progesterone levels, among 
other hormonal changes, contribute to altered pharmaco­
dynamics during pregnancy. Progressive lumbar lordosis 
during pregnancy alters the relationship of the vertebral 
column to surface anatomy. The imaginary line joining the 
posterior superior iliac crests (Tuffier’s line) crosses the 
vertebral column at a higher (more cephalad) position in 
pregnancy. This may increase the risk of misidentifying the 
actual lumbar interspace (i.e., anesthesia providers using 
landmark techniques may identify an interspace that is one 
or two levels higher than the intended interspace). The 
space between adjacent spinous processes is narrower and 
it may be harder for pregnant women to assume the flexed 
position that facilitates needle access to the neuraxial canal. 
Ligaments become more “lax,” causing the ligamentum 
flavum to feel less “dense” during advancement of the 
spinal or epidural needle. Blood volume increases and by 
midgestation the enlarging uterus compresses the inferior 
vena cava and impedes venous return from the lower 
extremities, and along with an increase in intraabdominal 
pressure, this results in the shunting of blood from the 
inferior vena cava to the azygous system. The expanded 
blood volume in the lumbar neuraxial canal, along with the 
increasing fat volume that accompanies pregnancy, causes 
a decrease in lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume as 
the dural sac is compressed and lumbar CSF is translocated 
cephalad. Additionally, the apex of the normal lumbar lor­
dosis shifts caudad and the normal thoracic kyphosis is 
reduced and shifts cephalad. Finally, CSF specific gravity 
decreases during pregnancy. These changes contribute to 
altered distribution of subarachnoid hyperbaric (or hypo­
baric) anesthetic solutions. At term, the local anesthetic 
dose required for neuraxial anesthesia is reduced by 
25%–30% compared to nonpregnant patients.
The enlarged epidural veins may increase the risk of 
unintentional cannulation of epidural veins by a needle or 
catheter. Additionally, engorgement of the foraminal veins 
may block egress of anesthetic solution injected into the 
epidural space and contribute to the lower epidural anes­
thetic requirement observed during pregnancy.
299
Regional Techniques During Pregnancy and Delivery
POSITION
Patient positioning for the initiation of neuraxial analgesia 
does not differ in the pregnant patient (see Chapters 40 
and 41). Laboring patients may prefer the lateral or sitting 
position, and clinicians may have a preference for one 
position. Occasionally, patient comorbidities may dictate 
patient position (for example, a patient with a dilated 
cervix and fetus with a footling breech presentation 
should be placed in the lateral position to decrease the 
risk of umbilical cord prolapse). Patient position should 
be considered when initiating spinal anesthesia with a 
hyperbaric (or less commonly, hypobaric) anesthetic 
solution. Monitoring during the initiation of anesthesia 
mimics that for nonpregnant patients, with the addition 
of fetal heart rate monitoring. The anesthesia provider 
may need to collaborate with the nurse or midwife to 
optimally position the patient for neuraxial anesthesia 
and fetal monitoring.
Increasingly more common, preprocedure ultrasonogra­
phy is used to facilitate identification of lumbar vertebral 
anatomy (see Chapter 39). It is particularly useful for obese 
parturients in identifying the midline, the interspinous 
space, and the estimated depth to the epidural space. Two 
views are typically obtained with a low frequency (2–5 
MHz) curved array probe, the parasagittal oblique (PSO) 
view, and the transverse median (TM) view. The acoustic 
window may be larger using the PSO view, especially in 
women with narrow interspaces. The depth to the epidural 
space is estimated by obtaining an image of the posterior 
complex (the ligamentum flavum, the epidural space, and 
the posterior dura-arachnoid) using the PSO or TM view. 
The estimation of the depth to the epidural space may 
underestimate the actual depth measured by the neuraxial 
needle by as much as 1 cm, especially in obese women. This 
underestimation is attributable to soft tissue compression 
by the ultrasound probe, which is often necessary to obtain 
a satisfactory view.
Spinal anesthesia is initiated in a midlumbar interspace 
(L2–L3 or lower). Epidural analgesia/anesthesia is also 
usually initiated in a midlumber interspace because of 
the need for both a thoracic and sacral anesthesia. Rarely, 
a two-epidural catheter technique is used in which one 
catheter is placed at a low-thoracic interspace to provide 
analgesia for the first stage of labor, and a second caudal 
catheter is placed to provide sacral analgesia. Like spinal 
anesthesia, combined spinal-epidural analgesia/anesthesia 
is initiated at the L2–L3 interspace or lower because of the 
need to avoid trauma to the conus medullaris.
Use of sterile technique during the initiation of neur­
axial anesthesia is critical to the safety of the parturient. 
When in the sitting position, the mother should don a 
surgical hat to keep hair and scalp skin flakes from falling 
onto the sterile field. All individuals in the labor room 
should don a face mask, and commonly, only one support 
person is allowed to stay in the labor room during the 
procedure. The skin over the needle puncture site is 
usually decontaminated with chlorhexidine in alcohol. 
The proceduralist should wash their hands with an alco­
hol-based antiseptic solution and all hand and wrist 
jewelry and watches should be removed before donning 
sterile gloves.
NEEDLE PUNCTURE
Young women of childbearing age are at increased risk for 
postdural puncture headache, therefore subarachnoid 
puncture should be performed with a small-gauge (usually 
25- to 27-gauge) pencil-point needle.
Epidural analgesia/anesthesia is usually initiated with a 
17-gauge Tuohy or other epidural needle appropriate for cath­
eter insertion. In virtually all cases, a single or multiorifice 
epidural catheter (19- or 20-gauge) is passed through the 
epidural needle and secured for the duration of labor and 
delivery. A midline approach is common—obstetric patients 
are young and the interspinous ligament is rarely calcified. The 
depth to the epidural space is increased in pregnancy because 
of an increase in subcutaneous fat. Loss-of-residence to 
saline is a common technique to identify the epidural space; 
the hanging-drop method is less reliable during pregnancy 
because of increased intraabdominal, and therefore epidural-
space pressure. A small bolus dose of anesthetic solution may 
be injected through the epidural needle before the epidural 
catheter is passed though the needle. More commonly, the 
epidural catheter is threaded into the epidural space and the 
anesthetic solution necessary to establish analgesia/anesthesia 
is injected incrementally through the catheter.
Combined spinal-epidural analgesia/anesthesia com­
bines the advantages of both spinal and epidural anesthe­
sia: rapid onset of analgesia with a low dose of drug(s), 
followed by the ability to provide continuous analgesia/
anesthesia. It may be used for both labor analgesia and 
cesarean delivery anesthesia. It is most common to use a 
needle-through-needle technique in which the epidural 
needle is advanced into the epidural space (Fig. 48.1). The 
epidural needle then acts as an “introducer” for a long 
spinal needle (25- to 27-gauge). The spinal needle is 
advanced through the epidural needle using the anesthesia 
provider’s dominant hand while the nondominant hand 
anchors the epidural needle by grasping the epidural needle 
hub between the thumb and first finger and placing the 
back of the hand against the patient’s back. This technique 
is similar to spinal anesthesia when the nondominant hand 
steadies the introducer needle as the spinal needle is 
advanced with the dominant hand. As the spinal needle tip 
passes the tip of the epidural needle, a small increase in 
resistance to advancement is usually noted. As soon as the 
anesthesia provider perceives the “pop” indicating punc­
ture of the dura-arachnoid with the tip of the spinal needle, 
spinal needle advancement should stop. The hubs of the 
spinal needle and epidural needle are then firmly grasped 
together between the thumb and first finger of the non­
dominant hand and the spinal needle stylet is removed. 
After verifying backflow of CSF through the spinal needle, 
the syringe with the prepared spinal anesthetic solution is 
attached to the spinal needle hub and injected, and the 
empty syringe and spinal needle are removed together. The 
epidural catheter is then sited in the epidural space, exactly 
as if initiating continuous epidural anesthesia.
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
Adverse effects and complications of neuraxial anesthesia 
in obstetric patients mimic those observed on nonpregnant 
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
300
patients. The neuraxial injection of local anesthetic agents 
results in sympathetic blockade. This blockade is extensive 
when anesthesia for cesarean delivery is initiated; neuraxial 
anesthesia to the midthoracic dermatomes results in a sig­
nificant decrease in systemic vascular resistance as a result 
of arterial vasodilation. Cardiac output increases and blood 
pressure decreases, sometimes profoundly. Uteroplacental 
perfusion is not autoregulated; therefore perfusion is 
directly related to maternal blood pressure. A decrease in 
uteroplacental perfusion results in a decrease in oxygen 
delivery to the fetus. Although there is significant margin 
of safety in oxygen delivery to the healthy placenta and 
fetus, this margin is reduced in some women (e.g., those 
with preeclampsia). Maternal hypotension is associated 
with low neonatal Apgar scores and acidemia. Thus it is 
critical that the anesthesia provider maintain maternal 
blood pressure close to baseline during neuraxial analgesia/
anesthesia. Blood pressure should be carefully monitored 
after the initiation of anesthesia. A patient complaint of 
shortness of breath, nausea, or just “not feeling well” within 
15 minutes of initiating neuraxial anesthesia is caused by 
hypotension until proven otherwise. Often the hypoten­
sion is preceded by an increase in heart rate. A combina­
tion of a rapidly administered intravenous fluid bolus, 
beginning at the time of initiation of anesthesia (so-called 
coload), and administration of a prophylactic vasopressor 
(e.g., phenylephrine), is the best method for maintaining 
blood pressure; hypotension should be treated with addi­
tional bolus doses of a vasopressor.
Other adverse effects of neuraxial analgesia/anesthesia 
include pruritus (from neuraxial opioid administration), 
urinary retention, and shivering. Low-grade fever occurs 
in approximately 15% of parturients with neuraxial anal­
gesia—the mechanism is currently not known but is likely 
related to noninfectious inflammation.
Neuraxial analgesia/anesthesia may fail for a number of 
reasons. The most obvious cause is failure to inject the 
drugs into the intended space. Women in advanced labor 
may complain of pain because of “sacral sparing.” Anesthesia 
solution injected into the lumbar epidural space preferen­
tially distributes cephalad rather than caudad. Therefore 
the low-thoracic sensory block established early in labor 
may provide satisfactory analgesia early in labor, but as 
labor progresses and sacral dermatome blockade is neces­
sary, breakthrough pain may result. The injection of a 
large volume of dilute local anesthetic solution (10–15 mL) 
may facilitate local anesthetic distribution to the sacral 
canal.
Fig. 48.1  ​Combined spinal-epidural block. The epidural needle is sited in the normal fashion and a long spinal needle is passed 
through the epidural needle to puncture the dura. (A) Sagittal view. (B) Transverse view.
301
Regional Techniques During Pregnancy and Delivery
Complications of neuraxial anesthesia in obstetric 
patients mirror those in nonobstetric patients and are 
discussed in Chapters 40 and 41. These include the unin­
tended injection of the local anesthetic solution into an 
epidural vein, resulting in local anesthetic systemic toxicity, 
or into the subarachnoid space, resulting in high or total 
spinal anesthesia. Occasionally, the epidural needle tip 
or catheter is unintentionally sited in the subdural “space” 
(a potential space between the dura and arachnoid mem­
branes). The injection of local anesthetic solution into this 
space results in a characteristically patchy block; onset time 
is similar to epidural anesthesia, but the cephalad extension 
of the block may be higher than expected.
Multiple drug errors have been reported—care must be 
taken to correctly identify all drugs prepared for neuraxial 
injection, particularly those injected into the subarachnoid 
space. Permanent cauda equina syndrome may result from 
the unintentional injection of neurotoxic substances.
Neuraxial damage may result from direct trauma to the 
spinal cord, conus medullaris, cauda equina, or spinal 
nerves. Indirect nerve tissue damage may result from isch­
emia or compression injury from a neuraxial hematoma or 
abscess. Obstetric patients are at increased risk for throm­
boembolic disease and death from pulmonary embolism; 
thus many patients receive prophylactic pharmacologic 
anticoagulation therapy. A thorough drug history is neces­
sary before planning a neuraxial technique.
Neuraxial infection is a rare but feared iatrogenic 
complication of neuraxial analgesia/anesthesia. Epidural 
abscesses are usually caused by skin contaminants—
thorough skin decontamination is indicated before initiat­
ing neuraxial techniques, particularly in the labor and 
delivery room, which is not a clean/sterile environment 
compared to an operating room. Meningitis after neuraxial 
procedures is almost always associated with a break in 
sterile technique. Streptococcus viridans species, which 
thrive in a watery medium (e.g., CSF), may be transmitted 
from the oropharynx of the proceduralist to the needles, 
catheters, and drugs used for neuraxial anesthesia.
Postdural puncture headache is a complication of neur­
axial procedures. Young women are at higher risk than 
other patient populations. The unintentional puncture of 
the dura-arachnoid with a large-bore epidural needle can 
cause a debilitating headache in the postpartum period 
that interferes with maternal-neonatal bonding.
Short-term backache after an obstetric neuraxial proce­
dure may be due to local tissue trauma. There is no evi­
dence that obstetric neuraxial procedures are associated 
with long-term backache, although many women suffer 
musculoskeletal back pain in the postpartum period.
PEARLS
•	 Preprocedural ultrasound-facilitated identification 
of neuraxial anatomy is particularly helpful for 
obese parturients; however, the posterior complex 
may be difficult to visualize. In the TM view, the 
depth from the skin to a line drawn between the 
transverse processes approximates the depth to the 
epidural space. It may not be possible to accurately 
identify the interspace in morbidly obese women, 
but it is almost always possible to identify the tip of 
the spinous process. It is useful to remember that 
the length (posterior to anterior) of the typical adult 
lumbar spinous process is 3–3.5 cm. An estimate of 
the depth to the epidural space can be obtained by 
adding this value to ultrasound-measured distance 
from the skin to the tip of the spinous process. 
Finally, an ultrasound-assisted paraspinous 
approach has been described in which the hyper­
echoic tips of adjacent spinous processes are 
identified and marked on the skin in the TM view. 
The needle is introduced 1 cm lateral and 1 cm 
superior to the tip of the spinous process, and 
advanced using a classical paraspinous approach to 
the interlaminar space (the needle is angled slightly 
cephalad [5–10 degrees] and slightly toward the 
midline [5–10 degrees], and walked off the lamina if 
bone is encountered).
•	 When caring for obese patients, longer needles 
(e.g., 10–13 cm) may be necessary to reach the 
neuraxial canal and use of a larger gauge needle 
(e.g., 24-gauge spinal needle) mitigates the tendency 
of small gauge needles to veer off to the side as they 
are advanced. Alternatively, a combined spinal-
epidural technique can be considered because it is 
easier to advance the larger gauge epidural needle 
through the spinal ligaments into the epidural space.
•	 Laboring patients may have difficulty maintaining a 
still position. Patients may reflexively move and 
rotate their spine during painful contractions. If 
difficulty advancing the neuraxial needle is encoun­
tered (e.g., repeatedly contacting the vertebra), 
reassessment of body position may be helpful. 
Additionally, most patients are readily able to 
differentiate needle movement to the left or right 
side of the sagittal midline plane; when difficulty is 
encountered, it may be helpful to query the patient, 
“Do you feel this on the left or right side, or in the 
middle?” Assessment of shoulder height may help 
identify axial rotation (the shoulders should be level 
if the spine is not rotated). Continuous, reassuring 
verbal communication with the patient is critical to 
success.
•	 When using the combined spinal-epidural tech­
nique, the spinal needle tip must extend 12–17 mm 
beyond the epidural needle tip when the spinal 
needle is fully advanced through the epidural needle 
(Fig. 48.2), or the spinal needle tip may not reliably 
reach the subarachnoid space when the epidural 
needle tip is sited in the epidural space. A 127-mm 
spinal needle is commonly used with a standard 
9-mm epidural needle. However, because of differences 
in hub configurations among needle manufacturers, 
Fig. 48.2  ​Combined spinal-epidural needle configuration. The 
spinal needle extends beyond the tip of the epidural needle 
12–17 mm.
ATLAS OF REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
302
some spinal and epidural needles may not be 
compatible for combined spinal-epidural anesthesia; 
the spinal needle tip may not extend far enough 
beyond the epidural needle tip. Some manufactures 
provide combined spinal-epidural anesthesia “kits” 
in which both the spinal and epidural needle are 
packaged together.
•	 Failure of the spinal needle to puncture the dura-
arachnoid after advancement through the epidural 
needle sited in the epidural space has several causes 
(Fig. 48.3). If the clinician is very confident that the 
tip of the epidural needle is sited in the epidural 
space, they may choose to abandon the combined 
spinal-epidural technique and proceed with epidural 
analgesia/anesthesia. However, epidural anesthesia is 
more likely to fail in this scenario, presumably 
because the epidural needle tip is not correctly sited 
in the epidural space, or it is sited off the midline 
and may contribute to one-sided anesthesia.
•	 During labor, especially late labor, a block that extends 
from T10 to the sacral dermatomes is necessary to 
block the pain of labor. A large volume of local 
anesthetic/opioid solution injected into the lumbar 
epidural space is required to establish the block. 
The median effective dose (ED50) of local anesthetic 
is lower when a high-volume of low-concentration 
local anesthetic solution is used (e.g., 0.125% 
bupivacaine), rather than a low-volume, higher-
concentration solution (e.g., 0.25% bupivacaine).
•	 Epidural anesthesia results in a block that is less 
“dense” than spinal anesthesia. Patients often 
complain of nausea and vomiting during surgical 
manipulation of the viscera, especially after delivery 
of the fetus if the obstetrician exteriorizes the 
uterus during repair, and during closure of the 
fascia. The density of the epidural block can be 
improved by “repainting the fence.” Approximately 
20 minutes after the initial local anesthetic bolus 
dose, an additional dose (20%–25% of the initial 
dose) is injected into the epidural space. This serves 
to “reinforce” the sensory/motor block, rather than 
extend it. Administration of neuraxial (or systemic) 
opioids also serves to treat the nausea caused by 
visceral stimulation. Used for this purpose, opioid 
administration treats nausea and vomiting, rather 
than causing it.
Fig. 48.3  ​Possible causes of failure of the combined spinal-epidural block—the spinal needle does not puncture the dura-arachnoid 
membrane. (A) The pencil-point spinal needle displaces, but does not puncture the dura. (B) The spinal needle does not extend far 
enough past the tip of the epidural needle to reach the dura-arachnoid membrane. (C) The epidural needle is directed obliquely into the 
epidural space and the spinal needle passes to the side of the dural sac.
e1
Keywords: Obstetric Anesthesia; Neuraxial Labor Analgesia; 
Epidural Labor Analgesia; Cesarean Delivery Anesthesia; 
Combined Spinal-Epidural Anesthesia
Abstract: The anesthesia care of obstetric patients is domi­
nated by regional anesthesia and analgesia, primarily neur­
axial techniques (spinal, epidural, combined spinal-epidural). 
These techniques may need to be modified in the pregnant 
patient to adjust for the physiologic changes that accompany 
pregnancy. The anesthetic care of the obstetric patient must 
also consider effects on the fetus/neonate. In general, neur­
axial compared to systemic analgesia/anesthesia results in 
less drug transfer across the placenta to the fetus. Neuraxial 
analgesia is the only analgesic technique that can provide 
complete analgesia for labor and vaginal delivery. Neuraxial 
anesthesia is considered the optimal technique for cesarean 
delivery. Postcesarean delivery analgesia is most often pro­
vided using multimodal analgesia which often includes 
single-shot neuraxial morphine analgesia. Neuraxial local 
anesthetics and opioids are usually combined for obstetric 
analgesia and anesthesia. They work synergistically, thus 
lower doses of both drugs are needed, contributing to 
decreased side effects from the both the local anesthetic and 
opioid. For parturients for whom neuraxial analgesia/anes­
thesia is not possible or not desired, other nerve blocks can 
be used to provide labor analgesia and postoperative analge­
sia (e.g., transversus abdominal plane block, quadratus lum­
borum block, pudendal nerve block).
Axillary nerve, anatomy of, 26f
in infraclavicular block, 60f, 61f
in interscalene block, 42f, 43f
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
in supraclavicular block, 51f, 52f
Axillary sheath, anatomy of, in 
infraclavicular block, 59
Axillary vein, anatomy of, in 
infraclavicular block, 31f, 67f
AXIS block vs. supraclavicular 
block, 50
B
Backache. see Back pain
Back pain, with spinal block, 256
Bicarbonate, local anesthetic with, for 
epidural block, 262
Biceps femoris muscle
anatomy of, in popliteal and saphenous 
block, 142f, 144f, 149f, 150f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Bier block, 85f
Brachial artery, anatomy of, in axillary 
block, 72f
Brachial cutaneous nerve, anatomy of
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
Brachial plexus
anatomy of, 26, 26f
dermatomes in, 27f, 28f
at first rib, 30
in infraclavicular block, 31, 27f, 28f, 31f
in interscalene block, 34f, 35f, 38f, 
40f, 42f
osteotomes in, 28f
peripheral nerves in, 25, 27f
prevertebral fascia in, 26
in supraclavicular block, 30, 26f, 30f, 
31f, 48f, 49f, 50f, 52f, 54f
cords of, 25, 26f
divisions of, 25, 26f
roots of, 25, 26f
trunks of, 25, 26f
Brachial plexus block
anatomy for, 25
axillary, 69, 73f. see also Axillary block
infraclavicular, 59. see also 
Infraclavicular block
interscalene, 33. see also Interscalene 
block
“push, pull, pinch, pinch” mnemonic 
in, 29f
supraclavicular, 45. see also 
Supraclavicular block
Brachial vessels, anatomy of, in 
infraclavicular block, 61f
Bromage needle-syringe grip, in thoracic 
epidural block, 264, 269f
Anterior cutaneous nerve, anatomy of
in paravertebral block, 216f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Anterior scalene muscle, anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 60f, 61f
in interscalene block, 33, 34f, 35f, 37f, 
38f, 40f
in supraclavicular block, 30f, 31f, 46f, 
48f, 50f, 54f
Anterior subcostal quadratus lumborum 
(QL) block, 238, 239f
Anterior superior iliac spine, anatomy of
in femoral block, 117f, 118f
in ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric 
block, 283, 285f
in sciatic block, 112f
Anticoagulants, with epidural block, 268
Antiplatelet drugs, with epidural block, 268
Arachnoid mater, anatomy of
in epidural block, 262f
in spinal block, 250f, 256f
Arm
dermatomes of, 27f, 28f
innervation of
with pronation, 27f
with supination, 27f
osteotomes of, 28f
Armpit, anatomy of, in infraclavicular 
block, 60f
ASRA. see American Society of Regional 
Anesthesiologists (ASRA)
Attenuation, 16
Axilla
anatomy of, in infraclavicular block, 59
proximal, anatomy of, in infraclavicular 
block, 31, 31f
Axillary artery, anatomy of
in axillary block, 69, 70f, 71f
in infraclavicular block, 31f, 61f, 64f, 67f
Axillary block, 69
anatomy for, 69, 70f
continuous catheter technique for, 71, 72f
indications for, 72
in-plane technique, 75f
local anesthetic for, 69
needle puncture for, 70, 71f
neuropathy with, 71
patient selection for, 69
pharmacologic choice for, 69
position for, 69, 70f
potential problems with, 71
sonoanatomy for, 72, 73f
systemic toxicity with, 71
technique for, 72, 74f, 75f
traditional block technique of, 69
ultrasonography-guided, 72
Axillary catheter
complications for, 75
indications for, 74
technique, 73
A
Abdominal wall
anterior, anatomy of, in subcostal 
transversus abdominal plane 
block, 233f
muscle layers of, anatomy of, in 
transversus abdominis plane block, 
231
Accessory nerve, anatomy of
in glossopharyngeal block, 190f, 192f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Accessory phrenic nerve, anatomy of, in 
supraclavicular block, 30f
Achilles tendon, anatomy of, in ankle 
block, 160f
Acromion, anatomy of, in infraclavicular 
block, 64f
Adductor brevis muscle, anatomy of, in 
adductor canal block, 151f
Adductor canal, anatomy of, 151, 151f, 
152f, 154f
Adductor canal block, 151, 152
local anesthetics for, 154f
position for, 153f
sonoanatomy for, 151
technique for, 152, 154f
Adductor longus muscle, anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f, 152f
in femoral block, 122f
Adductor magnus muscle, anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f
in popliteal block, 149f, 150f
Adductor muscles
anatomy of, 151f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Airway block
anatomy for, 183, 184, 183f, 184f, 185f, 
186f, 187f
glossopharyngeal, 189, 190f, 191f, 192f
magnetic resonance imaging in, 187f
superior laryngeal, 193, 194f
translaryngeal, 195, 196f
American Society of Regional 
Anesthesiologists (ASRA), 15b
Amide local anesthetics, 7
Amino amides, 4, 4f, 5f
Amino esters, 3, 3f, 4f
Anatomical landmark technique, 129
Anesthetics, local. see Local anesthetics
Anisotropy, 20, 21f
Ankle block, 157, 159
anatomy for, 157, 158f, 159f, 160f, 
161f
indications, 159
needle puncture for, 157, 160f, 161f
patient selection for, 157
pharmacologic choice for, 157
sonoanatomy, 159
technique, 159
Index
Page numbers followed by “f” indicate figures, “b” indicate boxes, and “t” indicate tables.
Index
304
Costoclavicular block, 65, 67f, 68f
Crawford needle, for lumbar epidural 
block, 262
Cricoid cartilage, anatomy of
in airway block, 185f, 186f, 187f
in interscalene block, 33, 34f, 35f, 36f
in superior laryngeal block, 194f
in supraclavicular block, 46f
in translaryngeal block, 195, 196f
Cricothyroid membrane, anatomy of
in airway block, 185f, 186f
in translaryngeal block, 195, 196f
Cupola, of lung, anatomy of, in 
supraclavicular block, 46f
Curvilinear probe, 20, 21f
Cutaneous cervical nerve, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Cutaneous nerve
anterior, anatomy of
in paravertebral block, 216f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 
289f
brachial, anatomy of
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
lateral, anatomy of, in paravertebral 
block, 216f
lateral femoral. see Lateral femoral 
cutaneous nerve
median, anatomy of, 26f
posterior, anatomy of, in sciatic block, 
114f
D
Deep cervical fascia, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Deep peroneal nerve
anatomy of, 93f, 96f
in ankle block, 160, 159f, 160f, 162f
needle puncture at, for ankle block, 157
Dermatomes
of lower extremity, 96f
in truncal block, 200f
of upper extremity, 27f, 28f
Descending genicular artery, anatomy of, 
in saphenous block, 143f
Digital block, of distal upper extremity 
block, 82, 83f
Distal upper extremity block, 77
digital block, 82, 83f
median nerve, 77, 78f
radial nerve, 79, 81f
sonoanatomy, 77, 78f
ulnar nerve, 79, 80f, 81f
wrist block, 81, 81t, 82f
Doppler shift, 18
Drugs, for regional anesthesia, 3. see also 
Local anesthetics; Vasoconstrictors
Dural puncture
headache after, 253, 256
with epidural block, 269
with spinal block, 253, 256
Dural sac, anatomy of, in caudal epidural 
block, 245f
Dura mater, anatomy of
in caudal epidural block, 245f
in epidural block, 262f, 263f, 266f, 267f, 
270f, 271f
Bupivacaine, 4f, 5, 5f, 7
for ankle block, 157
for axillary block, 69
cardiotoxicity of, 5
for epidural block, 261
for epidural labor analgesia, 298
for erector spinae plane block, 221
for femoral block, 115
for infraclavicular block, 59
for interscalene block, 33, 36
liposomal, 8
maximum recommended doses of, 11t
for obturator block, 135
for popliteal block, 141, 150
for pudendal nerve block, 291
for sciatic block, 107
single-shot caudal epidural dose of, 8t
for spinal block, 249
for stellate ganglion block, 177
suggested epidural infusion 
concentrations and rates for, 8t
for supraclavicular block, 45
C
Calcaneal nerve, anatomy of, 95f, 96f
in ankle block, 159f
Calcaneus, cross-sectional magnetic 
resonance images of, 98f
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 
for local anesthetic toxicity, 11
Carotid artery, anatomy of
in glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 192f
in interscalene block, 40f
in stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Catheters, 13
for continuous nerve block
in axillary block, 71, 72f
in femoral block, 115, 120f
epidural, 269, 272f
Cauda equina, anatomy of, in spinal 
block, 250f, 256f
Cauda equina syndrome, with spinal 
block, 256
Caudal block, 273
anatomy for, 273
circle of errors in, 276, 278f
ineffective, 276, 278f
local anesthetics for, 273
needle puncture for, 273, 277f
palpation technique in, 276, 278f
patient selection for, 273
in pediatrics, 281
anatomy for, 281, 282f
position for, 281
sonoanatomy for, 281
technique for, 281
position for, 273, 275f, 276f
potential problems in, 275, 278f
Caudal epidural block, 244, 244f, 245f, 
246f
Cephalocaudal arc of needle redirection, 
in infraclavicular block, 63f
Cephalolateral quadrant, anatomy of, in 
popliteal and saphenous block, 141, 
142f
Cerebrospinal fluid aspiration, in spinal 
block, 254, 257f
Cervical epidural block
anatomy for, 270f
needle puncture for, 266, 270f, 271f
Cervical fascia, anatomy of, in cervical 
plexus block, 171, 175f
Cervical pleura, anatomy of, in 
supraclavicular block, 52f
Cervical plexus
anatomy of, 171
cutaneous branches, 171
sensory distribution of, 172f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 288f
Cervical plexus block
position for, 174f
sonoanatomy, 171
technique, 171
ultrasound technique, 171, 175f
Cervical sympathetic ganglion, anatomy 
of, in airway block, 184f, 185f
Cervicothoracic ganglion. see Stellate 
ganglion block
Chassaignac’s tubercle, anatomy of, in 
infraclavicular block, 63f
Chloroprocaine, 3, 10, 3f
for epidural block, 261, 298
maximum recommended doses of, 11t
suggested epidural infusion 
concentrations and rates for, 8t
Ciliary ganglion, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 167, 
168f, 170f
Ciliary nerve, anatomy of, in retrobulbar 
(peribulbar) block, 167, 170f
Circulation, support, for local anesthetic 
toxicity, 12
Clavicle, anatomy of
in brachial plexus block, 73f
in infraclavicular block, 31f, 60f, 61f, 64f
in interscalene block, 34f, 35f, 38f, 40f, 
42f
in supraclavicular block, 30f, 31f, 46f, 
47f, 48f, 49f, 50f, 51f
in suprascapular block, 56f
Cluneal nerve, anatomy of, 96f
Cocaine, 3, 3f
Coccyx, anatomy of
in caudal epidural block, 244f, 245f
in pediatric caudal block, 282f
Color Doppler ultrasonography. see 
Ultrasonography
Color-flow Doppler ultrasonography, 18
Combined spinal-epidural block, 300f, 302f
Combined spinal-epidural technique, 301, 
301f
Common continuous nerve blocks, dosage 
chart for, 15t
Common fibular nerve, anatomy of
in popliteal block, 144f, 145f
in subgluteal sciatic nerve block, 114f
Common peroneal nerve, anatomy of, 93f
in popliteal and saphenous block, 141, 
142f
Continuous infusion dosage, 13
Conus medullaris, anatomy of, in caudal 
epidural block, 245f
Coracoid process, anatomy of
in axillary block, 72f
in infraclavicular block, 31f
305
Index
in interscalene block, 37f
in spinal block, 250f, 256f
in thoracic neuraxial blocks, 247f
Dysesthesias, with sciatic block, 109
Dyspnea, with high spinal block, 257
E
EMLA cream, 9
recommended doses and application 
areas for, 9t
Endothoracic fascia, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
Epidural anesthesia, 297
Epidural block, 261
anatomy for, 262, 262f, 263f, 264f
anticoagulation with, 268
catheter in, 269, 272f
cervical
anatomy for, 270f
needle puncture for, 266, 270f, 271f
headache with, 269
hematoma with, 268
incorrect injection sites in, 267, 272f
local anesthetics for, 261, 272f
lumbar, needle puncture for, 262, 264f, 
265f
neurologic injury after, 268
patient selection for, 261
position for, 262
potential problems with, 267, 272f
thoracic
anatomy of, 263f
needle puncture for, 264, 266f, 267f, 
268f, 269f
Epidural blood patch, for post-dural 
puncture headache, 256
Epidural catheters, 269, 297, 298, 272f
Epidural space, anatomy of
in epidural block, 262f, 263f
in spinal block, 250f
in thoracic neuraxial block, 247f
Epidural veins, 298
Epiglottis, anatomy of
in airway block, 183, 184, 185f, 186f
in translaryngeal block, 195, 196f
Epinephrine, 6, 6f
for epidural anesthesia, 298
for epidural block, 261
for erector spinae plane block, 221
for infraclavicular block, 59
for interscalene block, 33
for spinal block, 249
for stellate ganglion block, 177
Erector spinae muscle, anatomy of
in erector spinae plane block, 222, 222f
in lumbar plexus block, 104f
in quadratus lumborum block, 238, 
237f, 239f, 240f
Erector spinae plane block
anatomy, 222
cranial-caudal in-plane approach, 222
indications, 221t
local anesthetics, 221
pharmacologic choice, 221
position, 222
potential complications, 226
sonoanatomy, 224f
thorax, posterior wall of, 223f
ultrasound guided injection technique, 
222, 224f, 226f
Esmarch bandage, venous exsanguination 
with, 85, 87f
Esophagus, anatomy of, in stellate 
ganglion block, 177, 178f
Ester local anesthetics, 9
Etidocaine, 5, 4f, 5f
Exparel, 6
Exsanguination, venous, in intravenous 
regional block, 85, 87f
Extensor hallucis longus tendon
anatomy of, in ankle block, 160f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
External intercostal muscle, anatomy of, 
in paravertebral block, 215, 218f
External jugular vein, anatomy of
in interscalene block, 33, 34f, 38f
in supraclavicular block, 46f
External laryngeal nerve/branch, anatomy 
of, in airway block, 184, 184f, 185f
External oblique muscle, anatomy of
in quadratus lumborum block, 237f
in subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, 233f, 235f
in transversus abdominis plane block, 231
Extrapleural compartment, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
Extrinsic back muscles, anatomy of, in 
erector spinae plane block, 222, 222f
F
Fascia iliaca, anatomy of, in femoral block, 
125f
Fascia iliaca compartmental block (FICB), 
127, 128f
anatomy of, 127
sonoanatomy of, 127, 128f
technique of, 127
Fascia lata, anatomy of, in femoral block, 
125f
Femoral artery, anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f, 152f, 154f
in femoral block, 117f, 118f, 122f, 125f
in popliteal and saphenous block, 144f, 
149f, 150f
Femoral block, 115
continuous catheter technique for, 115, 
120f
indication for, 120
local anesthetic for, 115, 119f, 125f
needle puncture for, 115, 118f, 124f, 125f
patient selection for, 115
pharmacologic choice for, 115
position for, 123f
potential problems with, 115
sonoanatomy for, 120
technique for, 122
ultrasonography-guided, 120
Femoral canal, anatomy of, in femoral 
block, 125f
Femoral cutaneous nerve
lateral. see Lateral femoral cutaneous 
nerve
posterior, anatomy of, 95f, 96f
Femoral nerve, anatomy of, 91, 92f, 93f, 
94f, 95f, 96f
in adductor canal block, 151
in femoral block, 115, 116f, 117f, 118f, 
119f, 121f, 122f, 125f
in lumbar plexus block, 100f, 105f
in sciatic block, 108f, 109f, 110f, 
112f
Femoral neurovascular bundle, cross-
sectional magnetic resonance images 
of, 98f
Femoral sheath, anatomy of, in femoral 
block, 125f
Femoral vein, anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f, 152f
in femoral block, 117f, 118f, 125f
Femoral vessels, on magnetic resonance 
imaging, 112f
Femur
distal, cross-sectional magnetic 
resonance images of, 98f
greater trochanter of, anatomy of, in 
sciatic block, 109f, 110f, 111f, 112f, 
113f, 114f
proximal, cross-sectional magnetic 
resonance images of, 98f
Fentanyl
for combined spinal-epidural labor 
analgesia, 298
in spinal block, 258
Flexor digitorum longus tendon, cross-
sectional magnetic resonance images 
of, 98f
Flexor hallucis longus muscle and tendon, 
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Flexor hallucis muscle, anatomy of, in 
ankle block, 160f
Forearm surgery
axillary block for, 69
interscalene block for, 34
G
Gag reflex, eliminating, glossopharyngeal 
block for, 189
Gastrocnemius muscle, anatomy of, in 
popliteal and saphenous block, 142f, 
144f
Genicular artery, anatomy of, in 
saphenous block, 143f
Genitofemoral nerve, anatomy of, 91, 92f, 
93f, 94f, 95f, 96f
‘‘Gentle pressure’’, anatomy of, in axillary 
block, 70f
Glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 191f, 
192f
anatomy for, 189, 190f
intraoral, 189, 191f
local anesthetic for, 189
needle puncture for, 189
patient selection for, 189
peristyloid approach, 189, 192f
position for, 189
potential problems with, 189
Glossopharyngeal nerve, anatomy of
in airway block, 183, 183f, 187f
in glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 
191f
Dura mater, anatomy of (Continued)
Erector spinae plane block (Continued)
Index
306
Gluteus maximus muscle
anatomy of, in sciatic block, 112f, 114f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Gracilis muscle, anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f, 152f
in femoral block, 122f
in saphenous block, 143f
Gravity, venous exsanguination by, 85, 87f
Great auricular nerve, anatomy of
in cervical plexus block, 171, 173f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Greater saphenous vein, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images of, 98f
Greene needle, for spinal block, 253
H
Hand surgery
axillary block for, 69
interscalene block for, 34
supraclavicular block for, 49
Hanging-drop technique, in epidural 
block, 262, 265f
Headache, post-dural puncture, 253, 256
with epidural block, 269
with spinal block, 253, 256
Hematoma
with epidural block, 268
with retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 
167, 170
with supraclavicular block, 49
Heparin, low-molecular-weight, epidural 
block and, 268
Hip pain, diagnosis of, obturator block 
for, 135
Humerus, anatomy of
in axillary block, 70f, 71f
in infraclavicular block, 60f, 64f
in suprascapular block, 56f
Hunter’s canal, 151. see also Adductor canal
Hyoid bone
anatomy of
in airway block, 184, 185f, 186f
in superior laryngeal block, 193, 194f
in translaryngeal block, 196f
displacement of, in superior laryngeal 
block, 193, 194f
Hypoglossal nerve, anatomy of, in 
glossopharyngeal block, 190f, 192f
I
Iliac crest, anatomy of, in epidural block, 
264f
Iliac spine
anatomy of, in pediatric caudal block, 
282f
anterior superior, anatomy of
in femoral block, 117f, 118f
in ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric 
block, 283, 285f
in sciatic block, 112f
posterior superior, anatomy of
in caudal block, 273, 274f
in epidural block, 264f
in sciatic block, 110f, 111f
in subgluteal sciatic nerve block, 113f
Iliacus fascia, anatomy of, in femoral 
block, 125f
Iliacus muscle, anatomy of
in femoral block, 116f, 122f
in lumbar plexus block, 100f
in obturator block, 136f
Iliocostalis muscle, anatomy of, in erector 
spinae plane block, 222, 222f, 223f
Iliohypogastric block, 283
anatomy for, 283
position for, 283
sonoanatomy and technique for, 283
Iliohypogastric nerve, anatomy of, 91, 
283, 92f, 93f, 94f, 95f, 96f, 285f, 286f
Ilioinguinal block, 283
anatomy for, 283
position for, 283
sonoanatomy and technique for, 283
Ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric block, 130f
Ilioinguinal nerve, anatomy of, 91, 283, 
92f, 93f, 94f, 285f, 286f
in lumbar plexus block, 105f
Iliopectineal fascia, anatomy of, in 
femoral block, 125f
Iliopsoas muscle
anatomy of, in femoral block, 125f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
“Immigrant” muscles, 222
Inferior articular process, anatomy of, in 
epidural block, 267f
Inferior cervical ganglion, anatomy of, in 
stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
Inferior ganglion of vagus nerve, anatomy 
of
in airway block, 184f, 185f
in superior laryngeal block, 194f
Inferior lateral brachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
Infraclavicular block, 59
anatomy for, 31, 59, 31f, 60f, 61f, 62f
continuous catheter technique 
for, 63
indications for, 64
in-plane technique of, 67f
lateral approach for, 66f
local anesthetics for, 64
medial approach for, 65f
patient selection for, 59
pharmacologic choice for, 59
position for, 62
potential problems with, 63
sonoanatomy for, 63
technique for, 64
traditional block technique of, 59, 63f
ultrasonography-guided, 63, 64f
Infraorbital nerve, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus 
block, 289f
Infraspinatus muscle, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Inguinal ligament
anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f
in femoral block, 116f, 122f, 125f
in lumbar plexus block, 105f
femoral nerve anatomy at, 117f, 121f, 
122f
Inguinal perivascular block, 99, 100f
Inguinal region blocks, 129
anatomical landmark technique, 129
anatomy, 129
complications, 130
indication, 129
medication, 129
ultrasound-guided, 129, 130f
Inner intercostal membrane, anatomy of, 
in paravertebral block, 218f
Innermost intercostal muscle, anatomy of, 
in paravertebral block, 218f
Innominate artery, anatomy of, in airway 
block, 185f
In-plane technique, axillary block 
of, 75f
Intercostal blocks
PECS 1, 203
PECS 2, 203
pecto-intercostal block, 203
potential complications, 205
ultrasound-guided injection technique, 
203
Intercostal muscle, anatomy of, 211, 201f, 
212f
Intercostal nerve, anatomy of, 201f
in intercostal block, 203
in paravertebral block, 216f, 218f
Intercostal nerve blocks
analgesia after, 214f
needle position and injection, 211, 213f
rib, angle of, 211, 212f
sonoanatomy, 211
technique, 211
ultrasound for, 211, 212f, 213f
Intercostal nerves, 227
Intercostobrachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
in supraclavicular block, 52f
Intercostobrachial nerve, anatomy of, in 
intercostal block, 203
Interfascial injection technique, 138
Intermesenteric aortic plexus, anatomy 
of, 93f
Internal carotid artery, anatomy of, in 
glossopharyngeal block, 189, 192f
Internal intercostal muscle, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
Internal jugular vein, anatomy of, in 
glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 
192f
Internal laryngeal nerve/branch, anatomy 
of, in airway block, 184, 184f, 185f
Internal oblique aponeurosis, anatomy of, 
in subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, 233f
Internal oblique muscle, anatomy of
in quadratus lumborum block, 237f
in subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, 233f, 235f
in transversus abdominis plane block, 
231
Interosseous nerve, of leg, in popliteal 
block, 142f
Interpleural space, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
307
Index
for superior laryngeal block, 193
for supraclavicular block, 45
and tetracaine transdermal patch, 9
for translaryngeal block, 195
Ligamentum flavum, anatomy of
in epidural block, 262, 262f, 263f, 264f, 
265f, 266f, 267f, 268f, 270f, 271f
in spinal block, 250f, 256f
in thoracic neuraxial block, 247f
Linear probe, 20
Lithotomy position, anatomy of, 96f
Local anesthetics, 3, 4f
amino amides as, 4, 4f, 5f
amino esters as, 3, 3f, 4f
for caudal epidural block, 244f, 245f
in pediatrics, 7
amide, 7
ester, 9
maximum recommended doses of, 
11t
toxicity of, 10
structure of, 3, 4f
timeline of, 3, 4f
toxicity of, 6, 6t
with axillary block, 71
with epidural block, 261, 272f
vasoconstrictors with, 6
Long ciliary nerve, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 167, 
170f
Longissimus muscle, anatomy of, in 
erector spinae plane block, 222, 222f, 
223f
Long thoracic nerve, anatomy of, 207, 26f, 
208f
Longus capitis muscle, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Longus colli muscle, anatomy of, in 
stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
Loss-of-resistance technique
in lumbar epidural block, 265f
in thoracic epidural block, 264, 269f
Lower extremity
anatomy of, 92f, 93f, 94f, 95f
lithotomy position, 96f
dermatomes, 96f
osteotomes of, 97f
Lower extremity block, anatomy for, 89, 
92f, 93f, 95f, 97f, 98f
Lumbar epidural block, needle puncture 
for, 262, 264f, 265f
Lumbar lordosis, in spinal block, 251, 253f
Lumbar neuraxial block, 246
paramedian sagittal oblique view of, 246
transverse axial view of, 246
Lumbar paravertebral block, 99
Lumbar plexus, anatomy of, 91, 93f
Lumbar plexus block, 99, 103–104f, 105f
indication for, 104
inguinal perivascular, 99, 100f
injection site in, 102f
paramedial longitudinal scanning 
technique for, 100, 102f
psoas compartment block, 99
relevant anatomy for, 99
transverse oblique scanning technique 
for, 101
Interscalene block, 33, 38f
anatomy for, 33, 34f, 35f, 39f, 40f
indications for, 37
local anesthetic for, 33, 34
needle puncture for, 34, 36f, 37f
patient selection for, 33
phrenic block with, 36
position for, 33, 35f, 41f
potential problems in, 36
sonoanatomy for, 37, 37f
technique for, 38, 42f
ulnar nerve block with, 36
ultrasound for, 36, 37f
Interscalene groove, identification of, 33
Interspinous ligament, anatomy of
in epidural block, 262f
in spinal block, 250f, 256f
Intertransverse ligament, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
Intervertebral space, identification of, for 
spinal block, 253, 255f
Intralipid 20%, for local anesthetic 
toxicity, 12
Intravenous regional block, 85
anatomy for, 85
distal IV site for, 86f
early Bier block technique for, 85f
equipment for, 86f
local anesthetic for, 88
mechanisms of action of, 88f
needle puncture for, 85, 86f
patient selection for, 85
pharmacologic choice for, 85
position for, 85, 86f
potential problems with, 88
tourniquet inflation pressures for, 85
venous exsanguination in, 87f
Intrinsic back muscles, anatomy of, in 
erector spinae plane block, 222, 222f
Intubation
glossopharyngeal block for, 189, 190
superior laryngeal block for, 193
translaryngeal block for, 195
Ischial spine, anatomy of
in caudal epidural block, 244f
in pediatric caudal block, 282f
Ischial spine ligament, anatomy of, in 
pudendal nerve block, 292f
Ischial tuberosity
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
in pudendal nerve block, 291, 292f
in sciatic block, 109f, 110f, 111f, 112f, 
114f
J
Jugular vein, anatomy of
in glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 
192f
in interscalene block, 33, 34f, 38f, 40f
in stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
in superficial cervical plexus 
block, 289f
in supraclavicular block, 46f
K
Knee surgery, femoral block in, 120
Kulenkampff supraclavicular block, 45
L
Lacrimal artery, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 168f
Lamina, anatomy of, in epidural block, 
263f, 266f, 267f, 268f
Laryngeal nerve, anatomy of
in airway block, 184, 184f, 185f, 186f
in superior laryngeal block, 193, 194f
Lateral antebrachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of
in interscalene block, 42f, 43f
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
in supraclavicular block, 52f
Lateral cutaneous nerves, anatomy of, in 
serratus anterior muscles, 207, 208f
Lateral decubitus position
for epidural block, 262
for quadratus lumborum block, 237f, 
238f
for spinal block, 250, 250f
Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, anatomy 
of, 91, 92f, 93f, 94f, 95f, 96f
in femoral block, 117f, 118f, 121f
in lumbar plexus block, 100f
in sciatic block, 108f, 109f, 110f
Lateral femoral cutaneous nerve of the 
thigh (LFCN), 131
anatomy of, 131, 132f
sonoanatomy of, 131
technique of, 131, 132f
ultrasound-guided, 131, 133f
Lateral malleolus, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images of, 98f
Lateral rectus muscle, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 167, 
168f, 169f, 170f
Lateral supraclavicular nerve, anatomy of, 
in superficial cervical plexus block, 
289f
Latissimus dorsi muscle, anatomy of, 201f
in erector spinae plane block, 222, 222f
in quadratus lumborum block, 237f, 
239f, 240f
in serratus anterior muscles, 207, 208f
Leg. see Lower extremity
Lesser occipital nerve, anatomy of
in cervical plexus block, 171, 173f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Levator scapulae muscle, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Levobupivacaine, 6, 8
for erector spinae plane block, 221
maximum recommended doses of, 11t
Lidocaine, 4–5, 94f, 
for ankle block, 157
for axillary block, 69
for epidural anesthesia, 298
for epidural block, 261
for glossopharyngeal block, 189
for infraclavicular block, 59
for interscalene block, 33, 36
for intravenous regional block, 85
for obturator block, 135
for popliteal and saphenous block, 141
for sciatic block, 107
for spinal block, 249
subarachnoid, 4
Lidocaine (Continued)
Index
308
Lumbosacral (Taylor) approach, to spinal 
block, 256, 259f
Lumbosacral plexus, anatomy of, 92, 92f, 
93f
Lung, anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 61f
in supraclavicular block, 46f, 49f, 54f
M
Magnetic resonance imaging
in airway block, 187f
lower extremity anatomy on, 98f
in sciatic nerve block, 112f
in supraclavicular block, 49f
Malleolus, cross-sectional magnetic 
resonance images of, 98f
Mandible, anatomy of in airway block, 187f
Mandibular angle, in glossopharyngeal 
block, 192f
Mandibular ramus, anatomy of, in 
glossopharyngeal block, 190f
Mastoid, anatomy of, in glossopharyngeal 
block, 189, 192f
Maxilla, anatomy of, in glossopharyngeal 
block, 190f
Medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of, in supraclavicular block, 
52f
Medial brachial cutaneous nerve, anatomy 
of, in supinated arm, 27f
Medial malleolus, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images of, 98f
Medial patellar retinaculum, anatomy of, 
in saphenous block, 143f
Medial plantar nerve, anatomy of, 95f
Medial supraclavicular nerve, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Median antebrachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
Median cutaneous nerve, anatomy of, 26f
Median nerve
anatomy of, 25, 26f
in axillary block, 69, 70f, 71f, 72f, 73f
in brachial plexus block, 73f
in infraclavicular block, 61f, 62f
in interscalene block, 42f, 43f
in supraclavicular block, 51f, 52f
of distal upper extremity block, 77, 78f
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
Mepivacaine, 4f, 5, 5f
for ankle block, 157
for axillary block, 69
for epidural block, 261
for infraclavicular block, 59
for interscalene block, 33, 36
for obturator block, 135
for popliteal and saphenous block, 141
for sciatic block, 107
for supraclavicular block, 45
Middle cervical ganglion, anatomy of, in 
stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
Middle scalene muscle, anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 60f
in interscalene block, 34f, 35f, 37f, 
38f, 40f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
in supraclavicular block, 30f, 46f, 48f, 
50f, 54f
Midline approach
to lumbar epidural block, 262
to spinal block, 254, 258f
Midline incisions, bilateral blocks for, 231
Musculocutaneous nerve
anatomy of, 25, 26f
in axillary block, 69, 70f, 71f, 72f
in brachial plexus block, 73f
in infraclavicular block, 60, 61f, 62f
in supraclavicular block, 51f
block of, 69
Myotome innervation, of upper limb, 37f, 
43f
N
Needles, 13, 14f, 15f
Nerve block, ultrasonography-guided, 19, 
19f, 20f
Nerve root, anatomy of, in interscalene 
block, 40f
Nerve stimulators, 13, 16f
Neuraxial analgesia, pregnancy and 
delivery
anatomy, 298
needle puncture, 299
patient selection, 297
pharmacologic choice, 298
position, 299
potential problems, 299
Neuraxial anatomy, surface relationships 
in, 264f
Neuraxial block
caudal, 273
epidural, 261
spinal, 250, 256
ultrasound-assisted, 243
caudal epidural block, 244, 244f, 
245f, 246f
lumbar, 246
sonoanatomy for, 243
thoracic, 248, 247f, 248f
Neuraxial damage, 301
Neuraxial infection, 301
Neuraxial labor analgesia, 297
Neurologic injury
with epidural block, 268
with spinal block, 256
Neurotoxicity, direct, of local anesthetics, 
in pediatrics, 10
O
Oblique muscle, anatomy of
in retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 170f
in subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, 235f
in transversus abdominis plane block, 
231
Obturator block, 135
indications for, 136
needle puncture for, 135
patient selection for, 135
pharmacologic choice for, 135
position for, 135
sonoanatomy for, 136
technique for, 138, 137f, 
Obturator foramen, anatomy of, in 
obturator block, 136f, 137f
Obturator nerve, anatomy of, 91, 92f, 93f, 
95f, 96f
in femoral block, 118f
in lumbar plexus block, 100f, 105f
in obturator block, 135, 136f, 137f
in sciatic block, 108f, 109f, 110f
Occipitalis nerve
major, anatomy of, in superficial 
cervical plexus block, 289f
minor, anatomy of, in superficial 
cervical plexus block, 289f
Ophthalmic artery, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 167, 
168f, 169f, 170f
Optic nerve, anatomy of, in retrobulbar 
(peribulbar) block, 167, 168f, 169f, 
170f
Orbicularis oculi muscle block, Van Lint 
method, 167, 169f
Orbit, anatomy of, 167, 168f, 170f
Osteotomes
of lower extremity, 97f
of upper extremity, 28f
P
Paramedian approach
to spinal block, 256, 258f, 259f
to thoracic epidural block, 264, 263f, 
268f
Paraspinous muscle, anatomy of, 201f
in paravertebral block, 218f
Paravertebral block, 215
contraindications to, 215
indications for, 215
patient positioning for, 217f
sonoanatomy for, 215
technique for, 215
Paravertebral catheters, in pediatrics
contraindications, 293
indications, 293
local anesthetics, 293
paramedian approach, 293
sonoanatomy, 293
technique, 293
transverse approach, 293, 294f
Paravertebral space, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 216f, 218f
Parietal pleura, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
Parsonage-Turner syndrome, 54
PART, 20, 22f
Patellar ligament, anatomy of, in 
saphenous block, 143f
PECS 1 block, intercostal, 203, 204f, 
205f
PECS 2 block, intercostal, 203, 204f, 205f
Pectineus muscle, anatomy of, in femoral 
block, 125f
Pecto-intercostal block, 203, 206f
Pectoralis major muscle, anatomy of, in 
infraclavicular block, 31f, 61f, 62f
Pectoralis minor muscle, anatomy of, in 
infraclavicular block, 61f, 64f, 67f
Obturator block (Continued)
Middle scalene muscle, anatomy 
of (Continued)
309
Index
Pectoralis muscles
in infraclavicular block, 60f
in serratus anterior muscles, 207, 208f
Pediatric position, for caudal block, 273, 275f
Pediatrics, caudal block in, 281
Peribulbar block. see Retrobulbar 
(peribulbar) block
Peripheral nerve block, 88f
Peroneal nerve, anatomy of, 95f
in popliteal and saphenous block, 141
Peroneus brevis muscle, anatomy of, in 
ankle block, 160f
Peroneus brevis tendon, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images of, 98f
Peroneus longus tendon, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images of, 98f
Pharmacology, 3
Pharyngeal nerve, anatomy of, in airway 
block, 183, 184f
Phenylephrine, 6, 6f
for spinal block, 249
Phrenic block, interscalene block with, 36
Phrenic nerve, anatomy of, 30
in interscalene block, 34f
in supraclavicular block, 30f, 46f
Phrenic nerve block, with supraclavicular 
block, 49
Piriformis muscle, anatomy of, in sciatic 
block, 109f, 110f
Plantar nerve, anatomy of, in ankle block, 
159f
Pleura, anatomy of
in interscalene block, 35f
in supraclavicular block, 52f
Plumb bob supraclavicular block
needle puncture for, 48, 48f, 49f, 50f
position for, 48
Pneumothorax, with supraclavicular 
block, 45
Popliteal artery, anatomy of, in popliteal 
block, 144f
Popliteal block, 141, 143
anatomy for, 141
indications for, 143
needle angle for, 143f
needle puncture for, 141
patient selection for, 141
pharmacologic choice for, 141
position for, 141, 146f, 147f
potential problems with, 141
sonoanatomy for, 143
technique for, 144, 148f, 149f, 150f
Popliteal fossa, anatomy of, in popliteal 
and saphenous block, 141, 142f, 144f
Popliteal neurovascular bundle, cross-
sectional magnetic resonance images 
of, 98f
Postcesarean delivery analgesia, 297
Posterior antebrachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of, in pronated arm, 27f
Posterior brachial cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of, in pronated arm, 27f
Posterior cutaneous nerve, anatomy of
in popliteal block, 145f
in sciatic block, 109f
in serratus anterior muscles, 207, 208f
Posterior femoral cutaneous nerve, 
anatomy of, 95f, 96f
Posterior sacrococcygeal ligament, 
anatomy of, in pediatric caudal 
block, 282f
Posterior scalene muscle, anatomy of, in 
interscalene block, 37f
Posterior superior iliac spine, anatomy of, 
273, 274f
in epidural block, 264f
in sciatic block, 110f
in subgluteal sciatic nerve block, 114f
Posterior tibial artery, anatomy of, in 
ankle block, 160f
Posterior tibial nerve
anatomy of, in ankle block, 160f
needle puncture at, for ankle block, 157
Prevertebral fascia, anatomy of
in brachial plexus, 26
in cervical plexus block, 171, 175f
Prilocaine, 5, 85, 5f
for intravenous regional block, 85
Procaine, 3, 3f, 4f
Prone jackknife position
for epidural block, 262
for spinal block, 250, 252f
Prone position, for caudal block, 273, 276f
Psoas compartment block, 99
Psoas major muscle, anatomy of
in femoral block, 122f
in lumbar plexus block, 104f
in quadratus lumborum block, 237f, 239f
Psoas minor tendon, anatomy of, in 
femoral block, 125f
Psoas muscle, anatomy of
in femoral block, 116f
in lumbar plexus block, 100, 100f
in obturator block, 136f
Pubic tubercle, anatomy of
in femoral block, 117f, 118f
in obturator block, 136f, 137f
in sciatic block, 112f
Pudendal nerve, anatomy of, 291, 94f, 292f
Pudendal nerve block, 291
contraindications, 291
indications, 291
position, 291, 292f
sonoanatomy, 291
technique, 291
“Push, pull, pinch, pinch” mnemonic, in 
brachial plexus block, 29f
Q
Quadratus femoris muscle
anatomy of, in sciatic block, 112f, 114f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Quadratus lumborum block, 237
anterior, 238, 238f
lateral, 238, 238f
posterior, 238, 238f
sonoanatomy for, 237, 237f
subcostal, 238, 239f
suprailiac anterior, 239, 240f
technique for, 238, 239f
Quadratus lumborum muscle, anatomy of
in femoral block, 116f
in lumbar plexus block, 100f
in quadratus lumborum block, 237, 
237f, 238f
Quincke-Babcock needle, for spinal block, 
253
R
Radial nerve, anatomy of, 25, 26f
in axillary block, 69, 70f, 71f, 72f
in brachial plexus block, 73f
in distal upper extremity block, 77, 79, 
81f
in infraclavicular block, 61f, 62f
in interscalene block, 42f, 43f
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
in supraclavicular block, 51f, 52f
Rami communicantes, anatomy of, 199, 201f
Ramus
dorsal, 204f
in paravertebral block, 216f, 218f
in truncal block, 199, 201f
ventral, 203, 204f
in paravertebral block, 216f, 218f
in transversus abdominis plane 
block, 231
in truncal block, 199, 201f
Rectus abdominis muscle, anatomy of
in rectus sheath block, 227, 228f
in subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, 233, 233f, 235f
Rectus muscle, anatomy of, in retrobulbar 
(peribulbar) block, 167, 168f, 169f, 
170f
Rectus sheath, 227
Rectus sheath block, 227, 229
and catheter in adults, 227, 229
sonoanatomy, 227, 228f
technique, 227, 228f, 229f
Recurrent laryngeal nerve, anatomy of, in 
airway block, 184, 184f, 185f, 186f
Reflection, 18
Regional anesthesia
drugs for, 3. see also Local anesthetics
ultrasonography-guided. see 
Ultrasonography
vasoconstrictors in, 6
Resolution, 16
Retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 167
anatomy for, 167, 168f, 170f
hematoma with, 167, 170
needle puncture for, 167, 169f
patient selection for, 167
position for, 167, 168f
potential problems with, 170
Van Lint method for, 167, 169f
Retroclavicular block, 65
Rhomboid muscle, anatomy of, in erector 
spinae plane block, 222, 222f, 223f
Rib
facets for, anatomy of, in epidural 
block, 267f
first
anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 60f, 61f
in interscalene block, 34f, 38f
in supraclavicular block, 30f, 31f, 
46f, 47f, 48f, 49f, 50f, 54f
brachial plexus anatomy at, 30, 31f
neck of, anatomy of, in paravertebral 
block, 218f
Index
310
Ropivacaine, 4f, 5–6, 5f, 8
for ankle block, 157
for axillary block, 69
for epidural block, 261
for epidural labor analgesia, 298
for erector spinae plane block, 221
for femoral block, 115
for infraclavicular block, 59
for interscalene block, 33, 36
for obturator block, 135
for paravertebral block, 216
for popliteal block, 141, 150
for sciatic block, 107
single-shot caudal epidural dose of, 8t
for stellate ganglion block, 177
suggested epidural infusion 
concentrations and rates for, 8t
for supraclavicular block, 45
Rotator cuff, anatomy of, in suprascapular 
block, 56f
S
Sacral anatomy, sex of patient and, 273, 
274f, 275f
Sacral canal, anatomy of, in caudal block, 
244f, 277f
Sacral cornua, anatomy of, in caudal 
block, 244f, 275f, 277f
pediatric, 281, 282f
Sacral hiatus, anatomy of
in caudal block, 273, 244f, 274f, 277f
pediatric, 281, 282f
in sciatic block, 111f
Sacrococcygeal membrane, anatomy of, in 
caudal epidural block, 244f, 245f
Sacrospinous ligament, anatomy of, in 
pudendal nerve block, 292f
Sacrotuberous ligament, anatomy of, in 
sciatic block, 114f
Sacrum, anatomy of, in caudal block, 244f
pediatric, 282f
Saphenous block
local anesthetics for, 141
needle puncture for, 141, 143f
patient selection for, 141
pharmacologic choice for, 141
with popliteal block, 141
position for, 141
potential problems with, 141
Saphenous nerve
anatomy of, 93f, 95f, 96f
in adductor canal block, 151f, 152f, 
154f
in ankle block, 162, 159f, 160f, 163f
in saphenous block, 143f
needle puncture at, for ankle block, 157
sonoanatomy of, 151
Sartorius muscle
anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 152f, 154f
in femoral block, 122f
in saphenous block, 143f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Scalene muscle, anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 60f, 61f
in interscalene block, 33, 34f, 35f, 37f, 
38f, 40f
in supraclavicular block, 30f, 46f, 48f, 
50f, 54f
Scapula, anatomy of
in epidural block, 264f
in infraclavicular block, 60f
in suprascapular block, 56f
Scapular ligament, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Scapular notch, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Sciatic block
anatomy for, 107, 108f, 109f, 110f
anterior approach to, 108
needle puncture for, 108, 112f
position for, 108
classic approach to, 107
needle puncture for, 107, 111f
position for, 107, 110f
local anesthetic solution for, 107
patient selection for, 107
pharmacologic choice for, 107
potential problems with, 109
sonoanatomy for, 110
surface marking technique for, 111f
technique for, 110, 113f
traditional block technique of, 107
ultrasonography-guided, 110, 112f
Sciatic nerve
anatomy of, 107, 108f, 109f, 110f
in popliteal block, 144f, 145f, 149f
in subgluteal sciatic nerve block, 113f
on magnetic resonance imaging, 112f
Sclerotome innervation, of upper limb, 
38f, 42f
Seizure, from local anesthetic toxicity, 
prevention and treatment of, 12
Semimembranosus muscle and tendon
anatomy of, in popliteal and saphenous 
block, 142f, 143f, 144f, 149f, 150f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Semitendinosus muscle and tendon
anatomy of, in popliteal and saphenous 
block, 142f, 143f, 144f, 149f, 150f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Serratus posterior inferior muscles, 
anatomy of, in erector spinae plane 
block, 222, 222f
Serratus anterior block
anatomy, 207, 208f
potential complications, 208
sensory distribution of, 208f
ultrasound-guided injection technique, 
207, 209f
Serratus anterior muscle
anatomy of, in infraclavicular block, 
59, 60f
Serratus anterior muscle, anatomy of, 207, 
201f, 208f
Short ciliary nerve, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 167, 
170f
Shoulder surgery, interscalene block 
for, 34
Single-shot technique, serratus anterior 
muscles, 208, 209f
Sitting position
for epidural block, 262
for spinal block, 251, 252f
Skin, anatomy of, in spinal block, 250f
Soleus muscle, cross-sectional magnetic 
resonance images of, 98f
Specular reflection, 18
Spinal anesthesia, 299
Spinal block, 249, 250
anatomy for, 250, 250f
backache with, 256
cerebrospinal fluid aspiration in, 254, 257f
combined spinal-epidural technique 
in, 258
continuous, 256
fentanyl in, 258
headache with, 249, 253, 256
high, dyspnea with, 257
hyperbaric, 249
hypobaric, 249
local anesthetics for, 249
lumbosacral (Taylor) approach to, 256, 259f
midline approach to, 254, 258f
needle puncture for, 253, 255f, 256f, 
257f, 258f, 259f
neurologic injury with, 256
paramedian approach to, 254, 258f, 259f
patient selection for, 249
position for, 250, 250f, 252f, 253f, 254f
potential problems with, 256
vasoconstrictors for, 249
Spinal canal, anatomy of, in spinal block, 
253f, 254f
Spinal cord, anatomy of
in epidural block, 263f, 267f
in thoracic neuraxial blocks, 247f
Spinal fluid, in epidural block, 267
Spinal ganglion, anatomy of, 201f
in thoracic neuraxial blocks, 247f
Spinalis muscle, anatomy of, in erector 
spinae plane block, 222, 222f, 223f
Spinal needles, for glossopharyngeal 
block, 189
Spinal nerve, anatomy of
in epidural block, 263f, 267f
in intercostal block, 203
in paravertebral block, 216f
in supraclavicular block, 51f
Spinous process, anatomy of, in epidural 
block, 263f, 267f
Sprotte needles, for spinal block, 253
Stellate ganglion block, 177–178, 180
anatomy, 177, 178f
indications, 177t
palpation, 177
pharmacologic choice, 177
position, 177
potential complications, 180
ultrasound-guided injection technique, 
177, 179f
Sternocleidomastoid muscle, anatomy of
in cervical plexus block, 171, 173f
in infraclavicular block, 61f
in interscalene block, 33, 34f, 35f, 37f, 
38f, 40f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
in supraclavicular block, 46f, 48f, 49f, 
50f, 54f
Scalene muscle, anatomy of (Continued)
311
Index
Sternum, anatomy of, in infraclavicular 
block, 61f
Styloid process, anatomy of, in 
glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 
192f
Subarachnoid puncture, with caudal 
block, 275
Subarachnoid space, anatomy of, in 
epidural block, 262f
Subclavian artery
anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 62f
in interscalene block, 34f, 38f
in supraclavicular block, 30, 31f, 46f, 
47f, 48f, 49f, 50f, 54f
puncture of, during supraclavicular 
block, 45
Subclavian vein, anatomy of
in infraclavicular block, 61f
in interscalene block, 34f, 38f
in supraclavicular block, 46f, 48f, 49f, 
50f
Subcostal nerve, anatomy of, 94f
Subcostal transversus abdominal plane 
block, 233, 234
indication for, 234
position of patient and ultrasound 
machine for, 234f
sonoanatomy for, 233
technique for, 234
Subcutaneous fat, anatomy of, in spinal 
block, 250f, 256f
Subdural injection, in epidural block, 267, 
272f
Subdural space, anatomy of, in epidural 
block, 262f
Subendothoracic compartment, anatomy 
of, in paravertebral block, 218f
Subgluteal approach, to ultrasonography-
guided sciatic block, 114f
Subscapular nerve, anatomy of, 26f
Sufentanil, for combined spinal-epidural 
labor analgesia, 298
Superficial cervical fascia, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus 
block, 289f
Superficial cervical plexus, anatomy 
of, 287
Superficial cervical plexus block, 287, 
288f, 289f
anatomy and technique for, 287
position for, 287
Superficial peroneal nerve
anatomy of, 93f, 96f
in ankle block, 161, 159f, 160f, 
163f
needle puncture at, for ankle block, 157
Superficial sacrococcygeal ligament, 
anatomy of, in pediatric caudal 
block, 282f
Superior articular process, anatomy of, in 
epidural block, 267f
Superior cervical ganglion, anatomy of, in 
stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
Superior costotransverse ligament, anatomy 
of, in paravertebral block, 218f
Superior gluteal nerve, anatomy of, in 
popliteal block, 145f
Superior laryngeal block, 193, 194f
Superior laryngeal nerve, anatomy of
in airway block, 184, 184f, 185f, 186f
in superior laryngeal block, 193, 
194f
Superior oblique muscle, anatomy 
of, in retrobulbar (peribulbar) 
block, 170f
Superior rectus muscle, anatomy of, in 
retrobulbar (peribulbar) block, 168f, 
170f
Supraclavicular block, 45
anatomy for, 30, 45, 30f, 31f, 46f
AXIS block vs., 50
classic
needle puncture for, 45, 47f
position for, 45
indications for, 51
patient selection for, 45
pharmacologic choice for, 45
pneumothorax with, 49
potential problems with, 49
sonoanatomy for, 50, 51f, 52f
ultrasonography-guided, 50, 53f, 54f
vertical (plumb bob)
needle puncture for, 48, 48f, 49f, 50f
position for, 48
Supraclavicularis nerve, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Supraclavicular nerve, anatomy of
in cervical plexus block, 171, 173f
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
in supraclavicular block, 52f
Suprailiac anterior quadratus lumborum 
(QL) block, 240f
Supraorbitalis nerve, anatomy of, in 
superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Suprascapular artery, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Suprascapular block, 55
indications for, 55
sonoanatomy for, 55, 56f
technique for, 55, 56f, 57f
Suprascapular nerve, anatomy of, 26f
in suprascapular block, 55, 56f
Supraspinatus muscle, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Supraspinous ligament, anatomy of
in epidural block, 262f
in pediatric caudal block, 282f
in spinal block, 250f, 256f
Sural nerve
anatomy of, 95f, 96f
in ankle block, 159f, 160f, 162, 163f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
needle puncture at, for ankle block, 157
in popliteal and saphenous block, 142f, 
144f
Sympathetic chain, anatomy of, in stellate 
ganglion block, 177, 178f
Sympathetic nerve fibers, 298
Sympathetic trunk, anatomy of, 93f, 201f
in glossopharyngeal block, 190f, 192f
Syringes, 13
Syringe technique, for cerebrospinal fluid 
aspiration, 254, 257f
Systemic toxicity, of local anesthetics, in 
pediatrics, 10
clinical picture of, 10
predisposing factors in, 10
prevention/reducing risk of, 11
T
TAP block. see Transversus abdominis 
plane (TAP) block
Taylor’s (lumbosacral) approach, to spinal 
block, 256, 259f
Tendocalcaneus, anatomy of, in ankle 
block, 160f
Teres major muscle, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Teres minor muscle, anatomy of, in 
suprascapular block, 56f
Tetracaine, 4, 4f, 9
dose of, for spinal anesthesia for 
inguinal hernia repair, 10t
lidocaine and, transdermal patch, 9
for spinal block, 249
Thoracic epidural block
anatomy of, 263f
needle puncture for, 264, 266f, 267f, 
268f, 269f
Thoracic neuraxial block, 248, 247f, 
248f
Thoracic spinal nerve, anatomy of, in 
subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block
T10, 233f
T11, 233f
T12, 233f
Thoracic vertebra, anatomy of, 263f
Thoracoabdominal nerves, 229f
Thoracodorsal nerve, anatomy 
of, 26f
Thoracolumbar fascia, deep, anatomy of, 
in quadratus lumborum 
block, 237f
Thoracolumbar spinal nerves, anatomy 
of, 227, 228f
Three-in-one block, 99, 100f
Thromboembolic disease, 297
Thyroepiglottic ligament, anatomy of, in 
airway block, 186f
Thyrohyoid membrane, anatomy of
in airway block, 184, 186f
in superior laryngeal block, 193, 194f
in translaryngeal block, 196f
Thyroid cartilage, anatomy of
in airway block, 185f, 186f, 187f
in interscalene block, 34f
in superior laryngeal block, 194f
in supraclavicular block, 46f
Thyroid gland, anatomy of, in stellate 
ganglion block, 177, 178f
Tibia, anatomy of, in saphenous 
block, 143f
Tibial collateral ligament, anatomy of, in 
saphenous block, 143f
Tibialis anterior tendon
anatomy of, in ankle block, 160f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Tibialis posterior tendon, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images of, 98f
Index
312
V
Vagus nerve, anatomy of
in airway block, 183, 183f, 184, 184f, 
185f, 187f
in glossopharyngeal block, 189, 190f, 
192f
in superior laryngeal block, 193, 
194f
Van Lint block, of orbicularis oculi 
muscle, 167, 169f
Vasoconstrictors, 6
for spinal block, 249
Vastus intermedius muscle, anatomy of, in 
adductor canal block, 151f
Vastus lateralis muscle, cross-sectional 
magnetic resonance images 
of, 98f
Vastus medialis muscle
anatomy of
in adductor canal block, 151f, 
152f
in saphenous block, 143f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Venous exsanguination, with Esmarch 
bandage, 86f
Ventricle, anatomy of
in airway block, 186f
in translaryngeal block, 196f
Vertebral artery, anatomy of
in interscalene block, 33, 35f
in supraclavicular block, 30, 30f, 46f
Vertebral body, anatomy of, in epidural 
block, 267f
Vertebral notch, anatomy of, in epidural 
block, 267f
Vertebra, thoracic, anatomy of, 263f
Vestibular fold, anatomy of
in airway block, 186f
in translaryngeal block, 196f
Visceral afferent nerve fibers, 298
Visceral pleura, anatomy of, in 
paravertebral block, 218f
Vocal ligament, anatomy of
in airway block, 186f
in translaryngeal block, 196f
W
Whitacre needles, for spinal 
block, 253
Wrist block, of distal upper extremity 
block, 81, 81t, 82f
Tibial nerve
anatomy of, 93f
in ankle block, 159, 160f, 162f
in popliteal and saphenous block, 
141, 142f, 144f, 145f
in sciatic block, 108f, 113f
cross-sectional magnetic resonance 
images of, 98f
Time gain compensation (TGC), 18
Tongue, anatomy of, in airway block, 187f
Tonsillar nerves, anatomy of, in airway 
block, 183
Tourniquet inflation pressure, for 
intravenous regional block, 85
Trachea, anatomy of
in airway block, 184, 186f
in stellate ganglion block, 177, 178f
in translaryngeal block, 196f
Tracheal intubation
glossopharyngeal block for, 189, 190
superior laryngeal block for, 193
translaryngeal block for, 195
Transdermal patch, lidocaine and 
tetracaine, 9
Translaryngeal block, 195, 196f
Transversalis fascia, anatomy of, in 
quadratus lumborum block, 237f
Transverse abdominis muscle, anatomy of, 
in subcostal transversus abdominal 
plane block, 233f, 235f
Transverse cervical nerve, anatomy of
in cervical plexus block, 171, 173f
in superficial cervical plexus block, 289f
Transverse oblique scanning technique, 
for lumbar plexus block, 101
Transverse process, anatomy of
in epidural block, 267f
in lumbar plexus block, 104f
in paravertebral block, 218f
Transversus abdominis muscle, anatomy of
in quadratus lumborum block, 237f
in transversus abdominis plane block, 
231
Transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block
anatomy for, 231
classic approach of, 231, 232
indications for, 232
technique for, 231
Trapezius muscle, anatomy of
in erector spinae plane block, 222, 222f, 
223f
in infraclavicular block, 61f
in interscalene block, 37f
in suprascapular block, 56f
Trigeminal nerve, anatomy of, in airway 
block, 183, 183f, 187f
Truncal anatomy
cross-section of, 201f
dermatomes in, 200f
Truncal block, anatomy for, 199, 200f, 
201f
Tuohy needles
epidural analgesia/anesthesia, 299
for lumbar epidural block, 262
for spinal block, 253
U
Ulnar nerve, anatomy of, 25, 26f
in axillary block, 69, 70f, 71f, 72f
in brachial plexus block, 73f
in infraclavicular block, 61f, 62f
in interscalene block, 42f, 43f
in pronated arm, 27f
in supinated arm, 27f
Ulnar nerve block, interscalene approach 
to, 36
Ulnar nerve, of distal upper extremity 
block, 77, 79, 80f, 81f
Ultrasonography
for axillary block, 72
for femoral block, 120
for infraclavicular block, 63, 64f
for interscalene block, 36, 37f
for neuraxial block, 243
for sciatic block, 110, 112f
for supraclavicular block, 50, 53f, 54f
Ultrasound, 14. see also Ultrasonography
generation, 16
wavelength and frequency, 16, 17f
Upper extremity
cutaneous innervation of, 52f
dermatomes of, 27f, 28f
myotome innervation of, 37f, 43f
osteotomes of, 28f
sclerotome innervation of, 38f, 42f
Upper extremity block. see also Brachial 
plexus block
anatomy for, 23. see also Brachial plexus, 
anatomy of
intravenous regional, 85. see also 
Intravenous regional block
Upper limb. see Upper extremity
Uteroplacental perfusion, 299
Trapezius muscle, anatomy of (Continued)
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
Unlabelled image
